The population of sangai (Indian Eld’s deer) is stable at 260 according to the latest wildlife estimation conducted by the Manipur Forest Department. The sangai, endemic to Manipur, is found only at the Keibul Lamjao National Park (KLNP), the world’s only floating national park. The park is now reaching its carrying capacity. Low genetic variability, disease susceptibility, thinning of floating biomass habitat and competition from hog deer are challenges faced by the isolated single population of Sangai. Wildlife officials and conservation biologists are mulling relocation of the sangai to a second home. Is time running out for the 260-odd endangered sangai deer which have their only home Manipur? The sangai or the Indian Eld’s deer (Rucervus eldii eldii) resides as an isolated single population in the world’s only floating national park in Manipur − the grassland-dominated Keibul Lamjao National Park (KLNP). 



Unlike other national parks in India, KLNP is a 40 square km patch of floating biomass (locally called phumdi) and water body, in the southern rim of the saucer shaped Loktak Lake, a Ramsar wetlands of international importance and the largest freshwater lake in northeast India. Conservation of the sangai, the state animal of Manipur, has been the subject of concern and controversy. Despite being embedded in the cultural consciousness of the Manipuris, the dancing deer is now literally losing ground. Much of it has to do with the thinning of the phumdi habitat of KLNP, an observation that has been linked to dwindling water quality of Loktak Lake and changes in the water regime due to the National Hydro-Electric Project Corporation (NHPC)’s Ithai barrage on the Manipur river. On the other hand, the national park is bracing for a different set of issues: competition between sangai and associated species, the hog deer while the park inches towards its carrying capacity. Despite the latest wildlife census describing the population as stable, a section of wildlife experts believe the sangai, battling habitat loss and human pressures, may be fighting its “last battle”.