Eggs of the Japanese Quail have been hatched on board the Mir Space Station. The bird has been touted as the best sustainable food source in space. But thanks to the inefficiency of various government departments, the fledgling Japanese Quail farming industry in Karnataka is floundering.   In the last few months, rearing of these birds has completely ceased in Karnataka due to due to confusion created by a union government order, which includes the domesticated Japanese Quail in Schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act. There are two other wild quail species in India that are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act.    In September 2011, the union ministry of environment and forests asked all state departments to stop issuing, ""any new licence for farming of Japanese Quail and also not to give any permission for expansion or augmentation of the existing farming facilities,"" since the bird was included in Schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act. Farmers in Tamil Nadu knocked on the court’s doors against this order. Last month, the Madras High Court stayed the order. However, in Karnataka, the court directive has not allayed fears of 'harassment' by the police. All Japanese Quail being sold in Bangalore now are brought from TN, thereby increasing the bird’s cost.   Japanese Quail, known as Gowjala Hakki in Kannada and Bater in Hindi, was promoted by the animal husbandry departments of various state governments and the union government for years. Compared to chicken, the domesticated bird can be reared in less space.   Meanwhile, business related to Japanese Quail has taken a hit in Karnataka, especially Bangalore. MP Nagesh of Sri Lakshmi Venkateshwara Hatcheries, one of the firms rearing Japanese Quail near Bangalore, said, ""Nobody wants to have trouble with the police or forest officials. The real problem started with dhabas and hotels which purchased Japanese Quail from us and sold them to customers as wild quail to make extra money. Their lie created a problem for domesticated Japanese Quail. In the last few months, we have stopped hatching and rearing the birds but are providing our customers quail brought from Tamil Nadu.""   Dr Venkat Reddy, the head of department, poultry, Veterinary College, KVAFSU, Hebbal, said, ""There is great confusion among the police and forest department officers about the Japanese Quail and the wild quail. The wild variety is difficult to catch. At the most, poachers can catch a few birds whereas Japanese Quail can be supplied in the thousands. I can assure you 100 per cent that all Japanese Quail are domesticated. The wild birds weigh a maximum of 100 grams. The domesticated ones are up to 250 grams each. We have to avoid the judgement of some people that all quail varieties are the same. Japanese Quail is a bird that has the potential as space food. It is good for farmers and consumers.""   Prakash Sannamani, the first person from Karnataka doing a PhD on Japanese Quail, said, ""Even though rearing Japanese Quail was legal for many years, forest officials were troubling farmers. The domesticated and wild birds are slightly different in colour and very different in size.""   Japanese Quail grow up to 250 grams in just six weeks.""Their nutrition value per gram is one of the highest,"" says Sannamani. The flesh of the bird is also considered an aphrodisiac. Wild quail lay about 18 eggs a year while Japanese Quail lay 300 in the same period.