A group of early morning walkers ambling through a verdant Bangalore University campus froze in their tracks on Saturday: Before them lay five to six snares laid by poachers that could have easily killed wildlife inside – from peacocks and mongoose to wild rabbits and jackals, all protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act.
 
 Only last month, Bangalore Mirror carried a report on how sandalwood smugglers were getting richer with impunity inside the 500-acre campus (40 sandalwood trees carted away; 50 more hacked, left to wither). And now, alarm bells are clanging again over the city’s largest biodiversity reserve.
 
 “We were shocked to see the snares,” a walker told Bangalore Mirror. “This clearly shows that poachers have stepped inside this forest too. What are the officials doing? When a common man can point out these snares, why can’t officials, who are meant to do so?”
 
 The snares and traps are similar to the ones Haryana-based poachers had laid at Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) wildlife sanctuary and which were discovered in July. 
 
 Made of material similar to clutch cables in motorcycles, they were laid in artificially created cavities to trap wildlife. This is the first time that such snares have been found within the campus. 
 
 The morning walkers, who also happen to be wildlife enthusiasts, pointed out these snares laid near the nursery towards Mariyappanpalya. 
 
 They were clearly visible, unlike regular snares that are often camouflaged by greenery. There were, however, some creepers which would have grown with time to hide the snares.
 
 
 Thoughtfully chosen
 The greatest shock, however, is due to the fact that the snares were laid near a guarded nursery which stands on land belonging to the forest department. The spot seems to have been a well thought-out choice since the nursery has compound walls and a gate. 
 
 To get to this part of the forest, wildlife have no choice but to take the path through the cavity. In doing so, they fall into the trap, the walkers said. “These snares are dangerous as they are left hanging. Once a wild animal or bird makes an attempt to pass through, the noose tightens around the neck and the animals and birds are killed. “The more they struggle to get out, the tighter the noose becomes. This is a serious issue,” a source said.
 
 
 Snares common among poachers
 These snares are said to be common among poachers. They are usually camouflaged and around five or six are placed together in paths frequented by wild animals. The method does not leave a trace after the animals are killed. The products are then sold illegally. 
 
 Walkers in the university, who have decided to take up the issue with the forest department, think that a students’ initiative could protect wildlife under risk.
 
 “It is the responsibility of students to protect the flora and fauna they are blessed with. As government departments are involved in blame games, students on the campus should bring about a change and keep poachers and sandalwood smugglers at bay,” Maheshwar H, a local resident said.
 
 
 ‘We will look into it’
 Forest department officials said this was a first. “Putting snares is preparing the ground for poaching. This is an important issue and we will look into it. The government land was part of the property that was handed over to the university long back. They have to provide adequate security inside. Though snares were not found in the past and no poaching has been reported so far, the finding of snares will be looked into and an inquiry conducted to ensure nothing goes wrong,” A G Appurao, DCF, told Bangalore Mirror.