Just 20 people from state have surrendered items so far in window that closes on April 9

Nearly a month ago, the state government issued a notification under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (WLPA), allowing citizens to surrender undeclared wildlife or animal articles in their possession.
 
The notification issued on January 10 was aimed at providing a chance for citizens to declare animal articles or trophies, which do not have a certificate of ownership.

However, the scheme so far has evoked only lukewarm responses.

According to the officials at the Karnataka forest department (KFD), just 20 people from across the state have come forward to surrender these items.

“We have received 20 surrenders so far. Most of these are from Bengaluru Circle followed by some items from South Canara Circle and Shivamogga Circle. These items include elephant tusks, tiger claws, antlers, gaur horns and pelts of mostly spotted deer. The total number of items received is 50,” said Kumar Pushkar, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Karnataka forest department.

The scheme was announced by Karnataka forest, environment and ecology minister Eshwar Khandre. This was after the state government realised that some people might still be possessing wildlife artefacts because of a lack of awareness of the laws, and gave nod to provide a three-month window to surrender these items.

State forest department officials said the three-month timeline will close on April 9. After that, there will not be further opportunity to surrender items.

“It was considered necessary to provide one opportunity to these people who missed out on declarations in the previously provided windows, to surrender wildlife articles, which is the property of the state government. However, if the current window is missed, any person found in possession or involved in the trade of wildlife products will be prosecuted under the Wildlife Protection Act,” added Pushkar.

As per the new rule, after the receipt of the articles surrendered, the authority who has received them may inquire to verify and confirm that the articles surrendered are not sourced from the hunting of any wild animal after the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. If so, the person who surrendered the article will be prosecuted under the Act. The inquiries will be completed by or before ninety days from the date on which the artefacts have been surrendered.

 .
The surrendered items will be disposed of under the provisions of the Disposal of Wild Animal Articles Rules, 2023. “We are receiving inquiries from the Kodagu Circle and expect some items surrendered from that zone. Traditionally, many from the area inherit these items from forefathers but they do not have the certificate of possession. We would like to see more people coming forward. The scheme is being advertised through Karnataka forest department’s social media sites as well. However, the response has been lukewarm so far,” said Pushkar.

According to the Wildlife Protection Act, of 1972 and the recent amendments made by the central government in 2022, illegal stocking, trade, etc., of wildlife articles is a punishable offence.
 
A similar 30-day window was opened under Wildlife (Conservation) (Karnataka Rules) in 1973, and thereafter in 2003 for 180 days to obtain a certificate of possession of wildlife items.