By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 I’ve always been spellbound by snakes that live in water. I’m not sure where this fascination originated from. Perhaps it was from the stories my mother used to tell me as a child, about the vicious serpent Kalinga that used to live in the waters of the Yamuna river, poisoning the water and troubling the locals, until Krishna subdued him by dancing on his hood. Perhaps it was from that quiz I participated in as a teenager, where the quizmaster asked me to name the most poisonous snake on earth. “King cobra”, I said, confidently, waiting for the applause. “Sorry, the right answer is Belcher’s sea snake”, she countered, leaving me with vivid mental images of a marine serpent which could kill a thousand humans with a single drop of its venom.
 
 
 	So, when you spot a person standing on the western side of the Sankey Tank walkway, peering intently into the fringes of the lake, you’ll know it’s me. I’m looking for the freshwater snakes that have made this murky water their home. There is a particular spot where they love to surface for air.
 	
 	  	They swim languidly in the shallows near the bank, perfectly comfortable in their aquatic environment. They live in the cracks and crevasses of the rocky embankment surrounding the lake. They are excellent climbers, and if really lucky, one can spot a water snake crawling out of the water along the walls of the embankment, in search of a burrow or a basking spot.
 	
 	  	The water snakes of Sankey Tank are mostly keelbacks – more precisely the checkered keelback or the olive keelback. An occasional rat snake can be spotted too, its long sinuous body weaving gracefully through the water without so much as a ripple. But wait – the rat snake is a land snake, isn’t it? Indeed it is, and this highlights an important fact. Most snakes are as comfortable in water as they are on land. The classification of “land” snake and “water” snake (in the case of freshwater snakes) is purely based on the habitat and lifestyle of the creature, rather than any special adaptations for aquatic life. A keelback would be just as comfortable on land, but finds it more convenient to live in water.
 	
 	  	Sea snakes are in a different league altogether. They have evolved some amazing features to adapt to marine life. They have flat bodies and paddle-like tails to help them slice through water. They have enormous lungs, to allow better oxygen absorption and also to provide buoyancy in water.
 	
 	  	They deliver live young ones (no eggs), so that they can complete their entire lifecycle without leaving the water. And then there is their venom. Sea snake venom extremely toxic, and is used to stop fast-moving prey (literally) dead in their tracks.
 	
 	  	Back to Sankey Tank – our keelbacks are slender nonvenomous snakes, seldom exceeding 3 feet in length. You can spot them in and around most water bodies in Bengaluru. Their name is derived from the “keeled” or sloped scales on their backs, which gives them a matte finish. It is believed that keeling originally evolved as a means of camouflage, but keeling also roughens the skin, which is quite handy while swimming in the water. You can guess their body colouration from their names–checkered, olive, green, etc. They feed mainly on small fish and frogs. They are quite aggressive, facing potential enemies with a wide open mouth.
 	
 	  	As I watch a keelback slither out of the water, a couple of curious teenagers join me. They seem as fascinated by the idea of a water snake as I was at their age. They whip out their mobile phones to record a video clip, eager to make a splash on their social networks. Folklore or Facebook, I really don’t care what triggers their interest. I’m just happy that the next generation retains a connect with the wonderful wildlife in and around Bengaluru.