M C Vinay Kumar, state director, Worldwide Fund for Nature, says, “Hats off to this [social networking] generation for being concerned. But, I will give only 30 per cent marks for tweeting or joining an online group. For full marks, you have to go beyond posting messages and deal with the problem at the ground level.”

The chatter on the social networking sites has its own benefits. “More people are becoming aware that previous generations were unsympathetic to conservation issues. Hence, the campaign to save the tiger is gaining momentum,” he says.

THE NETWORKERS’ PROBLEM
Sharad supports the campaign online, but does not know what else he can do. “There is no information, no website where I can know more. What can I do to help the tiger?” One ‘tweet’ says, “How can general public help save Tigers? Give suggestions http://bit.ly/ dbQYjK.”

Vinay Kumar says, “They can involve themselves in any reliable organisation working for conservation in whatever capacity they can. Doctors, politicians, religious leaders, teachers, housewives, businessmen...whatever you are, you can play important roles in conservation.”

This is what you can do
Graphic designers can make posters and pamphlets to educate other people and field operatives

Website developers can make websites for organisations involved in conservation

echanical and electrical engineers can help the Forest Department make better use of solar energy at the ground level. For example: To re-charge wireless sets

Doctors can treat people living in and around protected areas so that they can protect the forests better

Agricultural scientists can teach better farming techniques to people dwelling near forests so that crops can be less palatable to crop-raiding wildlife. This will reduce human-wildlife conflicts

Public Relations for the tiger: people with contacts in governments and legislatures can share their contacts with conservationists. 

Suggestions from Sanjay Gubbi, assistant director (conservation science and policy), Wildlife Conservation Society-India Programme. He says, “People must first educate themselves about the priorities and important threats to tiger conservation. Once priorities are clear, the rest will follow.""