The Arctic isn’t your usual vacation spot, says Suhel Seth, but one that draws you to examine the quotidien
 
 When I began planning for the trip, not one person I spoke to thought I was sane. They told me of the problems I would encounter; how gruelling the regimen would be. I was also informed of the extremities of the weather and the fact that the region had hardly experienced any human traffic.
 
 I have been to almost every place on this planet, except for the Arctic and Antarctica. That was the first reason to make the trudge to the Arctic. I wanted to alter the leitmotif of taking vacations. For me the trip was as much about the travel as about the challenges that lay ahead.
 
 I arrived in Bergen which is in the South-West of Norway to take the ship to the Arctic Circle. From there we began a 12-day journey, of which five would be without any form of communication — no Internet, mobile or any form of contact with the outside world. So before you read on, ask yourself if you can be with yourself for five days not knowing what is going on in the world. From Bergen we continued our journey up north, passing the amazing Norwegian towns of Trondheim and Tromso and sailing towards the Isle of Runde which has the largest number of Arctic birds (half a million at any point). We passed some magical fjords; saw the Seven Sisters which is amongst the world’s prettiest waterfalls and it was only on Day 6 of our journey that we began pushing further north. In geographical terms, when you cross a latitude of 70 degrees North, you are within the Arctic Circle, but then we were not going to be happy with just that. The expedition was to take us as close to the North Pole as is legally permissible.
 
 We encountered tonnes of flat floating ice (which is distinct from icebergs) and it was only on Day 8 of the expedition that we saw the amazing wonder of ice and snow. We had now reached a latitude of 80 degrees: it was blisteringly cold with temperatures dropping to minus 32 degrees Celsius and when you are out on a small zodiac (an inflatable boat) whizzing towards glaciers and encountering not just sub-zero temperatures, but equally strong winds of about 120 kmph do you realise why this expedition is considered to be even more gruelling than one to Antartica.
 In between all the glacial walks, there was a lot of work to be done aboard the ship. Every day, there were at least three to four lectures on subjects like Arctic birds, polar bears and the whales you would find in the Arctic Ocean. We saw the Blue Whale (considered to be the biggest animal on the planet) besides the Beluga and Humpback whales. We also saw Skuas take flight — the most intelligent of all birds known — and the Northern Gannet. More magical wildlife lay ahead.
 
 On these expeditions there is no sleep for two reasons. For one, there is no nightfall. Further, sightings could happen any time and you would get about 10 minutes to wear at least five layers of clothing and your boots, and jump on to Zodiacs to see the wildlife that had been spotted. It was one such morning at 2 am that some of us whizzed to a glacier to spot a polar bear. When you come that close to an animal in its natural habitat, the experience is truly magical. We were in the middle of the ocean freezing to death when we watched a polar bear sit for hours on end, and trudge away eventually. We also saw a bearded seal lazing on another piece of flat ice. Here, one must share the caution that expedition teams have to take. Voices are down to a whisper and no movement is allowed on the zodiac for fear of disturbing the wildlife.
 
 We spent almost four days in the region in the coldest and the fiercest weather. There were glacial walks galore and it was on one of these walks that we encountered the reindeer, which is larger than its depictions in pretty Santa Claus pictures.
 
 I came away with an experience that I can never do full justice to in words. In the lives we lead, we often forget about the charm and ruthlessness of unspoilt nature. Both sit elegantly. For me, the Arctic was not just an expedition. It was the beginning of another life, one in which you move away from the usual and seek what is often ignored.
 
 Travel pointers
 Getting there
 » Fly to Bergen, Norway or Oslo. From Bergen, get onto an expedition ship such as the Silver Explorer part of Silversea Cruises (www.silversea.com) or from Oslo, fly to Longyearbyen and join the National Geographic expedition ship.
 
 Do remember
 » Polar-wear to protect your extremities: Gumboots for wet landings, gloves to avoid frost-bites » Carry medicines: no pharmacies in the Arctic Ocean » Carry a back-up battery for your camera, its battery may freeze » Sun-block and sun-glasses: the Arctic sun can cause a burn in minutes »Tell folks not to expect calls or emails: there is no satellite communication of any kind in the Arctic for days on end