Amended Wildlife Protection Act to come into force from today 

Are you a wildlife enthusiast looking for an exotic pet? Do you have an iguana in your backyard or a wild cat tiptoeing inside your living room? If you have an exotic or unheard-of animal species as a pet, it is time you declare the stock to the government to avoid prosecution.

As the amended Wildlife Protection Act is kicking in across the country from today (April 1), keeping any undeclared exotic animal species will put you on the wrong side of the law.

“A voluntary disclosure scheme that was announced in 2020 and the notification for which is on the central government’s Parivesh portal preceded the amendment. As per the notification, those with exotic animal species have the opportunity to declare the animals they have as pets. If they fail to do so, it will be considered an offense,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

While many have exercised this option and declared the exotic animal stock, officials from Karnataka Forest Department say they expect many more declarations in the coming days.

However, city-based experts say that the amended act with the one-time voluntary disclosure scheme is already fueling the illegal trade market in exotic animals leading to serious concerns. The scheme is going to open up a floodgate of illegal trade of exotic animals in India

“Fundamentally, the Voluntary Disclosure Scheme is rewarding those who had smuggled in exotic live species of wild animals which were prohibited items in the Negative list of imports. Shockingly, those in illegal possession of such smuggled animals got their stock legalised in one stroke without any penalties. This ill-advised scheme has been pushed through by the central government even when planning to include CITES regulations in the Wildlife Act, which will now come into force from April 1,” said Praveen Bhargav, trustee, Wildlife First and former member of National Board for Wildlife.

This ill-advised scheme has been pushed through by the central govt–Praveen Bhargav
Already, we are beginning to see the negative impacts with kangaroos escaping in the North East and such ‘regularised’ animals entering the illegal trade, he added.
Experts say, with the infiltration of many exotic species, the danger of zoonotic diseases spreading is going to be high, notwithstanding the claim of ensuring disease surveillance.

“With practically no disease surveillance mechanism and monitoring in place, it appears that we have not learnt any lessons from the recent pandemic. Even though national interest is considered as supreme, the decision makers have done a great disservice to the safety and well-being of our indigenous species of wildlife by notifying this scheme,” explained Bhargav.