By Vivian D’Souza 
 
 There were positives that came with the olden days. So with development. But both command their price. At best, Grey is what describes this story of change
 
 
 	 
 
 My father purchased this house in 1971 as a good place to retire as it reminded him of his childhood in Mangalore spent in independent houses with large compounds. As his whole working life was in the heart of noisy cities, he thought ‘WAVERLEY’ would be the ideal place for him.
 
 I remember all my friends in town (as Bangalore was referred to then) were aghast at the thought that our family was shifting to a place half way to Madras or Chennai as it is known now. No doubt these friends did eventually drop by during the weekends for picnics and enjoyed spending the day here visiting places like Alembic Glass Factory, and Joy Icecream Factory, where they used to allow one to eat all the icecream you could within the premises. You could not take any outside though. The all-time favourite used to be the cassata ball. 
 
 Many used to travel by train, get down at Whitefield railway station situated at Kadugodi and come up on the road to Whitefield. As one senior citizen put it, “The approach to the hamlet of Whitefield was a road through a pass between two hills. Sadly, today, only one hill remains as the other has given way to the call of development.
 
 Whitefield was then like a large family where everyone knew each other and we picked up and pieced together the history of Whitefield and Waverely passed on by word of mouth, now common knowledge and available on the Net.
 
 No doubt it was a different Whitefield then with a lot of wildlife, especially, birds like the hoopie, mynah, pigeons and seven sisters chirping about. The grocery stores on the main road were teeming with sparrows. I haven’t seen one in years now. 
 
 The baker, butcher and the vegetable vendors used to come to our doorstep with their wares but for every other thing, a visit to town was necessary. These trips had to be
 meticulously planned as the bus service was sparse and sometimes only hourly. If you missed the bus, you might as well come home and plan all over again. After an evening movie show, if you missed the 9.45pm bus back, there was nothng you could do but wangle a ride upto Marathahalli by a kind HAL bus driver then leg it the rest of the way in pitch darkness. 

Read Also
Showers soothe heat- struck city
  Our telephone system was in its infancy. We had two-digit numbers. It was a trunk call to Bangalore which could take a whole day to connect as the Whitefield telephone exchange used to be overloaded with lightning calls booked by secretaries of the industry honchos of Whitefield and therefore, they got priority. It was quicker to catch a bus, go to town and speak to the person rather than wait for the ordinary trunk call to get connected. 
 
 But change has come. In fact, Bangalore has come to Whitefield. Everything, from Marathahalli to Hoskote, is called Whitefield. We no longer have to go to town for anything. Everything is available here. Who would have thought that we would have AC buses plying to town, direct line telephones, tarred roads, streetlights etc?
 But progress comes at a price. The boom in population has led to mushrooming of high-rise buildings and garbage all over the place. 
 
 All old properties like ours have our own composte pits to convert our organic waste to compost for use in our garden. 
 
 The inner circle had the village green in the centre which hosted many hockey, football and cricket matches. An annual feature used to be a cricket match held during Christmas, between bachelors and married men, which was great fun. As a wag put it, “The married played with a minimal loss of energy.” 
 
 The inner circle also had a man-made pond created by the excavation of soil used to build the houses of the inner circle. The storm water drains used to fill this pond during the monsoon so much so that it was full perennially. This pond used be a habitat of so many frogs that when the first rains arrived, there used to be a cacophony of mating calls all through the night. Now these ponds have been filled up and a park stands in its place. Whitefield is no longer a large family. In fact, no one seems to know anyone anymore. The roads and shops are filled with strangers. I cannot believe that once we could reach Trinity Circle in 30 minutes. In today’s era, it takes that much time to reach Varthur Kodi. I suppose that is the price we pay for development.
 
 (The author is a resident of Whitefield)