A criminal case has been booked against the state chapter of the NGO People for Animals (PFA) headed by animal activist and former union minister Maneka Gandhi. The Karnataka state forest department (FD) has registered a complaint against members of the NGO for killing 20 highly endangered black kites, illegally. Activists claim this is ‘’as bad as killing a tiger.’’
 
 A fuming Maneka has called Principal Chief Conservator of Forests(Wildlife) Gayathriprasad S Prabhu a ‘‘mad person who should be removed from service and put inside jail.’’
 
 The 20 kites were destroyed between January 20, 2013 and February 02, 2013.The ailments these kites suffered included severe wounds, resulting in crushing of bones, torn chests, gangrene, septic wounds, severe sepsis and nerve injuries. Twelve kites were put to sleep in January and the rest in February.
 
 But, under the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, any person who intends to kill wild animals or cull wild birds has to obtain prior permission from the state’s Chief Wildlife Warden, who is also the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife).
 
 Prabhu (in pic), who took charge of the post in July, told BM: “I do not have any comments to make in public. I have written to the state government in detail explaining the issue. There is nothing vindictive and all are equal in the eye of the law. Following the powers vested in me by the Wildlife Act, without any fear, I have taken action against the violation under the Act and brought to the notice of the law. Now law has to take its own course.
 
 In a complaint dated October 30 to Chief Judicial Magistrate in Bangalore Rural district, the Range Forest Officer (RFO) of Kaggalipura Range of Bangalore Urban Forest division M Nagaraja stated that as many as 20 black kites -- a wild bird under Schedule I (highly endangered) of the
 
 Wildlife Act, 1972 -- were illegally destroyed at the PFA’s shelters in Bangalore. The complaint, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, states: “Honorable Magistrate be pleased to take cognizance of the offence and set the process for trial as under Criminal Procedure Code 1973 and direct the Assistant Conservator of Forest, Bangalore South Sub Division, to conduct investigation into the case under section 202 of the said code read along with the Wildlife Act.”
 
 Cases have been filed against PFA’s Alpana Bharatia, Founder Trustee, Trustees Namrata Duggar, Arushi Poddar, Gauri Maini Hira, and Kishan, Manager, PFA. Bharatia said: ‘’I can’t say anything on the matter as it is subjudice.’’
 
 Maneka told Bangalore Mirror: ‘’The birds were in terrible condition and hence put to sleep. It is completely legal. The Principal Chief Conservator has registered a false complaint against PFA. His act is revengeful and ill conceived.’’
 
 “The kites were put to sleep in January. After that, the DFO gave us a clean chit. The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) also gave its approval for this act. If Prabhu wants to, he can file a case against the CZA. He can’t do it against us,’’ Maneka said.
 
 Maneka claimed the PFA had filed a defamation case against Prabhu. “I have already spoken to CZA and the state government brass. They will be initiating disciplinary action against those who are party to registering a false case against PFA.”
 
 The PFA chief contended that the PCCF had ordered the filing of the case to take revenge upon her organization, which had questioned several of Prabhu’s orders earlier, including those permitting religious institutions to use elephants for their events. “The media went after him. Prabhu threatened that he would destroy our hospitals (PFA shelters in Bangalore). He is not interested in wildlife and things like that. He simply wants to take revenge.
 
 “Kites are not under schedule I. The question here is not of schedule I or schedule 20, or whatever. The question is, the 20 kites were suffering very much. Nobody sets up a hospital to destroy animals right? We have done it within the scope of the law,’’ Maneka said. Further, she claimed that principal secretary, forests, N Sivasailam had given a note in writing to forest minister Ramanath Rai complaining about Prabhu’s “disobedient’’ behavior.
 
 Killing Black Kites is as good as killing Tigers
 Both black kites and tigers have been classified under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Preservation) Act of 1972. The act, keeping in mind the level of extinction and status of their present numbers in the wild, has classified animals and birds particularly wild species under various schedules ranging from Schedule I to IV. Any offence including killing or injuring, in relation to any animal or bird specified under Schedule I shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three-years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than Rs 10,000.