Rain-induced flooding in Bengaluru has brought out snakes in residentials; it is important to know how to deal with this

First it was torrential rains, and now, it is reptiles and rodents who are making life miserable for people residing in Sarjapur road, Bellandur, Mahadevpura, Marathahalli, Whitefield, and Ramagondanahalli.

Asked to temporarily shift to safer locations by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), the shattered owners revealed that all the apartments in the area were flooded. Some of the youngsters who made attempts to pump out water and clear the debris in the basements were bitten by snakes.
 
While a major percentage of snakes and rodents have been washed away by the floods, the reptiles who survived have sought shelter in garages, gardens, and store rooms. In Bengaluru, Russell’s Viper, Saw Scaled Viper, Common Krait, and the Spectacled Cobra are commonly found, and apart from the four venomous species, many non-venomous types are looking for food in their bid to survive.

Hospitals are full of snake bite cases and many have run out of Anti Snake Venom Serum (ASVS). Baptist, Bowring, and St.John’s hospitals stock ASVS in large doses as they treat the highest number of snake bite victims each year.
 
Reptile expert and Wildlife conservationist Anees Mohammed pointed out that snakes shifting out of their homes are aggressive. They can attack at the slightest provocation.

“Snakes prefer to take shelter under cars, and if the rubber seals are worn out, they get inside through the seals or AC ducts into the glove compartment,” said Anees, adding that hundreds of snake bite cases were reported in the last three days. He said the numbers will only increase unless the BBMP deploys a team of professional snake catchers.

Mohan Krish, Wildlife Rescuer, BBMP forest cell, said they have been getting around 10-15 calls for snake rescues. Snakes are generally spotted in vacant plots or basements, he said.

“As the water levels have receded, snakes are coming out. People tend to get scared and try to harm the snake. We tell them the do’s and don’ts on calls. The common snakes seen are the rat and water snake,” he said.

Meanwhile, he pointed out that the BBMP has not given the wildlife rescuers any safety equipment. “We are not provided with rain coats or even gum boots. Nor are we given salaries on time,” he informed.

Snakes prefer to take shelter under cars, and if the rubber seals are worn out, they get inside through the seals or AC ducts­ into the glove compartment–Anees Mohammed, reptile expert 
Although many snake bites were reported, hospitals in urban areas revealed that many of the cases have not reached them. “With the floods going on, no cases have been reported to us,” said a senior doctor from KC General Hospital.
 
Dr Aravinda S N, consultant, Internal Medicine, Aster RV Hospital, explained that snakes whose habitats are destroyed might take refuge in drier areas. This increases the chances of humans getting bitten.

Rats are also making life miserable for people. Big, hungry rats are readily attacking cats. A couple of complaints of rats biting the legs of infants have been reported at government hospitals in Ramanagar, said Narasimha Murthy, a builiding contractor who has shifted his family to Kengeri after more than 100 houses in his area partially collapsed.

Do’s and don’ts

Anees Mohammed shared some guidelines to safely deal with snakes in waterlogged houses.

Do’s:
1. If you need to clear debris, slush, and muck in front of your house or in the garden, use a shovel or a big iron rod

2. Wear rubber boots at least 10 inches high if you are walking in waterlogged areas

3. Seal all openings in your house larger than 1/8 inch and keeps the windows and doors closed

4. Flush out water pipes twice daily; most snakes take shelter in there

5. If you spot a snake at home, move away and keep watching its movements while you make a call to the snake rescuers

6. If bitten by a non-venomous snake, wash the wound thoroughly with clean water or any antiseptic liquid; if swelling and bleeding continues, get first aid done at a local clinic
 
Don’t’s:
1. Don’t panic if bitten by a snake. Rush to a hospital and get a shot; don’t waste time with home remedies

2. Do not suck the wound and don’t apply any local medicines on the bite

3. There are no proven toxicants, fumigants, or repellants which drive away snakes, so avoid spraying all this

4. Don’t try to attack or kill a snake; snakes normally avoid conflicts with humans, but if attacked, they get aggressive
 
5. Don’t try and clear debris with your hands and do not step over any wood pieces or rusted metal sheets