A pleasant surprise at Kundapura beach

For the locals living around Kodi beach in Kundapura and the tourists visiting the popular beach destination, it came as a pleasant surprise. Forest officials, volunteers, and locals teamed up to clean the beach’s trash accumulated over the years. As a result, Olive Ridley turtles, not seen on the beach since 2017, were spotted once again on the beach laying eggs. Locals have now fenced the area with nets to ensure that the eggs are safe.
 
Olive Ridley turtles are often seen on the coastal belt. However, they were hardly seen since 2017 which had caused concern among wildlife experts. However, on January 22, local fisherman spotted that 88 eggs were laid by these turtles. Around 120 eggs were laid on January 24, 120 on Jan 26, and 150 on January 29. 
Range Forest Officer (RFO) Prabhakar Kulal said, "These turtles are a rare species. Earlier, they would be spotted near Maravanthe, Kodi, Bhatkal and Honnavar beaches. Currently, we are observing the area."

The egg-laying season for Olive Ridley is between October and January and each turtle can lay anything from 100 to 160 eggs– Dinesh Saranga
 
Dinesh Saranga, Chief Coordinator and Rakesh Soans, president of FSL India said that three species of turtles are found near the beaches in coastal Karnataka: Olive Ridley, Green Turtles and Leatherback sea turtles. "We have not seen much of green turtles since 2010 while Olive has now become a rarity though Leatherbacks are seen in the sea.

The eggs laid by the Ridley turtles will hatch in 48 - 52 days


 The egg-laying season for Olive Ridley is between October and January and each turtle can lay anything from 100 to 160 eggs. Sometimes they are caught in fishing nets while many predators also attack them," said Saranga. Now, various local groups led by the forest team have created a green zone to keep an eye on the eggs. It would take 48 to 52 days for the eggs to hatch. The area has been fenced with nets so that no one can go near it.
 
Locals say they are happy that the cleaning up process has given them good results. "We would find a lot of plastic and chappals all over. So far, we have transported around 30 trucks of trash from Kodi beach,” added a local.