By Rachana Ramesh

Vihaan, a fifth-grade student at Kumarans School, has achieved the Category Winner title in the under-10 age group of the esteemed Wildlife Photographer of the Year (WPY) competition, organised by the Natural History Museum, London. Vihaan’s remarkable photographic skills and commitment to capturing the wonders of the natural world have earned him this prestigious recognition.

Vihaan’s journey into the world of photography began at the tender age of seven, under the guidance of his father, Vikas TR, a passionate wildlife enthusiast. Inspired by his father’s love for nature and photography, Vihaan developed a deep connection with the environment and embarked on his photographic adventure. The 10-year-old told Bangalore Mirror that his winning photograph was captured when he was out on a trip with his father and friends to Nallur tamarind grove, about 40 km away from Bengaluru, very close to the Kempegowda International Airport (KIA).

The Nallur tamarind grove is a 54-acre biodiversity heritage site with over 300 tamarind trees believed to have been planted during the reign of King Rajendra Chola in the 12th century.
 
The grove is also home to a temple dedicated to Chennakeshava. “The ruined temple is adorned with depictions from the life of Krishna. The image has been taken there,” Vihaan said while adding that the wildlife captured in the frame is an ornamental tree trunk spider. The premises are home to more than 60 species of flora and fauna, including pangolin, slender loris, sunbird, Russell’s viper, cobra, banyan, wood apple and several other varieties of trees.

  .

The WPY competition, hosted by the Natural History Museum, London, is among the most competitive platforms for wildlife photographers worldwide. It attracts submissions from photographers of all ages and backgrounds, representing more than half of the countries across the globe. This year, the competition received a staggering 50,000 images, each capturing the diversity of the natural world. Out of this vast pool of entries, only 100 images were short listed for recognition and awards. Vihaan’s image will be part of the WPY59 collection. It will be presented in the Wildlife Photographer of the Year Exhibition at the Natural History Museum in October, which tours annually to around 25 venues across four continents.