Glossy touch
Resin has taken over everything, so why not your coffee tables or side tables. In this workshop, learn to make your own geode shaped wooden top with gold metal base table with the sheen and shine of resin and choose your own colours to personalise it. You will also learn how to work with different kind of bases, do’s and don’ts of resin art, different techniques to blend pigments and more. Studio Chhavi, HSR Layout , South Bangalore Check Estimated Time, 10.30am-1pm, August 6-9, `500, 
eventshigh.com and `8,500 at the venue 

Drip theory 
If there’s one trend in the cake world which is far from dying out, it is making a classic drip cake, so follow the suit and learn to make one. At this workshop, you will learn how to bake a rich chocolate cake with caramel filling, make Swiss meringue buttercream from scratch, prepare your cakes for decoration, create stylish drips on your cakes and make an upside-down ice cream cone. Flourish, School Of Baking Cake Decor 123-125, Brigade Road, 3pm-6pm, August 6-August 7, `4,980, eventshigh.com 

Soap opera
Soap-making is all the rage in the workshop circuit in the city, and this one will teach you how to make five cold pressed soaps – face bars, hanger swirl, pot swirl, pure coconut soap and milk soap. You will also be given a lowdown about the ingredients (oils, lye, water, additives, clays), you will learn to formulate your own recipe, you will learn to unmould and cut the soaps, and more. Nitya Jaivika, HV Nanjundaiah Road, Malleswaram West, 11am-3pm, 
August 6, `4,000, eventshigh.com 

Clay play 
Ganesh Chaturthi is a month away, still this venue is inviting people to make their own ganesha idols. The facilitators will demonstrate step-by-step process to make an eco-friendly statue using one micron filtered natural terracotta clay and other tools. Art Station Clay Potterym 10.30am-12.30pm, August 6, `1,000, eventshigh.com

DJs in the house 
The CandyMen, DJ Nash and DJ Raghu Achar are back in the mix to drop all of their favourite beats. The occasion is Meow Tuesday Nights, a party that is packed with groovy tunes and is meant for girls and their girlfriends. Head out with your dancing shoes and have fun. 

 WHERE: Kitty Ko, Kumara Krupa High Grounds WHEN: 7pm onwards, August 6 ENTRY: Free for the ladies

Comedy express
Laughs Over Latte is what it sounds to be – an evening of cracking and carefree dose of jokes to be savoured between bites and sips. Local talent Lalit Tyagi, Pronoy Chowdhury, Yash Gayatri Parikh, Suvagata Pritam Goswami, Himanshu Parikh (headliner) promise to make you laugh till your face goes red. 

 WHERE:Loft, 6th Block, 
Koramanagala WHEN: 8pm, August 6 
 ENTRY: `149, bookmyshow.com

Art for a cause
JagaChitra is an annual photography exhibition, conducted by TGiS (Thank God it’s Saturday). The 7th edition of this event brings together an art and a cause come. All proceeds from the exhibition will be donated to the Multiple Sclerosis Society of India (MSSI). Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an unpredictable, often disabling disease of the central nervous system that disrupts the flow of information within the brain, and between the brain and body. Since 2015, TGiS has been associated with the Multiple Sclerosis Society of India (MSSI). With JagaChitra, TGiS generates a substantial amount which is used for patients below the poverty line and their treatments. All sales proceeds are donated to the MSSI Bangalore Chapter. This year, the exhibition will also advocate with MSSI for the rights of persons with MS – to offer them better work and care conditions. JagaChitra, which literally means ‘universe taken as a picture’ and also ‘wonder of the universe’, is a space where photographs taken by TGiS members from around the world are displayed, showcasing scenic locales, culture, wildlife, nature, and people. ‘Thank God it’s Saturday!’ or TGiS, as it is known among its members, is an exclusive group of photographers, both experienced and amateur, who despite their varied professions get together every weekend to pursue their collective love for photography. 

 WHERE:Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath, Kumara Krupa Road
 WHEN: 10am to 7pm, August 8 to 11