As part of the effort, Centre for Ecological Sciences digitally mapped 5,000 plant varieties and segregated them district-wise
 
 Conservation and protection of unique varieties of flora endemic to Karnataka has always been a matter of concern. Despite stringent rules, several endangered species from various forests of the state have been axed over the years. In the absence of a full-fledged database of Karnataka’s plant wealth, authorities too found it difficult to locate and safeguard these varieties of species. 

 Now, putting an end to mindless plundering of plant wealth, scientists at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have come up with the country’s first digital map of plant wealth exclusively for Karnataka. This will soon be made available to the public through its website. 

 	The digital repository – Herbarium JCB – maps 5,000 different vascular plant species spread across various districts of the state. It is the result of painstaking efforts by K Sankara Rao and his team of volunteers comprising researchers from the IISc’s Centre for Ecological Sciences. 

 	Rao said, “The digital herbaria on regional flora would lead to creating informatics in the developing world to help achieve the goals of sustainable resource management and species conservation. Despite a rich flora spreading across evergreen forests of Western Ghats, dry deciduous forests of Malnad and the plains of the state, there is hardly any database of such unique variety with us. 

 	“In fact, out of the 5,000 plant species that we have recorded, as many as 3,956 are yet to be assessed. Such is our ignorance.” 

 

 	Work started in 2006 

 	Work on the digital plant database by IISc took off in 2006. The origin of the database, however, is attributed to creation of a herbarium (a collection of preserved plant species) at St Joseph’s College, Bangalore, way back in 1963. Rao said, “When I was working as botany lecturer at St Joseph’s, a senior colleague of mine, Cecil J Saldanha, started exploration for unique species and began a herbarium. He even got Smithsonian assistance to compile unique flora of Hassan district. Much of the data for our database has been provided by this. Later, I joined the IISc in 1982 as Biochemistry faculty. Post-retirement since 2002 I have been associated with Centre for Ecological Sciences in developing their herbarium.” 

 	According to the database, there are about 120 species endemic to Karnataka. Out of these, 72 species have been declared as endangered and need urgent action to conserve them. 

 	A researcher who worked for the project explained, “The details and entries of our digital database are entirely based on the data and collection of flora executed till 1990. Developments since then are yet to be included into the database. All 3,956 species need to be evaluated for various uses. 

 	“Our team has travelled extensively in the forests of all the districts, braving harsh weather conditions and wildlife threats. At some places, there was absolutely no place to accommodate us. We stayed under trees and collected these species. All of us have worked even during heavy rains, been bitten by insects, leeches and been gripped with fear of snake bite.” 

 

 	USER-FRIENDLY 

 	People can search for the species using their common names, botanical name or taxonomic names. Rao said, “Five thousand plants include both flowering and fern species. The database is user-friendly and interactive. Users can search by entering just features of the trees or pictures of the trees. If they enter the district name also, they could get district specific trees. 

 	“For each of the species, we have updated with the photos of tree, bark, flowers etc, besides giving information on uses, local name, botanical name, origin of the species. The only detail that we have not disclosed is the place where we found these species as it might prompt antisocial elements to exploit the species for illegal means.”