By: Kushala Satyanarayana
 
 
 For wildlife biologist Sanjay Gubbi, a calm Sunday afternoon in February quickly turned into a life-altering experience. A violent encounter with a leopard that had entered a school campus left him with severe injuries requiring intense treatment that cost several lakh. Now, seven months after the incident, having undergone two surgeries, 55 stitches and the loss of sensation in his right hand due to a damaged radial nerve, Gubbi is back on his feet.
 
 
 Gubbi refused the government’s gesture to pay his hospital bills and instead wrote to the wildlife department asking if ex-gratia, as per rules, could be extended to him in this case. He is still awaiting an answer. “I have not asked for any compensation, nor would I like to be considered as a special case. In response to their oral offer to cover my hospital and medical bills, I wrote back that I should only be considered for an ex-gratia as per existing laws and rules, if I am eligible. It was the call of duty and I am happy I assisted them,” he says.
 
 
 Gubbi is a member of the State Board for Wildlife and works with the Nature Conservation Foundation. On February 7, when a male leopard entered a school campus in Whitefield, Gubbi was called in and asked by the forest department to help tackle the wild cat. He rushed to the spot and while trying to prevent the animal from leaving the campus – which would have been disastrous, considering the presence of a huge mob outside – Gubbi became the target of the agitated animal. It attacked Gubbi before it was tranquilised.
 
 
 Gubbi sustained severe injuries to his hip, leg, and arm. The bites were so severe that bones in Gubbi’s right hand were crushed and resulted in severe infection. He was hospitalised and underwent two surgeries, including a reconstruction procedure. As many as 55 deep gashes had to be stitched. The treatment cost him upwards of Rs 6 lakh.
 
 
 Initially, Gubbi had problems with his private insurance firm – first the company wanted “proof”, and then the policy was cancelled, alleging that his profession was not declared accurately. However, following news reports in the media, the insurance company covered one-quarter of the expenses.
 
 
 When he was still in hospital, the government committed to taking care of his medical bills and had asked the forest department to work on it. However, after his discharge, Gubbi wrote to the principal chief conservator of forests and head of the forest force, politely rejecting the offer, and requested if ex-gratia could be extended to him as per rules.
 
 
 “I was hurt during the operation and had to be admitted to hospital and undergo surgeries. I thank the forest department for having offered to cover my medical expenses. This is a very noble gesture from your side. I request that an ex-gratia, as applicable to any common man injured in such situations, be extended to me as per existing laws, rules and guidelines. I again thank you all for the cooperation and kind offer made,” says Gubbi’s letter.
 
 
 However, the forest department hasn’t got back to Gubbi on this. Quite surprisingly, PCCF and head of the forest force, RS Suresh, said he had no idea about the issue.
 “I am new here and though I am the head of the department, I am unaware of this. Please talk to the PCCF, wildlife, who handles this,’’ Suresh told Bangalore Mirror. The PCCF, wildlife, BJ Hosmath had this to say: “On record, I am not aware of this issue.’’