Karnataka Forest and Fire Departments, with United Conservation Movement reinstates fire training programmes, equipping local communities to combat forest fires after 3 years

In collaboration with the Karnataka Forest Department and the Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services Department, the United Conservation Movement organised a firefighting training workshop for local community members at Bandipur Tiger Reserve today.

Dr Ramesh Kumar, the field director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve, and the District Forest Officer addressed the participants. They spoke about the devastating impact of forest fires and urged local residents to join hands with the government in safeguarding forests, wildlife, and biodiversity.

The United Conservation Movement has been organizing forest firefighting training programs for the past eight years. However, when Covid 19 emerged, the training sessions were halted. Although they were scheduled to resume in December 2023, they were postponed. Finally, after a hiatus of three years, the workshop has now been restarted. On February 5, the workshop took place in collaboration with forest officials and local residents from the forest fringe villages of Bandipur. 

Containing the forest fire and extinguishing it
The Forest Department arrived from Gundulpet with two extinguishing vehicles. Gururaj, the District Fire Officer from Chamrajnagar, along with nine of his staff, provided hands-on training on using the equipment. They oriented the participants about various tools such as chemical fire extinguishers, air blowers, fire beaters, and fire engines.

Over 22 youths from the surrounding villages of Gundulpet, Nanjangudu, and other areas attended the training programme. They will receive participation certificates from the Fire Department, Forest Department, and the United Conservation Movement. These trained individuals will be available during forest fire emergencies to assist the Forest Department with the hands-on experience they have gained. Moreover, they will support the Forest Department by providing water and other necessities when personnel are actively firefighting.

Daniel Sukumar, a Trustee of the United Conservation Movement, said, “We have been conducting the training for the past eight years. It started when a big fire had happened in Bandipur.

  Bandipur wildfire destroys 10 acres, swiftly doused by Forest Department.
 
We decided to help the Forest Department along with the locals, and we started the training program. We train both forest officials and locals. Now, since the forest officials are already trained, the aim is to train the locals. We had a gap due to Covid-19 and have started again now. We are conducting it in Bandipur and Bannerghata. This year, we wanted to do it in Nagarhole, but due to logistics, we couldn’t do it. So, we initiated again in Bandipur. Early detection and containing of fire are most important, as every hour counts. We spoke about the man-made forest fire awareness.”

Sukumar further added, “Right now, the locals underwent training in connecting the hose pipe with different types of nozzles and using the Quick Response Vehicle (QRV) to extinguish small fires. They also learned to use tree cutters to cut down dry, burning trees to contain the fire.”

The training involved awareness of man-made fires caused by the Forest Department. “Early detection and containment of fire are important as every hour counts,” he added.