Puppies, kittens, fish, birds and rabbits as pets are passe — it’s the age of guinea pigs in Bangalore! Dealers in pets say guinea pig sales are rising, not least because they are not too expensive and are easy to look after. They claim that many pet shops sell 15-25 guinea pigs every month for anything between Rs 800 and Rs 1,200 a pair. 
 
 Guinea pigs have a long history as pets in the West, whereas in India they have mostly been seen as — well — ‘guinea pigs’ for lab experiments.
 
 But, despite the fact that they belong to the rodent family, they are now becoming increasingly popular as pets in cities like Bangalore.
   “Unlike dogs, they don’t get depressed if their master is not around. Moreover, they do not require any training and there’s no problem of scattered poop as they stay in an enclosure. Plus, they’re cute,” said Supritha Raman, a techie who stays in BTM Layout and bought a pair of guinea pigs from a shop in Shivajinagar recently. 
   “Guinea pigs are quiet by nature and the ease of taking care of them makes them different from other pets in the Indian pet market. My daughter saw one at a neighbour’s home and fancied it so much, I came here to buy one,” said Sumana, whom Bangalore Mirror met at a pet shop.
   Breeders have taken the cue from the increasing demand for guinea pigs. Abdul Wahab, owner of Wet Pets on Infantry Road, said, “Every month we sell 15 to 20 guinea pigs. They live for four to eight years.” Dr Rohin, a resident of Indiranagar, said, “I don’t have a pet shop but I breed them at home. It is not illegal as they are considered domestic animals.”
   Wahab said taking care of a guinea pig is no big deal as their food demands are not too complicated. “They need a daily and fresh supply of oats, hay, fruits, veggies, red pepper and water. There is also a supplement called Cunipic which is good for their health,” he said. “I keep grass along with fresh fruits and veggies, and she is great. I named her Chuchu and we treat her like a part of the family,” said Rahul, a guinea pig owner who was at Wet Pets to buy Chuchu’s food.
   Deepak, another guinea pig owner, said, “My guinea pig is cute, clean and easy to take care of. They can be really entertaining, but it is also important to take good care of these cute little beings.” Ecologist and bio-diversity expert Harish Bhat said, “The advantage of keeping guinea pigs as pets is that they are not protected under any wildlife law. The trend is picking up in cities. However, when it comes to hygiene, one must be careful and clean their enclosures daily. Further, they are like any other rodents and must be handled with care. Generally, their bite is not good, especially for children. The possibility of their transmitting a disease cannot be ruled out.”