As part of its conservation and rejuvenation measures, the civic agency had extensively planted bamboo along the periphery of Narasipura Lake in Vidyaranyapura to attract migratory birds and to keep the twitter of local species going. The tall grass was especially chosen as it is a great agent of connectivity since it hosts plenty of insects, while also providing a rich supply of material for nests, protection from the elements and a roost at night.
 
 The BBMP’s conservation measures, however, have run into an unexpected hurdle— a few local residents have developed a taste for bamboo shoots. People began loping off the shoots as soon as they appeared, destroying the growth of the plants. With clumps quickly disappearing, the BBMP forest cell has taken a stern view of the thefts.
 
 Last week, when two people were caught carting away about 50 shoots, the forest cell lodged a complaint with the chief conservator of forests. “Although it appears to be a micro problem, it is of serious concern as it has already begun to affect local species of birds, while also driving away migratory species,” Sharath R Babu, advisor, BBMP forest cell, told Bangalore Mirror. “On Saturday, volunteers caught two people carting away about 50 bamboo shoots which they had cut from clumps planted at Narasipura Lake. A complaint was lodged with the chief conservator of forests.” Senior officials in the forest department are looking into the issue.
 
 As with most of the city’s water bodies, Narasipura Lake, spread over 15 acres, had all but dried up, but residents living around the lake joined hands with the civic agency to revive the lake. Since 2009, the civic agency and local residents had planted bamboo along the periphery. The lake is now considered a model of conservation efforts. It is home to more than 40 species of birds including whistling teal, sand pipers, night herons, whistling ducks and spot billed ducks. The theft of shoots has stymied conservation efforts.
 
 “The bamboo shoots were being illegally harvested,” said Kiran Venkatraman, a wildlife volunteer. “When security personnel found the two persons carrying away the shoots they called the BBMP, the forest mobile squad, and local police. But none turned up. The police finally got back, but the thieves were let off with a warning. The shoots were seized.”
 
 “Robbing shoots will undoubtedly have a detrimental effect on the biodiversity of the lake,” said Mohammed E Dilawar, an expert on birds. “People who steal bamboo shoots impair ecological efforts and they can be penalised under the Forest Act and for causing damage to public property.” The minimum penalty is imprisonment of six months for each of the offences.