The forest department has failed in preventing illegal resorts, home stays and hotels from sprouting in protected forest areas including Bandipur and Dandeli Anashi tiger reserve. Coffee plantations, too, have come up in the protected forest areas including wildlife and tiger reserve.
 
 In spite of the issue being highlighted in a recent audit report, commercial establishments are being run in sensitive ecosystem zones and the forest department has done nothing.
 
 Eviction drives have become a challenge due to the lobby comprising industrialists and influencial persons, a highly-placed sources of the forest department said.
 While commercial activities have been restricted 10 km from border of protected forest, many hotels are being run inside sanctuaries in clear violation of forest and tourism policy. The department of forest and Karnataka state pollution control board will have to shoulder the responsibility of controlling them.
 
 However, the forest department has not embarked on taking any steps to prevent illegal resorts. There are 51 commercial hotels in Bandipur, Biligiri Ranga Hills, Kuduremukh, Bhadra, Cauvery wildlife sanctuaries and Dandeli Anashi tiger reserve. Out of these 51, only seven hotels are running as per the norms by obtaining licenses from the forest department.
 
 There are about 50 homestays in Bhadra and Dandeli Anashi tiger reserves. The tourism department has given its nod to only 35 of these.
 
 A few resorts which have come up near lakes where wild animals drink water and in the elephant corridor of the protected forest have been identified.
 
 Coffee plantations belonging to a famous party has been spotted in the area of Biligiri Ranga Hills tiger reserve. Several cases in this regard are in the courts and a team of legal fraternity has not been appointed to dispose such cases, the source said.
 
 Environment Minister Ramanath Rai said that after the Congress government came to power in 2013, there are no illegal activities in the protected forest area. A few cases are in the court and attempt is being made to clear them, he added.