Film made by two Bengalureans is the reason Jan 14 will be celebrated as World Hoolock Gibbon Day in Assam
 
 
 
 Kalia, a Hoolock Gibbon, with filmmaker Nikhil Virdi
 
 ​Kalia is no ordinary ape. She walks on two feet. She drinks water from a hand pump. She picks out lice from anyone willing to offer their scru­ffy heads to her. She pulls the tails of dogs, plays with puppies and mimics humans calling out to her with ‘Hooloo! Hooloo!’ Kalia is also dead.
 
 On January 14, 2016, she bit a boy who had teased her with a catapult three months ago, taking her much-delayed revenge. In retaliation, his father smacked her on the forehead with a shovel, and that was it.
 
 Kalia is a Western Hoolock Gibbon – one of the rarest primates on this planet, and India’s only ape – who lived for 40 years in Digbol, Assam, with the village she had adopted. Bengaluru-based camerapersons Nikhil Virdi and Nitye Sood have made a 12-minute film, Kalia – The Lost Gibbon on her life. Tomorrow, when it is screened to her grieving family in Assam and released online, it will also mark the institutionalisation of World Hoolock Gibbon Day by the locals there, in memory of Kalia. The film was produced by Felis Creations.
 
 Kalia’s is a unique story of human-animal interaction and co-existence, and Virdi and Sood hope the locals’ proclamation of such a day will fuel their efforts to have it recognised and institutionalised by the authorities and wildlife community at large.
 
 Kalia’s story began when, chased out of their homes (Western Hoolock Gibbons live high up in the canopies of trees in the northeast of India) by immigrants who began chopping down trees, she and her parents took to the ground to find new shelter. When a dog attacked baby Kalia, local Bhupeshwar Ningda protected her. From that day on, the Gibbon family adopted Ningda, staying in the village with the family. When Kalia’s father was poached and her mother killed by schoolkids throwing stones at her, Ningda became Kalia’s everything. Over time, she started accepting others in the community, and within 10 years, she was everyone’s friend. “She even ada­pted to the ways of humans,” Virdi says, offering as an example how she learnt not to waste food. “They told us how if she ate half a papaya, the next day she would make sure to finish the other half and then go for any other food if she was hungry.”
 
 Bhupeshwar Ningda’s genial face breaks into a smile as he recounts through broken teeth how Kalia became a family member. The anecdotes come thick and fast from others in the village – Ranjan Kumar Das, divisional forest officer calls her an “adorable lady”; Rajib Rudra Tariang, assistant professor, Zoology department, Digboi College, relates how she would go ‘Hooloo!’; Amiyo Ningda describes how she has been his 5am alarm clock for 40 years, and Shukdave Tamang says he only had to call out to her and she would scratch his head and groom him.
 
 
 
 
 Sood and Virdi have felt Kalia’s death deeply. They met her and shot footage of her in December 2015, intending to make a film about this inimitable relationship she shared with humans. On January 14, 2016, Virdi was shattered when he heard of her death. He was in Rajasthan and started weeping. In March, the duo went back to Digboi, this time to shoot a film that would “do justice” to her life.
 
 While the village still mourns her (she was cremated and a ceremony was held that was attended by the villagers), Sood and Virdi hope the film will go some way in creating awareness about this wonderful animal. “When we think of apes, we think of orangutans and gorillas. People need to know about the Western Hoolock Gibbon too. Apes, after all, share 98 per cent of our DNA,” Virdi says. And if she could adapt and live beyond her years (Western Hoolock Gibbons usually live up to 30-32 years, but Kalia was 40 and when her body was examined after her death, researchers concluded she could have lived for another 10 years), why can’t we adapt to the beautiful creatures around us?