An analysis of the water samples says that lakes in the city’s centre are far cleaner and habitable for fisheries than the ones on the city’s fringes

An analysis of the water sample data of the city’s many lakes -- collected by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) – shows that lakes in the city’s periphery are a lot more substandard than the lakes in the city’s central areas. Peenya and Dasarahalli region has lakes with the worst quality of water while Bengaluru’s southern areas apparently fare better in terms of quality of water.
 
The report, prepared by Action Aid Association, a non-profit organisation, analysed the water samples collected by the KSPCB from 106 lakes of Bengaluru Urban and Rural districts over a period of two years till December 2020.
 
As per the report, Devarekere Tank in Banashankari 5th stage, Lalbagh Tank, Yediyur Lake and Kempambudhi Lake in Bengaluru’s southern region were found to be the best performing lakes with regard to water quality. These are among 24 lakes that have been categorised as ‘D’ to show that the water in these lakes is ‘fit for propagation of wildlife and fisheries.’
 
The criteria for the better performance, report said, is based on the indicative guidelines for water restoration by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which states that if the water sample of a lake remains 75 per cent in a designated parameter over a fixed period of time, then the lake is fit for a designated use.
 
The lakes that feature at the bottom of the list are: Shivapura, Karihobanahalli in Peenya, Gangondanahalli, Chikkabanavara and Visaneedam Lake in Dasarahalli. These lakes are located close to each other in the city’s industrial belt. As per the researchers, the water quality index (WQI) of these lakes remained more than and equal to 50 percent in Class “E” category for over 24 months, clearly indicating that these are the worst performing lakes.
 
The data shows that the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) has done nothing to tackle the discharge of industrial effluents into the lakes.

 . 
Another interesting finding in the report is that the lakes – which come under the Koramangala and Chalaghatta Valley – have reported far better quality of water as compared to the city’s three other valleys. Arkavati Valley was observed to be the worst performing valley as 53 per cent of the collected water samples were identified as Class D and 47 per cent under Class E.
 
Overall, the NGO has analysed 2,351 water samples of different lakes in Karnataka from January December. About 1,191 samples constituting 70.42 per cent has been categorised under “D” and 489 samples constituting 29.04 per cent under “E” – which is suitable only for irrigation or industrial cooling. Out of the total 106 lakes in Bengaluru, none of them are under the class of A and B. This shows that the lake’s water is not suitable for drinking purposes or even for outdoor bathing.
 
“Out of the total water sample from lakes in Bengaluru, only 0.24 per cent (or 4 lake’s water sample) water samples were marked as satisfactory (S). And almost 99.76 per cent (or 1,680 lake water samples) of the total water sample turned out to be unsatisfactory,” the report prepared by the team led by Raghavendra B Pachhapur, Programme Manager at ActionAid Association, stated.
 
According to the researchers, sewage entering lakes is the one of the common reasons for not maintaining designated water quality in lakes of Bengaluru. The recent NEERI report 2021 submitted to High Court also confirms that the domestic sewage as one of the main causes of pollution in the lakes of Bengaluru.