Durrell did establish a  zoo on the island of Jersey, and he brought his mother to live in the manor, on the  grounds of which he established his zoo.  In fact, one of the most charming stories relates to his mother. 

Durrell’s mother had just settled herself in front of the TV with a cup of tea when she heard  a loud bang on the front door.   She opened it to find two young chimps Chumley and Lulu on her doorstep.  

“Not one to be daunted,” Durrell writes, “she invited the chimps in…sat them down on a sofa and opened a large box of chocolates and a tin of biscuits.” For the chimps this was bliss.  She reported their whereabouts quietly on the telephone.  Durrell remonstrated with her for allowing them in.  But dear,” his mother said, “they came to tea…and they had jolly sight better manners than some of the people you’ve had up here.”

Why did Durrell want a private zoo?  Why not a biscuit factory, or a farm, or a market garden, friends and relatives wanted to know.  

He lists many reasons, among them that he had in mind a completely new concept of zoos. He didn’t want them to be mere show places. He wanted them to help the conservation movement by setting up breeding colonies of endangered species. This was to accompany efforts to preserve wild habitats and wild populations. Animals bred in captivity would be released into the wild when their habitats were safe.  

Of course, funds  were a problem.  As Durrell observes, “It has always seemed to me simplicity itself to raise money for things which are of doubtful help to our planet.  Most conservation organisations run around after funds…But should you want money to buy a nuclear submarine, a jolly little pot of nerve gas, an atom bomb or two, the funds are miraculously forthcoming.”  

Durrell also has a word of advice for would-be conservationists:  “In conservation work, if you can’t laugh you must weep and with weeping comes despair.”  

And, of course, there were the familiar problems of government inertia, officials and zoos which never replied to letters, or were as obstructive as they could be.  He was finally successful with the volcano rabbits from Mexico (he eventually had to go there himself because the official blandly denied receiving even registered mail), but not with the white-eared pheasants from China.  

Durrell was born in Jamshedpur in 1925 (he died in 1995).  Unfortunately, we can’t claim him as his family returned to England in 1928, and in 1933 went to live on the Continent.  And yes, he did turn out to be a major force in wildlife conservation, particularly after he founded The Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust.   

Renuka Chatterjee of Westland tells me they have been re-publishing his books for some time, and that the three titles sent to me are in honour of his 85th birth anniversary.  In any case, the books are welcome because Durrell is such a gifted writer.   As with so many conservationists, the writing is affectionate, observant, amusing,  and makes us poignantly aware of just what we are losing.

Liked/hated this column? write to Eunice de Souza at bmfeedback@indiatimes.com