The incident has left forest officials, bird watchers and conservationists in Bengaluru and Tumakuru shocked
 
 Is it an outbreak of a rare disease or spread of an unknown virus? Mysterious death of more than 80 kites in Tumakuru city (70 kilometers from Bengaluru), has set off alarm bells in both the forest department and animal husbandry department of the state. According to locals, in the last four-days more than 80 kites have mysteriously died and they suspect it to be either due to poisoning or the outbreak of a rare disease.
 
 The incident has left forest officials, bird watchers and conservationists in Bengaluru and Tumakuru shocked. According to sources in the forest department, the incident came to light on Friday afternoon with locals collecting carcasses of more than 30 kites near Maralur village on Tumakuru’s outskirts.
 
 Talking to BM, TVN Murthy, Honorary Wildlife Warden, founder advisor Wildlife Aware Nature Club, Tumakuru said, “The incident is indeed shocking. Nowhere in Karnataka have we seen such large number of kites dying mysteriously. Previously, the site was used as landfill but later it was cleared and shifted to the outskirts. Yet, the local slaughterhouse owners dispose of carcasses here. It could be because of poisoning or electrocution. We have complained to the district forest official and they have taken samples to the Veterinary University to ascertain the cause of death.” According to sources, locals have been witnessing the death of kites since Tuesday.
 
 “It was only when the locals called us that we got to know about the incident. When we went on Thursday and Friday we could see about 30 dead kites at the spot and prior to our visit, locals had seen many dead kites. There is a vast field located opposite the site and there could be many more lying dead amidst the bushes. We are worried that this could be an outbreak of some disease or a new virus. In either case, it would not only jeopardise the avian population of Karnataka but threaten humans as well,” Murthy clarified.
 
 Speaking to BM, Vinay Luthra, PCCF (Wildlife) said, “It has come to my notice and I have sought reports from the DCF. We suspect it to be poisoning. But samples have been taken to a laboratory in Bengaluru and hopefully by Monday we will know the reason behind the deaths.”
 
 Officials revealed that only two species of kites—Brahminy kite (Haliastur indus) and Black kite (Milvus migrans) have been found dead. Asked whether the kite or vulture population is dwindling across the state, Luthra clarified: “We do not see that trend as we have documented a high number of vultures and kites across Karnataka. Recently our observation in BRT Tiger Reserve, Nagarhole and other parts of the state has revealed a good number of kites and vultures. But in this case we will wait for the lab reports to reveal the exact cause of death and only after that a decision will be taken in this regard.”