By: Chandan Gowda
 
 
 There appears to be a systematic and sinister design by the government to take over farmlands in Challakere in Chitradurga for ‘scientific operations’, thus depriving farmers of their livelihood 
 
 
 	Hanumanthaiah: “How have we sinned? The government took over the Kaval without the village panchayat knowing about it. We are not valued in the country. We are being pushed into hell (naraka).”
 	
 	  	Dasa Boraiah: “We are innocent people. We should have protested when they had come to do the survey. We are being treated like Vidura in Mahabharata.” 	Palamma: “We have fought and fought. Who will listen to us?”
 	
 	  	Palayya: “The weakness is on our side. If 20,000 people got together, ISRO will have to leave.”
 	
 	  	Bhootayya: “There is not a spot in the Kaval where I haven’t rested with my oxen.” 
 	
 	  	These are snatches of anguished testimonials that local farmers shared with a large audience in Challakere town in the dry district of Chitradurga in Central Karnataka on Republic Day. The meeting was a continuation of protest against the government takeover of contiguous grasslands stretching over 10,000 acres to build a Science City.
 	
 	
 	Nearly 70 villages depended on these common grasslands (“Kaval”) for grazing their cattle and sheep and for collecting minor forest produce for making baskets. 
 	
 	  	Inside the Science City, the Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) will manufacture and test military drones (4,500 acres); the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre will oversee uranium enrichment work to produce nuclear energy (1900 acres); the Indian Institute of Science will build a Synchotron (1,500 acres); and, the Indian Space Research Organization will conduct its research (700 acres). And, 1250 acres of land ostensibly acquired for public use was leased out to Sagitaur, a private solar energy company. 
 	
 	  	Another part of Chitradurga had been initially identified for the Science City. Since acquiring land from farmers, the district MP explained in his letter to the Defence Minister in 2007, was “time consuming” and involved “a huge amount of compensation,” it was “cheaper” and helped avoid “procedural hazards” to acquire the Kaval land. This incredible shift in rationale found ready support among bureaucrats who misclassified the Kaval as revenue, and not forest land, and claimed that a takeover would not put anyone to inconvenience as only 19 cows lived in the surrounding villages (the actual number of cows is around 2 lakh). In this very dry region, where crops requiring even modest amounts of water are tough to cultivate, the shepherd, cowherd and tribal communities rear cattle and sheep as a subsidiary occupation.
 	
 	
 	(One of the farmers clarified that their region knew only two seasons: “Summer and extreme summer.”) Another farmer had become wistful: “Sheep and cattle have helped me raise ten children.” Just about everyone at the meeting expressed pride about how the Kaval had been deemed precious by past rulers who had left it undisturbed over centuries. Further, the woolen blankets from Challakere were sought by the Indian army for their softness and the fine insulation they provide against chilly winters. 
 	
 	  	The description of the local cattle in the 1929 Mysore Gazetteer conveys a sense for the strength of local cultural pride: “(The Amrut Mahal cattle) is a far famed breed characteristically different from every other Indian breed. It stands in relation to other Indian breeds, much as the thorough bred horse to horses generally. These cattle are of medium size and white or grey in colour. They are fiery tempered and very active, enduring and hardy. The bullocks are essentially suitable for road work and are capable of quick, long journeys under a light or moderate load. They have fine heads, alert ears and long pointed horns, while the compactly proportioned frame, the shapely limbs and the hard black feet indicate endurance, activity and strength.” 
 	
 	  	A couple of dozen families were in charge of maintaining the grasslands. These families were supported by the revenue contributions of the surrounding villages. A detail that the speakers testified repeatedly was that no one had ever encroached upon the kavals as far as they knew. Their disbelief was that the government had now felt free to become the encroacher. Another fact of disbelief was how the government had sold land for an absurdly low price of 30,000 rupees an acre. And, how could the government ignore the water needs of the region for decades and now promise a plentiful supply for the Science City? 
 	
 	  	The state’s seizure of common grazing land in Challakere taluk has cut off access to numerous shrines, temples and lakes in the area, impairing the life of villagers in important ways. 
 	
 	  	The villagers of Challakere taluk have protested intensely several times over the last few years. The entire taluk boycotted the last parliamentary elections. A few dozen villagers rolled on the road (urulu seve) from Challakere town to Chitradurga to make their demands heard. Except the present MLA from Challakere, no other political figure has stood by them. The DRDO, IISc, ISRO or BARC, who have been quick to build high compound walls around their allotted areas, have refused to engage in any discussion with the villagers. 
 	
 	  	The tireless efforts of Leo Saldanha, Bhargavi Rao and their colleagues at the Environment Support Group in support of the protesting villagers have helped. In 2014, the Green Tribunal (GT) has asked the agencies that have got the Amrut Kaval lands to abide by all the laws relating to wildlife and biodiversity conservation and to allow villagers access to their temples. One of the farmers testified that the police did not register a complaint against the IISc when they recently destroyed a temple. 
 	
 	  	The struggle now seeks to ensure compliance with the GT’s judgement and retrieve as much of the Kaval land as possible. And expose the violence that the governments try to hide on the grounds of scientific progress and national security. 
 	
 	  	The author is Professor of Sociology, Azim Premji University.