Mysore: Sighting a leopard is not such an uncommon occurrence in the outlying areas as to merit the brutal public reaction of Tuesday, when a three-year-old leopard that had strayed into the city limits was caned and pummelled to death.

While the forest and police authorities are justifying their action, everyone staying in the areas adjoining the Chamundi Hills is well aware that the hills are a natural habitat of leopards and other wild animals.”Chamundi Hills are a natural habitat for many wild animals, including leopards. They move freely in the area, even entering our villages. They prey on dogs, and sometimes sheep and cows. After claiming their prey, they go back to their hideouts. Normally, they do not attack human beings,” said Rame Gowda, a farmer and resident of Uttanahalli.

According to wildlife activists and forest officials, the animals normally roam the Mysore-Nanjangud-H D Kote-Srirangapattana belt but are now increasingly entering city areas. “The reason is obvious. It is not leopards and other animals who are crossing their limits but  humans who are encroaching on their natural habitat,” said K Manu, a wildlife activist. 

By one estimate, at least 400 acres of reserved forest land around the hills have been encroached on. The then Maharajas had declared around 2,000 acres adjoining the hills as a reserved forest area.

Forest department officials admit that 1,600 acres of that land remains with the forest department.

“Over a decade ago, the Chamundi forest was the habitat of the white rumped vulture — a globally threatened species. Today, they are no more to be seen in this area. In the entire state, only seven pairs of white rumped vultures have been sighted, all in Ramanagaram,” said K S Sudeer, an advocate and wildlife activist.

“The number of leopards in the Chamundi Hills is coming down every year. Encroachment of the forest area in the name of development, the growing number of visitors to the Chamundi Hills, noise pollution, and illumination of the hills during Dasara and other festivals are some of the reasons for leopards and other wild animals to move away from the forest area,” said a forest officer on the condition of anonymity.

Though the forest department has deployed watchers, their number is pathetically inadequate — there are just four or five watchers to monitor this vast forest tract. 

Both forest officials and activists accept that the only solution to protect the wildlife here is to declare the Chamundi Hills area a leopard sanctuary. “Once the area is declared a sanctuary, encroachments will end.  Not only that, residents of Mysore and the villages surrounding the hills will benefit from the environmental spin-offs of a protected forest area,” said Nagaraj and Bala Mahesh, both wildlife photographers.

Mysore district-in-charge minister Shobha Karndlaje told a meeting of the Muzrai Minister on Friday that the government had dropped the ropeway project at Chamundi hills. She also said that the forest area would be declared as a reserved forest. 

The fact is that the forest has got the status  long back;but the district administration and the forest department have failed in stopping the encroachment.

Endangered Eden

Declared reserve forest total area: 2000 acres

Encroached area: 400 acres

Area remaining: 1600 acres

Reptiles: 20 Species

Mammals: 26 Species

Butterflies: 150 Species

Birds: 205 Species

Spotted!

2001- A leopard took shelter in a deserted house on JLB Road

2001 Sep- A leopard was sighted in Vidyavardhaka Engineering College

2002- A trap was laid in the SJCE campus after reports were received of a leopard in the vicinity

2005- A young adult caught in a snare was killed

2006 Feb- Some village children playing cricket chased away a leopard by throwing stones at it

2006 Aug- A leopard and its two cubs were seen at mid-day 

2006 Oct - Some persons spotted a leopard atop the hills one morning who  charged at them to defend her two cubs

2006 Nov- A leopard and its cubs were seen in a farm

2007 Jul - A leopard died of injuries sustained in an accident atop the hills

2008 Sept- A leopard sighted near the police quarters was killed by the police, forest officials and public.

(Inf Wildlife activists Nithin Rangaraj and Mohan A N)