This art show, featuring the works of seven artists from Odisha, illuminates not just the beauty but interesting facts of a distant State as well

Did you know that horseshoe crabs were once found in Orissa state in abundance and are now endangered? Of the four species of horseshoe crabs existing in the world, two species are found in Chilika Lagoon and Bhitkarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary. Because of the medicinal properties of its blood, these marine arthropods are poached excessively and soon, it is feared, there will be none left in India’s largest brackish water lake that extends over three districts in Orissa. “This species existed on earth even before the dinosaurs. Can you imagine that?” asks Dr Gyanesh Mishra, an accomplished artist and sculptor.

The conversation on horseshoe crabs is happening at an art gallery where the show Purbaee is on display, which has works of seven artists from Orissa. The topic of horseshoe crabs has been instigated because of the unique works by artist Kesu Das. “He is an exceptional person,” Mishra exults. “One must go there to see the way he lives.”

Kesu Das is an artist from Baleshwar, a beach town popular with the tourists. Das runs the Bakleswari Kala Kendra and is the only artist in India, according to Mishra, to paint with lacquer on canvas. There are three works on horseshow crabs which glisten brightly under the spotlights. Two are abstracts in bright hues of yellow, orange and green. The graceful forms of the horseshoe crabs appear to float on a shimmery layer of lacquer. Mishra tells me about having to coax Das to take him to the workshop where he does the paintings. “That day, about seven years ago, Das had come with lacquer toys that he makes in order to revive the making of indigenous laq based craft. I had to buy all his toys – costing not even a thousand rupees – before he agreed to show me the method.”

Calling it a joyful experience, Mishra witnessed Das heating up a long iron surface and sprinkling it with some refractive powders that melt on the reverse side of a stretched canvas. He then takes long tubes filled with molten lacquer and natural colour additives and directly draws on the prepared canvas. “The way he reaches out for the tubes, moves around the canvas; he is literally dancing,” Mishra laughs at the memory. “Das lives in a modest dwelling in the village and has no ambition to sell his works. Instead, he devotes his time teaching not only his family members but also the villagers from neighbouring villages the ancient traditional skills of Jaukandhei of preparing lacquered clay dolls that are worshipped by the tribals.”

Just standing in front of these three works, a viewer is transported to the distant state and the plight of indigenous art and craft, the dying of centuries-old traditional practice of lacquer dolls marriage and the grim reality of horseshoe crabs. Not to speak of the originality of the medium. Shouldn’t this be the agenda of an artist?

There are other artists who stand out in this group show. Mishra himself has works on the plight of the tigers in Orissa and elsewhere in the country. 

One of his works show a neatly sliced tiger with its parts displayed meticulously; as though for the perusal of a shopper. “In Assam and other states, poachers sell the parts of the tigers to buyers even before they have caught an animal. Such is the demand.” Mishra is an accomplished ceramic artist and has several works on display. “I have now perfected the art of rendering a colour in ceramic exactly as promised,” he says. Looking at the bright yellows, reds and even the dullish skin tones of his ceramic works, it seems like he is walking the talk.

A group show usually may not deliver cent per cent in terms of the artist selection but Purbaee seems to have artists worth a second look. The silk paintings by artist Sudhir Meher are exceptionally rendered and makes one applaud at the talent nurtured in the country. Done in the style of Patta Chitras, the works show the dexterity and skills of a confident artist. “If even one stroke is wrong, the work has to be abandoned,” says Mishra who has curated this show of the East. Other participating artists include Sajal Patra, Usha Mishra, Pradosh Swain, and Priyaranjan.

Purbaee, 10.30am - 6.30pm, till Aug 31st, Art Houz, Call 080 41148662