Of 1,892 total sanctioned posts for forest watchers, only 241 are occupied currently

With over 40,000 sq km of forest area, Karnataka is facing severe understaffing of forest watchers, the frontline workers that play the most important role in wildlife and forest conservation. According to the statistics from Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), while the total sanctioned posts for forest watchers is 1,892, only 241 are occupied, leaving 1,651 posts (87%) vacant.

KFD’s human resource statistics also show that the number of frontline workers manning forests has been declining over the last four years. In 2019-20, while the total number of sanctioned posts for forest watchers was 1,177, as many as 717 posts were occupied and the vacancy rate was 39%. In 2020-21, the number of sanctioned posts was increased to 1,402, however, the total number of forest watchers on duty dropped to 529, increasing the vacancy rate to 62%. In 2021-22, the number of sanctioned posts was pushed up to 1,892 and the total posts occupied dropped to 327, leading to a vacancy rate of 82%.

Even forest guards are in short supply. In 2022-23, the total number of sanctioned posts for forest guards is 5,494 and as many as 2,581 posts are lying vacant.

Conservationists and experts say the large number of vacancies points to the apathy of the state government and higher officials of KFD in protecting our forests and wildlife. Forest watchers are guards who are barefoot soldiers that form the front line of defense against wildlife poaching, timber smuggling, forest fire, and other incidents and activities that endanger forest and its inhabitants.

“Forest watchers, though at the lowest rank in the department, form the most important workforce. Every forest watcher is supposed to patrol 15 to 20 kilometers of forest area every day.
 
They are positioned in anti-poaching camps and also report any untoward incidents such as the smuggling of timber or poaching of wildlife. They are at the forefront of conservation and protection. Thus, so many vacant positions will surely have a negative impact on the protection and conservation of wildlife and forest,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

Fund crunch much?
Experts say high vacancies indicate a fund crunch situation as there is no dearth of locals who would gladly take up the responsibility and work for the government.

“Although the department has sanctioned 1,892 posts for forest watchers and 5,494 posts for forest guards, they can be filled only after receiving approval from the finance department.
 
Since KFD has started giving preference to local tribes and communities for the post of permanent watchers, there is no dearth of applications. These communities are well-versed with local conditions and the forest. So the department receives applications in abundance,” said the conservationist.

According to Rajiv Ranjan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest and Head of Forest Force, KFD, the department is in the process of filling the vacant forest guard posts.

“There is no difficulty in getting people. We have completed our process of recruitment for forest guard posts. We are at the last stage and document verification is going on and will be completed within two weeks. Once these formalities are completed and this batch goes on the field, another notification can be posted for the next batch. One recruitment cycle takes 
roughly one and a half years and we will continue to fill in these positions. There are no financial constraints and we will soon start the process of recruitment for forest watchers too,” said Ranjan. He, however, did not comment on the reasons behind declining number of forest watchers despite higher sanctioned posts.