Sleuths had set a trap after receiving numerous reports of sightings of three leopards in layouts and villages between Kengeri and Tavarekere. Two weeks ago, they trapped a full-grown male leopard
 
 	The forest department often receives calls from jittery residents living on the periphery of forests complaining about wildlife — especially big cats —straying into layouts and villages. Department officials tend to ignore these calls since most calls informing them of the presence of big cats turn out to be hoaxes. The department also considers it “normal” for wildlife to stray into human habitation, given that humans are increasingly encroaching on forests. 

 	But when the department received numerous complaints over several weeks of a leap of leopards prowling areas between Kengeri and Tavarekere, it sat up and took notice. Forest sleuths laid a trap and after four days of baiting the big cats, they trapped a full-grown male leopard. Ever since the “catch” from a spot about 10 km from Kengeri a couple of weeks ago, forest officials have intensified the drive to trap two other big cats. The leopards were a worry for residents since they frequently surfaced in streets and villages. Residents reported sighting three leopards together and some believe that they had taken up residence in a den in the Kaggalipura range. Forest officials do not discount the theory since the terrain is rocky and interspersed with grassy patches. 

 	“A leopard was first spotted two months ago,” Veeresh S, a resident of Tavarekere, told Bangalore Mirror. “Then the three were spotted together. They have been spotted frequently ever since. Twice, they were chased away from public places by bursting crackers. Residents here are living in fear. We had informed the forest department officials, who acted quickly on the issue.” 

 	The leopards had killed four goats, a cow and numerous dogs and had strayed into villages twice. In the first week of February, forest department officials laid a trap with a dog as bait. Eventually, after four days, the male leopard fell into the trap. After a medical examination by a doctor in Bannerghatta National Park, it was released in Muthathi forest. 

 	Department officials and villagers say leopards have taken a liking for dog meat, although it is not their natural prey. The leopards are usually drawn by the sound of dogs barking. Forest sleuths say the leopards probably strayed into human habitation while searching for food and dogs. 

 	“They venture out of forest areas mainly in search of dogs,” a forest official said. “Besides, the area is teeming with rabbits and is a bit rocky. Though they were seen inside villages twice, no untoward incident has been reported. We have intensified efforts to trap the other two leopards.” 

 	NO NEED TO PANIC 	However, experts say that leopards are commonly found in forest areas around the city and instances of leopards attacking humans are rare. “Leopards are common in forests such as Turahalli, B M Kaval and Hesarghatta forests,” said Sharath R Babu, former honorary wildlife warden. “They are sometimes even seen in Bangalore University campus. Their movements are being studied. This is not a cause for panic. They usually come in search of food.” Forest officials say the issue is being addressed. “Residents had approached us about the big cats and our staff too have noticed them,” said H R Kumar, deputy conservator of forests, Bangalore Urban. 

 	“Residents are worried since the animals were frequently spotted in public areas. There is an ashram and a school in the vicinity. They have asked us to clear areas where visibility is low. The issue is being addressed by our officials,” he added.