In Sex and the City 2, we saw Samantha (Kim Cattrall) dealing with menopause and its impact on her life and love life. To take control of her menopausal symptoms, she resorts to eating oestrogen-laden food. She  says, “I read online that chickpeas are high in natural oestrogen. So are yams.”
   During menopause, the ovaries stop producing eggs and less oestrogen and progesterone. Changes in these hormones cause menopause. Doctors advise women to eat foods that have phytoestrogens to help them boost their overall oestrogen levels. “Phytoestrogens are a group of weak chemicals found in plants that are similar to and mimic the hormone, oestrogen. The richest sources of phytoestrogen are soy products and flaxseeds,” says Dr Vidya Desai Mohan, consultant gynaecologist.
   She adds, “Earlier, a synthetic drug called Premaril of equine origin was given to women during menopausal stages. Studies found that there was a slight increase in breast cancer which led to a scare. Therefore, food rich in oestrogen is recommended for women.”
   Why is it important to consume food rich in phytoestrogens? “Phytoestrogens work in the body in many different ways - they may have protective action against many women’s health issues such as breast or bowel cancer, cardiovascular disease, brain function disorders, menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis. Proper management of these symptoms can help women stay healthy, both physically and emotionally,” says Payal Banka, registered dietician.
   So, if you are experiencing hot flashes, irregular periods, night sweats, vaginal dryness, mood swings and loss of libido, then it is time to sit back and eat foods that will bring about a balance in the hormones, naturally. Here are some foods that will help:   Flax seeds  These are a rich source of lignans, substances that appear to positively affect hormone-related problems. Lignans may also be useful in preventing certain cancers and combating specific bacteria, fungi, and viruses, including those that cause cold sores and shingles. They help in the following ways:   »Treat menopausal symptoms: Because the hormone-balancing lignans and plant oestrogens (phytoestrogens) in flax seed oil help stabilise a woman’s oestrogen-progesterone ratio, they can have beneficial effects on the menstrual cycle, and relieve hot flashes of pre-menopause and menopause.   » Reduces the risk of cardiovascular diseases: Decreased oestrogen levels may increase a woman’s risk towards heart-related ailments. Flax seeds also help in lowering cholesterol.   » Helps in fibrocystic breasts: According to the author of The Women’s Health Companion, about 30 per cent of all women have fibrocystic breasts. Flax seeds are rich sources of essential fatty acid called alpha-linolenic acid, or ALA. The body uses ALA to make omega-3 fatty acid called eicosapentaenoic acid, or EPA. Women with higher levels of EPA are less likely to have fibrocystic breast disease than those with low levels.   » Promote healthy hair and nails: Hair loss is common in menopausal women, which is often related to dropped oestrogen levels. You can add ground flaxseeds (powdered) to regular chappati flour or dry roast the seeds and take a tsp every morning. It’s good to have one teaspoon of flax seed oil or 1 tablespoon of flaxseed daily.   Soya  Soy and soy isoflavones improve insulin regulation, weight loss, bone health, nail, skin and hair, heart, and decreased frequency and severity of menopausal discomforts, particularly hot flashes and night sweats.
   The effects of soy isoflavones observed on mood and cognitive performance in post-menopausal women have been positive – particularly with verbal memory – and this may be of relevance to younger women experiencing memory lapses too.
   Can be consumed as tofu/soya milk/tempeh or nuggets/ flour. Generally, it is recommended to have 30-50 gm soy and 150ml of soymilk  every day.   Sesame  Sesame seeds are also rich in phytoestrogen, primarily lignan. Add sesame seeds to hot cereal or sprinkle some on salad. You can also try tahini, a sesame seed paste in place of nut butters on bread or crackers. Consume 1 tablespoon or 15gm of sesame every day.   Cabbage and Carrots These are known to influence the levels of hormones, like oestrogens, in the body by affecting intake and breakdown of the compound by the liver.
 
 This total effect is especially beneficial for women with a genetic predisposition to tumours or women with a family history of breast cancer.
 
 Cabbage also helps in weight management. It can be added to salads, sandwiches, soups or eaten with chappati in the form of a curry.   Sprouts/Alfalfa  Alfalfa contains plant phytoestrogens, saponins and glycosides along with fibre. Alfalfa is a cooling, sweet, astringent legume. 
 
 It is used to manage hormone changes that occur with menopause. It relieves hot flashes and night sweats, lowers cholesterol levels, and aids  circulation. It also helps with other issues that accompany menopause, including digestion and exhaustion.
   Add them to your salad or sandwich with your favourite dressing or simply stir fry in olive oil with other veggies. Have 30 gms of alfalfa  per day.
     Cereals  The mood swings of menopausal women are often related to blood sugar levels. Hence, managing these levels can serve as a key factor to overcoming mood swings. This is where cereals come in. Oats, wheat germ, rice bran, barley contain complex carbs which help in better regulation of blood sugar levels, plus they also contain plant oestrogen which helps in combating other menopausal symptoms.
     Eating oestrogenic foods Not all women get the same symptoms and not all women benefit by the same food. For eg, some women may notice a healthy change after incorporating soya in their diet, while some may be allergic to it. 
   Some food items like soya/cabbage are not to be consumed by women suffering from hypothyroidism. Hence food options must be properly chosen depending on individual health needs and suitability.
   While choosing soya, one must go for its fermented variety – miso and tempeh – rather then choosing unfermented products. Balance is very important. Eating the right quantity of food at the right time is important.
   Foods very high in phytoestrogens should be avoided by a woman in her first trimester of pregnancy as phytoestrogen rich foods have a contraceptive effect.
   Also, eating very high levels of phytoestrogens may pose risks. Studies with laboratory and farm animals, as well as wildlife eating high amounts of phytoestrogen-rich plants, have documented reproductive problems. 
     Misconceptions  Here are common misconceptions people have of oestrogeni-rich foods
   Men don't benefit from oestrogen: While oestrogen is directly related to women's health, it does have some positive health effects on males when taken in limited amounts – less chance of acne, heart attack and balding.  Oestrogen also improves short-term memory and fertility.
   Phytoestrogen cannot be absorbed in the human body: This has been proved wrong. Since scientists have found phytoestrogens in human urine and blood samples, we know these compounds can be absorbed into our bodies. Or they can be broken down.
 
 
 
 The richest sources of phytoestrogen are soy products and flaxseeds