Fifty nine Indian Star Tortoises and 20 Spotted Black Terrapins seized from duo about to fly to Kuala Lumpur from KIA
 
 Two people have been arrested for trying to smuggle protected tortoises and terrapins from the Kempe Gowda International Airport to Malaysia.
 
 The CISF and airport police seized 59 Indian Star Tortoises and 20 Spotted Black Terrapins at the airport.
 
 The animals being protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 32-year-old Udman Ali Bilal and 37-year-old Raju Venugopal were booked under the provisions of the act for illegal possession of wildlife and attempting wildlife trade. They were also booked under section 379 of IPC for theft.
 
 The animals were shifted to PFA (People for Animals) wildlife rehab centre. The seizure and arrest were carried out on a tip off by the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB on Sunday night.
 
 The duo had come from Chennai and was about to board a Malaysian Airlines flight to Kaula Lumpur, police officials said. It came to light during probe that they had been lured with a free trip to Malaysia and an incentive of Rs 10,000.
 
 “They have told investigators that they didn’t know what was inside the baggage. They claimed that they were promised free air travel to Malaysia and an incentive of Rs 10,000 for transporting the baggage. Since they were doing small time jobs, they took up the assignment. It is being probed if their statements are true and who are the persons behind the smuggling,” a police officer told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 The tortoises and terrapins were bound using tapes to restrict their movements, explained the wildlife sleuths who were also called to the spot.
 
 This latest attempt to smuggle the animals is part of an international pet trade involving tortoise and terrapins and is growing at alarming pace, officials said. “This is second such incident in last 30 days at KIA. Similar seizure, involving 150 tortoises was reported in Kochi. The same species was seized seized in Chennai a week ago. This is an alarming trend, and all authorities, including police, wildlife department should work along with the wildlife crime control bureau to plug the menace,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru Urban told Bangalore Mirror.