Cook, eat and go back with an understanding of wildlife after a session with experts at this unique event
 
 
 	What does the average young, upwardly mobile Bengalurean do on a typical Saturday night? Go partying with friends, go out for dinner, catch a movie, or stay in for a house party or sometimes (gasp!) a quiet night with family. Ananth Shankar, fauna-toonist (he creates cartoon characters of animals), wants to add a new activity to that list – conversation. What’s new, you might ask; isn’t that we do every day, anyway? This one, however, is a conversation about conservation. And it’ll be rounded off with a meal you cook, a caricature of you in animal form that you can take home, and ideas and contacts for a headstart into wildlife appreciation and conservation.
 	
 	  	Aptly titled Wildtales Weekend, the event hopes to transport you to the real jungle amidst the concrete one. And there’s lots to look forward to. Wildlife expert and filmmaker Dilan Mandanna, who is also a crucial part of National Geographic crews that shoot in India, will talk about the vanishing wildlife of coffee estates, having grown up in Kodagu. That will be followed by a fun session with Shankar, who will help you start and then finish creating an animal character for you based on your personality. End it with coffee and desserts by estate grown Wow beans coffee (Wow stands for Welfare of Wildlife) and a cook out.
 	
 	  	Shankar says the event was conceptualised out of his own experiences with wildlife – having grown up amongst animals in the foothills of the Himalayas and having lived in Bannerghatta National Park, where he has designed all the forest logos.  	
 	
 	This helped him do what he does today – create characters out of animals such as Durga Murga, a feisty feminist, who become tools for social commentary. It is this process that has sensitised him to the critical state of wildlife in the country, and our rapidly vanishing ecosystem. 
 	
 	  	But he didn’t want to show a few wildlife films where the “filmmaker is above and the audience is below”. Like he says, “Many people look at Friday, Saturday, Sunday as a way of recovering from a five-day week, and don’t have the inclination or energy to go unwind in nature. They’re more content hanging out at a pub or a mall – in the urban jungle. The influence of a real jungle is very different to find now.” And that is what he hopes to give people at this event.
 	
 	  	The highlight of Wildtales Weekend, then, is the talk by Dilan Mandanna. “I am just a sideshow – someone who’ll create a return gift that you can take home with you. The food you cook will stay in your body. But Mandanna’s talk will stay in your head – his experiences with wildlife – and that will be the first step in conservation,” Shankar explains. 
 	
 	  	An interactive session will have Mandanna showing audiovisual, short films, clips and photos of his work in the field, and he will answer the questions you “always wanted to ask Indiana Jones”, as Shankar says. He believes the young, urban, cosmopolitan Bengalurean has the desire but not the wherewithal to get involved, and that’s what they can do after this interaction. There’s no wine and cheese – you’ll be cooking for yourself. “Animals hunt and eat what they need. Here too, you will cook and eat what you need,” Shankar explains. 
 	
 	
 	Wildtale Weekend, 5.30pm on May 14 at Slurp Studio, Indiranagar. Rs 2,000 per head. Call 9916580506 / 9886229019