By Rajmohan Sudhakar

Lately, some of us have become accustomed to watching live streaming video of wildlife after the human world was devastated by the rather strangely and rapidly mutating coronavirus — even for a virus SARS-CoV-2 gets curiouser and curiouser.

As I was saying, a few months ago I watched an albatross chick fledge through a live streaming camera operated by the department of conservation in the island nation of New Zealand, from a place known as Taiaroa Head.

The Royal Albatross chick born in a small colony in the southern hemisphere headland took over a year to attempt first flight after hatching, as most albatross chicks do, meticulously training to successfully lift off and masterfully glide through coastal winds or even squalls. It is a joyful thing to do, to watch how the albatrosses raise a family, even remotely so.

The latest update was the now juvenile bird named Tiaki, was spotted far out in the open ocean, off the coast of Chile, about 9,000 km away.
 
Several such cameras, as the one which showed us the coming of age of Tiaki, the Southern Royal Albatross, beam live footage of animals and birds from across the globe to living rooms, causing minimum human interference than it used to previously, in the natural world of creatures that boast an evolutionary history far greater than us.

Now, you may ask why all of a sudden you refer to the story of Tiaki, the albatross chick. All such animals we are tracking, albatrosses that spend most of their time on the wing, indeed a miraculous feat for a relatively heavy avian, or elephants in the African bush that maintain deep emotional bonds, showcase what transpires if a living being follows natural evolution and selection or if it veers off the path like us, now ready to brace for the apparent fallout.
 
The secret life of animals and birds that we voyeuristically observe are testimony to the fact that coexistence and a harmonious way of life are benefits of taking cue from nature as is the case of most living beings, unlike us.
 
Why do we now find it difficult to coexist even after claiming that we have masterfully evolved so far? The fact is we have an evolutionary span far lesser than any of the animals: well, depends on one’s perspective you might say.

A 3.5 million years of rapid neurological development as opposed to tens of hundreds of million years of evolving and cohabiting fauna — what is the use of it, if that brain power cannot recognise another fellow human being, but is repeatedly trying to disenfranchise and edge her away?

For instance, as a city, Bengaluru does not seem to believe in coexistence. The recent fiasco surrounding stand-ups not being allowed an audience in this so-called ‘city of the future’ exposes the farce of inclusivity and urbanism that many of us want to associate with Bengaluru of the day. Sadly, that seems a far-fetched idea now, unless these tendencies are reined in sooner.

The fact that these rightful citizens in question - Munawar Faruqui and Kunal Kamra - are stand-ups, who turn a mirror to the way you and I go about our lives, makes it even more absurd and bizarre, and sets us back to the dark ages. Cannot even take a bit of humour, can you? Are the identities of these hate-mongers so sullied and their ego bloated out of proportion with power and arrogance that a bloat of hippopotamuses pales in comparison?

Faruqui was targeted simply because of the hatred festering deep down in our society now showing its ugly face once again as the only thing the propagators know is to hate and they shall keep hating. Kamra was told by the organisers not to perform, probably for his brutally honest critique. He humoured his way through the whole drama saying he was being treated as another variant of the coronavirus.

So, in all probability, those who want to stop stand-ups from performing in Bengaluru (and those who provide cover) would just implode in anger and perish if they chanced upon ‘Spitting Image’, a satire sketch with puppets of politicians and popular icons from across the world. Thank goodness the larger world is not in the control of these bullies. Bully your way ahead as long as it sustains. Is it?

Bullies are a high school fixture, shoving and pushing the weak and vulnerable. Is that what Bengaluru is capable of? Is the citizenry represented by a bunch of bullies who think they shall decide who the city belongs to? So much for inclusivity and future investments that would bring in employment opportunities and infrastructural development.
 
Where were these bullies when two dead bodies of coronavirus patients were found after a year in a government facility at the heart of the city? Surely, they do not place credence to the plight of the oppressed, underprivileged or castaways of our society, waiting to be heard for entire lifetimes.