Standing on the crater’s rim you get a sense of immense distance. From this height, the crater out below, looks small and insignificant. And even when you squint into the binoculars you spot no animals — there are only shadows of Cumulus clouds on the green crater floor making interesting patchworks, which change if you stare long enough.
 We were driving along the crater’s rim on our journey to Serengeti when Musa, our driver-cum-safari guide, lets us slip off the SUV to take in a view of the Ngorongoro crater.
 We saw no wildlife but this stopover fuelled our expectations. The idea of wild animals (25,000 of them) living in close proximity in a natural enclosure was surreal. But Ngorongoro is not just a wildlife attraction in Tanzania. It is also a geological marvel. Two to three million years ago, a volcano collapsed on itself, forming this deep caldera — one of the biggest in the world.
 
 Even the splendours of the Serengeti couldn’t make us indifferent to Ngorongoro. We had pushed a late-rising Musa to be the first at the Ngorongoro check-post for the morning safari. As he went through the bureaucracy we stood on the rim to view the crater again. Today, it was an overcast sky and I rejoiced that, unlike in Serengeti, where I faced the full brunt of the sun, I wouldn’t have to worry about hard shadows in my photos.
 A long line of safari jeeps queued up behind us. But when they signalled us to move, our jeep spluttered, shook and spluttered some more. As jeep after jeep of binocular- and camera-armed tourists whizzed past us, I wondered if the view from the rim would be all I’d take home.
 One of the lessons from my African safari was — choose your safari jeep well. If the vehicle breaks down, it can put paid to all your plans and joy can quickly turn to irritation. I was now sharing the rundown Landcruiser with an aggressive Brazilian man, a shouting Italian woman, a cursing American guy and one cranky girlfriend.
 And we almost never made it to Ngorongoro. They tried to push-start the jeep on the sloping crater road but to no avail. They shoved us down into the crater alright but the jeep was dead.
 As we waited for a replacement vehicle, I felt hemmed in. We were stranded near the crater wall, which rose to about 650 metres. Standing here, deep below in the caldera with zebra and wildebeests herds just a gallop away, we got the real sense of being in the African bush.
 From here, unlike at the rim, the crater seemed like a vast endless plain, much like Serengeti itself. But it’s actually only between 16-19 kilometres across — with a total area of 264 square kilometres. The crater walls are steep but the ungulates — the wildebeests, the zebras and the buffalo — migrate into and from the crater annually. Many wildebeests, zebras and elephant herds make their way out of the crater in the wet season, even as the cape buffaloes make their way in. The giraffes, however, are conspicuous by their absence. The steep walls of the crater are too much of an obstacle for them. Besides, the crater does not have their favourite acacia trees whose leaves they feed on.
 The crater lions, unfortunately, have remained cooped up in the caldera for generations, leading to inbreeding. There are many reasons for this. Humans top the list. The crater’s rim is littered with human habitation. This includes both, the burgeoning tourist lodges and the Masai dwellings. The crater lions also chase away any marauding lions that might slip in. With no new blood, the lions have poor immunity and become easily susceptible to disease — including the deadly canine distemper. Their population now stands at less than 65.
 But when our replacement jeep finally arrived and we were taken on a whistle-stop tour of the crater, we were lucky to chance upon three lions in quick succession. One lay sleeping near a safari track, occasionally turning on his back with the cuteness of a pet dog. We came across two other lions in the woodlands near their zebra kill. They had had their fill and were now resting. We were so immersed with the lions that it took us a while to notice that the zebra had been pregnant. It had been disembowelled and the tiny dead zebra foal lay by its mother.
 The other prized sighting here is the black rhino. Their population is down to 26. We saw one at a distance and, as we closed in on him, he became skittish. Rhinos have very poor eyesight and Musa told us the rhino had possibly mistaken our jeep for another rhino.
 
 It was our cue to move on. We drove past Magadi — the soda lake (dotted pink with flamingoes) and past zebra, wildebeest and buffalo heads and climbed the escarpment back to the crater’s rim with our perspective completely altered of this Natural Zoo.