A cleanliness drive on Friday at the Bannerghatta National Park revealed an ugly reality – trash that had to be later transported in 12 trucks, had gathered at the park over the months. And this is just the tip of the iceberg.

The Karnataka Forest Department and volunteers had a tough time clearing the trash from an area spanning 1.5 km around the national and biological park. Ganesh V, Range Forest Officer, who organises the drive every year, told BM, “We started around four to five years ago. The idea is to sensitise people about the effects of plastic on wildlife and the need to ban plastic usage in and around the national park. Around 100 volunteers helped in the cleanliness drive. We started at 8 am from Kalkere State Reserve Forest and ended the drive by 1:30 pm. We will continue this every month with 100 volunteers each.”

According to the forest officials, the residential complexes adjacent to the boundary of the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) are illegal and the lake near it has been encroached upon and is almost dead. Until a few days ago, the boundaries of the BNP were all covered with huge piles of garbage. After the drive, a portion of it has been cleared, but at least 10 km of it still needs to be cleaned. Ganesh said in the summer it was more important to keep forests clear of garbage to prevent fires. 

VP Krisna, founder, KR Puram Constituency Association Welfare Federation, who volunteered with a number of people, said, “We handpicked garbage and collected around 12 tractors full of it. The residents said that because the BBMP does not collect garbage from them at regular intervals, they dispose it of here. We were only able to clean around 1.5 km today; the next 10 km stretch needs to be cleared too. We will return next month to clear it.” 

He said BBMP must ensure the collection of garbage in this area.

Arun Menon, a volunteer added, “This is forest land that belongs to the forest office and BBMP is in charge of the nearby areas here. Some officers who patrol in the morning catch miscreants throwing garbage. But they alone cannot stop them from dumping or clean up the area.”

Locals say the government school that shares its boundary with the BNP too has been dumping waste here. “We collected around 80 glass bottles. When we spoke to the school authorities, they said other people do it,” said Sharmila K, another volunteer. 

Shipra, a garbage segregation expert, who also volunteered, shared some tips on segregating garbage. “People must compost at their homes so that the degradable waste goes back to the soil. Jayanagar, HSR Layout and Domlur have some collection centres where they segregate waste in 50 categories and recycle,” she said.