By Rachana Ramesh

Animal activists slam Delhi’s move to remove Rhesus macaque from schedules of Wildlife Protection Act, note that habitat loss threatening monkeys found in cities

The species Rhesus macaques, commonly found in Delhi, has been removed from the schedules of the Wildlife Protection Act (WPA), allowing the public to treat them similarly to stray cats or dogs. Animal activists in the city have said that this measure must not be taken up with the Bonnet macaques found frequently in Bengaluru for varying reasons.

The Delhi forest department said that since Rhesus macaques are not endangered and are found as frequently as strays, there is no need to keep them in the scheduled category. They have noted the many cases of monkey menace reported in Delhi and said that the problem will now be treated as a civic issue instead of a wildlife protection one. Prior to the change, the species was listed under Schedule II of the WPA, 1972. This meant that killing or trading the species was forbidden along with hunting, unless the animal was considered a threat to human life.

 Under the act, killing of scheduled animals can attract a fine of up to Rs 10,000 and a jail term of three terms, while the punishment and fine can increase in proportion to the severity of the case.

An animal activist, Arun Prasad, noted that what the Delhi authorities have done is against the provisions of the existing law. “As long as the animal is wild in nature, they must be protected under the WPA and cannot be dropped. Under Section 2(36) of the act, the Rhesus macaques must be protected. Just because the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) criteria have deemed them as ‘least concerned’ species because of their population, it does not mean that they must not be protected,” he said. He further noted that while Bonnet macaques, commonly found in Bengaluru, had once belonged to the ‘least concerned’ category too, they have significantly decreased in the past 30 years, putting them under the vulnerable criteria. “The forest department has failed miserably to safeguard the species and have also taken up sterilisation initiatives with regard to them when they should instead be focusing on increasing their population,” he said, adding that habitat destruction and lack of measures to conserve them have led to the situation. If they were to be taken out of Schedule II, it would put them in a state where the chances of them turning endangered or extinct significantly rise.

 As long as the animal is wild in nature, they must be protected under the WPA. Under Section 2(36) of the act, the Rhesus macaques must be protected– Arun Prasad, animal activist
Rajesh Nataraj, who has been involved in wildlife rescue activities for the past 12 years, said that he receives over 40-50 calls every year from apartment associations regarding monkey menace. However, the problem of human-animal conflict is inevitable due to rampant habitat destruction, he explained. “The forest department is inadequately staffed to deal with the issues, and NGOs involved are filled up to the brim. The apartment owners only complain but do not take up measures such as putting up efficient garbage management systems in place or stopping their residents from feeding the monkeys. They have now adapted to urban life, not by choice but by force, and will choose to remain where they have a continued source of food,” he said and urged the authorities to conduct detailed case studies regarding the matter to come up with sustainable solutions that also keep in mind the rights of the animal.