Celebrity much
 
 At the launch of Dinesh Kumble’s Kaadoo, the big game, biggies such as Rahul Dravid, actor Chandrashekar and wildlife filmmaker Nalla Muthu made their presence felt. But the diarist can tell you that several guests were wondering aloud why Dinesh’s younger brother Anil Kumble didn’t make an appearance. It seems the Kaadoo game troupe was worried that too much of a celebrity presence might take the focus off the game. Anil, who probably took the cue, decided to let the event pass to ensure he doesn’t steal the spotlight, but we have to put it out there – then why did the organisers invite the other three celebrities?
 
 Movie magic
 
 Looks like Sudha Murty is raving about Rajesh Nataranga’s latest movie Kendasampige. Nataranga, who first met Murty seven years ago when he lent his voice for Infosys’ Kannada version of the solar system production and again when she acted in his serial, Preeti Illada Mele, was taken by surprise when she turned up to watch Kendasampige recently. That’s because, we hear she rarely watches movies. And soon after the movie, she was all praise for the director to whom she said, “Kuthoohalakaariyaada sundara cinema” (A well-made film that evokes curiosity). High praise, that.
 
 Many happy returns
 
 Our favourite agony aunt, Bachi Karkaria, was in stellar spirits recently, surrounded by adoring friends, family and admirers. Bachi’s former colleagues at the now-defunct Metropolis-on-Saturday had organised a get together to celebrate Karkaria’s 70th birthday. While her longstanding friend and occasional sparring partner Shobhaa De couldn’t make it as she was being tested for swine flu, the Times of India’s bossman Jaideep Bose spoke fondly of his association with Bachi. As did Arnab Goswami, who said he began reading newspapers as a six-year-old around the time Karkaria was firming up her formidable reputation as a writer on civic issues at the Statesman in Kolkata. He also complimented the birthday girl for being at the vanguard of fearless Mumbai journalists who did not (thankfully) take themselves as seriously as the journalists of Lutyens’ Delhi. Finally, said former Member of Parliament Bharat Kumar Raut, it was “time we took Bachi and her immense contribution to journalism seriously”. We promptly raised a toast to that.
 
 A model life
 
 IT’s been over a decade since Ujwala Raut made international runways sizzle. India’s next export to global catwalks seems to be Pooja Mor, a 23-year old Bareilly girl, who has created ripples at the recent fashion weeks in New York and Milan. Mor has walked for Givenchy, Calvin Klein, Roberto Cavalli, Narciso Rodriguez, Missoni and Victoria Beckham, among others. Her career was launched by Nicholas Ghesquiere for Louis Vuitton Cruise collection show in May 2015 in Los Angeles, and from there on was no looking back. The international fashion website vogue.com has also short-listed her among nine models around the world to be voted for their runway presentation skills. Mor is currently in third place.