Out of 79 dead in 2021, 13 were sub-adults, 17 juveniles and 9 newborns and calves

The elephant mortality report by the Karnataka Forest Department shows that about 50 per cent of elephant deaths in 2021 were of young elephants – newborns, juveniles and sub-adults.
As per the official numbers, while 79 elephant deaths were recorded last year (between January 2021 and December 2021), 39 were young individuals. This included 13 sub-adults (5 to 15 years old), 17 juvenile elephants (1-5-years-old) and nine newborns and calves (less than one-year-old).

Experts say the young population getting affected is always a concern as it implies that the population will get into some kind of issue in the future. “Generally, newborns, juveniles and sub-adults form the cream of the population. These are the individuals that are going to be the next generation. One elephant generation is looked at in terms of five years. We need to understand if the juvenile and sub-adults died in the first generation of existence or the second generation of existence,” said Avinash Krishnan, Director, science and conservation, A Rocha India.

The data also shows that over 60 per cent of the total deaths were male elephants. “In Karnataka, apart from Madikeri and Hassan, by and large, all the habitats are connected. If this is considered to be one source population of elephants, we are losing out on the first and second generations of elephants due to natural or unnatural deaths. Every elephant death is unique and the department should address these deaths on a case-by-case scenario,” said a wildlife conservation expert.

The record also shows that 20% of the total death cases were due to unnatural causes including snaring, gunshot, electrocution and train accidents. “From the conservation standpoint, for a population to remain viable, the number of deaths due to unnatural causes has to be reduced and regulated. Unless there are five years of data it is difficult to come up with any kind of interpretation in,” he added.

Post-mortem reports missing
In January this year, the forest department announced that data on wild animal mortality will be published on its website. Post that, although the department has created a separate section on its website to make the deaths public, details such as post-mortem reports are missing.

Experts say while the initiative by the department is commendable, more information should be available for the public to get a clear picture. “The initiative ensures transparency.

Generally newborns, juveniles, sub-adults form the cream of the population of elephants– Avinash Krishnan, A Rocha India 
Especially when a good chunk of the state’s funds is being utilized to mitigate human-elephant conflicts, these numbers must be available in the public domain. However, this data is inconclusive without postmortem details, especially in the case of natural deaths. Natural death causes can throw light on what is going on inside a population and it is an important piece of information from the conservation standpoint,” said Krishnan.

According to the principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF), Vijaykumar Gogi, the Information Technology and Communication wing of the department is responsible to make the details of wildlife deaths public within 24 hours of confirmation. “While this is a time-consuming process, the reports should be available within a month or two. We will look into it and publish the reports soon,” said Gogi. 

Fewer deaths this year
Only 11 cases of elephant mortality have been recorded by the department between January and May this year, registering a drop in death cases by over 62%. Last year, there were 26 elephant deaths recorded.