The albino snake was released in nearby BR Hills by forest staff
 
 	An albino snake was caught recently by a wildlife enthusiast at Yellandur in Chamarajanagar district. The news spread like wildfire as albino snakes, generally referred to as ‘white’ snakes, are said to be sighted very rarely.
 	  	Speaking to BM about the unique sighting, MS Mahesh said he was travelling on some personal work when he received a call from a farmer saying he had seen a ‘weird snake’. “The caller was in panic and asked me to go over to where he was urgently, as he had spotted one of the weirdest snakes ever; something he had not seen in his lifetime. When I tried to get the details over the phone, so that I could be better prepared, he said he couldn’t say anything further as he was too scared. That made me very curious, wondering what snake he could have seen. I abandoned my work and immediately headed to the farmer’s village,” said 50-year-old ‘Snake’ Mahesh who has rescued around 7,500 snakes.
 	  	Luckily for Mahesh, the snake was in an open field, from which it couldn’t escape. A group of people had gathered, and were only too keen to tell him where the snake lay hiding. “I couldn’t believe I was looking at an albino cobra snake.
 	
 	However, it also posed a challenge of a different kind. I had read somewhere that albino snakes are more venomous than conventional snakes, so I needed to be really careful. Added to this, I recently had heard that a snake catcher had died after a snake bit him. But my mission was on, and in a short while, I caught the snake. There was something still bothering me. Usually, after catching them, snakes are released in the wild. Being a very rare one, this snake may be poached by someone, so I called up forest officials. They came over and I handed the snake over to them. They took it over to the nearby BR Hills, where it was released,” he added.
 	
 	
 	 		RAREST SNAKE
 		 	 		A white cobra or albino cobra is said to be one of the rarest snakes. According to cobras.org, albinism is rare among animals. The condition, which occurs as a result of the lack of pigments, becomes a villain for the snake as it is left without a protecting camouflage, thereby exposing it to predators and enemies. Such snakes are also at the risk of skin cancer because of the ultra-white skin. An albino snake was spotted in the USA last year. From then, till its capture, Twitter was abuzz with constant updates.