Research team led by naturalist and arachnologist Ahmed from Mumbai names them after conservationists
 
 
 	Arachnologists from Mumbai and Karnataka teamed up to document spiders of the ‘Kans’ forestlands of Central Western Ghats in Karnataka, and in the process discovered three new species. Kans forestland that falls in Shivamogga is a specialised ecosystem that consists of evergreen and semi-evergreen vegetation, surrounded by a deciduous forest, which results in unique micro-climatic conditions, making them rich pockets of biodiversity.
 	
 	  	Western Ghats is a global biodiversity hotspot and Unesco world heritage site. Traditionally preserved as sacred groves, these fascinating habitats are being rapidly encroached upon and destroyed by unsustainable development practices. 
 	
 	  	Recent surveys conducted in the area have led to the discovery of three new species of spiders, which have been named in honour of Mumbai-based wildlife conservationists. The following discoveries are published in The Indian Journal of Arachnology, the country’s foremost and only peer-reviewed scientific journal dedicated to arachnology, and which publishes novel and significant observations and research on the subject.
 	
 	  	Paraplectana rajashree is a rare, dainty red orb-spider whose appearance mimics ladybird beetles. Besides being a new species, this is the first time that this genus has been reported from India. The species was named in honour of conservationist, birdwatcher and aboriginal dog fancier, Rajashree Khalap, who is currently studying the birds and biodiversity of Powai Lake and who recently collaborated on and co-authored a seminal paper on the genetics of Asian village dogs. “It’s a beautiful and very rare spider. I feel very honoured that it has been named after me, and that my name features in the list of our planet’s fabulous biodiversity,” she said.
 	
 	  	Thelcticopis kirankhalapi is a mid-sized, handsome huntsman spider, elegantly coloured in hues of copper and coffee brown. It has been named in honour of leading brand guru and consultant, expert rock climber and critically-acclaimed author Kiran Khalap, who is also a connoisseur of arts, life sciences and supporter of conservation initiatives.
 	
 	  	Cyrtarachne sunjoymongai is an uncommon, dainty little orb-spider whose appearance mimics a snail; thereby avoiding predation by birds. The species is named after Sunjoy Monga, honorary wildlife warden from Mumbai suburbs who is also an ornithologist and natural historian. 
 	
 	  	He said, “It’s a tremendous feeling, a great sense of gratitude to know that there is a species out there, howsoever tiny it may be, named after you. When, some months ago, Javed mentioned to me that he wanted to name a species in my honour, I thought he was kidding; I always knew he was an incredibly passionate observer, always diligently exploring the empire of life... but that he would stumble upon some new finds and that one of these he would be naming in my honour... well, I was awe-struck when it became a reality. 
 	
 	  	“I sure am going to try and see, with Javed’s help, that little spider in the wild and savour every moment with it, perhaps even introduce myself to it. Life on Earth is a miracle, a never-to-be-recreated marvel and now my name is etched in the story of this life that I so cherish and am so passionate about ever since I came to my senses.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	The research team is led by naturalist and arachnologist Javed Ahmed from Mumbai, who is currently pursuing a master’s degree in environmental science and includes Sumukha JN, an electronics engineer from Bengaluru, who’s also a keen naturalist and photographer; Rajashree Khalap, conservationist, birder and landrace dog fancier; Krishna Mohan, surgeon, environmentalist and wildlife photographer; and Bhushan Jadhav, wildlife photographer and lepidopterist.
 	
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror of the find, Mohan said, “India remains largely unexplored in terms of its spider fauna. The vast majority of Indian spiders remain understudied, and many species await discovery. Because spiders are so poorly studied, local distribution records are almost non-existent. Even basic life histories and behaviour of some of our commonest spiders remain unknown. Our team has made it a mission to contribute toward a better understanding of these fascinating organisms.”