Even as Salman Khan’s childhood friend Sajid Nadiadwala cancelled the success party of Baaghi 2 in the wake of the superstar getting a five-year sentence in the 1998 black buck poaching case, Nadiadwala and scores of ‘Bhai’s’ friends and fans need not worry. Going by the history of the case that has lasted two decades, Salman appears to be on a good footing as far as securing bail is concerned.

One of the primary reasons why he shouldn’t find it so tough to secure bail (from a sessions court in this case) is the fact that he has been out on bail during the entire trial process, and he has been present for the legal proceedings whenever summoned.

Salman’s lawyer Anand Desai said the legal team had already filed an appeal against the judgment and the sessions court was likely to hear the appeal for suspension of the sentence/bail on Friday.

The statement also said that the judgment “came as a surprise” and that the acquittal of all the five co-accused implied that “Salman was out hunting alone in the middle of the night in a remote area outside Jodhpur”.

In a 201-page judgment, the Jodhpur CJM while deciding the case, observed that the witnesses’ deposition with respect to the other accused “only proved their presence in the same vehicle as Salman”, and not that they asked him to fire gunshots.

Due to pendency, it takes a few years for appeals to be heard, and, owing to his acquittals from higher courts in the cases that he was convicted earlier by the respective trial courts, Salman can’t be called a convict for any other case – a point that would be referred to by his lawyers before the Jodhpur Sessions Court, if needed.

In all probability, whichever side loses in the sessions court will challenge the order before the Rajasthan High Court

—Sunil Baghel


Past brushes with the law

* Spent 18 days in total in the jail in 1998, 2006 and 2007, in cases of poaching

* Sentenced to five years for killing one person and injuring four after crashing his Toyota Land Cruiser into American Express Bakery at Hill Road at Bandra on September 28, 2002. Acquitted, but state govt has filed an appeal

1 case still pending

Salman was also charged with two other poaching cases of Chinkara and black buck in Bhawad and Mathania villages. He was acquitted in both. But, the verdict in the Chinkara case was challenged by the Rajasthan govt in the SC, following which the actor was issued a notice. The matter is pending in court. He was also acquitted in a case under the Arms Act.

Things will get better: Raj Babbar 

Congress MP Raj Babbar on Thursday expressed hope that Bollywood actor Salman Khan would get ‘justice’ in the coming days and people’s good wishes will help him tide over the difficult times.

Speaking in his personal capacity, the actor-turned-politician said Salman has done a lot of philanthropic work and people’s good wishes are with him and help him come out of the crisis.

“Today the court has given its verdict and we respect it… I hope he gets justice in the coming times. I am sure he is a strong man and people’s good wishes are with him which will help him overcome the difficult times,” he said.

“It is my personal experience that Salman Khan is a good human being and has done a lot of philanthropic work for the welfare of people, irrespective of caste or community,” he added.

Qaidi No. 106 gets dal-roti, refuses to eat

Salman Khan may be a heartthrob of millions, but at the Jodhpur Central Jail he is just Qaidi No. 106 who was served simple dal-roti on Thursday evening which he did not eat.
Khan has been kept in ward no. 2, adjacent to the cell of self-styled godman Asaram.

Jail superintendent Vikram Singh, while briefing the media on the celebrity inmate, said Khan would be treated as a normal prisoner and no special treatment would be given to him.
He will have a simple wooden bed, a rug and a cooler in his cell, Singh said.

“He (Khan) was given normal jail diet like Dal chapatti and the morning meal will include simple khichdi,” he said.

Singh said that the actor had a blood pressure issue when he came inside the jail and the doctor of the prison dispensary checked him. His blood pressure was later declared normal.


Asaram, Malkhan Singh co-inmates

Salman was to be lodged in barrack no. 2, which also houses godman Asaram Bapu, accused of raping a schoolgirl; ex-Congress MLA Malkhan Singh Bishnoi, facing trial in the Bhanwari Devi murder case; and Shambhu Lal Regar, who hacked and burned a Muslim labourer in December last year. 


Who are the Bishnois?

The politically powerful Bishnoi community had filed the hunting case against Salman. Its 29 tenets direct members to protect nature and animals as well as worship god. The killing of animals and the felling of trees are “grave sins” for it. Post Salman’s conviction, the Bishnois were jubilant. The community has for long boycotted Salman’s films.


Judge: Salman a popular actor followed by masses

While sentencing Salman Khan to five years in jail, the Judge pointed out the fan following of the superstar, saying he is a “popular actor whose deeds are followed by people”. Chief Judicial Magistrate Dev Kumar Khatri sentenced the Bollywood superstar to five years in prison for killing two blackbucks, capping a 20-year case that began with a late night safari outside this tourist city on the sidelines of a film shoot in 1998.

“The accused is a popular actor whose deeds are followed by people. Despite this, the accused hunted two blackbucks,” Khatri said in his written judgment.

The defence had argued that Salman has not been convicted in any case earlier and that he has always appeared before the court on given date.

The defence counsel also said Salman was under the custody of forest department for five days and he should be given the benefit of the Probation of Offenders Act.

But the court refused to give Salman the benefit citing the circumstances of the case and gravity of the offence, according to a copy of the judgement.

“...considering the rising number of cases of illegal hunting of wildlife animals, looking at the circumstances of the case and gravity of the offence, giving the benefit of Probation of Offender Act does not appear justified,” the judge said.

The defence also said the accused is an actor and his sentencing will affect the livelihood of several families. Opposing this, the prosecution said the actor has committed an offence of serious nature.

The prosecution also mentioned the hit-and-run case against him in Mumbai and other cases while requesting for the maximum punishment.