Locals used a rope to pull it out; luckily, authorities came to its rescue soon enough
 
 
 A jackal was rescued on Thursday by a team of city-based wildlife rescuers, from a water body in Rajanukunte. They came in aid of the animal, before suspect elements could get their hands on the creature. Like the slender loris, red sand boa and the barn owl, the Indian jackal is commonly traded in the underground wildlife market. The jackal is illegally hunted for its tail due to the superstitious belief that it brings fortune. The skin of the jackal is also used to make fake animal products like tiger skins. Jackals are rarely spotted otherwise, and they dwell in scrub jungles in city outskirts, experts said. BBMP forest cell volunteers had rescued a jackal last in 2013.
 	  	On Thursday, locals first spotted the creature as it struggled to make its way out of a pond. Those who noticed it, instead of calling the forest officials, tried to rescue the animal by themselves. But thanks to a tip-off from People’s Trust — an NGO, city wildlife volunteers reached the spot just in time.
 	  	“It must have been stuck there in its bid to hunt some bird. Some locals used a rope to tie it and pull it out. That’s when People’s Trust officials intervened. They immediately called us and our boys rushed to rescue,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru (urban), told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	“The jackal was found with superficial injuries thanks to the locals’ attempt to tie it by the limbs. The rescue team, after administrating first aid, released it immediately into a more conducive habitat the same day (as it looked considerably stressed),” one of the volunteers said. 
 “Listed in Schedule II of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, the Indian jackal is found in scrub forests in rural districts like Anekal and Devanahalli. It is rarely spotted in residential areas,” the volunteer added. 
 	  	Wildlife volunteers didn’t rule out the possibility of the jackal being used for suspect purposes by the locals, if it weren’t for the People’s Trust’s intervention. Jackals are sold for a huge price, sleuths said. 
 	  	In the last decade, at least three raids revealed Bengalureans confining wild jackals inside their residences in JP Nagar, Banashan-kari and Sadashivnagar. The last instance turned out to be the residence of a senior advocate. 
 	  	Illegal possession or any transactions that involve jackals may land one in jail for up to three years besides a fine imposition, forest cell volunteers told Bangalore Mirror.