Thiruvananthapuram: The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) on Monday held that the pregnant elephant in Kerala may have died after accidentally consuming a fruit filled with explosives.

The death of the elephant had sparked major outrage in the country.

The MoEF's version is in sharp contrast to one of the ruling party MP Maneka Gandhi's claim that the elephant was fed a fruit concealing a 'bomb' in it.

According to MoEF, primary investigations into the recent death of a pregnant elephant in Kerala reveals the pachyderm may have accidentally consumed explosives -filled fruit.

The ministry said it is deeply concerned and pained by the pathetic death of the pregnant elephant in Palakkad district of Kerala.

"It is noted that many a times locals resort to an illegal act of planting explosive filled fruits to repel wild boars from entering plantation farms," MoEF tweeted.

We in @moefcc are deeply concerned & pained by the pathetic death of a pregnant #Elephant in Palakkad District, Ker… https://t.co/NPe3peF8tl— MoEF&CC (@moefcc) 1591448850000

"All concerned departments of the ministry and Kerala government are handling the matter in an unbiased manner and we are confident of concluding the investigation sooner than later, to be followed by exemplary legal actions and punishment that will act as strong deterrent to committing such future acts," MoEF said.

The ministry's statement comes after a review meeting was chaired by Sanjay Kumar, Director General of Forests & Special Secretary, on Sunday to discuss the progress on the action taken on the incident.

The ministry is in constant touch with the state government and has sent a detailed advisory for immediate arrest of culprits and stringent action against erring official that led to the elephant's death, a tweet said.

The Kerala forest department last week arrested a 35-year-old rubber tapper at a farm in Ambalapara for his alleged involvement in the death of the pregnant elephant.

The owners of the farm where he worked, a father-son-duo, are still absconding.

Untitled Carousel Kerala: One suspect arrested, forest officials on lookout for father-son duo in connection with death of pregnant elephant in PalakkadThe suspect has been identifed as Wilson Joseph, 35. He is being questioned by the investigation team.

The death of the elephant had gained a communal colour following former Union Minister Maneka Gandhi's remarks.

She said the elephant was looking for food when someone came along and fed her a fruit with a 'bomb' concealed in it. 

Maneka, who is also an animal rights activist, came under attack after she claimed the incident happened in the Muslim-dominated Malappuram district.

She tweeted the district was known for "its intense criminal activity" especially with regard to animals.

"Malappuram (sic) is known for its intense criminal activity especially with regards to animals. No action has ever been taken against a single poacher or wildlife killer so they keep doint it," she wrote. 

Mallapuram is know for its intense criminal activity specially with regards to animals. No action has ever been tak… https://t.co/Qca5geGPDu— Maneka Sanjay Gandhi (@Manekagandhibjp) 1591166743000

A Malappuram native lodged a police complaint against her resulting in police registering a case against her under IPC section 153 (want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot).

The elephant, sources say, broke her jaw and suffered injuries in her tongue when she tried to chew a coconut or a fruit filled with crackers at the fringe areas of Silent Valley National Park near Mannarkad in Palakkad district. It then walked further, entered, the neighbouring district where it died standing in a pond on May 27 after suffering agony for nearly one week.


Untitled Carousel Kerala Elephant Death: CM Pinarayi Vijayan promises strict action against culprits, says three suspects in focusAfter the tragic killing of a pregnant elephant in Kerala triggered a nationwide outrage, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Thursday assured that strict action will be taken against the culprits and people’s concerns will not go in vain.