Until recently, Bengalureans had to travel at least 200 km to spot a tiger. But now, they can see one just 28 km away, in the vicinity of Bannerghatta. This has become possible because of the relentless efforts of conservationists and bureaucrats between 2011 and 2014 to connect five tiger reserves of the state. Their synchronised efforts, while overcoming several odds in the process, not only added a whopping 2,000 square kilometres of area to tiger parks but also gave a wider space for the big cats to roam around in.
 
 	
 	The tale of their hardship and subsequent achievement was published in an international journal ‘Fauna and Flora International’ a few months ago. The research work is collectively authored by noted conservationists Sanjay Gubbi and HC Poornesha, former chief secretary Kaushik Mukherjee and former APCCF MH Swaminath. The publication has also brought laurels to Mukherjee for being the first chief secretary (CS) to author an article in a scientific journal.
 	
 	  	According to the publication, conservationists and bureaucrats joined hands to resolve the problem pertaining to tiger habitat. “Protected areas are a mainstay of tiger conservation but often lack connectivity, which is key to ensuring both genetically and demographically viable populations. Enhancing the protected area network would therefore provide protected space for more breeding tigresses besides ensuring preservation of landscape corridors,” the article reads.
 	
 	  	The collaborative work resulted in the addition of 2,385 sq km of additional area to tiger reserves increasing the percentage of protected area network from the then existing 3.8 per cent to 5.2 per cent. “This is one of the largest expansions of protected areas in India since the 1970s,” revealed a senior IFS officer. Interlinking of tiger reserves has yielded three complexes of protected areas with Bannerghatta-Nagarhole complex including Bandipur, BRT. Though all complexes have benefited, it is the Bannerghatta complex that got the highest extent of additional land – 1,786.32 sq km.
 	
 	  	Recalling his experience, Kaushik Mukherjee said, “The study is the best example to showcase how much positive output can be achieved if scientists and bureaucrats join hands. Be it reserved forest, state forest or minor forest, there is enough forest out there adjoining or between protected areas. All we need do is join them by adding fragmented spaces to the ambit of protected areas. Making use of the data made available with Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre and using GIS analysis, the areas were identified and accordingly notified through government orders to link them with reserves.”
 	
 	  	Mukherjee, who was ACS (forests and ecology) and later promoted as CS, held 13 meetings in 33 months with the chief minister, forest minister and elected representatives of the local areas. Though most were convinced, a few opposed his move. Yet, the team succeeded in adding over 2,000 sq km of land to tiger reserves.
 	
 	
 	“The maximum opposition was from the forest department itself. Because they did not want to receive brickbats later that wildlife purpose has gulped over huge tracks of
 	forestland,” he recalled.
 	
 	  	Sanjay Gubbi, co-author of the work said, “Wonderful results can be achieved if you take science to its logical end. This is what we precisely attained through this work. The increased space will contribute to the multiplication of wildlife.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Even though the team identified a total of 4,767.4 sq km of area, they could only notify 1,819.1 sq km due to opposition by some elected representatives. “We still believe there is an additional 1,800 sq km of forest that could be added to the protected area network as priority regions for investment in tiger conservation,” the team says in the article.