The Kerala government has granted a solatium of Rs 15 lakh to the family of slain National Security Guards (NSG) commando Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan, who died fighting terrorists in Mumbai on Nov 28.

Honouring the valour of Major Sandeep in combating terrorists at Hotel Taj, the government on Dec 3 decided to grant Rs 15 lakh to the bereaved family. On Tuesday, Kerala’s industries minister Elamaram Kareem, forests and wildlife minister Binoy Viswam and revenue minister K P Rajendran along with Kozhikode district collector A Jayathilak visited Major Sandeep’s parents at their residence near Yelahanka.

The ministers offered their condolences to the family and handed over the cheque for Rs 15 lakh. The ministers, who arrived around 11.45 am, spent almost an hour with Sandeep’s parents - K Unnikrishnan Nair and Dhanalakshmi and a few relatives. They shared their memories of Sandeep.

“The solatium is a symbol of respect from the people of Kerala, the Kerala chief minister and the cabinet,” said Kareem.
During his interaction with ministers, Unnikrishnan clarified his criticism of Kerala CM V S Achutanandan’s actions were due to an “emotional outburst”. “It was not me but an emotional father in me who was disturbed after losing my only son that made me react that way,” he explained. 

However, the ministers consoled Unnikrishnan and explained that Achuthanandan had understood the intensity of the situation.

Family undecided
Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Unnikrishnan said the family has yet to decide on the solatium offered by different governments. “Nothing has been decided so far, be it forming a trust in Sandeep’s name or utilising the amount. We feel it would be apt to use the amount for educating children hailing from poor families. We will use it for public purpose only.”

Classmates moot trust
According to sources from Sandeep’s family, his friends and classmates from Frank Anthony’s Public School in Ulsoor are planning to set up a trust in the name of Sandeep and take up charity events for the benefit of society. When Bangalore Mirror contacted Yugandhar G, a friend of Sandeep, he refused to comment. “It is too early to comment on the structure of the trust as it is at an initial stage. Nothing has been finalised as yet.”