BBMP, Bannerghatta Biological Park, NGOs to set up urban wildlife rescue centre

As Bengaluru continues to expand, encounters with wildlife in the city are becoming commonplace each passing day.
 
According to the officials from the forest department of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), the number of wildlife rescue calls from various parts of the city has increased multifold over the last few months.

To manage this surge, BBMP, in association with Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) and city-based NGOs are to set up a wildlife rescue-cum-rehabilitation centre.

The centre, with a capacity to rescue and rehabilitate at least 30 animals, and birds, will be located at BBP.

“The number of calls on the department’s helpline regarding wildlife in distress has been going through the roof. We are getting three to four calls every week to save monkeys, four to five calls every month regarding other small mammals, and nearly four calls every day for snake rescues. Many reports of small animals entering people’s houses come in too. While our team tries to attend to all these calls, it is increasingly becoming difficult to manage without a dedicated centre. With this new facility, we will be able to rescue, keep the animals under observation, and then rehabilitate them,” said BLG Swamy, deputy conservator of forests (DCF), BBMP.

The centre will be managed by BBP officials and veterinarians from NGOs such as the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC) located inside the BBP campus.

.
Wildlife rescue cases from urban areas have gone up. As the city is growing, people are utilising vacant patches of land frequented by these animals and birds. The animals have no other option but to move to urban habitats. These animals have to be rescued and rehabilitated before they are released back to their natural habitats.

“While the number of rescues is going up, there is no SoP in place to handle these animals. With this initiative, we will be able to create a structured mechanism around the process. There will be dedicated rescue teams and veterinarians to attend to these animals, ensuring proper rescue procedures and rehabilitation. We are doing it in association with WRRC to minimise our expenditure while utilising the existing expertise,” said AV Surya Sen, DCF and executive director of BBP.

The centre will cater to wildlife in the city and on the outskirts.