No unnatural deaths, says forest department, but activists worry cases may have gone unreported

Over the last three-and-a-half years, Karnataka has lost 57 tigers. Of these, 11 deaths have been recorded since January this year, according to data from the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). The 11 deaths include seven adults and sub-adults, one cub, and two undetermined. Last year, eight deaths were reported in the given period (January to June).

Officials from Karnataka Forest Department say the number is not alarming as no unnatural deaths have been recorded so far. Protection levels in tiger reserves in Karnataka are up to the mark and poaching camps are active. Officials say tiger mortality rate is always in their radar and a thorough analysis will be taken up only if it goes up by more than 25% by the end of the year.

“Eleven deaths is not big, especially when not even a single case of poaching or unnatural deaths has been reported. The major causes behind tigers’ mortality are territorial fights or old age. Tigers’ deaths become concerning when they happen due to electrocution, poison, or gunshots. As far as a comparison from last year’s data is concerned, animal mortality cannot be a perfect graph,” said Kumar Pushkar, additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), KFD.

As per NTCA’s mortality data, in 2023, Karnataka had recorded 12 tiger deaths. In 2022, 18 big cats died over 12 months and in 2021 15 tiger deaths were recorded.

However, conservationists allege while some unnatural deaths have taken place in some tiger reserves over the past few months, they have gone unreported. Some also point to recent thefts of camera traps suspecting involvement of poachers. Around six camera traps, installed by the department for the recent survey of big cats in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, went missing.

Poaching concerns
“Big cats across multiple tiger reserves in Karnataka have been poached, but these deaths are never on record. In certain areas, tigers have disappeared. Since the carcass is not found, it is difficult to prove this illegal activity. Theft of camera traps is a matter of grave concern. Poachers steal the cameras and get valuable information on tigers’ location and movement,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board of Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

KFD officials admitted to theft of camera traps, but refuted involvement of poachers. “More often than not, cameras are taken away by tribal out of curiosity. We lodged FIRs but police could not recover them,” said a KFD official.