Barely a week after forest minister C P Yogeshwar claimed the department will combat forest fires using satellite-based GPS technology, forest fires have gutted more than 3,000 acres of forest in the Nagarhole National Park, raising questions over efficiency of the method. 
 
 After more than 30 years, core tiger areas have been completely burnt by the raging fires, prompting the department to put on hold the Tiger Safari at Nagarhole for a month (till Ugadi), much to the disappointment of tourists.
   Even as questions were being raised over the origin of fire, sources in the department said delay in the preparation of fire lines had aggravated the problem. “By December-January, the department should have completed both maintenance and preparation of fire lines. Delay in executing the works resulted in the fires spreading wide,” said a forest officer.
   He, however, said the large-scale fire could also be the handiwork of some miscreants. Unlike the previous year, when fire incidents caused extensive damage in the fringe areas, this time several core areas, including the tourist safari areas, have fallen prey.
   The forests around Marappana Katte were free of fire for 35 years. The last such incident in the area was reported way back in 1975.
   “This time, the entire forest area on the banks of Lakshman Theertha has been gutted. Forest areas in Aane Choukur, Kallhalla have also been affected,” said a department official.
   Another senior official supervising the task of controlling the fires, said: “Saturday, Sunday and Monday were the worst. In both Bandipur and Nagarhole, more than 5,000 acres of forest have been lost. Initial reports indicate it’s the handiwork of miscreants.”
   The flames rose to a height of 200 to 300 feet because the bamboo clusters were dry. “Since the fire tenders cannot venture into the area, we are using traditional methods like beating the fire with green branches,” he said.
   Meanwhile, the department released Rs 45 lakh for maintaining fire lines as against Rs 30 lakh released last year. Despite the increased budgetary allocation, the department has failed to douse the fire.
   A senior wildlife activist, on condition of anonymity, said: “Some officials are eager to exhaust the allocated funds before completion of the budgetary year. Hence they took up civil works rather than going to forest and making preparations ahead of the summer season. This being the case, how can you expect officers to avert such a mishap?”
   Admitting it was the worst tragedy in the history of the department, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests A K Varma said, “All our staff headed by PCCF (wildlife) have been camping at the frontline areas. As per the latest report, the fire has been controlled and the situation is under observation.”
   He said once the senior officials return, the department will conduct a probe into the incident, including DCFs and CCFs of the area.
   While trees and grasslands in Nagarhole, Metikuppe, Veeranahosahalli in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve and Gundre, N Begur and Gopalaswamy Betta have been gutted, forest officials say a few animals may have been burnt alive.
   “It is possible cubs of some mammals may have been killed. But there was no threat to the larger animals. We are yet to verify this fact,” said a conservator of forest.
 
 
 Blame blazes on mankind
 
 Every day, we hear of forest fires across Karnataka. According to Aparna V Kolekar, a member of Kenneth Anderson Nature Society, forest fires in India are always man-made. “Indian flora always contain enough moisture, even in peak summer, to deter a natural fire. Anybody who has tried starting a fire by rubbing dry bark would know. If fires are an annual feature, the forest will not see regeneration of vegetation, which will result in fast-spreading Lantana, Eupatorium and Parthenium species occupying the space. These dry up in summer and add fuel to fires. Although all large mammals escape a fire, ground-dwelling birds and insects perish. These fires are mostly set off by people who want to encourage growth of grass for their cattle,” she said.