Peace deserts Purva Highland apartments after the big cat was clicked sunning in the neighbourhood
 
 When the going gets tough in the wild due to human depredations, where do the tough leopards go? Residents of Purva Highland, located off NICE road, are hoping that it won’t be to their backyard, terrified as they are, after repeated sightings of the big cat in their neighbourhood. 

 	And no, this is not one of the residents of the high-rise, multi-apartment complex hallucinating. They have clinching proof, in the form of a photograph clicked from the apartment terrace by one of the residents. An agile leopard is seen resting on a rock near the complex, ears pricked, eyes alert, ready to strike or play. 

 	The Forest Department officials have confirmed that the fears of the residents are genuine. 

 	”We received a complaint from the residents that they have spotted a leopard. They also gave us a photograph of the leopard which was frequenting the neighbourhood. We have checked and confirmed that the place where the leopard has been sighted is indeed the grounds near the apartment complex,” M Nagaraj, range forest officer, Kaggalipura range, told Bangalore Mirror. “We have carried out combing operations on two consecutive days and are closely monitoring situation.” 

 

 	STRAY DOGS ARE A DRAW
 	  	Purva Highland, which is spread across several blocks, is located adjacent to the NICE Road leading towards Electronic City. It has been a hive of activity ever since residents knocked on the doors of the Forest Department on Wednesday. Besides the combing operations, department staff also burst firecrackers, and trained the residents on how to chase away the leopard using fireworks. Additional supply of fireworks were provided to the security personnel at the complex, who were also trained on how to burst them. 

 

 Since hundreds of families and children are residing at the multi-apartment complex, the matter is considered sensitive. Wildlife experts are not surprised by the development. This is to be expected if humans encroach into previously wildlife habitations, especially in an area considered as ”leopard zone”, they say. The experts also note the area’s proximity to the Devika Rani Estate and Khodays’ Estate, besides the Bannerghatta forest. 

 

 	Forest officials also point fingers at waste meat thrown from chicken and mutton stalls at 3-4 places in the vicinity, which draws stray dogs, and in turn lures the leopard. 

 	“It was their habitat, once. The meat waste thrown is another reason these leopards come from the nearby forests to prey on the dogs. We have sensitised residents and have asked them not to panic. We have also educated local people not to throw waste meat in the vicinity. We have asked people not to walk in the vicinity during nights without taking due care,” Nagaraj added. 

 	The forest department has asked the management of the complex to raise the height of the compound wall, currently at about 20 feet, and secure it with solar fencing, since the leopard is believed to have entered from the NICE Road side. The management too is aware of the situation.