With a sizeable increase in the population of Bonnet macaques within city limits, residents are requesting the authorities and even private agencies to relocate the primates.

In fact, relocating wildlife is illegal according to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Veterinarians and wildlife activists say there is no strict implementation of such rules in the city or state.
 
The high court recently directed the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike and forest department to chart a plan to protect both the residents and monkeys, and ensure the macaques return to their natural habitat.
 
That said, awareness about monkeys and their life among the citizenry is quite poor, and a proper mechanism is yet to be put in place. Referring to the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, Dr Prayag HS, assistant professor and chief wildlife vet, said the citizens are not allowed to feed wildlife, and this includes monkeys.
 
However, people continue to feed monkeys which draws them to the city. If people stop feeding the primates, they would return to their natural habitat on their own.
 
“More awareness needs to be spread to prevent gruesome incidents like the recent poisoning of 20 monkeys in Kolar. If we don’t control this now, we might have to witness more such instances,” he said.

Simhadri MN of Swift Wildlife Action Team (SWAT) said they receive multiple requests for relocation of monkeys. There are instances where people attack the primates in an attempt to shoo them away, he said.
 
“Citizens reach out to the forest department requesting relocation of monkeys. We don’t respond to such calls as relocation is illegal. We have seen cases where monkeys were hurt by the public. People even pelt stones at them,” he added.


  Monkeys are currently migrating as they have no place to go…We are destroying their home through widening of roads and cutting decades-old trees…— Suparna Ganguly, Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre
 
Recalling an instance, he said: “Last week, we received a call regarding an infant macaque that got its head stuck inside a plastic bowl. The animal was seen struggling for days in RR Nagar. We rescued the infant along with the mother and sent it to the rehabilitation centre to treat the injury. The infant was found in an apartment in RR Nagar where a troop of macaques has taken up residence. The residents there worship the monkeys in the form of lord Anjaneya and regularly feed them. Now the macaque population in the area has increased. The monkeys go to houses and steal food, which has now become a menace. The residents are requesting relocation of the primates. They are asking us if the animals can be sent to forests nearby, which cannot be done. Monkeys are supposed to eat the food that is available in nature -- fruits, vegetables, flowers, worms and insects. With people feeding them home cooked meals and snacks, whole generations living in urban areas have adapted. We are indeed responsible for this menace.”

Dr SM Byregowda, director of Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals said the monkeys will find food in nature on their own and there is no need for people to feed them. “There is a misconception that monkeys would die if we don’t feed them. We need to create more awareness about this. If people stop feeding the monkeys will return to their natural habitat and find food. The monkey population has not increased. Instead we are entering their territory and claiming they need to go back resulting in human-wildlife conflicts. If the menace is out of control in any area, the forest department would consider relocating them to forests,” he said.

Suparna Ganguly, president of Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, told BM that the monkeys are currently migrating and have no place to go. That is why they are seen wandering in the city: “We are destroying their home through widening of roads and cutting decades-old trees. It is important that the monkeys find fruit bearing trees, which are now being cut down. The animals end up eating food offered by people instead, and reside in the area where grub is available.”

Monkey business

 Stop feeding monkeys

  Plant more fruit bearing trees or grow a mini-forest on the outskirts
 Continuous feeding and easy availability of food near temples and tourist spots make macaques snatch food
 People should avoid keeping food in plastic covers as macaques snatch food and end up eating plastic as well

  Do not contact private agencies for relocation as it is illegal. Contact the forest department for assistance
 Harming monkeys is a punishable offence