IFS officer Srinivasalu takes up second-in-command post at KSPCB, which has been criticized for doing a shoddy job

Srinivasulu, an IFS officer of the 1997-batch, took charge as the Member Secretary of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), a second-in-command post in the regulatory body. He is among the nine senior IFS officers, who were transferred to various important posts, last week.

Incidentally, Srinivasulu hails from the home district of Forest Minister Anand Singh and served as Chief Conservator of Forests in the home district of Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa in Shivamogga, just before taking charge at the pollution control board. The 1997-batch IFS officer replaces Basavaraj Patil, who held the post for a brief time of about five months.

Postings in KSPCB are considered highly coveted as it deals with issuing and rejecting clearances to thousands of industries and resorts on the basis of whether these establishments are harming the environment. Polluting industries are categorised as Red, Orange and Yellow, depending upon the severity of the pollution.

Currently, the KSPCB does not have a full-time chairperson ever since Dr. M Sudheendra Rao resigned on May 2 as his appointment to the top post had come under the scrutiny of the High Court. Vijay Kumar Gogi, who holds the post of Principal Secretary at Forest Department (Ecology), has been given an additional charge of KSPCB, on a temporary basis.

It’s learnt that there are at least 60 cases against the KSPCB before the National Green Tribunal and many more cases in the High Court. Besides this, the Board has also come under extensive criticism from the general public for failing to perform effectively and siding with the polluting industries.

The failure of KSPCB had also come to the fore during the weeks-long lockdown as the industrial waste in the Vrishabhavathi Valley had come down. “The Board, which is in the process of collecting water samples of lakes and valleys, should make the data public once it’s complete. And, it should be published online. We have, for long, seen that the KSPCB has been favouring the polluting industries although it’s named as pollution control board,” Niveditha Sunkad, an environmental activist, said.
 
Eight other transfers
Among other transfers include Ajay Mishra, who has been appointed as Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife). Interestingly, the 1986-batch IFS officer, has not been given the Chief Warden (Wildlife) post, which is usually given to the same officer who holds PCCF (Wildlife).

New appointees include: Raj Kishore Singh Principal Chief Conservator of Forests - Development), Surya Deo Pathak (Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests – Evaluation), R Ravishankar (Chief Conservator of Forest, Shivamogga) and Basavaraj Patil (Conservator of Forests – Budget and Audit).