Activities within protected conservation areas should be approved by authorities concerned

A recent news report about a local farmer supplying water to a check dam inside Bandalli Betta within the limits of Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary to ensure water availability for wildlife created a stir among wildlife conservationists and researchers.

In a written complaint sent to the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), a Bengaluru-based conservationist highlighted the issue of waterholes being created inside forest reserves and protected areas by nonprofit organisations and individuals; in some cases without due permission.

“NGOs and private people are being allowed to create and fill waterholes without following the Wildlife (Protection) Act. As per sections 27 and 28 of the Act, citizens are not allowed inside protected areas and tiger reserves. Any activity taken up by individuals and organisations other than KFD inside protected areas need permission from the chief wildlife warden (CWW).

 However, these rules are not being followed,” noted the complaint, a copy of which is with BM.

When BM reached out to SK Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests, wildlife, and chief wildlife warden, KFD, he confirmed that any activity inside protected areas should be approved by the CWW.

“Any activity inside PAs requires mandatory permission from CWW. 

These are sensitive areas and necessary assessment should be conducted before permission is granted for creating extra waterholes. We have not given any such permission in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. An inquiry will be conducted and necessary action will be taken,” said Malkhede.

Conservationists are of the view that artificial waterholes should be created only in landscapes that are completely fragmented and obliterated owing to human activities and development projects.

“Wildlife sanctuaries are generally well-connected forest patches. Allowing private organisations and people inside PAs will lead to unnecessary disturbance. These forests have been through many draught seasons and wildlife is accustomed to such conditions. Filling waterholes for wildlife in forest patches such as Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary will lead to animals losing their natural resistance. While such interventions can be done in degraded landscape, for instance, areas with Acacia plantation, it should be taken up only by the department and not NGOs,” said another Bengaluru-based wildlife conservationist.

Wildlife activists are of the view that owing to the high frequency of such activities being taken up across forest patches in the state, KFD should issue a circular highlighting the rules.
According to wildlife researchers, a better approach to help wildlife, in the long run, should include clearing encroachments on forest land, restoring wildlife corridors, reducing wildlife frequency, and planning infrastructure development sustainably.

They said that although RFOs and DCFs can take calls and give permissions based on requirements in forest reserves, creating waterholes is not a necessity, especially inside forests that are well connected with surrounding landscapes.

“‘Survival of the fittest’ is the rule followed in the wild and we must not interfere with the process. People do not understand the science behind how natural habitats such as forests operate. Moreover, every waterhole created is akin to meddling with the landscape and altering its topography. We are damaging and destroying so many microhabitats in this process.

. 
Any human activity inside ­protected forest areas should be discouraged,” said Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

“Unless a landscape is completely obliterated, no interference should be made and we must allow nature to take its course. However, when people see dehydrated animals, they create a hue and cry and blame the forest department for not providing water.
 
Moreover, we cannot deny that human activities have led to a negative impact on forest landscapes, and have changed water regimes. We are walking a tightrope and trying to balance public sentiments while ensuring minimal interference,” said a senior KFD official.