Karnataka government seems to have had a brain wave for the 65-km road connecting Chikkamagaluru with Dakshina Kannada. It has decided to change the alignment which will result in more trees being chopped; also, the many tributaries that snake through the area will dry up, say experts
 
 
 	 	 	   
 
 The state government has acknowledged that its proposed four-lane highway through Byrapura-Holegandi route in the Western Ghats to link Mudigere (Chikkamagalur) with Shishila (Dakshina Kannada) would cause tremendous destruction to the evergreen forests. But the new alignment proposed by the Public Works Department (PWD) would cause even more damage to the fragile ecosystem than the earlier one, affecting west-flowing rivers, experts have warned.
 
 It would also further escalate the already bitter confrontation between Coastal Karnataka and Bayalu Seeme districts (districts of southern hinterland of the state) over natural water supply over the Yettinahole project being affected.
 
 	 	 	   
 
 While the state government on Tuesday claimed in the legislative council that the new alignment has less forest and wildlife, activists and conservationists have revealed that the fresh alignment would disturb several river tributaries of Nethravathi — the lifeline of Dakshina Kannada.
 
 The situation could get worse if the government does not take the local people into confidence and minimise the damage to the Western Ghats.
 
 The state government has long been mulling an alternative road to the crammed Shiradi and Charmadi ghats, which connect the coast with the state’s hinterland.
 
 While the government is already toying with the idea of tunnelling through the ghats simultaneously with the process of widening roads of Shiradi and Charmadi ghats, the effort to build yet another road has heightened anxiety levels among the locals as the project would put tremendous pressure on the Western Ghats.
 
 Bangalore Mirror broke the story and published a series of reports on how the road project would further jeopardise the already exploited Western Ghats.
 
 No damage: PWD
 
 Proposing a new route, initially the PWD had zeroed in on the alignment that connected Mudigere-Byrapura (Nanya Bhairava Temple)-Holegandi-Shishila. BM reported about the project in its December 10, 2015 edition, revealing that close to 30,000 trees would face the axe. BM subsequently reported on November 24, 2016 that the survey work on the alignment had begun.
 
 However, after a detailed project report (DPR), the government itself understood the extent of damage it would cause to the fragile ecosystem. On March 18, 2017, the PWD decided to change the alignment and ordered the preparation of a fresh DPR on the second alignment.
 
 Replying to a question by BJP MLC Lahar Singh Siroya in council on behalf of the PWD minister Dr HC Mahadevappa, higher education minister Basavaraja Rayareddi accepted that the first alignment would cause major damage. “The initial alignment passes through dense forest causing more damage to wildlife and also involves steep hairpin curves, making it difficult to execute the road project. Hence a fresh alignment was chosen by dropping the earlier one. The new alignment passes through Mudigere-Byrapura-Nayihalla-Perike-Shishila, and has less forest and wildlife. Further, it also has less ghats, and hence was found feasible. We have ordered a survey to be conducted along alignment-2 and submit a DPR at the earliest. Only after the DPR we will come to know the exact number of trees that would have to be axed,” Rayareddi said.
 
Read Also:
Mirror test drive reveals temperature variation of 5 degrees Celsius on streets with and without trees

 The project, despite gaining support from political leaders, has received a huge backlash from locals and conservationists. A few environmentalists from Chikkamagalur even approached the court making the project execution even more difficult. Sensing stiff opposition the government has changed the alignment so as to ensure that the new route does not pass through Chikkamagalur division and routed it through Hassan division where there is much lesser opposition to the project.
 
 DV Girish, a naturalist from Chikkamagalur, told Banga­l­ore Mirror, “Regardless of the change in alignment, the project has to cut through dense forest. In fact, the new alignment proposed by the government would do even more damage to the ecosystem as it has vast stretches of evergreen forests and is also source to several tributaries of Nethra­vathi River. Disturbing the topography of the area would damage the water-holding capacity and affect flow of water into the river. From Chikkamagalur to Hassan division, the government is only trying to bypass the protestors as the opposition in Hassan is less. The latest alignment passes close to Shiradi Ghat.”
 
Read Also:
Bengaluru's green spaces stay stubbornly closed to public

 Another activist G Veeresh said, “While the earlier alignment had cut through Balur Reserve Forest in Chikka­magalur division, the latest alignment would partially pass through Balur Reserve Forest but a major portion would go through Kabbinale Reserve in Hassan Division. The stretch has source points for at least 20 rivers and rivulets like Shishila River, Nayihalla etc, which all drain into Nethravathi along with the others. Already the Yettinahole has dried up and state government will never get its desired yield. Now by disturbing the fragile terrain that is bowl-shaped, even other rivulets would also get damaged, leaving the Nethravathi bone dry. The new stretch will have even more number of trees that would have to be cut for executing the project.”
 
Allaying fears, Rayareddi clarified: “We have now ordered for a survey and the preparation of the DPR. Based on the report and its findings, we will take a call whether to go ahead with the project or adopt an elevated model approach to build roads over forests. Until the government gets hold of the DPR, it is difficult to comment on any damage. Before taking up any work on the stretch, we will go through all the pros and cons associated with the project.”