By Mark Mackenna Anthony
 
 A rescuer explains the importance of these reptiles for our ecosystem
 
 Come February, and all the way on till September each year, we rescuers in Bengaluru are flooded with calls concerning snakes in houses, backyards, gardens, and even inside cars or motorcycles.
 
 This is due to the fact snakes will try to find cool places during the summer, and a time when they will mate and nest, and burrows get filled with water during the rains, which is also the hatching season. While one might feel the presence of snakes around as a matter of concern, it is necessary to understand the importance of snakes in our ecosystem. Snakes not only keep the rodent population in check (in urban or rural areas), without having to use harmful chemicals, but they also thrive in areas where there are plenty of frogs, birds and other small mammals around, and in turn they snakes get eaten by larger predatory birds. So having snakes around is actually a sign that we are living in a healthy ecosystem.
 
 Back in the day before easy access to mobile phones and the Internet, each locality in the city had its own resident snake rescuers, who were called in to remove snakes where the informer thought better than to kill it.
 
 Though more often than not, snakes were usually killed. Also, with the lack of strong enforcement of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, under which killing of snakes is a non-bailable offence, one would also witness several cases of ‘snake charmers’ in many parts of the city possessing sadly de-fanged reptiles, and many other individuals keeping these creatures as ‘pets’.
 
 Citizens are now clearly more well informed about the role snakes play in the ecosystem, and are less given to believing in superstitions than they earlier were but the fact remains that the first reaction to seeing a snake is to panic.
 
 Some basic precautions to avoid incidents with snakes is to keep gardens, yards and garages etc. free of rubble, dry leaves, stacks of stones / wood / tiles and
 garbage to avoid rodents. Also, it is necessary for people to understand that is very unlikely for a snake to bite unless physically handled.
 
 While technology has helped in rescuers being able to have networks that are reachable by informants, reaching informants is also a cake walk with Google Maps, and when we do have an injured snake, there are at least 3 wildlife hospitals in Bangalore that can treat them – a far cry from way back in the 90s when there was no real wildlife hospital that could effectively treat snakes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 But going by the number of calls rescuers receive in a day during the ‘snake season’ (February-September) in the city, just technology is not good enough. Most rescuers are volunteers doing it out of passion, and not often having the support of authorities does not help.
 
 While the BBMP does have a rescue cell, there are several independent rescuers as well as NGOs with teams of rescuers available (numbers are available online) in Bangalore, but the flip side to this, is that there are also a lot of dubious rescuers around.
 
 So in order to ensure the snake is removed and relocated safely, it is best that the informants try to accompany the rescuer to relocate the snake in a wooded area within a reasonable distance of a couple of kilometres from where it was found.
 
 The creation of a single network for rescuers in the city would help well-meaning informers, voluntary rescuers and the creatures being rescued.
 
 (The author is a snake rescuer)