A collection of stories
City theatre company, the 13-year-old WeMove Theatre, presents its 15th production, Kathegalu. An anthology of three different stories directed by three directors of WeMove, this Kannada play is a rollercoaster ride of different shades of emotions; greed, hatred, humanity, destiny, desperation and inspiration. The 90-minute play is an amalgamation of stories of past, present and future. The stories are directed by Ranjan S, Suraj Kiran and Sindhu Hegde. 

 WHERE: Rangashankara, 2nd Phase, JP Nagar
 WHEN: 7.30pm, August 9 
 TICKETS: bookmyshow.com 

Art with a purpose
The 7th edition of annual photography exhibition JagaChitra is now open to the city. Conducted by TGiS (Thank God it’s Saturday), it will showcase scenic locales, culture, wildlife, nature, and people. But it’s no ordinary art show, as all proceeds from the exhibition will be donated to the Multiple Sclerosis Society of India (MSSI). This year, the exhibition will also advocate with MSSI for the rights of persons with MS – to offer them better work and care conditions. 

 WHERE: Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath, Kumara Krupa Road
 WHEN: 10am-7pm, August 8-11 CALL: 22261816

New looks
Check out the special pop up show by Soham Dave and Sartorial. Using the traditional Ajrak craft to form comfortable and modern aesthetics and hand-blocked prints with modern silhouettes, cuts and pleats, these collections are flattering and easy-to-wear.

 WHERE: Cinnamon, Gangadhar Chetty Road
 WHEN: Till August 11 CALL: 41634220

 Party time
It’s Friday, and that means it’s time to celebrate. DJ Ansh, from Patna, is known for setting the dance floor alight with his tracks. Plus he offers something fresh all the time. An active figure in the Bollywood dance music circuit in clubbing – he will ensure you to have a gala time by playing some foottapping Bollywood numbers.

 WHERE: Output36/5, Soul space Arena Mall, 4th floor, Outer ring road, Doddanekunddi
 WHEN: 8pm, August 9 
 TICKETS: Free

Tell tales
People of all cultures have used stories to help them explain a practice, a belief, or a natural phenomenon. It is a universal means of communicating cultural traditions and values, as well as a vehicle for passing on information about history, science, government, and politics. Some stories are new; others have been handed down from the ancients. Regardless of the origin of stories, storytelling is a unique and dynamic interaction between the teller and the listener. At this meetup, you can gather around and share stories with each other. 

 WHERE: Lahe Lahe, 80 Feet Road, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 8pm, August 9
 TICKETS: `100, bookmyshow.com

Watch a movie
Andreas van de Laar will do a screening of his project One Point Seven, a documentary series supported by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, about India’s development and innovation in the face of the largest population the world has ever seen. In the series Andreas explores some approaches to solutions in order for India to grow sustainably. The series follows four themes: urban development and governance, healthcare, education and agriculture. 

 WHERE: The Courtyard, 105 KH Double Road, Shanti Nagar
 WHEN: 6pm, August 9 TICKETS: `250, eventshigh.com

Sound and show
Sophia High School presents Pia Pinto Pops In, an adaption of the Broadway musical Mary Poppins. In this adaptation, we have the Dalals, a family unit that is not so harmonious. The father, Hiren Dalal, is too wrapped up in his work to pay his wife and children any real attention. The wife, Anchal, is caught between her own spontaneity and her desire to live up to Hiren’s notions of propriety. The children have run wild; they play pranks, are rude and disrespectful. Into this situation, drops in Pia Pinto from the heavens. She opens up the world to the children. When she finally disappears, she leaves behind a happy, integrated family.

 WHERE: Auditorium, Sophia High School, Palace Rd, High Grounds
 WHEN: 10.30am and 6pm, August 8 
 ENTRY: At the venue
 CALL: 22208794

Dance on
Get ready for the best of music with DJ Shiva Manvi this weekend. With years of experience performing at Sunburn Festival, TimeOut 72, Sensation Rise, Tinder-Swipe Right Night, Smirnoff Experience, Budweiser Experiences, Passion Unleashed, Corona Sunsets, Studio B, Beluga nights and many more, he is a versatile artist who will keep your feet tapping all night long. Having played alongside almost every Indian artist and some big international names, he’s earned his respect around the country as a skilled DJ.

 WHERE: Shiro, 3rd Floor, UB City, Vittal Mallya Road WHEN: 10.30pm, August 9 

Music men
The Kishan Baalaji Collective is a supergroup of some of Bengaluru’s finest musicians, all coming together to pay their respects to Coldplay. The KB collective features Kishan Balaji (drums), Yogeendra Hariprasad (keys), Yogesh Pradhan (bass), Keertana Bhoopal (vocals) and Pradip Ramanathan (guitars). The outfit will play a tribute to Coldplay. A well-known face in the local music circuit, Kishan Baalaji has played with Masala Coffee and Galeej Gurus. With a mother who is a trained Indian classical music singer, Balaaji has music in his blood. For 15 years, he has played with many established artistes. With the collective, he pays tribute to many bands that have served as inspiration.

 WHERE: Fandom, 1st floor of Gilly’s Redefined, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala WHEN: 7:30pm, August 10 ENTRY: `300 + 
`200 (cover), insider.in 

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’