If we really did care about the last of the few remaining cheetahs numbering a few thousands on the planet, perhaps we would not have brought them to the sparse patches of grassland in the subcontinent.

What is our understanding of the African cheetah to help the animal if it were to make it indeed in India? It should not be a case of Escobar’s lost hippos terrorising a river in the Americas.

The recurring depiction of the cheetah in literature and imagery as a tame animal used during royal hunts does indicate what led to the animals’ extinction here.

From a series of instances across the world barring a few miraculous recoveries that deserve special mention, in most cases humans and wildlife are incompatible.

How would the unbelievably agile, slender and arguably the fastest of cats fare now in the Indian plains where it once roamed, in terms of hunting, propagating or even surviving even whole life terms?

These critical factors did appear overlooked in the rush for pageantry around the whole ‘cheetahs-are-back-in-India’ trope.

Sadly enough the deaths of some of the cheetahs that arrived in Madhya Pradesh’s Kuno and their cubs that did not make it just days ago have become a regular fixture in the news cycle.

The latest of such news involves a forest department team tracking the cheetahs being beaten up by villagers who mistook them for dacoits.
 
In effect we have introduced an extinct species into a region where humans, livestock and human-subsidised carnivores are competing for the meagre resources along with existing wildlife. How would the cheetah and the aforementioned entities react to each other’s presence in such a landscape?

An animal, in its evolutionary history, in this case separated from its extinct cousins in this geography thousands of years ago, can it adapt to such a reintroduction?
 
How would it feel? Does it feel traumatised? Some have died. So surely something’s not working for them in the new setting.

More importantly how would this affect the human settlements around the area; are we in times of economic prosperity that we can afford human-animal experiments of this kind and expect the villagers to be in awe of the animal and forget their livelihoods?
 
Perhaps we should try and minimise the mounting instances of human-animal encounters that are affecting the lives of both.

On the one hand, each summer, we have rising instances of wildlife straying out of the jungles and forests in search of food or water hurting humans, in some cases resulting in deaths of humans, and on the other our god complex is trying to rehabilitate an extinct species. Maybe we should understand the changes that are occurring in these landscapes due to the sudden fallout of extreme global heating and other dynamics at play triggered by the climate crisis as a first step instead.

Addressing the immediate fallout of climate emergency in areas adjoining forests where humans and wildlife are undergoing a tremendous transformation like never before should be an immediate priority; we need to help wildlife and humans on the fringes of their habitats.

But why do we end up underestimating animals, especially those we call wildlife, always? Have we ever got it right about them? Perhaps not.
 
But we always made a grandstanding of how much we care; all that is now exposed reveals our gross misconduct in this sphere. Perhaps we should leave them be.

It is also a question of continuity of policy in these matters as envisaged changes in terms of reviving a lost life form do demand time. Like project elephant and tiger that did to a degree help salvage the animals’ dwindling numbers and degrading habitats, disruptive measures such as the introduction of entirely new wildlife require dedicated attention to detail or else it is surely bound to fail affecting the animal in question quite badly as we are seeing now in the cheetah’s case.

The larger question is what is the future of conservation itself in the rapidly shrinking spaces of the world’s most populous nation. The lack of space and the allied difficulties arising from it for humans would naturally lay the blame on the ‘rogue’ animal as we are seeing in cases of wild animals venturing out to human settlements already. There is no easy way out of this conundrum, but in earnest, the efforts that are going into projects like the reintroduction of cheetahs should also figure in helping both animals and humans find a way to coexist as spaces keep shrinking further.

Of course one of the most critical issues for the world’s most populous nation is space management.
 
Are we getting lost somewhere in search of lost glory when the present presents far greater challenges that need to be addressed sooner than later?