By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 The bonnet macaque makes me question my loyalties. As a lover of urban wildlife, do I sit back and admire the intelligence and cognitive abilities of this monkey, the ubiquitous kothi that runs wild in every locality of Bengaluru? Or as an aspiring farmer, do I treat it as a pest and adopt every possible measure to chase it away? I have to confess that I’ve been at the receiving end of the bonnet macaque’s capers. I put in a lot of effort growing vegetables on my roof, and no matter what barrier I erect, the monkey troop always seems to get past it and lay the crop to waste. The house is not safe either – a chink of an opening in a door or window is enough to ensure a raiding party in the kitchen. 
 
 
 I’m not the first person to face this dilemma. Farmers across India, wildlife officials, government departments, NGOs, all go through the same soul-searching and conclude that there is no easy answer. Monkeys are revered for religious reasons. Yet, the crop damage caused by them is extensive. In Karnataka alone this runs into crores of rupees every year. There have been many recorded cases of farmers abandoning their fields after frequent monkey attacks. Relocation, sterilization, culling (in extreme cases) – all these methods have been tried with limited success.
 
 
 The bonnet macaque is endemic to south India, and is one of few monkey species that has completely adapted to life in urban areas. Its close cousin, the rhesus macaque, takes its place up north. The two species do not overlap, and an imaginary line running along the Godavari and Tapti rivers forms a kind of lakshman rekha for the two species. To tell them apart, look at the head (distinctive ‘bonnet’ or whirl of hair for the bonnet macaque) and face (tell-tale pink face for the rhesus macaque).
 
 
 Why are these monkeys so common in human settlements? While the ‘we took their forests, where else will they go?’ argument has some strength, the truth is that bonnet macaques seek out human habitation even when there are forests close by. The reason is simple – easy availability of food. In the forest, a monkey usually spends more than 10 hours a day searching for food. In human habitations, including farmlands, this gets reduced to a few minutes. This leaves the monkeys with a lot of time on their hands, which they spend on procreating and increasing their numbers!
 
 
 Bonnet macaques move in troops of 10 to 40 individuals. The troops are highly hierarchical, dominated by an alpha male, and his two or three lieutenants. These high-ranking males call the shots in the troop, and also have privileged access to the breeding females. Other males (from within or outside the troop) may challenge the alpha, leading to bloody fights that can leave the participants scarred or maimed. Females too have their own hierarchy, which remains stable, as females do not cross over between troops. These monkeys score high on cognitive abilities. I’ve seen them figure out how to open windows, turn on taps to drink water and unscrew the caps of plastic bottles to get at the goodies inside. The little ones are incredibly curious and playful. Babies hitch a ride under their mothers, clinging on for dear life as they jump from branch to branch.
 
 
 What’s the best approach to handling a troop of bonnet macaques in your neighbourhood? For starters, don’t harm them and don’t feed them. Keep your distance, especially from the alpha male and his coterie. Make your home as inhospitable as possible by closing windows and covering food. Keep a catapult handy. You don’t have to use it, monkeys bolt just at the sight of it. With all these precautions, you may just be able to sit back, relax and watch the playful antics of these highly intelligent creatures.