The safari at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is one of the most popular tourist attractions in Bengaluru. However, many frightening incidents have occurred at BBP where animals have attacked safari vehicles and workers at the park due to the delays in opening and closing of safari gates. This often results in fights between different species, leading to injuries, and even death. 
 
 However, BBP is now ready to introduce gates for the safari enclosure which operate using sensors to ensure that the exit and entrance gates cannot be opened at the same time.
 
 The BBP safari enclosure has two gates to allow safari vehicles to enter the park without letting any animals out. And in many incidents, animals succeeded in entering or leaving the enclosure along with the safari vehicles. There have been many incidents like these and it is extremely difficult for the animal keepers to get the animals back into their enclosures.
 
 Realising that the gate operator cannot single-handedly open and close the gates and is usually unaware of what is happening on the other side, BBP authorities have decided to introduce the new system.
 
 “There have been many incidents when animals entered another enclosure along with the safari vehicle. The staff managing the enclosures open the first gate to allow the vehicle to pass, close the gate and then open the second gate to allow the vehicle enter the enclosure,” a source at BBP said.
 
 “Recently, there was an incident where two white tigers followed one such safari vehicle and entered the enclosure which houses three Royal Bengal tigers. Seeing the new tigers in their territory, the Bengal tigers attacked the white tigers leading to a fight that injured the tigers badly. It was very difficult for the employees to take the animals back to their enclosures,” the source added. 
 
 The new gates have sensors and offer more safety of the workers and visitors.
 
 “The new gates will be fixed at all five safaris. The sensors make sure that the exit gates will open only if the entrance gate is closed. So, there is no possibility of animals entering another enclosure with the safari vehicle.” R Gokul, Executive Director, BBP, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Bannerghatta has four different safaris: white tiger, Bengal tiger, lion, bear and herbivores safaris. A trial of the new system was undertaken and BBP has received a green signal to go ahead with the project. Officials say the new enclosures will be ready by the last week of January or first week of February.
 
 
  MEASURES TAKEN TO PREVENT BIRD FLU
 
 Bannerghatta Biological Park has made all the arrangements to protect their animals from bird flu. BBP has constructed a foot-dip for visitors. “We have installed a new foot dip at the entrance gate for visitors and a similar system for vehicles which enter the park. Earlier, the foot dip was used only during the time of a bird flu outbreak. But, this time, it will remain regardless of an outbreak,” R Gokul, Executive Director, BBP, explained.