Despite working from home in a different city, Sharath Babu manages to coordinate the operation with officials to save a falcon

Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) volunteers, while working from home in Bengaluru, managed to bust a poacher and his associate in Hyderabad who were trying to sell a falcon bird online to a customer in Bengaluru.
 
Sharath Babu, a WCCB volunteer based in Bengaluru, keeps a tab on online advertisements involving protected wildlife species and its products that pop up online every now and then.
 
There many YouTube videos and channels about wildlife found online, of which some are very informative, and some give away unwarranted information about capturing and taming wildlife. At times, these video also talk about the prices that are available in the black market, that lands people in soup, Babu pointed out.

Babu stumbled on an online advertisement that stated a Common Kestrel, a falcon, was available for sale in Hyderabad. He contacted the person selling it and confirmed whether he had the same bird he had advertised online. After confirming, Babu asked the seller where he could come in Hyderabad for the delivery of the bird so his driver in Hyderabad could pick it up after paying for it on Thursday, it is said.

The seller allegedly told Babu that he is a resident of Attapur and he could come to Shamshabad to deliver the bird. Babu informed his counterparts at Hyderabad and contacted range forest officer Ramesh.
 
Ramesh informed his Anti-Poaching Squad, and its members Sathish and Mahesh acted as decoy drivers for Babu to pick the falcon up on Thursday afternoon in Shamshabad.
 
It is said that two men, rode on a bike and came to the meeting point with a box that contained the cage in which the falcon was kept. The duo was surrounded by squad members and detained in their custody.
 
The two accused have been identified as Ahmed Faizan (21), a student, and Khaja Mukkramuddin (24). Both of them residents of Attapur in Hyderabad. “While Mukkramuddin rode the bike, Faizan was riding pillion holding the cage with the falcon,” anti-poaching squad member Sathish told Bangalore Mirror.

Faizan told the forest officials that he had rescued the Common Kestrel. He told them that he needed money so he decided to sell it online. The Common Kestrel was seized, and the paperwork for it was taken care of after which the two accused were handed over to the Shamshabad forest range officer.
 
The officer then initiated legal action against them for indulging in selling protected wildlife species. Further inquiries and legal procedures are underway.