What price the ‘scientific’ conservation of tiger reserves, the last refuge of India’s national animal? Wildlife activists are aghast over ongoing afforestation work by the forest department in the state’s Dandeli-Anshi tiger reserve. 
 Saplings of exotic tree species like acacia are being planted in the grasslands in the Sulavali, Marli and Kalpe areas of the Kumbharwada range, that form the heart of the tiger reserve. Signs of JCB usage are evident from the fact that a path has been cleared to the plantation, which has been fenced. These activities are in gross violation of section 26 of the Indian Forest Act, the Karnataka Tree Preservation Act and more pertinently section 29 of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, which prohibits destruction of wildlife habitats.
   “We were shocked to see these exotic species being planted in the tiger reserve. Activities like this are prohibited as tiger conservation is one of the most prioritised issues throughout the country,” Ravi Reddy, a wildlife activist who visited the spot, told Bangalore Mirror. Spread over 800 sq km, the Dandeli-Anshi tiger reserve in Uttara Kannada district is one of the state’s few tiger reserves, which include the Bhadra, Bannerghatta, Nagarhole and Bandipur tiger reserves. Conservation of its habitat is crucial to the welfare of the endangered feline. 
   “One of the biggest threats to wildlife is destruction of natural habitats. Surprisingly, the Karnataka forest department has taken it upon itself to destroy the tiger reserve’s grasslands by planting exotic saplings,” Ravi Reddy said. “Grasslands within forests are main feeding grounds for several small and large herbivores, including spotted deer, gaur, sambar and even elephants. Since many of the grasslands hold water and function like swamps, they harbour green grass even during peak summers, making them vital feeding areas for herbivores. Protected areas such as Nagarahole support high densities of wild herbivores due to the grasslands present inside the tiger reserve. Hence it is highly reprehensible to plant exotic trees in these unique eco-systems that are vital for the survival of herbivores, especially during summer,” Reddy said. It is a known fact that such exotic species inhibit the growth of indigenous species of trees and plants. 
   Planting exotic tree species in natural grasslands is unscientific and affects the availability of fodder for herbivores. The fences built around these plantations block free movement of herbivores in the already fragmented tiger reserve which is threatened by human settlements and increasing vehicular traffic. 
   Furthermore, the entire food chain is affected and could lead to man-animal conflict, say activists.“This may result in incidents of cattle-lifting as the herbivores migrate while the carnivores don’t as they have a set territory. But once the latter go in search of food, it may result in man-animal conflict,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert, told Bangalore Mirror.
   Surprisingly, the forest department’s activities come even after then forest minister C H Vijashankar had last year halted the planting of exotic species such as acacia and eucalyptus in these reserves.“The forest department has to immediately stop this unscientific act. It is debatable whether such activities are approved under the Tiger Management Plan, which is the basic document regarding management of tiger reserves,” Reddy said.
   Departmentat denial  However, the department top brass in the ï€¥division have denied the allegations of acacia saplings being planted in the tiger reserve. “Nowhere in our division has any such activity taken place from our side. We have planted only bamboo and fruit-yielding saplings that help birds and animals. We haven’t planted a single acacia,” B B Mallesh, deputy conservator of forests, Dandeli division, told BM.