Several districts are witnessing protests over water- and environment-related issues

Environmentalists — and villagers — across the state are pushing for local issues before political parties and prospective candidates so that they can be sorted out in this poll season itself. Many of them believe this is the only time when candidates and leaders listen to their grievances and demands. 

While some activists have threatened to use NOTA (None Of The Above) option, some of them have listed various demands before parties and leaders if they have to turn up and vote on D-Day. 

Greens from Coastal Karnataka are spreading awareness on NOTA or the right of voters to reject all candidates contesting elections. 

Environmentalists, led by Sahyadri Sanchaya and National Environment Care Federation (NECF), are working towards drawing the attention of villagers to use NOTA as all parties have failed to save the district from environment destruction. 

The team has urged people opposing illegal sand mining, mindless felling of trees, destruction of Western Ghats, encroachment of forest land, implementation of unscientific Yettinahole project and hunting of endangered animal species to opt for NOTA or stay away from electoral process. 

Greens from the region believe that “all political parties in the state are not concerned about protecting Netravati, the lifeline of region”. 

Despite strong opposition from the people of Coastal Karnataka, the state government went ahead and implemented the Yettinahole project. Sahadev SH, convenor, Paschima Ghatta Jagruti Vedike, said, “In case, the government had invested Rs 12,000 crore to rejuvenate the tanks and taken up afforestation in Kolar and Chikkaballapur districts in the last three-four years, we would have seen the difference. The government went ahead to implement an unscientific project. This project may only provide a short-term solution.” Another leading activist said, “We must opt for NOTA to teach these leaders a lesson.” 

The government is facing heat from Kodagu after activists realised the ecological damage caused to the district. Sundar Muthanna, Bengaluru Co-ordinator for Coorg Wildlife Society, requested the government to introduce Payment for Ecological Services (PES) that is in practice in a few countries. Greens have been urging the government on the need to protect the river Cauvery as Kodagu provides over 70 per cent of the total inflow into KRS dam. Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have serious disputes over the sharing of Cauvery waters. 

For Kodagu, the damage has already been done in the name of the 400 KV high-tension powerline from Mysuru to Kozhikode in Kerala. Locals have been opposing the proposed Mysuru-Thalassery railway line as well. It remains to be seen if the water and ecological issues will have an impact in the Assembly polls. Incidentally, Karnataka has been fighting water wars with the neighbouring states. Several elections have already been fought in the name of Mahadayi and Cauvery. The Cauvery crisis has resurfaced again with a series of bandhs lined up in both Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.