Wildlife sleuths arrested the officials from Nilgiri Plantation, estate said to be owned by Birlas
 
 
 Nilgiri Plantation’, an estate said to be owned by the Birlas that was once the abode of hunter and naturalist R C Morris, has come under the Forest Department scanner. The estate is a heritage property within Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve in Bandipur.
 	  	On May 7, Forest Department officials seized wildlife products from the estate officials, who could not validate the products’ origins with any substantial documents. Wildlife officials suspect the animals were hunted. The seized products - a tiger skin and 16 antlers belonging to reindeer, spotted deer and barking deer – were seized from a bungalow in Honnametti Estate which exists at the core of the tiger reserve. The executive president of the plantation, B H Lakhani, who is the power of attorney holder of the estate, was arrested on May 7 and got bail on Monday for failing to furnish the ownership certificates of the wildlife products.
 	  	“The court in Kollegal granted bail to Lakhani - who is the power of attorney holder. We arrested him as per the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act as possessing wildlife products without any valid document is a serious offence. We have booked a case of poaching and started probe on source of the (tiger) skin and antlers,” Manjunath P O, the range forest officer, who is also investigating the case, told Bangalore Mirror. Lakhani had claimed he had got the trophies from Morris. But this was slammed by Manjunath who said, “In the preliminary probe, we found that we have not issued any certificate or certified any documents (to support the existence of the products) since the Indian Wildlife Protection Act of 1972, came into existence. They (estate officials) too have not declared it so far,” The officer said that Lakhani would need to produce an ownership certificate to be let off the hook. The source of these trophies, he said, were important as BRT Tiger reserve was also a habitat of the animals whose products were found.
 	  	Regular alerts, including one in writing, were supposedly sent out to the estates within the tiger reserve last year. Officials, in their letter, had sought estate managements’ cooperation in conservation efforts. The communiqué was sent to four estates - Sangameshwara Coffee Estate, Nilgiri Plantation, Biligiri Ranga Coffee Estate, Emerald Haven Estates on September 9, 2014. Despite this, the presence of wildlife products within the premises of the estate has raised serious concern among officials.
 	  	The court, which heard Lakhani’s plea, granted bail on certain conditions that include appearing before the investigating officer whenever summoned, not moving out of the station without prior permission and furnishing all the details pertaining to the estate they own.
 	  	Lakhani has been booked under various sections of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act including Section 9 (Hunting), which if proved, will land Lakhani behind bars for up to six years. When BM contacted Lakhani on Monday, his son answered the phone and said they preferred not to comment on the issue.
 	The estate, which Birlas reportedly bought from Morris, was in news for alleged encroachments in the past, sources in BRT tiger reserve told Bangalore Mirror.