What price the sensitivity towards our feathered friends of Bangaloreans in general, and the staff of the city’s iconic Lalbagh in particular? It took a visitor from Delhi to play the good Samaritan with a bird that was in danger of having its life snuffed out by the ‘killer’ glass powder-coated string that is a favourite of kite-flyers.
   Carolina Fernandes, who works with a reputed travel agency in the national capital, had come to the city on official work. On Wednesday, she was in Lalbagh when she saw a pariah kite entangled in ‘manja’. She alerted the garden staff, but they seemed least interested in saving the bird. Her schedule demanded that she return to Delhi that night, but Carolina was not giving up so easily.
   Early on Thursday, she contacted wildlife activists in Delhi, who put her on to their counterparts in Bangalore. Carolina gave a pin-point description of the incident, and the city activists rushed to Lalbagh and rescued the bird. An adult pariah kite, it had got entangled in the string after it had swooped down on a dead pigeon entangled in the same string. Fortunately, it had not been cut to ribbons by the ‘manja’, despite its 20-hour ordeal,  and is now well on the road to recovery.
 
 R Sharath Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, was fulsome in his praise of the lady. “It was a rare act of concern. She found the kite entangled in the manja, dangling from a mango tree and struggling to free itself. She was disturbed at the sight and brought it to the notice of the Lalbagh staff, but to no avail. On Thursday morning, she got in touch with us and we rescued the bird.”
   Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Carolina said, “I alerted the staff but got no response from them. I had to leave the place with a heavy heart. However, I was determined not to let it go at that.”
   Back in Delhi, she got the numbers of wildlife activists in Bangalore and guided them to the exact spot where she had seen the bird. They did the needful, and retailed the happy news to Carolina.
   Adding a postscript to the touching story, Sharath Babu told Bangalore Mirror, “We are happy that the bird she was so concerned about was rescued. The message here is that people should be sensitive towards wildlife. And most definitely, the use of ‘manja’, which can be fatal to birds, should be banned.”