They claimed the animal died of a cardac arrest but activists say an overdose of tranquiliser killed it

The Forest Department is trying to cover up the death of an Indian Gaur (bison) in Mangaluru, calling it a casualty of a cardiac arrest, after the process and methodology of capturing and rescuing it failed miserably.

 An overdose of tranquiliser actually killed the bison, which strayed into the city on Tuesday, wildlife activists point out. Ideally, forest officials should have calmed down the animal before tranquilising it as it was already under stress after straying into the city and being chased by men amid chaos, they pointed out.

“We are desperately short of wildlife veterinarians and their expertise,” said Joseph Hoover, an environmentalist and former Karnataka Wildlife Board member. The Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of capturing/rescuing the wild animal were not followed, especially by veterinarians who were unsure about the dosage amount and the type of tranquiliser to be used for the operation. 

A veterinarian pointed out that the type of tranquiliser should have been narcotic-based like etorphine instead of Ketamine/Xylazine combination. The forest officials claimed to have conducted the postmortem at the spot and prima facie concluded that the bison died of probably a cardiac arrest. However, the samples of the vital organs have not been sent to the Forensic Laboratory.

Veterinarian and forensic expert Dr Prayag H S told BM that these kind of mega-herbivores become too excited after they venture into human habitat and this needs to be carefully handled since they could die of capture myopathy, a disease complex associated with the capture or handling of any wild animal. “Ideally the rescued animal should be quarantined in a nearby facility for at least a few days or weeks depending on condition and later be sedated and released back into the wild once it stabilises This can be achieved only after checking for all its vital parameters for health and screening for any diseases,” he said.