Art connoisseurs stand the chance of getting in a daze as they enter the Alliance Francaise de Bangalore where a painting exhibition My Heart by Thomas Kallarackal is being held. They are likely to feel as if they’ve lost their way and entered the Bennarghatta National Park. For, life-like and life-size oil paintings of wild animals staring and wild flowers in all hues are what that greet you there.  

Thomas’ artworks, (37 to be precise) — depicting flora, fauna, nature and wildlife — look so realistic and mind-blowing that one would simply utter ‘wow’ at a single glance itself. Backed by intriguing colour combinations and concepts, the artist’s strokes have a seductive visual quality, to boot. And the highlight, of course, is the Perspective Theory employed by the self-taught, Bangalore-based artist. “Perspective is a device used by artists to show the 3D world on a 2D surface so as to make artworks look realistic”, says Thomas. 

That explains why one feels like the tiger (a huge life-size painting of a tiger titled Trance on display) always stares at you from whichever angle he/ she views it. Similarly, view the frames — Moving boat and Landscape from any direction — the effect would be the same — you’ll find a clear use of foreshortening and the vanishing point in the paintings. “This technique has been extensively used by many artists in the past. However, the new generation artists are not keen on employing the technique. In fact, the technique is a closed book to many, though the Perspective Theory is one of the basic lessons in art,” rues Thomas.  

The exhibition has on show, 25 canvases from the Signature Series, with themes inspired by the green that surrounds us. 

“The series has been inspired by the wild flowers of Western Ghats”, says Thomas, who is dotty about nature and wildlife. Wildflowers that portrays the majesty of Western Ghats in all its glory is easy on the eyes. He has used the knife technique to paint this. If knife technique is beyond one’s ken, the artist explains: “I apply the oil paint directly on the canvas, thus bringing to it the brightness of the wild flowers against a verdant background.”  

Landscapes have both riverscapes and seascapes inspired by coastal India while the Birds series depicts the beauty of the bright plumes, framed against the nature that surrounds it. Animals series comprises mammoth paintings of elephants, lions, tigers, horses, zebras and deers. Thomas, who hails from Kerala, has paid sedulous detailing to the anatomy of the animals.  

Thomas’ message seems to be writ large on his canvas: “It’s an attempt to spread awareness to be more concerned about our environment and wildlife. And, a reminder for many to at least admire the beauty of nature and animals.”   My Heart — organised by the Lovedale Foundation — is on till October 18.