It has been five months since a leopard strayed into Vibgyor School in Whitefield. Reputed wildlife scientist and conservationist Sanjay Gubbi himself took on the creature and was left bleeding profusely as the beast bit his right arm, injuring the humerus bone. That was on Feb 7.
 
 
 	Despite this dangerous tryst and a loss of sensation in his right arm, Gubbi is back in the forest studying leopards and tracking their movements through camera traps as part of his ambitious project to understand their behaviour and life cycle.
 	
 	  	He has often been criticised by his detractors for pushing himself into such extreme situations. But he is unrepentant: The stressed and panicked creature that was surrounded by a mob could have attacked more civilians if it had not been confronted by Gubbi.
 	
 	  	Gubbi, who has worked as a wildlife scientist for more than 20 years, said the incident has made him better understand the harsh realities of life.
 	
 	  	He volunteered to assist in the rescue operation at the request of the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officers, but except for a few officials, others haven’t turned up to check on his condition following the incident.
 	
 	  	A senior officer offered to foot his medical bill, but till date, neither the government nor the department has acted on the promise. Gubbi refused to call it an ‘exceptional case’ but appealed to the authorities for basic minimum compensation as a citizen who was attacked by a wild animal, but the government has shown little initiative.
 	
 	  	He was back in Bengaluru in June end, after his week-long field study in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary and MM Hills after collecting data on leopards. Sharing his experience with Bangalore Mirror, he said, “The last four months were indeed difficult. I am thankful to my family, staff and friends who stood by me. I was surprised by the kind gestures of many who stopped by to wish me speedy recovery. At the same time, those I thought were close to me never showed up to check on me. The episode has only made me stronger and concentrate more on conservation,” he said.
 	
 	 

 	Painful recovery spanning four months
 	
 	  	Gubbi’s condition was critical initially, and said to be botched up by doctors as a threat of virulent infection loomed large. “The chipped humerus bone stuck inside and bite marks on forearms, ribs and hips had only worsened the condition. For the first 15 days, the wounds were left to heal naturally. Only later, doctors conducted fasciectomy to remove dead tissue and muscle, which left me with more than 55 stitches. Subsequently, through rotational flap surgery, the skin was grafted and stapled for over a month. The wounds healed completely but other issues surfaced. There was no flexion in the right arm and it had become stiff. Later, I had to undergo physiotherapy for over a month to regain my original posture. I am unable to feel or sense anything with my right forearm till date. I cannot even hold my laptop or tablet properly. However, work is work and nothing can stop me from working for the cause of wildlife – something I loved doing all my life,” Gubbi explained.
 	
 	  	Doctors told him it may require more than six months to recover as the radial and arterial nerve, linking to the pulse in his hand, was severely damaged. “Luckily, the nerve was not cut,” Gubbi said.
 	
 	
 	
 	 		Missed being in field
 		
 		 	 		Gubbi is currently leading a team of more than 10 junior conservation scientists and an equal number of field staff, in order to document the life and behaviour of leopards across Karnataka. This is said to be the first-of-its-kind study to aid conservation of leopards in Karnataka.
 		
 		 	 		He was halfway through his project when he the attack at the school happened. “I missed going to field for about four months since I had no sensation in my right arm but I executed all tasks as usual. In June first week, I travelled extensively at the Cauvery wildlife sanctuary and MM Hills to collect data on leopards using camera traps. I will be soon submitting the details of the study conducted across 30,000 sq km in Karnataka, to the KFD, and I hope that it will help understand leopards and their behaviour across Karnataka,” he said.
 		 	

 	 		Safety - top priority
 		
 		 	 		Gubbi has now made safety a priority for team members out in the field. 
 		
 		 	 		“Members of the field staff have been provided pepper sprays and first aid kits for safety. They have been trained in first aid. I have even decided to distribute vials of anti-snake venom. I have also advised them to allow the animal to decide its course of action,” Gubbi added.