A cool evening with friends, family and food cooking on the grill — winters are the perfect time to bring out that BBQ set and make a party of it 

With that slight nip in the air, the season for al fresco dining has arrived in the city. While countries in the West like to bring in their summer with barbecue parties, for us, it signals the onset of winter. The grill is dusted off and brought out as soon as the temperature drops a little. But there’s more to a barbeque than gathering your friends together on the terrace, switching on the fairy lights and making the most of the city’s brief cold weather. Mirror readers share tips on the things that will make your barbeque the best on the block

* Rohan Khule, 36, entrepreneur, Sion Chunabhatti

Khule has been barbecuing since he was 16, when he’d go for overnight picnics with friends. “Back then, our tight budgets didn’t permit us to eat at restaurants all the time, so we carried marinated food from home, went to a nearby beach and grilled it on a dug-up pit lined with bricks, with a wire mesh placed on it. Now, we often barbecue on the terrace at friends’ homes,” he says.

What you need: “Good [preferably cool] weather, patient friends or family members, and music you can groove to. That’s a sure-shot formula for a memorable party,” says Khule. “I picked up a mini seegdi [grill] from Trombay, and that has survived for over 15 years. Recently, I decided to buy another grill online, along with disposable skewers, some charcoal for fuel, and a pair of tongs.”
Prep work: Marination is key, says Khule. “In India, people think of tandoori chicken when they think of a barbecue, but that’s not true,” he says. “Vegetables can also be served. The preparation varies based on the food you are planning to grill, whether its chicken, fish, steak or veggies.” 

Hit recipe: Chicken barbecue with a honey glaze, where you make slits in a drumstick with a sharp knife, and soak it in a marinade made with two tablespoons of ginger-garlic paste, juice of a whole lemon, four or five teaspoons of freshly-ground black pepper, two tablespoons of butter, 90 ml of rum, and salt to taste. Keep it in the fridge for a minimum of an hour. Add honey, mix well and get set to grill it.

On the side: Onion and mint leaves salad, pudina chutney and garlic bread.

Tips: 
1. Wood-based charcoal provides a great smoky flavour to the food. 
2. Get the meat or fish out of the fridge at least two to three hours before putting it on the grill. You don’t want it to be cold on the inside.
3. Cook the extra marinade on the grill in a metal bowl and pour it over the cooked meat as a sauce.
4. Avoid cooking too many different things at the same time. It is just too complicated. Getting the timing 
and heat right requires
5. Sprinkle water to keep the flames manageable. However, this will send ash flying over the food, so move it aside when you do this.
6. Clean the barbecue after use, and apply a layer of oil over it immediately, to prevent rust from forming.

* Aashay Mandrekar, 32, Entrepreneur and wildlife photographer, Navi Mumbai 

Born and raised in Goa, barbecue was a part of Aashay’s life. “Our weekends usually revolved around a barbecue, with friends and family. Ever since I moved to Mumbai, eight years ago, I wait for the winters to throw barbecue parties on my open terrace and organise it at least once every month, if the weather permits. Sometimes, I just look for an opportunity to celebrate, and organise a barbecue party,” adds Mandrekar.

What you need: “All you need is good weather and company. November to February is always the best. In a place like Mumbai, an open terrace or small garden is a luxury. If you find a place like that, make the most of it,” says Mandrekar.

Prep work: Marinate the meat well in advance so it absorbs all the flavours. There are plenty of 
ready-made marinades in the market, but Mandrekar prefers to make his own using Goan spices and American Buffalo sauce. “I usually keep the meat and veggies ready at least four or five hours before the party. This adds extra flavour,” says Mandrekar.

Hit recipe: A dish that you can never go wrong with is chargrilled chicken in Buffalo sauce. “I also do a great seafood barbecue, with tiger prawns and chargrilled octopus,” he adds. 

On the side: Mostly salads, hummus and pita bread.

Tips
1. Use a generous amount of butter or olive oil to avoid the food from sticking to the grill or getting charred.
2. Use natural coal to get the right smoky flavour for your food.
3. Never operate the grill in closed spaces or indoors, as it generates a lot of heat and smoke. So be safe.

* Anjali Manjare, 35, entrepreneur and fashion designer, CBD Belapur 

A barbecue party has become a family ritual for the Manjares, ever since they renovated their home and dressed up their terrace. “That feeling of cooking under a clear, open sky with some old rock music playing and all of us sipping on chilled beer while we wait for the tikkas to come off the grill, is hard to beat,” says Manjare. “Our BBQ chicken legs, paneer and mix veggies (like potatoes, sweet potatoes, capsicum and onions), and chargrilled vegetable pizza are a big hit, with both adults and kids alike.” 
What you need: “A good space, like an open terrace or balcony, and a mix of dishes and drinks. All kinds of barbecue equipment is available online, and at homestores in malls,” says Manjare. “My set includes a grill, a coal chimney, a silicon oil brush and a stainless steel brush for cleaning the grill, charcoal and skewers.”

Prep work: “We start the prep on the morning of the party. Meat marination takes time and we ensure we marinate the vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes separately, as they have different cooking times. I make a special kids barbecue marinade that is less spicy,” says Manjare. “A basic ginger-garlic paste with herbs like oregano and rosemary, always works well.” 

Hit recipe: A mix of ketchup, brown sugar, black pepper powder, paprika powder, lemon juice, mustard powder, onion powder, Worcestershire sauce and apple cider vinegar for the marinade.

On the side: Salad and biryani goes well with tikkas. Mint chutney is a must. For vegetarians, either pizza or vegetable biryani is a good option. For kids, it could be nachos with dips, French fries and garlic bread.

Tips: 
1. Do an overnight marination (or a minimum of six to seven hours) for meat.
2. Grill the fast-cooking food first, so that the guests can have some starters.
3. If you have a main course as well do remember to stop the BBQ after a point, or no one will touch the other food. 
4. After you light the charcoal, let it burn for some time so that the heat gets evenly distributed and the food doesn’t get charred.
5. Don’t overload the grill.

* Sarthak Patkar, 32, Telecom professional, Wadala 

Patkar’s wife Kadambari loves throwing parties during this season, and a barbecue is just another excuse to have people over for an evening outdoors. “Create an ambience with light and candles, and keep a good playlist ready,” suggests Patkar. 

What you need: “The right tools are key. We bought our main grill from Amsterdam and ordered the other tools online, including stainless steel skewers, an oil brush, a steel spatula, a tandoor grill and spoons, forks and igniters. The quality of coal is equally important. Keep a good mix of vegetables, meat and poultry dishes,” adds Patkar.

Prep work: “We don’t use readymade sauces as I feel they overwhelm the flavours of the barbecue,” adds Patkar. “We generally marinate chicken legs or fish in basic tikka masala; prawns in lemon and garlic; potatoes with butter and salt; and paneer in a pudina green masala. We also have pineapples on the menu, which is our favourite.” 

On the side: Always keep things like chips, dips and salad, so everyone is constantly eating.

Tips:
1. Do keep the lid of the grill on during the barbecue. 
2. Don't flip over foods more than once.
3. Don't push down an item to check if its cooked. 
4. Keep the kids away from the grill.