Officials want to inspire young minds, help them connect with wildlife
 
 If you think working in a biological park or taking up activities in zoos or forests is dangerous or it is meant only for a section of people, then you are wrong. Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is now giving an opportunity for schoolchildren — from Class 6 to II pre-university students — a hands-on experience on conservation and other activities in the park. The opportunity for students is aimed at inspiring young minds to connect students with wildlife, say BBP officials.
 
 Amla M Anil, Education officer, BBP told Bangalore Mirror: “Students are now hooked on to technology and they hardly get to see real-time activities in the zoo or forests. All that they know is the picnic and visiting the zoo occasionally. But, we want students to look beyond this and give them the insight into the management of animals and nature at BBP.”
 
 “We also want to tell students how there are different careers related to wildlife can be taken and this is also one of the job prospects for them,” she added.
 
 What do students get?
 
 Right from the management of the office works to managing animals, students are exposed to many events and activities during a fifteen-week programme. Amla added, “We are bringing wildlife experts and having career sessions and seeing how it can help students take up this in their future. We also give them real-time sessions on what we actually do in the zoo and in the safari and overall picture of the park.”
 
 “Not just showing them, we will introduce students to organic composting and what are all the small things that they can do at home. We will also brief them on how to reduce human-animal conflict and nature protection. This is something we need to focus on very serious,” she added.
 
 Students will also be learning about the green cover of the state and its rich bio-diversity. “Students will be introduced to zoo conservation activities and animal behaviour. Students will also be introduced to Wildlife Protection Law, so that they will know which animal to be kept at homes,” say officials. “Any student who wants to be a part of this can get in touch with us online or by dropping into our offices and this would really help them in real time experience with wildlife,” added Amla. Details can be had @: 8884414262.