By Barkha Kumari
 
 Laypeople are taken by the frog — studying, mapping and protecting the tailless amphibian for fun and science
 
 Madhushri Mudke is a nature-lover, and frogs are her latest fixation. This October, she added a section about frogs under her travel-wildlife blog Girl Gone Birdzz. The first post was pretty much what she wanted her followers to know – why she loves frogs and why they should too. Next came #FridayFrogFact – a weekly feature on unique species: the Kumbara (or ‘potter’) Night Frog, for instance, that does handstands and wraps its progeny in mud while mating. There is the Wayanad Night Frog, too, whose call sounds like the horn of a tuk-tuk.
 
 She recently created a Facebook page, Frogs of Manipal, to conduct frog-spotting walks around her hometown of Manipal, and spread froggie love using the NotJustFrogs hashtag. The month-old forum has 103 members – mostly, students from her alma mater Manipal University. She has so far held three frog trails. The 27-year-old is now hopping from one school to another to teach kids the importance of frogs in our ecosystem. Sketching frog caricatures is also part of the exercise. Though, Mudke graduated with a degree in physiotherapy in 2014, today she is working as a researcher and conservationist, and leading citizen science projects tomap frogs.
 
 Mudke is part of the growing tribe of frog lovers, who are stepping up to save these croaking knights that have seen 200 species of their kind disappear globally since 1980. This, while a third of the rest is on the verge of extinction, thanks to climate change, and over-harvesting for the pet food industry.
 
 Webbed-foot fetish
 
 Mudke’s thing for frogs surfaced this April at an experiential course in ecology by a research collective, Gubbi Labs, two hours from the city, set up by Dr HS Sudhira and Dr KV Gururaja. Started in 2010, the outfit has initiated laymen into this amphibious world and mobilised them to spot, appreciate, and protect them. In 2012, Gururaja published A Pictorial Guide to Frogs and Toads of the Western Ghats – a field guide to identify 73 such species.
 
 By October 2013, the team had launched Frog Find, an interactive app that lists indigenous species’ photos, habitats, and recordings of their calling patterns. It lets users report frog sightings while also enabling them to chat with scientists. Nearly 5,000 people use the app today. Additionally, their Bisle Frog Watch initiative brings ecologists and laymen to Bisle forest in Hassan district each monsoon to study frogs – teaching how to identify them, understand breeding behaviours and acoustic communication; all this, while working on a Facebook bot capable of answering frog-related queries in English, and an Augmented Reality –based frog discovery application.
 
 Croak and roll
 
 Frogs are an important link in the food-chain: they prey and are preyed upon, and tadpoles keep waterways clean by feeding on algae. The chemical secretions on their skin are being studied for numerous human benefits in painkillers and cancer cures. But most of all, frogs are excellent bio-indicators as their skin is permeable: they breathe through it so any environmental stress affects them quickly. Their absence or presence is indicative of the overall health of an area. More frogs mean a healthy biosphere while a decline in their numbers may imply harmful environmental changes: even dangerous levels of local toxicity for co-existing humans.
 
 This is why frog conservation matters. Dr Gururaja, a batrachologist, who is currently working as an adjunct faculty at Gubbi Labs, explains, “If an area is flooded, a tiger can run away, but a frog will lie trapped somewhere in a crevice. So between a tiger and a frog, the latter gives precise information about a micro habitat (within 300sqmt).”
 
 Spread the love
 
 People-participation is key to saving frogs, Dr Gururaja says. “India has 414 species of amphibians, including 372 frogs and toads. Of them, we don’t have data about 250 species. That means, we don’t know where they stand in the world. Are they critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable or threatened? We don’t know. On the other hand, there are just about a dozen scientists studying frogs in India (including himself). How can just a handful of us map them?” he laments, adding, “That’s why we need people to come forward and report them – click photos, record the croaking, or write down their breeding patterns, location, date and time of the sighting.”
 
 This team of 10 scientists, engineers and researchers expects more of us laymen. They want more awareness of frog ecology and for the converts to spread their love with their networks. Caring for frogs is caring for the environment we humans are part of. “Once people know frogs by names, species, or genus, we can tell them more. It makes conservation processes easier. And this exercise must start from your home. You never know which rare species is visiting your backyard,” adds the amphibian expert, specialised in Western Ghats’ fauna.
 
 
 
 Froggy-style
 
 They’ve managed to get people from seeing these anurans as slimy and poisonous to cutesy, converting urban passivity to a heartening glad-you-are-still-here-acknowledgement. Incidentally, India has no poisonous species.
 
 Meanwhile, the ‘Frog Watch’ category on the Indian Biodiversity Portal, which lets citizens contribute to information on our biodiversity, is seeing people such as trekkers, photographers and nature walkers play a significant role. They upload photos and notes about sightings. The site has seen 2,300 citizen submissions of about 200 species in the last two years.
 
 Nature photographer, 23-year-old Amatya Sharma, says he lingers at spotting a frog, spending time to observe it rather than just point, shoot, and move on. He scours scientific papers, keeping distribution maps handy for frogs’ spatial scatter while he trails across the Ghats and the North East of India. He has so far reported 10 frog sightings. He’s even started his own frog watch workshops under a joint venture – Bike n Hike. “It’s not as scientific as Gubbi Labs” he admits, “but offers enough scope for novices to develop an interest in frogs in three days.”.
 
 Likewise, frog-watching and photography (minus strong flashlights, please note) has become a ritual for research engineer Shashwat Jaiswal and his techie wife Deepika during their forest treks. The interest developed three years ago, as Shashwat participated in the Bisle Frog Watch. He says, “Purple frogs found in Kerala come out from hiding to breed for only two-three weeks a year. Is that not mind-boggling? Then once I went observing a pair of Sholiga frogs. The male sat on the female, moved to a small pond, and submerged themselves. They rose up again, and went down. And kept repeating this. These creatures are so tiny, but they have such complex behaviour. Their world is fascinating.”
 
 Join the party
 
 Dr Gururaja jokes his name finds its way to nearly every online or offline forum tagged ‘frog’ or ‘amphibian’, even Frogs of Panama but networking across scientific communities and laymen is crucial to the exercise of frog mapping. He cites examples: “For long, we believed that Malabar Tree Toads were endangered, and are only found across six points in Kerala, Karnataka and Goa. But 35 observations have been made since our team urged people to report these toads in 2015, as part of Mapping Malabar Tree Toad initiative. We realised that it is not a rare species, it is widely distributed and that we can delist it from endangered to vulnerable. They were also mapped in the region between Kudremukh Peak and Kerala three times, something we as experts hadn’t known. That’s why numbers are critical in frog conservation.”
 
 This March, Ramit Singal, a student at Manipal Institute of Technology, brought a rare and tiny frog of the Microhyla species to the notice of experts under a citizen science initiative called My Laterite, My Habitat that he helped set up.
 
 
 
 The frog conservation efforts will only bear fruit in next five to 10 years, the team says. “These things take time.” For now, the they are happy to have stirred up a citizens’ movement. For instance, in August they opened India’s first Batracharium (an aquarium, or a sanctuary for frogs) at a luxury hotel in Madikeri, Coorg, and that’s because hotelier Arun Achappa wanted to do his bit for nature conservation, and the team was happy to muck in.