Bengaluru’s rising temperatures have not only affected humans; they have taken a toll on even animals and birds. The number of dehydration cases among birds has increased due to the scorching heat and limited water sources. With temperatures soaring, birds struggle to find enough water to stay hydrated, especially when natural water sources dry up or become scarce.

According to People for Animals (PfA), in March alone, over 88.2 per cent of birds, 5.9 per cent of reptiles and mammals who were dehydrated were rescued. In April, 201 out of 450 wildlife rescues were due to dehydration. During periods of dehydration, birds may become weaker, making it difficult for them to forage for food and compete for resources. Additionally, it compromises their ability to regulate body temperature, which can further exacerbate their condition, especially during heatwaves.

Colonel Dr Nawaz Sharif, chief veterinarian at PfA, said, “With temperatures often reaching high levels and humidity dropping, birds lose moisture rapidly through evaporation from their skin and respiratory systems. This increased water loss can lead to dehydration, which manifests through symptoms such as lethargy, sunken eyes, and loss of appetite.”

Mohan, the BBMP wildlife warden, said, “We are getting calls from residents of Banaswadi, Jayanagar, Hebbal, Jeevanbhimanagar, and Indiranagar that monkeys are getting into their houses or apartment complexes, opening taps, and drinking water. Some have even reported monkeys opening refrigerators, taking all the drinks stored in them, and running away. By the time we reached, monkeys had fled away. Rescuing them needs official approval from the Forest Department. For the rescue of birds with dehydration, we are getting about three to four calls daily.”

Dr Sharif also stated that they come across cases where monkeys are falling off trees due to dehydration. “The rescuers are carrying glucose water with honey and homoeopathic drugs that could reduce the stress for the animal as their heart rates would be high. They are then taken to the hospital, given IV fluids, and tested. The test results show that the cause is dehydration. Most of the cases after the treatment have been successful. None of them have died,” he added. Speaking about measures to mitigate dehydration for animals, he said that PfA is distributing clay pots to people to keep them near houses or shops filled with water. “It is important for birds to take a bath in the water to keep their body temperature cool; otherwise, they might die.”