No wildlife rescuers were available for five hours to help an injured kite sliced by manjha thread

One more bird was caught in the web of the manjha menace and for over five hours, the resident who found it could not find someone to rescue it. Reason? The rescuers were not willing to help because the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike has not paid an honorarium to them for the last 30 months. These rescue volunteers risk their lives to save kittens stuck on roofs, dogs stuck in gutters, birds who’ve been injured by manjha strings and snakes that slither into gardens.

Janet Yegneswaran, a resident of Ejipura, found a black kite had fallen into her compound when her dogs alerted her about it. Yegneswaran, also known for planting many saplings in the City, said, “I noticed the injured kite when my dogs started barking. My neighbour Prem Kumar took the injured bird and kept it in his house so that it would be safe from my dogs. I contacted the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) to send people to rehabilitate the injured bird (which had manjha thread entangled in its feathers) but in vain.’’

She said she tried the BBMP Helpline for four hours but could not connect with anyone. Finally, she gave up and got the phone number of a volunteer whom a friend knew. He in turn provided her with the phone numbers of two rescue volunteers. “One of the volunteers said that he had to come from Yeshwanthpur and I would have to give him Rs 400 for fuel expenses. The other contact, from the Animal Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre at Horamavu, was prompt and tended to the injured bird,’’ she said.

However, through her search for a wildlife rescue volunteer, she learnt something else. The rescue volunteers said that the BBMP had not paid them an honorarium for the last 30 months. They said that considering their financial situation, it was difficult for them to meet the expenses of commuting from one place to the other in the City.

“We have been requesting the BBMP authorities to clear our arrears for the last 30 months. They have been assuring us that they will clear our dues but we have received no payments till date,’’ said Mohan, a wildlife rescuer.

According to them, the BBMP used to pay Rs 13,000 per month to each wildlife rescuer as an honorarium until 2018. However, since 2019, their payments have been delayed or being continuously postponed. “The BBMP had approved a proposal to hike the honorarium to Rs 15,000 from Rs 13,000, but there had been a delay in releasing the funds,’’ said a wildlife volunteer.

The wildlife rescuers have rescued and rehabilitated 840 birds in eight zones of the BBMP from 2019 until June 2021. “I rescue 15 snakes per month and release them back into a safe habitat in Bengaluru East,’’ said Mohan.

The BBMP has only seven wildlife rescuers in Bengaluru. While Bommanahalli and Raja Rajeswari Nagar have two wildlife rescuers each, Bengaluru East, Bengaluru South and Mahadevapura Zone have one wildlife rescuer each and Bengaluru North, Yelahanka and Dasarahalli Zone have no wildlife rescuers.

Arun Prasad, a social activist, said that the delay in paying the wildlife rescuers is affecting wildlife rescue operations in the City. “The BBMP must release the honorarium periodically without keeping any arrears in the interest of conservation,’’ said Prasad.

Meanwhile, BBMP’s Deputy Conservator of Forests Ranganatha Swamy said that he has already sent a proposal to the higher authorities to make arrangements to pay the honorarium to the wildlife rescuers. “They will be paid soon,’’ he said.

Meanwhile, the bird lost one of its legs.