The seventh edition of Times Litfest commenced with witty anecdotes and pressing questions 

Day One of the Times Litfest had diverse offerings – from history to wildlife, music to politics, and romance to mythology – catering to all audiences. Author, historian and art curator William Dalrymple took the audience a few centuries back with his presentation The Anarchy: The relentless rise of East India Company with a humorous anecdote. “Loot is the first Indian word to enter the English dictionary,” he said to much laughter. Likening the actions of the East India Company to a corporate coup, he spoke of the unravelling of the Mughal empire and the subsequent looting of 
their treasures. 

The fest was inaugurated by economist and MP Jairam Ramesh. He sounded the warning bells on the current political situation. “There has been a systematic assault on our institutions. We look for mono culture in today’s time. Institutions shouldn’t become echo chambers.” He remarked on the phrase ‘Unity in diversity’ which, he says, comes from what Rabindranath Tagore wrote in 1907. 

A popular session proved to be the one on Karnataka’s wildlife. Acclaimed filmmakers and conservationists Amoghavarsha JS and Vijay Mohan Raj discussed the challenges of taking the ‘niche’ topic of wildlife to mainstream with their film Wild Karnataka. “Many people came and asked us if it was indeed in Karnataka,” said Amogha-varsha, while praising Bengaluru for its “irrational optimism” for all kinds of subjects and technology. 

Authors spotted at the venue included Devdutt Pattnaiak, Hoshang Merchant, Preeti Shenoy, Anuja Chauhan, Agni Sreedhar, Milan Vohra and more. The discussions ranged from political biographies, LGBTQ issues, crime writing and other topics. Workshops on writing were conducted for both adults and children. Musician TM Krishna’s session on dissent literature along with poet Hoshang Merchant was an afternoon-entertainer. Talking about the need to question traditions, Krishna said, “Anyone believing that something is non-questioning, that is a big lie. Even not questioning is a problem.” Later, he read excerpts from his book Sebastian and Sons on mirdangam makers. 

The evening resounded with the husky voice of singer Usha Uthup.