Wednesday’s boat capsize tragedy in Thekkadyhad a sickening after-taste — the fact that the occupants of a boat following the ill-fated vessel did nothing to come to the rescue ofthe victims.

Ranga Prakash, a relative of victims Surya Prakash (57) and Vishalakshi Shailesh (45), said he was told by those of the vacationing family who survived how the other boat just kept moving on as people were floundering in the water. “There were more than 50 people in that boat, but not one of them attempted a rescue act. They were all mute spectators to the tragedy,” he was told.

Surya Prakash, a resident of Ranga Vihar Apartment in Gavipuram near Gangadhareshwara Temple, was working as an electronics consultant after retiring from Indian Oxygen Ltd (IOL). His brother Shailesh Prakash, who is settled in Singapore, had come on a visit with his wife Vishalakshi and son Akash. Surya’s daughter Sneha, her husband Prabhudeep Singh and their daughter Archana joined them from Pune.  “It was like a family get-together for them. After Vijaya Dashami, they had planned an outing before Shailesh and Sneha went back to their respective places. Surya Prakash’s wife Yamuna, a mathematics teacher in Delhi Public School, also joined them,” Ranga Prakash said.

According to him, the family members who died were on the lower deck of the double-decker boat. Disturbingly, no one on the boat, which is owned by Kerala Tourism Development Corporation (KTDC), was wearing a life jacket and neither were there air bags aboard, he said.

Airlines too added to the woes of the victims’ families by refusing to transport the bodies. “My family members arranged for coffins in Ernakulam but then learnt that the airlines were refusing to transport the bodies. Now, they are planning to bring the bodies by road,” Ranga said. There was inclement weather in that part of Kerala and it was uncertain when the bodies would reach Bangalore, he added.

Ashwath Kumar, a neighbour, said Surya Prakash was a quiet and modest person and a long-time resident of Gavipuram. Mahadevappa, the security guard of Ranga Vihar Apartment, said his last glimpse of the ill-fated family was whenthey left on Saturday in two autorickshaws. “Surya Prakash was a good man and had helped me a lot,’ he said.

Techie among victims Meanwhile, the police have confirmed the identity of one of the victims as Rajashekaran Ramaswamy (37), a techie working with Yahoo. Rajashekaran hailed from Chennai and was staying in Raheja Plaza Apartment near Forum Mall with his wife, a software engineer working in Dell, and a child. He had taken his family to Thekkady on Friday. There is still no information on the fate of his wife and child.

Capsize toll 41; Govt admits to lapses 

Thekkady: The pleasure cruise that ended in a watery grave for 41 tourists in the famed Periyar wildlife sanctuary here could have been avoided, experts said on Thursday, as the government admitted lapses in ensuring basic security measures like lifejackets

Eleven more bodies were pulled out of the Thekkady lake, upping the toll to 41. Officials said the dead comprised 12 each from Delhi and Tamil Nadu, five each from West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh, three each from Karnataka and Kerala and one from Mumbai.

The accident could have been averted if the state government had taken steps like appointing a Water Transport Safety Commissioner, said Justice K Narayana Kurup, who headed the inquiry commission into the 2002 Kumarakom boat mishap that killed 27 people. “It is really sad to see that there is none to check such aspects. Just saying that this was a new boat does not mean anything. I wish to know if there was a dummy test done on the boat to see how it moves in the water? I feel there is some serious defect in the boat,” Kurup said. Chief Minister V S Achuthananadan announced compensation of Rs 5 lakh to the family of each victim.