By Bindu Gopal Rao

July
On the Id and Rakshabandhan weekend, plan a getaway to Shivamogga’s lush green landscape with swaying palms and paddy fields. Shivamogga is 302 km from Bengaluru. The rivers Kumudavathi, Sharavathi, Tungabhadra and Varada run through the city that is a gateway to the famed Jog Falls. Trek up the Kodachadri Hills and enjoy the evergreen forests of Maravanthe. If you’re a wildlife enthusiast, don’t miss a trip to the nearby Agumbe forest and the Mandagadde Bird Sanctuary. Put the scenic Gajanur Dam on your list too.

August
The Janmashtami weekend is just right to drive down to Belur and Halebid, which is just 210 km from Bengaluru. The temples here are an ode to the finesse and intricate architectural style of the Hoysala kingdom. The architecture in stone is characterized by minute detailing where each panel tells a story. The Hoysaleshvara Temple at Halebidu dedicated to Lord Shiva has several wall inscriptions of gods, animals music and dance. At Belur’s Chennakesava temple, you can also see ornate carvings on the walls that have scenes from the Ramayana and Mahabharata as well as rows of elephants, horses, dancers and more. What makes these carvings interesting is that no two of them are the same.

September
Mysuru, 145 km from Bengaluru, as the erstwhile princely state of the Wodeyar dynasty, is the city of palaces. Soak in Mysuru’s historical past with a visit to the majestic Amba Villas Palace or the Mysore Palace. Spend some time observing the ornate work on the ceiling, floor and walls, which is guaranteed to take your breath away. A visit to one of the oldest markets in Asia, the Devaraja Market, is a must to take in the heady fragrance of the famed Mysore mallige (jasmine) as well as a visit to Guru Sweets, a store that makes Mysore Pak for the royal family. Drive up to the Chamundi Hills where you will find the presiding deity of the region who is worshipped by the royal family. Don’t forget to make pit stops at the Rail Museum, Jayalakshmi Vilas Mansion Museum Complex and Jaganmohan Palace when you are here.

October
October has many long weekends. You can start off with a visit to Kodaikanal, set amidst the rolling meadows, grasslands, eucalyptus trees and shola forests. The Kodaikanal Lake, the Kodaikanal Boat Club, Bryant Park and Coaker’s Walk are places that nature lovers must not miss.
Madurai, famous for its Meenakshi Amman temple is the epicentre for culture and spirituality. The temple is the nerve centre of the city that has a large market all around it. Do check the Gandhi Memorial Museum, Tirumalai Nayak Palace and Temple Art Museum when you are here. Don’t forget to sample the famed Jigarthanda a local dessert when you are here.

The last weekend of October and November 1st can be combined to take a tour of Mangaluru. Take you pick from the many beaches here or visit all of them - Tannirbavi, Panambur, Kapu, Malpe and Someshwar Beach. Some of the famous temples to put on your travel list are Sri Gokarnatheswara temple, Mangaladevi Temple, Kadri Manjunatha temple and the Kudroli Sri Gokarnatheswara Kshetra which is dedicated to Lord Shiva. A stop at the 130-year-old St Aloysius Chapel, the Rosario Cathedral and Milagres Church a beautiful Roman Catholic Church in Hampankatta, the Dargah of Hazrat Shareef ul Madni at Ullal and the Zeenath Baksh Jumma Masjid in Bunder are also recommended.

November
Escape the noise of Diwali, to the forests of Bandipur. The national park has several upscale staying options that will make your trip memorable. Take the safari trips into the jungle in the morning and evening to come up close with animals like deer, bear, elephants, leopards and tigers and more. Make sure to observe the several species of birds including the state bird – the Indian Roller that is found here in abundance. Or you could consider Coonoor on the Guru Nanak Jayanthi weekend. Tea plantations, majestic blue mountains, a toy train ride on the Nilgiri Mountain railway are must-dos. Sim’s Park, Lamb’s Rock and Dolphin’s Nose are other places to see here.

December
Gokarna (486 km from Bengaluru) may be a quiet temple town that is known for the Mahabaleshwar temple but it is also a coastal paradise. Go beach hopping as you visit the Gokarna beach, Kudle beach, OM beach, Half Moon beach and Paradise beach here. You can also try water sports like banana boat and parasailing here. This place is ideal to explore the neighbouring regions like Yana, Mirjan Fort, Murudeshwar and Karwar. That leaves you with the New Year weekend.

The French Quarter of Puducherry is ideal at this time of the year. At the White Town close to the beach front, a visit to the Aurobindo Ashram will help you begin the New Year with a sense of calm. Auroville‘s community living is charming as are the number of cafes. Head to the Promenade Beach which is dotted with lots of cafes and boutique stores to ring in the new year. Stay back and relax in the large number of charming boutique hotels. Tip: the Gandhi memorial is a great place to watch the sunset too.

(The January to June holiday calendar was carried in BM edition dated January 6, 2020)