Featuring a cheesy ’80s action movie vibe complete with corny one-liners, retro styled presentation and an inane plot, we’re surprised that Far Cry 3: Blood Dragon exists in the same universe as us. After all, it’s not every day that the developers responsible for last year’s superlative jungle survivor adventure, Far Cry 3 decide to release a standalone expansion that goes in a completely different direction. Replacing the dangerous wildlife of the islands with a host of robotic animals, in place of blood thirsty mercenaries are a cyborg army and instead of the drugs addled antagonist, Vass you have Colonel Sloan, a cybernetic agent to contend with. You don the role of Rex Power Colt, a cyborg-soldier entrusted with bringing Sloan down. Your journey takes you to an unnamed island replete with zombies, robot soldiers and deadly mechanical flora and fauna. Along the way you’ll rescue scientists, liberate outposts and hopefully save the world. Unlike its predecessor there’s no need to go on an inane number of side missions to allow you to carry more items. Rather, you’d be doing them for weapon attachments which won’t be usable until after you finish the main story. Having said that, while Far Cry 3 lasted a good 15-20 hours, expect not more than 6 hours out of Blood Dragon at best. The good thing? You don’t need a copy of Far Cry to play this.
   The gunplay too has been tweaked. Instead of you coming to grips with the tools of survival on a tropical island, you’re an overpowered super soldier. Everything that comes your way is easily decimated. Be it a legion of cyborgs or a veritable horde of zombies, each and every challenge is pushed aside with ease. It’s a refreshing change that keeps you firmly in control and delivers an immense sense of satisfaction. Well, that is until you square off against the game’s Blood Dragons. These beasts wield lasers and are extremely strong. While every other animal in the game has been retooled to look like their 80s, sci-fi equivalent, these are the only new addition.
   As mentioned earlier, the game features a strong retro aesthetic. Not only does this result in cool, nostalgia-inducing cut-scenes, rendered in a fashion that gamers who have played on older consoles like the Sega Mega Drive would appreciate, but it’s a throwback to ancient tech like VHS cassettes and loud ’80s music too. To further heighten the appeal, it sports a lot of neon colours. Minor quibbles aside, Blood Dragon is a fun surprise that has you playing till the very end. Well worth a look in even if you aren’t a fan of the Far Cry.