The bird was probably on its first outing trying to fly and fell on the tracks, just about missing contact with the high-tension power lines running alongside
 
 In Pictures: How the rescue operation unfolded
 
 She is barely a month old and learning to fly. This was probably her first solo flight and it brought her down between Metro rail tracks and dangerously close to the live high power line. She was scared, shivering and waiting for help. And it came in the form of a good samaritan and Namma Metro authorities. Thanks to them this baby Paraya kite is alive and well today.
 
 In a gesture that went above and beyond the line of duty, Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited (BMRCL) blocked power to a part of their network, halting rail operations for four minutes between 10.23 and 10.27 am on Saturday morning at Mantri Square Sampige Road station at Malleswaram. All to rescue a juvenile kite that had fallen between the railway tracks close to the Third Rail (a high power line that supplies power to the train which is 750 volts DC) and had it moved even an inch it would have been electrocuted. But Pradeep Singh Kharola, managing director of BMRCL wasted no time in ordering a ‘power block’ to save the little bird as soon as he heard the news.
 
 But the rescue operation all started with Felix Raviprakash who happened to be on the right platform at the right time. A printer by profession and wildlife volunteer by passion, Felix was waiting for a train to Peenya at 8.30 am when he saw security personnel peering down at something beyond the forbidden Yellow line on the platform. Felix tried to find out what they were looking at but security moved him away from the Yellow line. “Just then the train arrived and I got in. It was only when the train started moving, that I saw what it was, a bird, totally traumatized and shivering. I tried calling my conservationist colleagues but the signals are bad in a moving train. As soon as I got down at Peenya, I made a few calls and got through to Rahul and passed on the message,’’ says Felix.
 
 As luck would have it, Rahul Aradhya, a wildlife volunteer, was near Malleswaram when he got the call and rushed to the station. Soon Sharat R Babu, a wildlife warden with the BBMP forest cell found out about the kite and called BMRCL general manager, finance, U A Vasanth Rao. “Since the bird was alive, the only option was to switch off the power. I conveyed this to BMRCL authorities who were sensitive and took a call immediately,’’ says Babu. A few senior officials who were at the yet-to-be opened Magadi road station, rushed to Mantri to take stock of the situation.
 
 By 10.10 am, just as a train from Peenya pulled into the station, controllers were informed that the power was being switched off, and just in the knick off time too. Once the train left, the power was switched off on that 130-metre stretch. Equipment was pressed into action to check the tracks and make sure that the line was disconnected.
 
 Rahul, along with station controllers Venkatesh, Rakesh and Amaresh Naik jumped on to the tracks and walked towards the bird. Rahul lifted her up carefully, taking the petrified kite into his hands and moved back to the platform along with the others. The rescue operation lasted four minutes in which time all activity at the station came to a standstill.
 
 “A life is more precious than rail operations getting halted for a few minutes and it was an immediate decision taken by our managing director,’’ said Vasanth Rao who was at Mantri overseeing the rescue operation.
 
 Once the tracks were cleared, the power was turned back on and the baby kite was delivered into safe hands. Curious and concerned passengers heaved a sigh of relief as Rahul checked the bird and found that it had an injury near the wing. When somebody offered water to the bird, Rahul declined saying, the baby would choke if she consumed water in her condition. All the bird needed was a doctor, Rahul found a box, put the bird in it and left.
 Felix, who was restless thinking about the bird, finished his work at Peenya and took a train back to Mantri. “I was so happy to see that the kite was rescued,” he says.
 
 But there has been a more far-reaching consequence of this amazing act of humanity. All stations will now display the name and number of wildlife volunteers so that passengers are aware of whom to contact in such situations.
 
 When BM spoke Rahul in the evening to check the little bird’s health, the news was positive. ``She is at the animal rescue home, recuperating and out of danger,’’ the young volunteer said.
 
 Arthur and August
 In August 2013, two kittens were spotted on the train tracks in Brooklyn. Train services were shut down for about two hours after power supply to the third rail was disconnected. The kittens were safely rescued and were later named Arthur and August. Disruption in train services for this long had a big impact in a city that is hugely dependent on its subway.