It’s not what you know, but also who you know and how you approach the problem. Sanjay Gubbi, one of the state’s foremost names in the field, shares a blueprint for wildlife conservation 

In 2011, along with his team, wildlife biologist and conservationist Sanjay Gubbi mooted a proposal to have Malai Mahadeshwara Hills Wildlife Sanctuary (popularly known as MM Hills) in Chamarajanagar district notified as a protected area. By February 2012, it was almost done – until it wasn’t, until it wasn’t, courtesy rumblings in bureaucratic corridors. Come the Assembly Elections in May 2013, Gubbi knew right away that vested interests would stall the proposal if a new government came into power. In an act of shrewdness and alacrity, he set about redoing the time-consuming process of moving files – which had already been done once, over a year – to secure the notification before it could be scuttled by political machinations. In a matter of two weeks, MM Hills was declared a protected area by gazetted notification, a declaration that was “probably the fastest” in the country, Gubbi says, seated in his Banashankari office. Which is why he repeatedly says wildlife conservation is an “art”, driven by an understanding of people as much as by wildlife considerations. 

In his two-decade-long career as a conservationist (documented in his new book Second Nature), that understanding has seen Gubbi be part of some big conservation efforts – increasing the state’s protected area forest cover by 30 per cent, geographically, between 2012 and 2013, to enabling the night closure of Mysore-Mananthavady Highway passing through Nagarhole, to lessen the impact of vehicular movement on wildlife (it was done in July 2008, after which the issue went to several courts, and finally in April 2018 the Supreme Court upheld it).

In the first instance, disconnected areas of reserve forest had potential to be interconnected, thus securing land tenure for the biodiversity in the region. “There was extraction, mining and mechanisation going on outside protected areas. Land was being fragmented; we were losing land in the blink of an eye, and development pressures were skyrocketing,” he says. So he began “convincing the authorities that it was for the good of society”, and “did outreach, right from the clerk to the CM”. It’s essential to “know the process”, and anticipate that each cog in the wheel (and even those who may not technically be part of the wheel) will need to be “convinced of his/ her place”. That includes knowing the structure of democracy, right from Gram Panchayat to Minister, and proactively educating each person along the way. Sometimes, as Gubbi says, critical steps mustn’t be taken if the climate isn’t conducive – such as when an MLA is completely opposed to the idea. In this case, people with vested interests in hydro projects planned in between Kudremukh National Park and Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary were opposed to his efforts.

And yet, at the end of it all, Bannerghatta National Park went from 100sqkm to 250sqkm; Maidenahalli in Tumkur was identified as a wildlife sanctuary; Ranganayyaduraga was given protected area status in 2011; Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary and Anshi National Parks were expanded to double their areas in December 2011. In all, 23 new sites were linked, totalling 2,800 sqkm of protected areas. Patience, then is key, as is a grounding in the reality of people, politics and governance, and “relationship-building”.

 “Water”, Gubbi says, is one of the easiest ways to convince people of the need for protection. It is how the Small Indian Otter now enjoys protection in the Tungabhadra Otter Sanctuary in Hampi. “The Tungabhadra river itself is a great sell – a free-flowing river in the state that hosts the torrent frog. 

We’ve gotten protection for the Lion Tail Macaque in Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary and in Uttara Kannada, the sloth bear in Gudekote and in Tumkur, the Hornbill, and even the Bar-Headed Geese in Magadi,” he reels off. Evidently, while the tiger may often be the posterboy (or girl) of conservation in the country, getting protection for other animals and species too is possible, if as Gubbi says, you have “intent, patience, knowledge”, and his favourite, “an understanding of society”.

 What needs to be done is to make the animal palatable or “marketable”, he says. It is how Ranganayyanadurga forest in Jagalur taluk, Chamarajanagar (all of 77sq km) was notified as a sanctuary for the Four-horned Antelope, which politicians initially dismissed as ‘just a goat’. Today, those very same politicians take ownership of the animal, and the antelope finds pride of place in political brochures, posters and even signboards on the highway. 

“Conservation is about vision,” Gubbi says. In 1998, he had the foresight to anticipate that development and vehicular traffic would degrade the forest habitat that fell in between the Mysore-Mananthavady Highway, and therefore staked claim to closing the stretch at night. A lot had to be done – for instance, getting a budget of `18 crore sanctioned for repair of a 13km alternative road. Still, the battle was far from over. Between 2003-2009, a proposal to expand the road cutting through the forest into a four-lane highway had to be fought by talking to the World Bank, which was financing the project, on the grounds that their own guidelines for constructing roads in biodiversity-rich areas didn’t allow it. The state government had to be also convinced against this. Today, Gubbi is proud of the way they created a model that other states have emulated – “Gujarat closed the road in Gir National Park at nighttime, and so on. Doing anything for the first time is the toughest. But you show a precedent and the government becomes more willing to do it again. It becomes a movement,” Gubbi says.

 And all of us can be part of that movement. “Develop a love for nature; enjoy butterflies, grass, trees. Get your boots dirty and discover what is there just 10km away from you. Educate yourself and don’t just do the trendy thing,” he says. Seed balls, for instance. “You have no idea of the invasive species it might contain that threatens local habitat. The Four-horned Antelope, for instance, would have died if people had planted tall trees. It can only survive in woodland savannahs with trees of stunted growth,” Gubbi explains. He also takes issue with support for artificial pumping of water into man-made water holes in forests, which he says interferes with nature’s ecosystem, causing animal population to explode unnaturally. Instead, he suggests we do what we can with existing skills, such as drawing or painting wildlife for awareness. “And be prepared to fight for the cause – if you have a friend in the bureaucracy or somebody in the media, start working with them.”