By Saumyangi Yadav

More than 60,000 people have so far signed an online petition to notify Hesaraghatta Grasslands as a conservation reserve. The petition was started by Conservation India.

Situated on the periphery of Bengaluru, the Hesaraghatta lakebed spans an area of about 1,912 acres. The 356 acres of the landscape surrounding the lakebed is the last remaining grassland habitat in the Bengaluru region.

On September 5, the Karnataka State Wildlife Board and the Chief Minister will determine whether or not the region should be declared a conservation reserve. The land is likely to be turned into a concrete jungle if a development project is approved in the coming month.

Bengalureans and environmental activists have also been vocal about the issue on social media.

“It is so important to conserve the limited green space that we have left in the state. Making it a concrete forest will be a huge environmental loss and will affect the flora and fauna as well,” said Jagdish BK, a resident.


  Not without our grasslandThere are numerous advantages like there will be multiple layers of protection besides no one can alienate the greenery here with concretisation. 


The state forest department, along with the animal husbandry department, had planned a proposal to declare the 5,010-acre land area as “Greater Hesaraghatta Grassland Conservation Reserve” and placed it before the board. However, it was rejected.

Around 235 species of birds, some of them listed as endangered or vulnerable on the International Union for Conservation of Nature Red List, are part of the grassland’s exotic fauna. 400 species of insects, of which nearly 30 have been described as new to science by entomologists, and 100 species of butterflies including the very rare Lilac Silverline (Cigaritis lilacinus), have chosen this land as their breeding spot, the petition mentioned. “I have been trying to get as many signatures for this petition by sharing it with all my friends and acquaintances. I believe that the authorities need to make the right decision. One that is good for our future as well as for the ecosystem,” said Sugandhi Jaganath, a resident of Bengaluru.