Indian Rock Python makes way to residential area in Banashankari; rescuers release snake into forest

In a display of wildlife conservation efforts, a team of rescuers successfully saved an Indian Rock Python from a residential area in Banashankari 6th Stage. The incident was reported on Wednesday and showcased the challenges posed by urbanisation and habitat loss, as well as the dedicated efforts of wildlife rescuers to protect the reptile.

There have been multiple rescues of spectacle cobras, russell vipers, saw-scaled vipers, or rat snakes slithering into the house and hiding themselves inside car bonnets, toilets, garden areas, etc. in the backyards of the houses. However, spotting a python in a residential house seems like a rare sight. Deepak, a resident of the area, spotted the python entering a house in the vicinity and alerted the rescuers individually.

The Indian rock python is a non-venomous snake species that is protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. They are also classified as near-threatened snake species by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) and have experienced population decline that could be caused by poaching and habitat loss.

When rescuers Kapil Mavinkurve and Rashmi Mavinkurve from SharreHabitat received a call, they were not aware that a python had been spotted. However, they reached the spot immediately and were surprised to see the Indian Rock Python approximately measuring 12 feet in length and weighing approximately 10 kg.

Rashmi said, “Since it was a densely populated area with a high vehicular movement on the road, the python would have chosen to enter a house, finding a hiding spot. The family residing on the first floor observed the snake entering the ground floor.”
 
Unlike most of the residents who panic while spotting the snake, the residents of Banashankari showed calmness. Following the rescue, the team reached out to the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) and received the green light to release the python into the BM Kaval Forest.