Tourism department spends Rs 1.07 crore to develop trekking routes through Kali Tiger Reserve that was cleared of natives to provide an unsullied habitat for wildlife; forest department refuses to allow trekkin
 
 
 
 
 
 To attract more tourists to the vast stretches of untouched evergreen forests in Western Ghats, the Tourism department recently declared 2017 as Year of the Wild. In less than a week since that, the department faces a major setback what with the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) refusing to open up forests in tiger reserves to visitors and trekkers. The KFD has permitted only 11 sites out of the 27 listed for exciting treks that cover 288 Km in Shivamogga and Uttara Kannada districts.
 
 Even as the project, Great Canara Trail, witnessed bitter opposition from conservationists and wildlife enthusiasts besides having to wait for clearance of the National Tiger Con-servatory Autho-rity (NTCA), the Tourism department went ahead and sanctioned Rs 1.07 crore for Kali Tiger Reserve to improve its infrastructure and develop trekking routes through its various ranges. Contrary to the actions of the state Tourism department, NTCA – the apex body that decides on activities in tiger reserves – has said it has not approved any such activity.
 
 The Tourism department’s action of releasing over one crore rupees for creating basic infrastructure in Kali Tiger Reserve without the consent of the NTCA has left the department in the dock. Documents sourced from the Tourism department reveal that in February-March Kali Tiger Reserve, based on the oral orders of then Tourism minister RV Deshpande, the department sought the approval of an action plan that would cost Rs 1.07 crore. The plan included upgrade of the existing camping facilities at Anshi and Castle Rock besides setting up new tented cottages, restrooms and other basic facilities. The plan was approved based on certain conditions.
 
 Accordingly, several facilities like development of trekking tracks, signage, cement flooring to set up tents and toilets were installed at Anshi, Kumbarwada and Castle Rock ranges of Kali Tiger Reserve. The structures and installations have been lying inside the core area of the reserve, according to sources. An application under RTI to NTCA revealed that no permission was given for any tourism activity inside the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve.
 
 
 ‘KFD did not submit any proposal’
 
 “KFD did not make any tourism proposal to us of any development activities to be taken up in Kali Tiger Reserve. Nor does the tiger conservation plan submitted to NTCA by Kali Tiger Reserve mention the Great Canara Trail Trekking project. NTCA does not provide any approval or clearance in such matters but advises the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) as per provisions of Section 38 of the Wildlife Act 1972,” Dr Vaibhav Mathur, assistant inspector general of NTCA replied to the RTI query on November 30, 2016.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Pramod Deshpande, a nature trekker, said, “I strongly support legalised trekking paths but not at the cost of precious ecology that too within a tiger reserve.” Manoj, a Belagavi-based wildlife activist also questioned the move. “How could the Forest department introduce trekking paths in a tiger reserve when people living within are being relocated elsewhere? On the one hand, the department is relocating people to provide inviolate space for wildlife and on the other it plans to bring in urban crowds to enjoy the ecology,” he said.
 
 Based on the ruling of Supreme Court, the NTCA had laid down guidelines in October 2012 for all tiger reserves in the country to obtain approval prior to taking up any works in them. As per the NTCA guidelines, all tourism activities have to be taken up in delineated tourism zones as indicated in the tourism plan. Any deviation,
 besides the tourism plan, has to be approved by the NTCA. “The Tiger Conservation Plan, which would ratify the carrying capacity of tourism, does not mention Canara Trail. Promoting tourism in core and buffer areas will outnumber the carrying capacity of the landscape,” opined yet another activist.
 
 
 
 
 Even though the apex court and NTCA laid down that no tourism infrastructure be carried out in any core area of tiger reserve where relocation has been carried out, a trekking route has been planned at Sawant Matakarni village.
 
 When the matter was taken to BG Hosmath, principal chief conservator of forests, he said, “We have not allowed any tourism programme in any tiger reserve. The Tourism department has to explain what it is doing. In fact, we have approved only 11 routes of the 27 planned under Canara Trail. No project is allowed in any of the tiger reserves of the state.”
 
 
  GREAT CANARA TRAIL
 
 Great Canara Trail is an ambitious eco-tourism project taken up by Karnataka State Eco-Tourism Development Board as an arduous trekking path covering a total distance of 288 Km to be covered in 25-days. The trek starts from Malemane village near Gerusoppa, which is a part of Aghanashini Lion Tailed Macaque Conservation Reserve and passes through Katlekan, Devimane Ghat, Bedthi Conservation Reserve, Anshi, Ulavi, Kumbarawada, Kuveshi and ends at Castle Rock in the Dandeli range. Out of the 17 inter-connected trek routes, as many as seven routes spanning 97 Km are said to be within the limits of Kali Tiger Reserve.
 
 
  Great Canara Trail will be taken up wherever the Forest department gives us clearances. No other place will be pursued for the project. If the KFD does not give permission, we will not take up any activity in those areas. In Dandeli too, works were previously taken up outside core tiger reserve areas. The government understands the importance of protection and conservation of core areas of a protected sanctuary and will continue to do so.
 –Priyank Kharge, Tourism minister, Karnataka