Wow! This is going to be different” Joy whispered. There was a frightening silence at that dusk hour, darkness engulfing us by every second, with an occasional call of a macaque to set the tone for the events ahead. We were looking up at a machan, our place for the night’s stay that overlooks a vast open field. We could see a herd of gaurs, grazing in the lush field and could even listen to the crisp fresh grass getting ground. It was going to be a night of adventure, having a moonlit dinner atop this giant tree set in absolute wilderness and watching another type of dinner staged right below us. At a distance, a herd of spotted deer with their playful calves were heading towards the water hole.  

The jeep dropped us somewhere in the woods, far away from the listening distance of the diners so as not to distract them. The walk was pleasant, all along the tiger country where we followed the fresh pug marks of a tigress that must have walked right ahead of us along the same route. We spotted the pug marks disappearing into a bush right before we arrived at our destination for the night. Perhaps, she was dressing up for the dinner.

DISCOVERING A SECRET
Here we are at India’s youngest tiger reserve, getting ready for one of the most exclusive experiences of life. Parambikulam is Kerala’s well kept secret tucked within the folds of Western Ghats, isolated without even a direct road access from mainland Kerala! The only way to reach is from the eastern slopes starting at Pollachi, a town off Coimbatore. You need to drive up through Anamalais, and the road narrows down beyond Top Slip, making you feel that it ends beyond that turn. An unassuming gate welcomes you beyond the turn and you are entering another magnificent world altogether! Endowed with abundant water sources and three major lakes created out of dams this 280 sqkm of pristine nature is well protected and managed by a set of dedicated forest officers and their committed staff, hand in hand with the local tribal community members.  

It was the full moon day in February and was a weekend too. We had heard a lot about the Moonlight Census program conducted by the Kerala’s Forests and Wildlife Department and had enrolled well in advance to become the watchers atop the machan on the full moon day of February. They allow only a maximum of four persons, discreetly interviewed by the Wildlife Warden himself to assess the level of commitment, either allowed permission or politely declined if he finds the group touristy and noisy. Once seated at the treetop pavilion, you should be communicating at very low whispers if you are bad at sign language. The field below is the theatre of action, a vast and lush green field with a pond beside it. It is the perfect setting where every animal finds its feed and drink. After sunset, every inhabitant of the jungle emerges out of the woods into this open space. You can see herds of elephants, gaurs, spotted deer and even bears, all happily grazing in the open. The carnivores make their appearance a little later, not for the grass, but on the look out for the grass eaters!  

TABLE IN THE TREES
And we were there, in a rickety bamboo machan with moon up there, lighting up the stage. The helpful and knowledgeable tribal guide, sent with us by the officers was carrying our dinner, sleeping bags, binoculars, lamps etc. Hefty and shining black gaurs dressed up in white socks were just below us, totally unaware of the intruders sitting right above them. We decided not to light up the lamp as we could easily manage our slight movements, with the Moon lighting up the place very well. We heard some movement of dry leaves up above us on the steep slope of a hill. The sound was becoming louder and we spotted a hefty bear rolling down the hills towards our tree. There were more sounds and on closer watch, we saw a mom and two kids following the big dad. All of them reached below our tree and were looking up and started smelling around. The guide told us that they typically climb up and spend nights in our machan on no intruder nights! That piece of information sent some shivers across and justified our further decision of skipping our sleep for that night. To our luck, the dad decided not to scare us anymore and commanded the troop away from our tree. 

QUAKE IN THE WILD
A little later, towards our left, we noticed some commotion with monkeys announcing the entry of someone special. We saw the deer families running for cover and all gaurs looking head up towards the source of that sound. The experienced leader sensed the presence of that dreadful guest and gave a signal. What we heard and saw next was something that will be etched in our minds for ever – we thought for a moment that it was an earthquake but the quick turnaround and thundering noise of about one hundred massive gaurs on the run was something that could cause an earthquake. Now, who made that silent entry that created this havoc? Maybe the striped queen who went into the powder room early that evening? We could only sit and guess as the thick growth of grass prevented a clear view of the grand dame whose tribe is legendary to be elusive. But we knew that she was somewhere close by. 

Amid all this furore, another group of veterans was unaffected and stood steady like a rock, much farther to our right near the pond. From a distance, it looked really like some huge formation of rocks. A group of cow elephants and calves were having a pleasant dinner and didn’t find it worthwhile to even glance to the other side of the joint where someone just came bullying and created some havoc. Past midnight, slowly the vegetarians started re-appearing and we were kept amused throughout. It was sunshine again and we could spot many animals still hanging around. We waited for another two hours to make it safer to alight from the treetop hut because it was a full one hour walk towards the nearest jeep pick up point amidst all the happy and energetic crowd cheering around us. It was indeed a very special night and exclusive because public access is limited to just two nights a month for six months of the year which makes it just a dozen opportunities in an year to do it. I had not seen a place like this ever, surrounded by abundant wildlife of this scale and depth in a rustic setting. Those who can rough it out a little and accept some surprises should definitely try this one.  

HOW WE GOT THERE
We drove off from Bangalore on a Friday evening and reached Coimbatore by midnight to stretch our legs. Early next day, we started our drive to Pollachi and reached Parambikulam by 10 am. They have some nice Swiss tents where we checked in followed by a sumptuous lunch in their central gazebo. On our return from the Moonlight census and after a quick shower and breakfast, we left the reserve on Sunday and Joy found a shorter route, skipping Coimbatore by-pass. It takes you directly from Pollachi and delivers you on the highway somewhere after Avinashi. We reached Bangalore by dinner time, for our usual course! I couldn’t help wondering whether we were in a dream the night before!  

For more details on Parambikulam, visit www.parambikulam.org or call up the Wildlife Warden on 04253 245005 / 9447979102 / 9442201685 The author is an engineer by profession and an adventurer at heart