In a major victory against poaching, Hebbagodi police on Saturday arrested six suspected poachers and recovered six elephant tusks, a handcrafted rifle and ammunition. The poachers were arrested while attempting to sell the tusks in the city, but it is the arms and ammunition, later recovered from the forests of Anchetti in Tamil Nadu, close to the state border, which are significant. 
   The poachers had hidden the single-barrel rifle in a sort of cave and the ammunition in a tree, and divulged their location only during police interrogation. Since the area from where the gun and bullets were recovered is infested with naxals, police are probing if the gang has any links to naxalites or if the gun and ammunition itself can render clues to those who supply arms to naxals. 
   Tamil Nadu’s elite police, Q Force, that has been tracking naxal movements for years, have sought information on the arms and ammunition from the city police. “The area from where the gun and ammunition were recovered is heavily-patrolled by anti-naxal forces from Karnataka and Tamil Nadu,” a police official who is part of the probe said. “The only active channel through which these poachers can get arms and ammunition is from naxals since they are believed to make their own guns and ammunition. So the naxal connection is being thoroughly examined.”
   The recovery of the weapons is also significant as it makes the police case against the poachers watertight. Police normally seize wildlife products, but rarely, if ever, do they get their hands on the weapons used in the crime. If the weapons are not traced and recovered, poachers continue with their illegal activities immediately as they are out on bail, police say. “But once the arms are seized, it completes the case,” officials said.  
   Experts believe that the six tusks were taken off elephants that were aged around 15 to 18 years after the animals were gunned down by the gang. City police also seized machetes which they suspect were used to remove the tusks from the elephants. 
   “The rifle which was used to shoot the elephants appears to be made by an expert,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert, said. “Q Force officials usually make enquiries when arms are recovered from poachers and they contacted us immediately after the arms were seized. We have shared all the information we have with them.”