A pall of gloom descended on Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Tuesday with the news of the death of the most photographed tiger ‘Prince’. A star attraction for safari tourists, Prince has been the cynosure of all eyes especially, wildlife photographers. In fact, rumours of Prince’s death were doing the rounds for the past two days when Forest personnel and Safari tourists could not sight him in the last two days.
 
 Close on the lines of these rumours, forest officials found the carcass of the 12-year-old male near Moolapura lake and it resembled Prince, according to sources. However, Forest officials refused to confirm whether the discovered carcass was that of Prince and thus leaving the anxiety levels high among his fans. In fact, several photographers and officials were seen praying that it shouldn’t be the body of Prince!
 
 Roamed like a king
 
 Prince literally roamed like a king over 14 sq km territory spread across Bandipura, Kundakere and GS Betta range. The tiger had become an attraction among foreign travellers and used to be spotted at least 2 to 3 times a week. Unlike other tigers that shy away from tourists, Prince stood at the crossroads of the safari path, giving ample opportunity to tourists and photographers to capture him in frames.
 
 Reacting over the incident, T Hiralal, Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve told BM, “The carcass of the male tiger that was discovered on Sunday has about 90 percent resemblance with Prince’s stripes. We will get a clear picture after physiological examination.”
 
 Corporate funding
 
 Overcoming challenges of shortage of funds for various conservational programmes, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has decided to rope in corporate firms to fund its various programmes in protected areas. Listing out various desirables that companies can fund as part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives, KFD and Karnataka Eco-tourism Board on Tuesday held a workshop in Bengaluru and invited corporates to invest in long-term programmes that would support the rare biodiversity of Karnataka.
 
 Highlighting the importance of funding conservation programmes, Chief Wildlife Warden Kishan Singh Sugara said, “Corporates must own the biodiversity and only then a sense of ownership will prevail and thereby they can emerge as ambassadors of conservation.” Sugara also said that investment in conservation does not mean ‘one-time payment, but funding an entire project over several long years.’
 
 
 Vinay Luthra, Chairman, Karnataka Eco Tourism Board, said, “We have several successful partnerships of corporate funding conservation programmes in the past. In fact, in the last three-years, various Tiger Foundations run by individual tiger reserves have received a total of Rs 35 crores and this year, we are expecting a contribution of Rs 15 to Rs 20 crore.”
 
 The KFD has invited funding in conflict mitigation activities including buying of land for creating wildlife corridors, solar borewells, employee welfare, creation of basic infrastructure along peripheral villages, rejuvenation of rivers, eco-tourism activities, technology intervention like camera traps, website creation, software for vigilance etc.