By Garima Prasher

31 elephants died due to unnatural causes in 3 years in Karnataka. Of these, 28 died due to electrocution

If you thought poaching is the biggest threat to wild elephants, you are in for a shock. Information from the Wildlife division of the Karnataka Forest Department reveals that it is electrocution, and not poaching, that might send jumbos on the road to extinction.

As per data furnished by the department, while 31 elephants died due to unnatural causes in the last three years in Karnataka, 28 perished due to electrocution.

During 2021-22, nine cases of unnatural deaths were recorded and eight of them died due to electric shocks. Through 2020-21, while 13 elephants died of unnatural causes, 11 of them were electrocuted; during 2019-20, nine unnatural deaths were recorded, all electrocuted.

A high percentage of elephants dying due to electric shock is startling, say wildlife researchers and activists.

“So many electrocutions point to escalated human-wildlife conflicts. It also can be strong evidence of a crime. A majority of these cases are due to the forest department turning a blind eye to complaints from the villagers. The farmers are left with no other option but to take law in their hands and save their livelihood,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

Most of the cases, say the experts, are from the areas where escalated wildlife conflicts have been reported in the past due to ever-shrinking habitat.

“Elephants are migratory animals. They need to travel from one forest to another in search of more food. However, some of the forest corridors have been encroached upon for agriculture purposes. This is where the conflict starts. To protect their farms, villagers put up barbed wire fences with high electric currents. In a few cases, sagging electric wires from electric poles might also lead to the death of elephants,” said Daniel Sukumar Das, director, Wildlife Conservation Foundation.

Experts say that a review of human-wildlife conflict management policies at the government and community level is required to save the habitats and the ever-decreasing jumbo population.

“This data implies that a lot of illegal power lines are in use in forest fringe areas. Villagers are tapping into power lines to draw such high voltage wires. So, the vigilance aspect has been overlooked by the Forest department. The department should have conducted a combing operation and worked closely with the electricity supply companies to catch hold of the offenders,” said Avinash Krishnan, director, science and conservation, A Rocha India.

Conservationists opine that although elephants are Schedule I animals and killing them is a punishable offense under the Wildlife Protection Act, the conviction rate has been low.

“Killing a Schedule I animal attracts the strictest of the punishments under the Wildlife Protection Act. While the regulations are in place, neither enough cases are booked against the offenders, nor are they convicted,” added Sukumar.

Vijaykumar Gogi, principal chief conservator of forest (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department said, “Every time an elephant is electrocuted, a case is booked and is analysed by the electrical inspectorate. The findings are included in our chargesheets and offenders are booked under the Electricity Act and Wildlife Protection Act. We are also paying special attention to the Schedule I animal cases. While some delay in convictions has been inevitable due to the lack of an in-house forensic facility, we have started training our staff and upgrading our facilities to get it on a fast track.” 


Killing a Schedule I animal attracts the strictest of the punishments under the Wildlife Protection Act. While the regulations are in place, neither enough cases are booked against the offenders, nor are they convicted– Daniel Sukumar Das, Wildlife Conservation Foundation
Male elephants at risk
As per the data, 26 out of the 31 elephants that died due to electrocution were males.
 
Wildlife conservationists say the alarmingly dwindling population of male elephants can impact the viability of the population overall.

“Most of the elephants who get electrocuted are males. Males are bolder and risk-takers, which is a part of their natural biology. On the contrary, females tend to avoid danger as they have calves to take care of. More males getting killed will lead to a skewed population and this will have implications on the viability of the elephant population in the wild,” informed Krishnan.

Mix-and-match to deter the clever animals

From elephant-proof trenches to railway barricades and from solar power tentacle fences to steel wire ropes, the forest department has many ploys in its arsenal to contain the jumbos. However, experts say that it is only a combination of different and ever-changing barriers that probably can bring down the number of wild elephants venturing into farmlands.

“Electric fences with low voltage to keep the elephants out of farmlands have become a futile exercise over time. The elephants know their way around this mechanism. Moreover, setting up an electric fence is a costly affair too. We have suggested that the forest department should put up a combination of different barriers so that the elephants do not adapt.

 For instance, a combination of an elephant-proof trench, electric fence, and rubble wall will demotivate elephants from destroying the fence. These barriers also need to be changed often. Elephants are smart animals and if exposed to a similar set of fences for long, they discover a way around it. Maintaining the barriers is equally important,” said Belagere.