In complaint filed with forest department, wildlife volunteers say the pair of jumbos was made to march with chains around their legs and mahouts pulled hairs from their tails to sell them
 	
 	
 Amidst all the revelry and religious fervour, little thought was spared for the two beings at the head of a Ganesha visarjan procession in Bellandur on September 7. The procession was the usual — drums beating, youth dancing and fire crackers going off at regular intervals — but with a slight twist. A pair of male elephants led the procession to immerse an idol of Lord Ganesha. Wildlife volunteers allege that the animals were grossly ill-treated. 

 The two elephants were illegally brought from Kerala. Volunteers allege that one was blind in both eyes and both animals were made to march the 3km route with chains around their legs and crackers bursting around them. In a complaint to the forest department on Tuesday, wildlife volunteers say “drunken” mahouts pulled hair out from the elephants’ tails and sold them to devotees. 

 Wildlife volunteers have filed a complaint with the forest department against Vinayaka Classic Boys, the organisers of the Ganesha procession. Elephants are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act and using them for commercial purposes is a violation of several Central and state government orders and the Act. Explicit permission is needed from the forest department to use pachyderms for religious or cultural events. In this case no permission was granted. 

 	 		“The forest department had stopped sanctioning permission to use elephants for such events,” Sharath R Babu, environment advisor to BBMP forest cell told Bangalore Mirror. “Yet, these two elephants named Vinayaka and Rajshekar, were brought here and were subjected to brutal cruelty.” 	

 	 		The elephants purportedly belong to Ananda Mani, a resident of Palakkad, Kerala. The complaint claims that one Mithun Reddy had hired the elephants for the procession. In posts released on social media, organisers had announced elephants would be used for the procession. “It is illegal,” Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests and chief wildlife warden, Karnataka said. “We have not given any permission in this case. I will direct my officials to act.” 	

 	 		However, Reddy of Vinayaka Classic Boys, who has been named in the complaint, said he was unaware that permission had to be obtained. “People in the vicinity around Marathalli, Bellandur have been getting elephants during festivities for seven to eight years now,” Reddy said. “This is not a new practice. Had we known that it is a violation, we would not have got them (the elephants) at all.” On the allegation that the animals were ill treated, Reddy said, “I was not aware they were chained. We were busy with the event. We kept the elephants for one and half hour and the march was less than half kilometer. We had put in place all safety measures and even paid Rs 25,000 for a veterinary doctor and tranquiliser just in case of any mishap.”