Kolkata: A one-horned Rhinoceros died after drowning in Assam’s Kaziranga National Park on Tuesday, as 90 per cent of the reserve park remained inundated for the last few days.

Huge number of animals are fleeing to higher lands inside the park. The rescue team of the state government has been pressed into action to save the animals, even as 30 out of 33 districts in Assam are flooded and Brahmaputra is flowing above the danger levels. The flood death toll has touched 15 in Assam.

According to latest data (updated till July 16) provided by the Assam government’s Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, under which Kaziranga National Park and Tiger Reserve falls, altogether 15 animals died following rise in water levels inside the park. Out of the 15, 11 animals died after drowning while the rest four died during treatment after rescue.

Around 31 animals have been rescued from the park by the forest department’s rescue team. Unfortunately, two Rhinos, six Hog Deer, one Elephant and two Wild Boars have also drowned. 

Parimal Suklabaidya, Assam Minister for Forest and Environment, tweeted, "The situation of Assam's biggest asset the Kaziranga National Park is under significant control of the park authority now. All senior officials are being tasked to monitor and take all expedient action to ensure the safety and good health of all animals of the park."

Union Jal Shakti Minister Gajendra Singh Shekhawat on Tuesday conducted an aerial survey in flood affected Assam. Brahmaputra river is flowing far above the danger levels in Passighat, Diburgarh, Tezpur and Nimatighat. At least 160 people were rescued by the Army in Nalabari district during a night operation. The area is completely under water. 

In view of the flood situation in the Eastern region, Lieutenant General MM Naravane, PVSM, AVSM, SM, VSM, General Officer Commanding in Chief, Eastern Command, took stock of the situation and was briefed by various Commanders on ground about the preparations. The Army Commander stated that the situation is presently under control and assured a quick response by the Army on being requisitioned for deployment on flood relief tasks. 

Various resources of the Army, in anticipation of flood related calamity, are on ‘Stand by’. Army is closely monitoring the flood situation in close coordination with civil administration along large number of flood prone areas. There are 152 monitoring stations which will ensure timely warning of an impending crisis due to floods.