Worrying about inflation, netas in the state petitioned the Speaker to double their salaries and perks a couple of months ago. Their collective grievances have been addressed, with the next Assembly session likely to approve the hike, which would cost the exchequer Rs 1.5 core a month. But lesser mortals like the forest department, who risk their life toiling in the wild, have been waiting to get their hardship allowance doubled. And the total amount – Rs 1.52 crore – is negligible when compared with some of the other proposals cleared by the finance department.
 
 	The finance department HAS been sitting on the proposal -- amounting to just Rs 1.52 crore annually covering 1,405 forest personnel – for the last five years. The decision to double the allowance was cleared by the then cm BS Yedddyurappa in September, 2009 and  	the matter is still being shuttled between the government and finance department. In the meantime, the latter has cleared several proposals pertaining to other ‘glamour sections’.
 Considering that front-line staffers posted at anti-poaching camps (APC) in wildlife circles are exposed to grave dangers, it was proposed to give them hardship allowance to boost their morale. “The State Wildlife Board, which met in September 2009 under the chairmanship of then CM, cleared the proposal. It was decided to give 50 per cent of the basic salaries of officials belonging to the ranks of Range Forest Officer (RFO), Deputy RFOs, Forest Guards and Forest Watchers,” said a senior forest official.
 	  	Though proposed in 2009, the state government wrote to the forest department only in 2014, seeking financial implications of  	the proposal. 
 	  	“The department gave a detailed report on the implications and how much it would cost the exchequer. But since then, the proposal has been pending before the finance department, which is yet to give its clearance,” the official clarified. 
 	  	Acknowledging the delay in getting the required approval, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra told Mirror that they have brought the issue to the notice of the chief minister. 
 	  	“In fact, we discussed the issue during our department’s pre-budget consultation meeting and requested the chief minister to consider the proposal as it has been pending for long time. The chief minister has responded positively and we are hoping that it will be cleared in the upcoming budget.”