World heritage site Kaas Pathar is Maharashtra’s very own Valley of Flowers 
 
 For an urban resident, programmed to constant activity, it will be hard to stomach that at Kaas Pathar, a plateau located 25 km from Satara, there is nothing to do. Even the driver groused, “Kya madame, chai tak peene ka jaga nahin hai!” But that’s not such a bad thing, you realise soon. Every year, between August and October — towards the tail end of monsoon — the lateritic tableland (typical of the Western Ghats in Maharashtra) transforms into a wild flower wonderland. More than 300 varieties of flowers, herbs, orchids, shrubs, insectivorous plants including bright shades of pink balsams, yellow smithias, and blue utricularias carpet the vast grassland. Maharashtra’s Valley of Flowers was declared a World Heritage Site by Unesco in 2012.
 
 There are only two lodges close by that are sparsely populated. Your best bet is to stay in Satara City, or if you don’t mind travelling further, then a good option is the picturesque hillstation of Panchgani. Take your own vehicle or hire a taxi from Satara, as public transport is non-existent. The first few kilometres are a bumpy ride, but the path smoothens along the way and gets prettier. En route to Kaas, we mistook Yevteshwar plateau — a flat ridge with the beautiful Kanher Lake on one side and the Urmodi reservoir and Sajjangad on the other — for our destination. Fellow travellers, who had stopped to take photos, signalled to us that the pathar has more to offer than a bed of yellow flowers.
 
 And they were so right. It was around noon when we finally reached the flower zone. Anxious about the sharp sun overhead, we were happy it played hide and seek with the clouds. We paid an entry fee of Rs 10 each, and were warned not to go too far into the woods. It is quiet and lonely, we were told. Acres and acres of pink and blue flowers over a lush green vast land, punctuated with puddles, welcomed us. The plateau gets its name from the kas plant (Elaeocarpus glandulosus), whose leaves turn red as they mature. As we walked further, we got a better view of the plateau that overlooks the emerald green Sahyadri mountains and Koyna dam, and makes for a spectacular picture.
 
 A septuagenarian local, Sarvalaxman Kadam, who has served as caretaker at the plateau for the past two years, pointed out, “It rained a lot in the last couple of days, so the growth is a bit scanty. Come back in 15 days, and you will see this place covered in various shades of red, blue, pink, yellow and white.” He routinely reprimands unmindful tourists from trampling on the flowers, directing them instead towards the walking path with his wooden stick. The flowerbed, we learnt, is full bloom mid-September and is an absolute delight for budding botanists and wildlife photographers. We found a quiet spot to sit. While we trying to find our way out, we were approached by a group of students from Fergusson College in Pune, who were conducting a survey on the visitors’ experience in Kaas. Needless to say, most gave it a unanimous thumbs up.
 
 So, what did we do there? Well, nothing. Except that we sat at the lap of nature and stared at the scenic view — a real breather for people who constantly want to do things.
 
 STAY AT
 At Panchgani: www.basilicaholidayhome.com Dhun Heta Bungalow, www.stayindia.com
 At Satara city: www.nivantresort.com
 
 RAIN CHECK
 The trek is easy
 It’s a child-friendly destination
 Wear comfortable shoes and keep windcheater and umbrella on standby, since there are no shelter spots
 
 Verdict: Meant for those who’re happy to sit and soak it all in
 
 Readers’ Reco
 Know a destination or property around Bangalore, across the country or world that should make it to this page? Write to the editor at bmfeatures@gmail.com