By Melvin Mathew

Activists say number of macaques held captive in city on rise; forest official rubbishes claim

According to animal activists, there is a slight increase in the number of bonnet macaques being held captive in homes; forest officials, however, said that the number of cases is not alarming and these are just isolated instances.
 
Recently, Bengaluru-based People for Animals (PfA) rescued three macaques held captive inside an ashram in Sondekoppa. Wildlife activists raised concerns about such cases making a comeback after a long time.

PfA received a call for the confiscation of three captive macaques in a span of two days from an ashram in Sondekoppa and from Kengunte, Mallathahalli, in the second week of October. The PfA rescue team (Mohan and Bharath) rushed to the location immediately along with local police; after spreading awareness and convincing the persons who had kept the macaques, the animals were brought to PfA centre and kept in separate cages for observation.

“There has been an increase in cases of people keeping bonnet macaques as pets in their homes. When we rescued the monkeys, they were chained. In both cases, the monkeys were considered as divine reincarnations. The macaques are being used to attract donations. In most cases, the claim is these monkeys came in as infants and had to be taken care of. They also stated they were not aware of the laws preventing them from keeping the animals as pets,” said PfA chief veterinarian.

As the macaques get better and fit, they will be shifted to a bigger enclosure and provided care to enhance their psychological behaviour. Eventually they will be introduced to other macaques so that they can learn their natural behaviour while in rehabilitation and learn to live in a troop when released into the wild.

Rescuers noted that the monkeys had developed skin disease and were suffering without a proper diet. They also recalled the case of a celebrity keeping a monkey at home, noting that the problem extends to educated people as well.

Animal activists BM spoke to said macaque populations in Bengaluru have gradually vanished.
 
“I have been a resident of the city for the past 50 years; the numbers have been declining. As per reports, the numbers are going down as compared to 2018 statistics.

 Keeping bonnet macaques inside homes is a serious offence. Action must be initiated against forest officials for not taking proactive action,” said activist Arun Prasad.


     .

However, a senior forest official rubbished the claim about a rise in the number of macaques illegally kept at homes, and attributed it to isolated incidents. “Apart from a few cases, we have not been informed of any cases. Currently, there is no daily or weekly pattern. The numbers are not alarming either; stray incidents do occur. We do conduct awareness drives for the public to discourage the practice of keeping the monkeys captive,” he added.

Vanishing act

In another case, animal activist Anand Vedula alleged that forest officials are asking him to sign off on the report stating that some monkeys disappeared on their own.
 
Allegedly, the monkeys that used to haunt Shriram Samruddhi Association, Thubarahalli disappeared one day; the RWA claims to have received permission from the forest department for relocating the monkeys.

Five months ago, four monkeys disappeared, towards the end of May 2022. Residents suspect that some illegal monkey catchers were deployed to relocate the monkeys.
 
“We still do not know where the monkeys are right now and whether protocol was followed while relocating them. But, they want me to close the case filed against the association and state that the macaques left on their own accord,” said Vedula.