Karnataka has been ranked among top five states experiencing number of large forest fire incidents; KFD officials say they are currently keeping close watch on forest patches

Karnataka has featured among the top five states in the country with the highest number of large forest fire events in the last seven days, according to Forest Survey of India reports.
 
Karnataka, with 14 major forest fire incidents between January 12 and 18, is only after Himachal Pradesh (38 events), Uttarakhand (31), and Jammu and Kashmir (21 incidents.).

The state has also recorded the fourth-highest number of fire alerts in the given period. As many as 188 fire incidents were recorded in the state using spatial information through SNPP. In the given period, Himachal Pradesh had 511 fire alerts, Uttarakhand recorded 435 fire alerts, and Jammu and Kashmir logged 293 alerts of forest fire.

According to Karnataka Forest Department officials, the peak forest fire season begins on February 15, and the department is keeping a close watch on the vulnerability index of various forest patches in Karnataka.

They highlight that the department is taking every measure to keep fire incidents under control this season. However, weather conditions and high weed density might lead to a higher number of fire incidents.

“While woody material on the ground along with dry season fuels forest fires, high weed density also contributes to large fire incidents. Karnataka forests have a high growth of weeds such as lantana and senna. Lantana grows very high and has a woody biomass. Once it catches fire, it spreads fast through cinders. The department, however, is working towards cleaning the forests of these weeds,” said a senior KFD official.

In the recent legislature session, the Karnataka Forest Minister said that while 40% of Bandipur Tiger Reserve is covered with weeds, 20% of Bannerghatta National Park and 30% of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve have been taken up by these fast-growing exotic species.

However, experts say that while there might be some correlation between high weed density and fire incidents, it is preparedness, monitoring, and accountability on the part of the department that play important roles in forest fire management.
Forest fire lines must be created between January and February every year. However, the department is often lagging behind on the task ­–a wildlife conservationist
“Forest fire lines must be created between January and February every year. However, the department is often lagging behind on the task. We also fail to recruit an adequate number of forest watchers or foot soldiers to man vulnerable forest patches. Dense weed cover might lead to some fire incidents, but mostly it is a combination of the above factors coupled with extreme weather conditions and disgruntled villagers. The department must focus on these aspects instead of clearing weeds,” said a wildlife conservationist.

BM had earlier written about KFD’s plan to add ten drones to its aerial firefighting fleet to deal with forest fire events in the upcoming fire season.

Forest department gets into fire fighting mode with dronesFire lines based on a fire resonation map are being created, fire watchers are being deployed, and awareness activities for communities living in and around the forest areas are also being taken up. The department is also keeping a close watch on the vulnerability index of various forest patches provided by the Forest Survey of India. 
Officials had informed BM that the proposal to procure ten drones had already been approved by the Centre, and the department is securing these aerial robotic devices with the help of the Karnataka State Remote Sensing Agency (KSRSA). KFD is also planning to add a Cessna aircraft to douse critical fire cases that emerge in inaccessible areas.