By Ananya Kashyap 
 
 Wildlife photographers recall the king of the forest with a touch of sadness
 
 
 
 Prince
 
 With Karnataka’s most photographed tiger Prince dying of starvation, avid photographers and wildlife enthusiasts from Bengaluru recall their ‘Prince’ days. Praveen Siddannavar, an award-winning wildlife photographer says there was a time ‘Agastya’ used to be the most photographed striped big cat. However, Prince soon took over the title.
 
 “I can say Prince dominated the entire tourism zone. He hailed from the Yedhal range in the Bandipur Forest. His death is a very sad and big loss. He was a tiger who didn’t disappoint the tourists. He was bold, and handsome. He loved spending a lot of time in the water. He was a legendary wild cat. After I named him, the name picked up quickly and even the forest officials started were calling him by the name which is very unusual. We used to study his behaviour and I can even tell you his favourite water holes,” he said.
 
 Siddannavar recalled the time Prince attacked a large Indian Gaur. “I also remember another incident on July 1, 2014, when he attacked 21 buffaloes that came from Mangala village and killed three of them. He mated with a tigress Gowri and spent a lot of time with the cubs when she died, which is a rare behaviour for tigers. Prince never shied away from anything,” he added.
 
 Wildlife enthusiast Amith Bhavikatti called Prince a very brave tiger. “Prince has killed more than five to six tigers in the past. I was very sad to know he had passed away. We could observe him sometimes for one-and-a-half hours at a stretch. He would walk along and even sleep in front of the jeeps. He was the one bringing revenue to Bandipur. I feel, his last rites could have been performed better. The forest department should have informed us in advance so we could visit Prince for one last time and pay tribute.”
 
 Prince was given many names such as Legend, Kunta, Bhavikatti said. He remembered the tiger had hurt his leg.
 
 Anuga Rajendra Rakesh Chowdary, a businessman and photographer said, “I bought a high-end camera a day before we left to Bandipur in September 2016. We went on four safaris and saw Prince hunting a deer. He disappeared near a water hole. He was the boldest and the bravest of tigers. He ruled the forest and gave many litters.”
 
 Chowdary went on to talk about Prince’s popularity. “If anyone had come back from Bandipur, we would ask them if they saw Prince. Even the people, who haven’t seen him, were aware there was someone called Prince in the Bandipur forest,” he said. Vinai Kumar, IT official and wildlife photographer says he saw Prince for the first time in 2013. “He was a bold and daring tiger,” Kumar said. The department could have done something to save his life, Kumar said. “It is sad to lose a legend like Prince from the Bandipur forest.”
 
 “King (Prince) has faded away (RIP) - Finally the King has faded away, he will be forever in our memories. He showed us how a South Indian male tiger lives his life in king size. He was charismatic, majestic, hugely built and has a record of killing many tigers in territorial fights. He was the most photographed tiger in South India and the real star of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve,” Bhavikatti said.
 
 He had entertained many tourists and photographers with his ‘show’ (that wildlife enthusiasts called the Prince Show), Bhavikatti said. “It is sad he has gone down like this and none could pay him the last respects that he deserved. He is indirectly responsible for the livelihoods of many departments. May his soul rest in peace,” Bhavikatti said.