Blame it on rapid population growth, immense pressure from urbanisation, or inaction of authorities concerned, rivers of Karnataka are suffering. According to a recent water quality analysis of 12 rivers in the state, nine were found to have stretches with poor water quality (class D).

The 12 rivers monitored under the central government’s National Water Monitoring Programme (NWMP) include Arkavathi, Lakshmantirtha, Tungabhadra, Bhadra, Cauvery, Kabini, Kagina, Krishna, Shimsha, Bhima, Netravati and Tunga.

Under the programme, the water quality of these rivers is monitored at 38 locations. Out of these, 19 locations recorded water quality under class D – suitable for only propagation of wildlife and fisheries. These locations include all five monitoring stations of Arkavathi and Lakshmitirtha, two stations of Tungabhadra, one station of Cauvery, both stations each of Kabini and Kagina, all three stations of Shimsha, two stations of Bhima and both stations of Tunga rivers.

The water quality report released by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) for November 2023 showed that the biological oxygen demand of some of these stretches is as high as 8, the fecal coliform levels at some stations have reached 2,60,000 MPN/100 ML and total coliform bacteria has increased to 2,80,000 MPN/100 ml.

As per the Central Pollution Control Board’s (CPCB) standards, the permissible level of fecal coliform bacteria in waterbodies considered suitable for bathing, contact water sports, and commercial fisheries is 100 MPN/100 ml. Similarly, in waterbodies suitable only for industrial cooling, aesthetic purposes, navigation, and controlled waste disposal, the permissible level of fecal coliform bacteria is 500 MPN/100 ml.

Ecologists BM spoke to said while it is important to keep a tab on the water quality of waterbodies and monitoring is an essential component of a regulatory mechanism, it has to be accompanied by penalising the polluters and bringing down pollution sources.
Unless regulatory authorities are vigilant, waterbodies will continue to receive pollutants— Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences, IISc
“Once the values have been monitored, it has to be followed up with steps to reduce pollution. Identifying the culprits and taking action against them is equally important. Moreover, considering the river network in the state, the number of monitoring stations and parameters being evaluated under NWMP are inadequate. Contamination of rivers is not just from untreated sewage but also from industries and agricultural runoff. These sources will add heavy metals; the current method does not include parameters that can indicate pollution from such sources. Similarly, the number of monitoring stations should be decided scientifically, based on sources of contamination and level of contamination, which is not being followed,” said Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science (IISc). The KSPCB tests four parameters - dissolved oxygen (DO) level, biochemical oxygen demand, total coliform, and fecal coliform levels - to deduce the water quality of the rivers. Experts highlighted that the regulatory mechanism is equally weak.


“While the number of industries along these river stretches has gone up, cities are discharging untreated sewage. For instance, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) has failed to treat sewage generated by the city despite ensuring the National Green Tribunal that raw sewage will be treated effectively. Unless regulatory authorities are vigilant, waterbodies will continue to receive pollutants. KSPCB is not performing its duty as per the mandate. Even the sample collection protocols are not being followed,” added Dr Ramachandra.