By Manoj Sharma 
 
 Over 10 days, 600+ personnel of the Karnataka Forest Dept fought the blaze with all that they had, battling temperatures in excess of 5500°Celsius and a severe shortage of food and water
 
 	 
 
 
 The temperature had touched 10000° Fahrenheit (upwards of 5500° Celsius) but the searing heat was not the only problem. Trees as tall as 70 feet were being licked by flames -- reducing timber to ashes in seconds – and producing huge amounts of noxious gases which made it impossible for the fire personnel to breathe. Most had left their oxygen masks behind as they had been summoned in an emergency. One of their colleagues, Guard Murigeppa, had fallen – left gasping for breath and then charred to death. Yet, the 600-odd fire personnel dug in their heels, battling the biggest blaze in decades in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 
 It took over 10 days and several false starts before the blaze was brought under control. The full assessment of the extent of damage is yet to be done. Bangalore Mirror spent a day in N Begur range, the worst affected area, to experience first-hand the trials and tribulations of the fire personnel who didn’t give up. 
 
 Massive flames, searing heat
 
 Nobody could have imagined that what started on February 18 as a stray blaze would result in the worst fire witnessed in decades in Bandipur. “In my entire career spanning close to 20 years I have neither heard of nor witnessed this kind of forest fire in any part of the country, leave alone Bandipur,” said Field Director T Heeralal.
 
 Like every other year, Heeralal and his men had set up 1,800 km of fire line (a gap in the forest vegetation which prevents the fire from spreading) in 13 ranges of Bandipur spread across 1,020 sq km of area. The team had spent Rs 4,800/km for setting up the fire line, which involves complete removal of vegetation – including roots.
 
 But the gusts of wind proved too strong; and the fire line couldn’t hold. Everything was being reduced to ashes. “At times the wind speed was up to 120-150 kmph. The flames turned violent and began spreading to other sides of the ranges and even to the neighbouring Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve,” said D Rajkumar, Managing Trustee of Wildlife Conservation Foundation who has been voluntarily assisting the KFD in Bandipur.
 
 Despite a severe shortage of frontline staffers, the forest department had very little turnaround time. “We diverted staff from adjoining ranges to Begur so that the fire could be quickly put out. But back-to-back drought had left several trees dried up; thick deposit of leaves and lantana bushes on the ground only provided fuel to the fire,” Heeralal said.
 
 “Trees as tall as 70 to 100 feet were burning to the ground, consumed by flames which were as high as 50 feet. Our men could not even get into the forests as the temperature in the vicinity was up to 10,000 degree Fahrenheit. Yet, they began fighting the fire with whatever they had from just 150 to 200 feet from the eye of the fire,” Heeralal said.
 
 
 In two shifts, they fought fire 24/7
 
 The battalion of more than 600 men were divided into different groups that worked in two 12-hour shifts. While one team worked from 7 am to 7 pm, the other took over from 7 pm to 7 am. A few took shelter in APCs while many other slept by the roadside waiting for their turn. For close to 15 days, the firefighters survived on oral rehydration salts, dehydrated food, glucose, fruits and water.
 
 Fire Brigade officials, including Assistant Fire Officers B Basavaraju and Manje Gowda from HD Kote, said that they had never seen such a massive fire. “Even though we had seen several types of fire, this was the worst as it gave us no chance to fight back. In fact, it haunts me even in my dreams; I see burning trees falling on me,” Basavaraju said.
 
 Shortage of oxygen, not courage
 
 The fire tenders found it tough to get into the core area due to narrow roads. “Ground staff went deep inside the forests with five Quick Response Vehicles with a capacity of 1,000-1,500 liters equipped with 0.5 HP engines. Supporting them, a few others accompanied the vehicles by throwing water and sand against the flames. As they kept going inside by dousing the fire, thick cloud of smoke began to engulf them. Soon, the visibility reduced; and the sound of burning branches and gushing winds was almost deafening. Thick smoke was bellowing out of the forests, cutting off oxygen. Even though personnel were supplied with masks and shoes, many had left them behind in the Anti-Poaching Camps (APCs) as they were summoned in a hurry.
 
 “The men were stuck in between; neither could they go forward, nor return. Carbon dioxide got into their lungs leaving them unconscious. It then that the martyr guard Murigeppa was charred to death and several others were left burnt. The nearest hospital was a Primary Health Centre which had only 3 to 4 beds and many were taken to far off hospitals,” Heeralal said.
 
 
 	 
  What the forest department lacked in terms of numbers, it more than made up in terms of help from locals and NGOs
 
 
 They got by with a little help from friends
 
 What the forest department lacked in terms of numbers, it more than made up in terms of help from locals and NGOs. “The NGOs and civilian groups were kind enough to supply us with enough food that kept us going. As many as 10 NGOs supplied us with tonnes of fruits, several gallons of water, snacks like cookies and medicines,” said a junior rank officer from one of the ranges of Bandipur.
 
 While the nearest water source was Kabini backwaters, KFD was helped by farmers in the adjoining areas who generously provided water to fire tending vehicles to douse the fire. The solar-powered borewells also worked all through the day filling tankers and vehicles with water.
 
 The next step: Assessing the damage
 
 The department now has a daunting task of organising a massive health check-up of its entire field staff after the major fire as many have experienced breathing problems and chest complications.
 
 It also needs to assess the impact of wildlife in the forest. And, most important of all, what caused the fire. “There have been indications that a few miscreants are behind the incident. We are probing to prove their role and even the CID is also probing the last year’s fire incident. Very soon the department will come out with the actual cause,” said another KFD officer.
 
 
 NASA gave max fi re alerts to Karnataka
 
  USA’s National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), which helps countries fight forest fires, gave out the maximum alerts for Karnataka, according to the Forest Survey of India. While Karnataka received 4,699 alerts, Andhra Pradesh received 2,521 alerts followed by Maharashtra with 2,313 alerts.
 In Karnataka, while 1,487 alerts were issued for Canara circle on February 18 and 19, Bandipur alone received 614 and Shivamogga region 1,327 alerts.