A film festival will showcase the wonder of our rivers and oceans, and how our rapaciousness for water, sand and electricity is killing our lifelines. Bengalureans, take note 
 
 Did you know that we know less about the ocean floor than the surface of the moon or even Mars? Knowledge of what lies beneath the oceans and rivers that bring us life is surprisingly scant. The information void is especially significant given the context of the Cauvery water-sharing dispute, and even the pollution of Bellandur Lake, which has made global
 headlines.
 
 In its debut edition, The Moving Waters Film Festival (movingwatersfilmfestival.org) hopes to address this gap by showing documentaries on oceans and rivers. They will highlight the connections between moving water ecosystems across the world. The two-day festival will showcase independent films from different countries and host talks by renowned scientists, conservationists, explorers and filmmakers. The hope is that this will be the first in a series of annual events travelling across the country.
 
 “Understanding the various ways in which we rely on water, whether for drinking, oil exploration, electricity generation, recreation or fishing, is increasingly important,” explains Tarun Nair, wildlife biologist.
 
 Over 30 films – varying in length from four minutes to over an hour – have been selected to reflect themes of exploration and adventure, ecosystems, conservation issues and people who depend on these rivers and oceans.
 
 There will also be talks by speakers. Siddharth Chakravarty has patrolled the high-seas with Sea Shepherd Global for several years, tackling poaching and working through the loopholes in international conservation law. John Kurien has worked with fishing communities in India and across the developing world for over four decades, helping to organise small scale fishermen’s efforts to maintain their traditional livelihoods. Arati Kumar-Rao is an independent environmental photographer and writer documenting effects of land use, river use and climate change on communities and ecosystems in South Asia. Nachiket Kelkar is an ecologist specialised on the biodiversity and fisheries of the Gangetic floodplains of Bihar. “Through their talks, the speakers will connect the themes of the films to their Indian counterparts by describing their personal engagement with actual places, people and events,” says Divya Karnad, marine ecologist and geographer. 
 
 Amoghavarsha, storyteller, photographer and filmmaker, whose film Kali (which will be screened at the festival) was instrumental in getting the Dandeli Anshi Forest Reserve renamed to the Kali Tiger Reserve, says the festival will give documentaries a platform and a way to reach an audience that doesn’t necessarily comprise wildlife enthusiasts. “A documentary is like feeding medicine, not French fries. Plus, there are no distribution avenues. This is a great avenue for people to see them,” he says.
 
 Kali, which focuses on the Kali river, and its importance to the hamlets situated alongside, was told through the story of a 100-year-old woman and her grandson’s quest to find its origin and offer prayers, as part of their ritual to honour the river for serving them and their crops. It was this focus, Amoghavarhsa believes, that led to the film’s huge impact. “People find it easier to connect with people, not animals. Viewers could see themselves in that story and were hence more likely to watch it as opposed to a wildlife film,” he says, candidly.
 
 The organisers hope to sensitise the urban populace to the ways in which our water usage and aquatic knowledge impacts ecosystems and our lives. “By starting the conversation with inland water use, and following the story through rivers to the impacts on coastal areas and oceans, we hope to encourage out-of-the-box thinking about how connected we are to all the water bodies on the planet,” says Nisarg Prakash, wildlife ecologist.
 
 Pertinent, in a city facing routine water shortages. “Bengaluru is a typical example of unplanned urbanisation in India. While several attempts have been made to generate awareness about freshwater in the city, few have gone beyond to trace the relations between inland cities and oceans through rivers. This festival will highlight these themes and relationships and should resonate quite widely with Bengalureans,” Nair adds.
 
 
 DIVYA KARNAD (Marine ecologist and geographer)
 
 After several years of staying in fishing villages across India, studying the ecology of the oceans, Karnad knows we are extremely dependent on nearshore or coastal waters. But it’s the same waters facing an onslaught of pollution and sedimentation due to dredging for ports and other modifications. “There are no one-size-fits-all solutions. I believe that understanding the multiple interests of diverse groups of people, with respect to using India’s marine resources is critical to being a well-informed citizen. This is where I think the perspectives brought in by the films and speakers at the Moving Waters Film Festival will help push the conversation on marine conservation beyond generalisations, towards identifying specific problems and innovative solutions,” she says. Excerpts from an interview:
 
 
 What do we need to know about our rivers and oceans? Why is it important to get involved?
 
 In India, so much of our physical and spiritual life revolves around rivers and oceans. We depend on rivers and oceans for fishing, drinking water, irrigation, oil exploration, transport and so much more. Yet rivers, like the Vrishabhavati in Bengaluru and others passing through Indian cities, are killed with pollution, and now considered gutters. This signature of river death is carried along to the river delta, killing estuaries and coastal areas.
 
 In cities, people tend to disconnect from the little things they do that could have serious impacts elsewhere. These impacts could be serious with respect to water because all water bodies are connected through ecological processes like groundwater seepage, rivers flowing into the sea, sea water being filtered by sand to fill wells in coastal areas and so on. While we may not immediately perceive the ill-effects of our habits, they may eventually come back to poison us. With so many rivers and such a beautiful coastline along the Arabian Sea, Karnataka has the potential to set an example in terms of regulating water use or counteracting oceanic pollution. Through engagement with these issues, it is possible for everyone to contribute to maintaining our water bodies.
 
 
 How do our lifestyles and urban livelihoods impact the oceanic ecosystem?
 
 Working directly with coastal people and in the oceans has taught me that the usual tropes, such as blaming fishermen for overfishing, or industries for polluting, are not helpful. My work with fisherpeople along the west coast of Ind-ia shows that these people are actively involved in conservation efforts, whether it is to fight the pollution in the rivers that drain into the sea next to their village, or to ensure that fishing is conducted equitably and sustainably in the sea. These people are really engaged with these issues. Instead, urban lifestyles are causing a disconnect that affect each and every one of us. Just as lifestyle diseases, like diabetes, increasingly affect our bodies, our lifestyles are in effect causing ecological diseases that are affe-cting increasingly large parts of our population. Urban dwellers are protected by services such as running water, garbage collection, sewage pipelines and industrial zoning regulations, so we don’t see the impacts of our way of life. But if we lived next to the thermal power plants that generate our electricity, or fish in the waters being dredged for ports, I am sure we would not be so passive.
 
 How can we address theseproblems?
 
 Solutions to our water issues require minor adjustments in our mindsets and expectations. For instance, in an increasingly water-starved city like Bengaluru, merely repairing or replacing the pipelines of the city’s water supply can help to plug leaks that waste almost half the water being diverted to the city. Increasing the number of sewage treatment plants to match the city’s population explosion can ensure that clean water flows downstream, reducing conflicts with other states. Conserving traditional agricultural practices of growing dryland crops in drier parts and maintaining traditional irrigation methods can prevent the need for controversial developmental interventions, such as river interlinking. While these suggestions have been made repeatedly, there has been very little social will to ensure that it gets done. Civic engagement with issues that affect us has to go beyond a single click of a mouse. People are both part of the problem and part of the solution. Just taking the trouble to arm themselves with more information about India’s rivers and oceans can take people a long way towards ensuring a better future for the next generation.
 
 
 What can the festival do in this regard?
 
 If as Aldous Huxley said, “We can only love what we know...”, getting to know the dynamics and nuances of these water bodies in India and around the world will better help us connect to these important ecosystems. I hope some of the films in this festival will help the audience see the fantastic potential of rivers and oceans. Once we can imagine them to be better, we can start working towards this goal.
 
 I hope the audience leaves with a sense of curiosity and wonder about rivers and oceans and it encourages people to explore Karnataka’s rivers and coastal areas. If some people start to question the ways in which they personally use water and its impacts on the environment, the festival will have met one of its important goals.
 
 NISARG PRAKASH (wildlife biologist)
 
 Prakash believes waterfalls, rivers and beaches are popular with people because we have memories associated with them. But urban centres and our lifestyles isolate those values and replace them with more utilitarian ones. So, rivers begin to mean drinking water, electricity and sand, instead of “strands that hold the entire landscape (and the life in it) together”, as he says. “Now, more water is stagnating behind dams than reaching the sea.” Having worked to document the Cauvery, he discusses how the politics surrounding the river impact its ecology and the lives of those who depend on it. Excerpts from an interview:
 
 
 What impact does water politics have on the otters in the Cauvery?
 
 We use otters as a flagship species to understand how the river has changed in terms of ecology and its resilience to everything we inflict upon it – unsustainable forms of cultivation, dams, sand mining, water diversion, pollution, etc. Life along the river is greatly affected – the excessive and wasteful consumption of water for sugarcane and rice cultivation or illegal mining of sand from the river or diversion to meet the needs of cities and towns. The people who say they are fighting for their share of the river water give little thought to how water is being wasted because of leaky piping and excessive mining which leaves the river dry even before the summer.
 
 
 What about fishermen, for whom the river is a lifeline?
 
 Urban dwellers and their and drinking water and electricity needs, farmers who want their crop of water-intensive sugarcane and rice…they all get attention when it comes to the river water fracas. But fishermen are never truly represented in this conflict. They are also the ones most directly impacted by how we abuse our rivers – in this case the Cauvery. Their problems are far more serious – that of a drastically falling fish catch, the river being severely modified by sand mining and dams which in turn affects fish, pollution from agriculture and more. The people who have depended on the river for the longest now stand to lose their livelihood due to the way the river is abused by more powerful groups of people (farmers, city-dwellers, etc). And fishermen are mostly powerless since they form a very small percentage of the votebank, are mostly unorganised and often are the lower-most strata in the countryside.
 
 
 How do our lifestyles and urban livelihoods impact the Cauvery’s fragile ecosystem? What do we need to know about the river?
 
 That it is not a tap we can turn on and off. It is more than just water, sand and electricity. It is important we stop using rivers as purely a resource that needs to be exploited. A river needs to flow, and water reaching the sea is not water wasted. All of the water is not meant to be diverted to fields but the river has supported life for eons and they have a right that needs to be honoured. The Cauvery once had large natural sandbanks, forests along the river edge (riparian forests) and plenty of fish. Some of this still remains in the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, but we have lost it elsewhere. We need to be conscious that the homes we aspire to build in our already crowded city not just consume water from the river, but also sand, at the same time affecting lives of fishermen, otters, and numerous other animals and birds. We can start by learning to share the river not just with fellow humans but with wildlife too.
 
 Now we have sugarcane cultivation in millet-producing areas and sucking up groundwater as well as emptying out our rivers. Our thirst for sand from the Cauvery has almost killed the river. Almost all the sand we use in Bengaluru and cities and towns nearby comes from the Cauvery basin alone. Sand in the river meant more water during the summer months, but with the sand gone the water is too and all we can do is blame the monsoon! Native vegetation along the river played a role in this too, but everything’s been hacked away.
 
 
 
 How can we address these problems?
 
 To address this means we really have to stop fighting over water and start thinking about the river. Restore the river – keep the sand in it, restore the banks. Switch to less water intensive forms of cultivation. Restore village ponds and tanks, rely less on the Cauvery for all our needs. Fix leaky piping to avoid colossal wastage. Stop just praying for a good monsoon every year and get serious about water.
 
 
 How can a festival such as this promote conservation efforts?
 
 More than anything – to show what a river is, used to be and can still be. Stories and visuals from different parts of the country and the world serve as a constant reminder that we can do better to treat our rivers better. Most of the success stories are those that invol-ve communities; communities that rise up to protect their rivers. Someti-mes, laws with the help of science step in to help restore our rivers by advocating removal of dams. Dams have been such a controversial topic for so long. Most have long outlived their benefits and only end up choking a river. Festivals like these seed new ideas, something that one day will grow to be important. It is also a good place to meet people and collaborate.