To put an end to wandering and roadside camping inside protected forest area, the Karnataka forest department has now started timing vehicles passing through Nagarahole National Park. Entries are made on tablet computers at the entry gate and cross-checked at the exit gate for the time taken to reach there. The tracking system may soon be extended to other forest areas in the state too. 
 
 For the last few days, officials at Nagarahole National Park, a favourite haunt for Bengalureans, are noting down the time of entry and exit of vehicles. Overstaying in the forest area is illegal.
 
 To begin with, the forest department officials calculated the time required to cover the distance, at an average speed of 30 km/hr. Entries are made on tablet computers at the entry and exit gates with the driver’s phone and vehicle registration numbers.
 
 The time taken to travel the distance is calculated at the exit gate to ensure that the vehicle had not overstayed inside the forest premises.
 
 The development, believe forest officials, will discourage people from loitering into the forest.
 
 So, if you are wondering what brought this on -- beer bottles, most likely.
 
 A forest department official said they were frequently finding beer bottles strewn on the sides along the road. It proved that people would park their vehicles on the roadside and drink. It was a dangerous trend, considering Nagarahole was an ecologically sensitive area.
 
 The park was declared 37th Project Tiger reserve and was also a part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. It had a rich variety of plants and animals and was also poised to get the UNESCO World Heritage tag.
 
 Assistant Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) KD Belliappa said they had identified six routes that passed through the Nagarahole reserve. “For example, if a vehicle is coming from the Veerahosahalli side and exiting through Kutta, it should traverse the distance in an hour at a speed of about 30 km/hr. Speeding can be harmful for animals. Once an entry is made, the personnel at the exit gate can be updated. If a commuter is late, he/she has to mandatorily give a reason, which will be updated in the server and sent to higher authorities.”