“They’re actually going to take a bunch of debris, shredded up tires, golf balls and things like that, and under very high pressure shoot it into the preventer itself and see if they can clog it up and stop the leak,” Allen said.

The report said it was not clear when such a plan might be put in place.

The latest effort to plug the leak comes as British Petroleum was reassessing its options, one day after an attempt to lower a steel-and-concrete dome over the leak hit a setback as ice-like crystals clogged the inside of the dome, the report said.

No end in sight 
The uncontrolled spill, which could become the worst in US history, is expected to drift farther west, away from Florida’s popular beaches but into the important shipping channels and rich seafood areas off the central Louisiana coast, west of the Mississippi Delta.

The environmental group Greenpeace issued an unconfirmed report late on Sunday that traces of oil had been found onshore at Port Eads, the southernmost point of Louisiana, which is accessible only by boat or helicopter.

At least 5,000 barrels (210,000 gallons/795,000 litres) of oil a day have been gushing unchecked into the Gulf since the Deepwater Horizon rig exploded on April 20, rupturing the well and killing 11 crew members.

The spill threatens economic and ecological disaster on Gulf Coast tourist beaches, wildlife refuges and fishing grounds across four states. It has forced President Barack Obama to rethink plans to open more waters to drilling.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration projects that, with brisk onshore winds expected from the southeast, the points of potential contact of the spill with the mainland will multiply between now and Wednesday.

The two Louisiana parishes directly west of the delta declared states of emergency on Sunday in anticipation of a battle to keep oil from coming ashore. Additional staging areas for the spill response have been set up in that area. Tourism and fishing have become the first victims of the oil spill crisis.

Fishing is suspended in parts of the Gulf waters and much of the Louisiana coast. Many tourists have been scared away by reports of reddish, putrid water offshore, even though the coast is currently unaffected.