SC refuses to stay ban on vehicle movement at night in Bandipur
 
 The Supreme Court has refused to stay the ban on vehicle movement inside Bandipur forest during night time. The Kerala government had approached the apex court against the ban.
 
 Read: Will Kerala be 4th-time lucky on Bandipur night traffic?
 
 Kerala proposed alternative routes to connect Karnataka and Kerala and the case was adjourned by eight weeks on Friday.
 
 While hearing the case argued by senior advocate Gopal Subramanium, the three-judge bench of the SC headed by Chief Justice HL Dattu observed that forests belonged to the animals that lived there and not to people who built roads through it.
 
 The movement of vehicles at night on the national highway that passes through Bandipur has been stopped since 2011.
 
 Kerala sought movement of vehicles in a convoy three times during the night as travellers were suffering.
 
 The deputy commissioner of Chamarajanagar had imposed the ban which was later withdrawn by the Karnataka government.
 
 But after a directive by the Karnataka High Court, the ban was reimposed.
 
 Subramanium argued that only 14 wild animals had died due to vehicle movement through the forest between 2000 and 2012. The court observed that a tiger had also been killed.
 
 National Highway 212 runs through the Bandipur National Park and traffic movement on it at night had become a major reason for unnatural death of wild animals.
 
 A PIL in the Karnataka HC claimed that over a hundred animals, including six elephants, two tigers, two leopards and dozens of deer and antelopes had died due to injuries sustained in vehicular accidents.
 
 The majority of such accidents were caused by trucks.
 
 The PIL sought stopping of vehicular movement even during the day time.
 
 NH 212 runs for 17 kilometres inside Bandipur connecting Karnataka with Kerala.
 
 Bandipur covers an area of 874 sq kms.
 
 Along with the adjoining Nagarhole National Park, Mudumalai National Park and Wynad Wildlife Sanctuary, it is the largest protected area in south India and home to the largest number of tigers in India. Bandipur is home to endangered species like tigers, leopards, dhole and sloth bear, apart from thousands of other animal species.