By Iffath Fathima

As summer pushes reptiles out of burrows, rescuers say people mustn’t scare, harm them; best to call professionals

With summer setting in, the number of snake rescues in the city have increased. Snakes have been spotted near compounds of homes, vacant sites and in bushes. Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) has been attending around 20 calls in this regard each day in each zone.
 
On Sunday, a resident of Indiranagar called the BBMP helpline to inform he had spotted a snake, below a staircase. The resident was very worried and scared as he had children at home and asked the officials to arrange a rescue immediately.
 
BBMP wildlife rescuers have been receiving many such calls from other localities including Rajajinagar, Banaswadi, Koramangala, Yelahanka, KR Puram and HSR Layout too.

A Hisss Mohan, who is a wildlife warden at BBMP, told BM, “We have been receiving many calls at day and at night. People spot snakes in drains or at garbage dumping spots and call us. It’s difficult to rescue snakes in drains. Many times, before the rescuer reaches the location, the snake disappears. Hence, we focus on rescue missions where snakes are found inside houses or in compounds or garden areas.”

Mohan pointed out, snakes generally exist outdoors too, but in summer due to higher temperatures, they move around more to find cooler spots.
 
He also said that it is mating season for some.


 .
 
“The number of King Cobra rescues is large as it is mating season for them. The females emanate a scent to attract the males during this time.”

He added, the snakes go to places with more rats as rats are their favourite prey.

Rescuers BM spoke to said rodents, reptiles and animals that live in burrows step outside during the summer as it is difficult to stay burrowed inside due to the heat.
 
They added, during monsoon too, when their burrows are flooded they cannot stay in and tend to move around.

 Many times, people gather around the snake... this petrifies it. One must leave them alone and act calmly during such situations–a rescuer 
BM found, many spotting snakes tend to panic and try to harm them or try doing something themselves to shoo the snakes away. But rescuers said it is dangerous to do so as snakes could react badly and end up biting.

“We need to create a distance – atleast a distance of 10 to 20 feet – from the snake. It is important to call a rescuer who will handle it professionally. Many times, people gather around the snake and this petrifies it. One must leave it alone and act calmly during such situations. It is also important to keep our surroundings clean to keep snakes away,” said a rescuer.

Venomous or not

Russell Viper: venomousRat Snake: non-venomousCobra: venomousCommon Krait: venomous