A rare guest dropped in on residents of Subramanyanagar, one known for its immense strength and swiftness of foot. But this guest had to be carried off in a basket!    Monitor lizards are rarely found in residential areas, but wildlife sleuths were called in on Monday to rescue one from Subramanyanagar. The volunteers believe that the reptile, weighing about a kilogram and just under four feet in length, was brought into the city by poachers. It was found in a bag and its hind limbs were fractured. Sleuths say poachers usually break the limbs to prevent the reptile from escaping.    Monitor lizards, which usually habitat rocky terrain, are a protected species under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act and catching or killing one is as grave an offence as killing a tiger.    Superstition, however, fuels a flourishing illegal trade in body parts of these reptiles. Considered one of the strongest animals, these reptiles are hunted for its meat, and the blood is mixed with rum and consumed. It is considered a stimulant, experts say. The fat is made into ghee and is believed to give one who consumes it enormous strength. Body parts of the lizard are also used to make medicine to treat erectile dysfunction. The meat is also in great demand.   “The monitor lizard was found in poor condition,” said Rajesh S, a wildlife volunteer involved in the rescue. “It was stressed and its nails were broken. When a veterinarian checked the reptile, he confirmed that its limbs had been fractured. It appears that it was brought into the city by miscreants to sell it. However before they clinch a deal, members of the public noticed the bag and alerted us.”   Wildlife expert Sharath Babu said, “These creatures move very quickly. Those in illegal wildlife trade fracture or damage its limbs to ensure it doesn’t escape. If the creature had strayed from its habitat, it would have been in good condition, but this one was found with fractured hind limbs. Superstitious belief is fuelling this rampant illegal trade and it is proving to be a serious threat to monitor lizards.”   The lizard is now being treated by wildlife volunteers, but they say, that unlike regular rescues, it would take a while for the lizard to be released. Apart from broken limbs, the animal also suffers from malnourishment, dehydration and injury to its claws. It would take a month at least for it to recuperate fully.