By Garima Prasher

Bannerghatta National Park’s passive adoption programme for animals is a hit among schools with hundreds of children pitching in to care for them financially

An Indian grey wolf, an African grey parrot, a tiger, a porcupine and an elephant at Bannerghatta Biological Park are the darlings of the many young minds who come to visit them. These animals -- although they may not know it -- get a tad more love and care than the rest as they have been passively adopted by hundreds of school children as part of the BBP’s animal adoption (passive) programme that was launched two years ago. So far, five animals at the zoo have been passively adopted, christened, and taken care of financially by four city-based schools.

The passive adoption programme was launched by BBP after the zoo faced a financial crunch due to a dip in revenue from lockdowns. In passive adoption, the patron pays a lump sum amount and the officials use that amount to care for the animal.

“We have passively adopted an eight-year-old tiger and have named him Mithun. I love animals and I am looking forward to seeing Mithun when we visit the park next time. It gives me a feeling that I am responsible for him,” said Tvisha Vibhu Malige, a student of Orchid International School in BTM Layout. The school passively adopted Mithun only a week ago.

According to the school, the idea behind adopting the tiger was to send out a message about protecting wildlife and their habitats. Under the initiative, 20 students from the school formed a council to sensitise their peers and raised the money required for adopting Mithun.

“The tiger was a natural choice as it is our national animal. Moreover, the number of tigers in the wild is dwindling and we wanted to play our part by sensitising the students,” said Manjula B, Principal, Orchids - The International School, BTM Layout.

While students from Orchid are fostering Mithun, Ekya School children have taken an Indian grey wolf and an African grey parrot as their own. They did this by raising the money required for passive adoption through various crowdfunding and contributions.

“We passively adopted these two animals in March this year. We went for the adoption to voice our support for biodiversity conservation and instil compassion for animals among the students,” said Prasidh Pradeep, a student of Ekya School, BTM Layout.

The animals were passively adopted under the school’s Service-Learning Programme where the students are allowed to be involved in activities beyond their academics.

“The adoption will create a sense of participation among the children thereby creating a bond with these animals. It will allow students to take ownership of the animals’ well-being and experience the joy of spending time with them. Besides, it will also provide a source of revenue for better zoo management and better up-keep of animals,” said Asha Doris, head of school, Ekya School.

Raintree School in Jayanagar decided to go with an Indian Crested Porcupine and named him Herbert.
 
“The students adoringly called him ‘Herby’. We passively adopted him in 2020. Since physical classes were not on, the school management went on with the process on behalf of the students.
 
“We decided to passively adopt a porcupine as we felt not many people would choose them due to their spiky appearance. We took care of Herby for one year and we are looking to passively adopt a few more animals this year so students can experience the process first-hand,” said Jayant Gauri, founder, Raintree School.

According to BBP officials, an elephant has been adopted by GJR School, another city-based school. All the funds cover food, maintenance and veterinary health care expenses of the animals.

The zoo has multiple adoption plans for those who want to adopt the animals. They can be passively adopted under ‘diamond class’, ‘gold class’, ‘silver class’ and ‘bronze class’.
 
The adoption rate of animals under ‘diamond class’ varies between Rs three lakh and Rs 75,000 per year; the rate of animals adoption under ‘gold class’ varies between Rs 50,000 and Rs 20,000 per annum; the rate of animals’ adoption under ‘silver class’ varies between Rs 15,000 and Rs 10,000, and the rate of animals adoption under ‘bronze class’ varies between Rs 5,000 and Rs 1,000 per year.