The man in the mirror
 Actor Imran Khan gets ready to face the cameras during a promotional event in Mumbai. Who says vanity is the preserve of women?
 
 Q and A
 What to do when you get on the wrong side of a superstar? Kunal Kohli may well be asking himself this question. The other day, at a felicitation ceremony organised by makers of timepieces, Shah Rukh Khan was at his inimitable best, grilling the film directors present; these included Tarun Mansukhani and Puneet Malhotra. While he put them through the wringer too, SRK saved the best for the last when he asked Kunal Kohli which was the worst film he had seen in recent times, insisting that the director of several recent forgettable films answer him. In the face of Shah Rukh’s sharp insistence and the media’s unblinking gaze, Kohli blurted out Delhi 6 which featured SRK’s current costar Abhishek Bachchan. Up went the devilish eyebrows as Kohli dug his metaphoric grave and mumbled something about being confused by Kala bandar…At the end of a tortuous 15 minutes, Kohli regained poise, asking SRK instead to name the worst film he had seen. Prompt came the reply: “Now Kunal, I don’t really want to embarrass you with that.” Ouch! Makes us wonder if there’s some history behind the bad blood. Watch this space for more.
 
 Riding high
 She was 35 when she first started playing the ‘male’ sport. Five years later, Rina Shah is ready for her first match with her own team, riding with the ‘boys,’ Samir Suhag, Gaurav Sehgal, Chirag Parekh and Karan Ahmed. At her first Polo match, the sassy designer watched from the sidelines, one with the ladies in chiffon and pearls and oversized sunglasses. But the self-confessed adventure junkie wanted to get on to the field and play instead. She has been training hard, and though she is far from being a top-notch professional, she knows she is quite good at it. And her investment in the sport is running deeper. First she designed a line inspired by polo, then came her own purchases. She owns two horses — Butterscotch and Hercules — and intends to get a couple more at least. But more than anything else, Shah sounds justifiably thrilled to have mastered the tough, extremely physical sport at her age. (“I just turned 40” she trills. Who would’ve guessed!) Her enthusiasm is infectious — she tells us that some of her gal pals have now been inspired to learn riding. As far as building her own team is concerned, she smiles, “I always wanted to own my own sports team.” The Rinaldi Polo Team will play its first 4 Goal tournament at the amateur Riders’ Club next week and we can tell you Shah is not just going to play for fun, she is eyeing the big win as well.
 
 To foreign shores
 After shooting for some big music festivals such as Vh1 Supersonic and CirkusIndigo, photographer Ashish Parmar goes international for the first time with the Future music Festival Asia (FMFA) at Malaysia. He told the diarist that he will be freezing international DJs such as Deadmau5, Armin Van Buuren, ERIC PRYDZ, Paul Van Dyk, Pharrell Williams and others in his frames. Parmar also said that he would probably be the first Indian photographer to make it to FMFA. The diarist is checking on that. From shooting wildlife to DJs, Parmar has made quite the transition.
 
 Amlani’s new venture
 CEO and Managing Director of Impresario Riyaaz Amlani is back in the city with a new venture... something Bangaloreans are awaiting with bated breath. The first outlet of Social, his next in the city after Smoke House Deli, is opening next week at Church St. A cafe by day and bar by night, it will be a collaborative workspace for creative people, where artistic people can collaborate face to face and not over the web. 
 
 Tailpiece
 City gallerist Deepa Subramanian is currently thanking the weather gods of London for being kind to her as she makes the rounds of galleries there, including the Tate Modern. She has also been visiting the artists’ studios in a quest for artworks. The diarist wishes more sunshine to her. Just don’t bring the rain gods to namma city.