By Garima Prasher

If all goes to plan, wildlife enthusiasts can go on a safari in Tiger Reserve buffer zone from May; this is likely to ease traffic in core areas

The Nagarhole Tiger Reserve is all set to become the first reserve in Karnataka to have a safari in the buffer zone. According to the Nagarhole forest officials, the long-awaited proposal to introduce buffer zone tourism has finally received the government’s nod. And if all goes to plan, the safari will be up and running in a couple of months from now.

Notably, the forest department had sent a proposal to the Chief Conservator of Forest, seeking permission to start the safari. “We have received the approvals recently and are in the planning phase to establish the infrastructure. Currently, we are processing the detailed project report and will soon be calling for the tenders. If things go as per the plan, the safari will be available for the wildlife enthusiasts by the first week of May,” said Mahesh Kumar, director, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve.

Officials say that the main aim of the buffer zone safari is to reduce pressure from the core area of the tiger reserve. As per the National Tiger Conservation Authority guidelines, tourism activities in the core areas of any tiger reserve should be negligible. This ensures better conservation and viability of the tiger population.

“Tiger conservation has two major components. While the core zone of a tiger reserve is expected to be an inviolate area to ensure successful tiger breeding, the buffer zone serves as a shock absorber. With the introduction of buffer zone tourism, there will be less stress on the core zone. The core area will now focus on habitat management and conservation activities.
 
While we do have eco-tourism in the core zone currently, we aim to bring it down gradually so that there is minimum human interference,” said a senior official.

  With buffer zone tourism, there will be less stress on the core zone. The core can focus on habitat management and conservation–Official, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve 
At Nagarhole, currently, eco-tourism is happening only in the core zone. Forest officials say that while they plan to reduce this activity in the core region significantly, immediate removal is not viable as it will impact the livelihood of many stakeholders in and around the area.

“We cannot bring down the core zone activities immediately. With so many stakeholders involved, even a gradual cut down of the activities will be a challenge,” added Mahesh Kumar.

The buffer zone tourism initiative will also give a livelihood to villagers and the tribal population in the area. “At least around 30-50 members will be employed in the first leg of the project. As of now, we are planning to start only the jungle safari. While we do have scope for other nature-based activities, we need to examine the pros and cons of expanding the project.
 
The area is rich in wildlife with tigers, elephants, leopards, sloth bears and some other animals too, making activities such as nature walks and day hikes challenging. We will expand the scope gradually,” said Mahesh Kumar.