The malaise of political appointments has finally crossed the human-animal divide! In a move that has raised the hackles of wildlife enthusiasts, a departing BJP government has rewarded two of its MLAs with honorary wildlife warden posts, throwing the norms governing such appointments to the winds.    The two worthies, Ravi Subramanya and C N Ashwath Narayan, were appointed to the posts on February 20, along with another politician.    Incredibly, even though the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act stipulates that a wildlife warden should reside in the area coming under his jurisdiction, Basavangudi MLA L A Ravi Subramanya has been appointed wildlife warden of far-off Chamarajnagar (home to the BRT tiger reserve). Malleswaram MLA Dr C N Ashwath Narayan has been charged with the guardianship of Bangalore Urban district.    “This is first time that politicians are getting such posts. It is both surprising and shocking; how can someone with no experience in handling wildlife issues become a wildlife warden? Clearly, these are political appointments,” a wildlife enthusiast told Bangalore Mirror.   Under the Act, honorary wildlife wardens have wide-ranging powers, including inspecting forest licences and the powers of entry, search, seizure and detention. These apart, the state government can delegate other powers to them.   The government had appointed 33 wildlife wardens in March 2012. Since then, a proposal to appoint 13 more persons to the post has been rejected repeatedly by the forest ministry on the grounds that no further vacancies exist. It is surprising, therefore, that the two MLAs and another politician were appointed to the post last month.    “The Act states that the appointments should be made by the government based on recommendations by the state wildlife advisory board, the jurisdictional deputy conservator of forests and the chief wildlife warden. This was not followed in the case of these three appointments and the state government appointed them in a jiffy. Again, a city MLA has been made honorary wildlife warden of a sensitive zone like Chamarajnagar. Can these appointees really deliver?” a source remarked.    Besides, wildlife enthusiasts have questioned the qualifications of two of the three new appointees, Ashwath Narayan and another neta. “We don’t know what wildlife expertise they have, or if the DCF and the chief wildlife warden recommended their names,” said the source.    Strangely enough, Ashwath Narayan was not aware of his selection. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, he said, “I’m not aware of my appointment. However, we have been working for wildlife conservation. I have been planting saplings. They must have considered this in choosing me for the post. It is not as if one has to be an expert to be an honorary wildlife warden.”    On the other hand, Ravi Subramanya justified his appointment, citing his 25-year association with wildlife conservation. “Since my student days, I have involved myself in wildlife conservation. I am well-acquainted with places like Bandipur, Madhumalai, Dandeli and Nagarhole. I have also participated in the elephant and tiger censuses. I have also raised wildlife issues in the state assembly. My appointment will help me raise wildlife issues in the assembly more effectively than an ordinary warden can,” he told Bangalore Mirror.