FIR registered after disturbing cruelty to animals comes to light

In an alarming incident, Ganesh, a 65-year-old resident of the Railway colony third stage, was found to have unlawfully confined animals and birds in deplorable conditions. Rescuers, including Hima Prasad, Asha Robert, and Lumeena, were alerted to the situation by a concerned resident. Upon investigation, they discovered that Ganesh was an illegal breeder who had subjected two dogs, one cat, four calves and goats, roosters, chickens, and a parakeet to horrific living conditions.

The animals were kept in filthy enclosures, covered in excrement from dogs, cows, and goats. They were reportedly not provided food or water, resulting in severe malnourishment and dehydration. Even during rainy weather, the dogs were left outdoors in cages. Following their rescue, an FIR was filed at Kadugondanahalli police station.

Upon arriving at the scene, Hima and Asha were shocked by the deplorable condition of the place. “We were shocked to see the place where the animals lived in such unhygienic conditions, and the place smelled. Ganesh’s family told us he was a breeder and had a mental health issue wherein he would get animals and treat them like this. The local neighbours who spoke to us stated that they had seen cases where he would dump garbage in the cages of dogs and leave them there, and they had seen animals dying as well. It was unfortunate to see the animals in such a condition. 

One of the pugs was bleeding from its nose, and there was a pregnant French bulldog and a Labrador that was extremely dehydrated. None of the animals looked like they were fed. The family said he would give them something to eat occasionally or leave them in the same state,” said Hima.


 .
On September 11, KB Harish, an SPCA and PFA anti-cruelty officer member, lodged an FIR at the Kadugondanahalli police station. He said, “The place looked like it hadn’t been cleaned for 8-10 months. Twelve animals were seized, including a parakeet protected under Schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
 
 We were shocked to see the place where the animals lived in such unhygienic conditions. Ganesh’s family told us he was a breeder and had a mental health issue–Hima Prasad, Rescuer

A Persian cat was tied around its neck, and when we released it, the fur around its neck was all gone. Some calves and goats were captured; however, as Ganesh learned that the police were coming, he shifted them to another place with the help of some outsiders. However, the rescued animals were shifted to the CUPA animal centre and Second Chance Sanctuary. The police officials were supportive and acted to the complaint.”

The rescued animals are now receiving the care and attention they desperately need.