Animals have the right of way in the forest. But at the Bannerghatta National Park in the city, it is doesn’t seem to work in favour of animals!

Sample this: A black Indian bear almost got killed after an unknown speeding vehicle which used take people on a safari knocked it down four days ago. The bear is now being treated for a broken jaw.

The incident is suspected to have occurred on Oct 3 when a trek was organised inside the park by the forest department as part of the wildlife week celebrations. The eight-year-old bear, named Madan, was found injured by a bear keeper of the rescue centre inside the park.

Narrating the incident, a senior official from forest department said: “The Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation runs many buses inside the national park as part of their safari. The bus drivers are very rash and also make lot of noise while driving. On Oct 3, one such bus must have run over the bear which caused this injury.”

Madan was bleeding for more than two hours before it was reported to the officials who took the bear to emergency care. “The bear was not only bleeding, but its jaw was hanging unusually. The bear was also very irritated as it was under going a lot of pain”, he said.

The bear was taken to the Zoo hospital in Bannerghatta National Park about eight kilometres away from the bear rescue centre. “Since the animal was under severe pain, it was restless and so we tranquillised it before operating. As a head injury was suspected, the bear was shifted to veterinary hospital in Hebbal”, the official said.

When an X-ray of the head was taken, the doctors noticed that there was a crack in its jaw. “At first we thought it was just a fracture. But at a closer look we realised that the lower jaw was broken into two halves. We immediately took the animal to surgery”, he said.

After a two-and-a-half hour surgery, Madan was saved and a wire to join both the parts of the jaw was inserted. “We have joined the jaw with a stainless steel wire which will be a permanent piece. We also had to amputate one claw which will not grow back and is very painful. But we were able to save the bear and that is a big deal”, he said.

The bear has also sustained severe blow in the left part of the head several bruises on the body and a wound on his foreleg. “It looks like the vehicle hit it from the left side. The blow has shaved out a part of the hair on the animal’s head. Today, the bear was conscious, but ate only a small portion of food we gave it”, he said.

The official said that there were 86 bears in the rescue centre and it was high time that vehicle drivers were sensitised on the importance of driving slowly in the park. In fact, most of the times, these vehicles are driven at great speeds or in a callous manner. Some of the drivers are seen clicking pictures of tourists instead of focusing on the drive. BEAR FACTS

The black Indian bear is also called the Asian black bear.

The rescue centre at Bannerghatta National Park has 86 bears rescued from all over the state.

The rescue centre officials scatter food for the bear all around the park to make them feel like they are in the wild and hunt for food.