Seattle: Whether they are hunters or the hunted, these cunning animals are all masters of disguise who can fool even the most beady-eyed passer by into believing they are not there. Some hide under lily pads, some dissolve into the bark of a tree while others slip seamlessly into the snow, either to hide from a hungry predator or silently stalk an unwitting prey. But the one thing from which they cannot hide is the all-seeing camera lens of photographer Art Wolfe.
   Wolfe spent over 35 years roaming the deserts of Africa, the rainforests of South America, the mountains of the United States and snow plains of Canada to capture wildlife at its most invisible. He has travelled through every continent in the world in tireless pursuit of more subjects for his chef-d'oeuvre ""Vanishing Act"" that dates back to the 1980s, reports Daily Mail. 
   Wolfe said, ""Throughout my career as a nature photographer, I have challenged myself to present new perspectives on well-documented subjects. Like most of my projects, this collection has been a long time in the making. Finding and filming animals on location is an exhilarating and painstaking process. I'm still adding to the project even now. 
   ""Conventional wildlife photography calls for isolating the subject by selective focus, this way the animal is clearly defined. Photographers always want to show off their subject. And yet, is this really the way an animal is viewed by the human eye? Not quite. We don't have the isolating abilities that a telephoto lens provides. On most occasions an animal remains somewhat concealed by the clutter of its natural habitat a necessity of survival for both predator and prey. 
   ""I have basically employed three different photographic approaches and purposely worked to enhance the difficulty to find the camouflaged subject as difficult as it is in the wild to see animals that do not want to be seen. Since it is impossible to capture all the distractions to the senses of an entire landscape in a photo, I worked to make it visually challenging by using depth of field, scale and placement and confusing the subject,"" Wolfe said.
   Wolfe is also a successful book publisher and television producer. He has published at least one book a year since 1989. The 61-year-old from Seattle said, ""It is in the wild places, where the edge of the earth meets the corners of the sky, the human spirit is fed.""