But night ban stays at tiger reserve, says Karnataka Forest Department

Amid a series of protests in Kerala against the night traffic ban in Bandipur, the Karnataka Forest Department has assured that there will be no hindrance to the movement of traffic during the day time through Bandipur Tiger Reserve as the night ban stays for now. 

KFD released a statement on Saturday, which says, “It has come to the notice of the department that few people are organising agitations, dharnas and campaigns demanding NH 212 (NH 766) be kept open during the day time. There is no such order or proposal before the government to close NH 212 (NH 766) during the day hours and the road will remain open from 6 am to 9 pm as usual. It is hereby clarified to the public at large that the national highway from Kollegal to Kozhikode passing through Bandipur Tiger Reserve will be open from 6 am to 9 pm and there is no restriction on traffic movement during these hours.”

Tourism Minister CT Ravi too has recently spoken in favour of the night traffic ban. 

Thousands of people have been protesting against the ban in Kerala as they say that the local traders are suffering due to trouble in accessing agricultural and livestock products in neighbouring Karnataka districts.

Recently Wayanad MP Rahul Gandhi too had come out in support of those protesting against the night traffic ban that was first imposed in 2009, in Kerala and had drawn flak from environmentalists and wildlife activists for saying so. 

Jospeh Hoover, Former member, State Board for Wildlife (Karnataka) says, “Heavy carriage vehicles have been moving about unhindered from 6am to 9pm on NH 766 (hitherto NH212), which traverses 30km through the core habitat of Bandipur tiger reserve. On an average, 650 lorries and trucks use the highway every day. As many as 90 buses and 300 cars/ jeeps use NH 766 each day. The numbers increase on weekends and holidays. A ten-day data collected from Moolehole checkpost (Karnataka border), reflects that neither local communities nor traders are being affected.”

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests Punati Sridhar says, “We have always been in support of the ban. In fact it would be ideal to have ban from 6 pm to 6 am as animals stray out at dawn and dusk with greater risk of accidents and further they need a traffic free corridor to move across. We are also not for any elevated alternate highway in place of the present corridor. The night traffic ban will continue.”