Indian species takes beating from cannibalistic Red-eared Sliders
 
 	It’s a whodunit with all the elements of mystery, suspense, blood and gore, and it’s finally been cracked. 

 For a while now, the injured and dead Indian Pond Terrapin and Indian Flapshell turtles at a water source of Dakshinamukha Nanditheertha temple, located near Malleswaram’s Kadu Malleshwara temple, had left wildlife sleuths puzzled. It now appears that water wars with others of their ilk was behind the fatalities. 

 	Wildlife sleuths say devotees were letting in Red-eared Slider turtles inside the water body to fulfill vows, besides some releasing their pets too, putting the different turtle species in direct confrontation with each other. 

 	They are now gearing up to protect the remaining Indian Pond Terrapin -- which is protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act -- by preventing the conflict between Indian and exotic species. 

 	“The peculiar issue has been persistent for long and we have been getting rescue calls,” Prasanna Kumar, a BBMP forest cell volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror. “We used to get between four to seven calls a month, and the turtles would either be badly injured or dead. However, we have now found that it is due to a conflict between the Red-eared Slider turtle and the Indian species.” 

 	Just last week, a badly injured turtle was rescued with injuries near its neck. Closer inspection of its wounds revealed the Red-eared Sliders in the water body were responsible. “Red-eared Sliders are basically cannibalistic in nature,” Sharath R Babu, environment advisor, BBMP forest cell told Bangalore Mirror. “Initially, they look attractive with their resemblance to Rs 5 coins and people buy them for their aquariums. But in four to five years, they grow big enough to bite off the fingers of people,” he said, adding that that is the stage when people abandon them in the water bodies. However, this poses a threat to the existing aquatic life in the ponds. “Red-eared turtles are also potential carriers of salmonella and can affect the local population with bacterial diseases that cause diarrhoea, severe stomach pain and fever. People should stop buying these exotic species,” he said. 

 	A local resident said sometimes devotees too released these turtles into the water body to fulfill vows. “Little knowing the consequences of their actions, devotees have been releasing turtles inside the water body near the temple, and this has led to an increase in their numbers. An awareness drive by wildlife sleuths will bring about a change,” a resident living close by told Bangalore Mirror. 

 The BBMP wildlife team has now decided to segregate the Indian species in the water body from the exotic species. “We will seek the permission of temple authorities to shift either the Indian species or the Red-eared Sliders away from here. We will do whatever they suggest, but the Red-eared Sliders pose a threat to local residents as well as the Indian species in the pond,” said Sharath Babu.