A techie family finds a snake in the toilet; after an hour-long rescue effort, the snake was removed
 The next time you are at your commode, take a good look before sitting down. You might find a snake inside!
 
 	The family of a techie with city-based IT major Accenture who is a wildlife enthusiast, got jittery on sighting a snake inside the commode - the last place they could have ever imagined a snake to be in. 

 The rat snake, which was more than 5 ft long, was rescued from their house in Bhavani Street, Ramamurthynagar. The snake is said to have come from a vacant land beside the house. The rescue went for about an hour on Sunday noon. 

 	Though non-venomous, the rat snake could strike and cause a minor injury. ‘’More than that, it could inflict a major psychological blow and prove fatal to peoplem as the one at receiving end in such snake calls won’t be able to recognize species, and get panicky,’’ wildlife volunteer Mohan K, who rescued the snake, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	This was one of the unusual rescues that happen in city, which include a cobra appearing from the handle bar of a two-wheeler, inside shoes, from inside a packed bandage box. The rat snake was first spotted at a commode inside the servant’s room on the ground floor. 

 	Mohan was called immediately. But he could not find the snake in the commode. The family got tense. Mohan flushed the toilet to force the snake out. But it didn’t appear. 

 	Later, Mohan asked to check other outlets, if any, connected with the same pipeline. The family told him about the chamber and another room in ground floor inside the duplex house with the same sewage line. 

 	After about an hour, the snake appeared in the commode inside the house. To prevent the snake going the underground drain pipeline, which could kill it, the chamber pipeline that connected the house and UGD was blocked. The common pipeline of the commode was flushed and the snake was rescued. 

 	“As the members of the family were sensitive, they didn’t take any extreme steps. We rescued the snake,” Mohan said.