Made in China is creating havoc in the bird kingdom as well. Over a 100 birds have fallen prey to made-in-China manja, used to fly kites, this year alone. 
 
 “The Chinese nylon threads or manja used to fly kites act as a death snare for animals and birds in the city,” said Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban. “Most of the bird rescue calls we get are of birds trapped in manja and the number of deaths has crossed 100 this year,” he added.
   There were 60 bird deaths between July and December last year. Most victims include pariah kites, pigeons, crows, barn owls, and fruit-eating bats.
   Usually, kite-flyers compete with each other and try to cut other kites. When this happens, the unmanaged kite and manja float freely in the air or get stuck in trees, across roads, on poles etc and become death snares for birds, says Sharath Babu.
   The wildlife cell gets an average of 20 calls every month. “We have already found over 10 birds dead in the last six days,” Rajesh M, a wildlife volunteer told Bangalore Mirror. “In most of the rescue calls we get, birds are either entangled in manjas, or are dead because of them. While pariah kites can survive for up to two days, other commonly-trapped birds like the barn owl, fruit-eating bats, pigeons, and crow cannot.”
   Wildlife volunteers and activists find the rapid rise in bird deaths an alarming trend and fear that this will only get worse in June and July, the kite-flying season.
   They are taking it upon themselves to create awareness among people by explaining the damage manja causes. They also want BBMP to be more strict about enforcing the ban on manja that came about last year and to mete out stringent punishment to manja sellers.
   “We will bring this to the notice of the council and commissioner and seek effective measure to ensure the ban is enforced strictly as it the only way to help birds survive,” Babu added.
   Former deputy mayor S Harish, during whose tenure the ban was imposed, said it was very much in place. “Action is being taken against those selling Chinese manja. However, the ban will be strictly enforced and measures to create awareness will be taken. If people inform us when they come across such incidents, we can take action,” Harish said.