By: Simon Barnes 

 
 ​Virender Sehwag brought slogging to the highest level of achievement and made it a new orthodoxy
 
 	Idon’t believe Virender Sehwag ever saw a game of cricket in his life. I think some one just told him about it. “And so Viru, the bowler tries to get the batsman out — and the batsman tries to score as many runs as he possibly can.” 	“Is that it? I always thought it was supposed to be a complicated game.”
 	  	And so Sehwag went out to play cricket and every time the ball came to him he tried to score as many runs from it as he possibly could. Six if possible, four as a reluctant second-best. You see the ball and you hit the ball: what could possibly go wrong? 	
 	Few people have the ability to think that simple. And very few of these have the audacity to put that thinking to the test. And few of these have the physical skills required to bring it off. Sehwag had all those things and they made him perhaps the quintessential cricket of the 21st century. He ignored the conventions and customs and received wisdom of cricket. He believed instead that if you take cricket simply, in the most literal manner possible, you can cut through all the claptrap and get on with the task in hand. Which is scoring runs, isn’t it?
 	  	Nor for him the precious separation of one-day cricket and Test cricket. It was all one to him. His achievement was to take the techniques, and above all, the thinking of one-day cricket into Test matches: and by doing so, he became one of the finest Test match cricketers that ever picked up a bat. He didn’t invent the idea: but he took it to its logical conclusion. He just hit the ball — and if I’m making him sound simple-minded, I must stress that this was the simplicity of genius. Sometimes it takes an exceptional person to see the obvious. 
 	  	Odd to think that he started life as a Sachin clone: well, there are worse models, it has to be said. But if Sehwag could do a decent imitation of the master, he found that when he gave his own nature free rein he could be something more than a great man’s shadow. He was a cricketer forever defined by the notion of the boundary. It was as if he didn’t have any — boundaries that is, personal frontiers — but the cricket ground most certainly did. He treated every ball as a boundary-opp and a ridiculous number of them made it.
 	  	I can still see that characteristic Viru shot. It begins with a quick engagement of reverse gear: a generous step back, precisely in the way that every schoolboy was once coached not to. (That, by the way, was the only sort of footwork he went in for, in any demanding sense of the term.) This backward-shuffle was followed by that inside-out offside smear: did Sehwag invent offside slogging?
 	  	But it wasn’t really shot-by-shot that Sehwag was an original: it was in his entire approach to batting and to the game of cricket. He was a conceptual artist who understood Test match cricket as no one else really had: as an arena in which the batsman performs as if he had the gift of immortal life.
 	  	It really shouldn’t have worked. All logic, all previous examination of the game says that Sehwag should have failed. Bowlers always fancy their chances against such a batsman. But time and again, Sehwag refused to give them any. Chances, that is. He just sent your best ball to the boundary and then prepared to belt the next. The cream of the joke is that he was a Test match opener: the position that traditionally goes to the careworn. 
 	  	Sehwag batted in a hurry or not at all. And of course this had limitations. To give his best, he needed a flat track. You won’t find many hang-in-there bad-wicket innings on his CV. In bowler’s conditions — increasingly a rarity — Sehwag tended to be found out.
 	  	That’s a bit of perspective.Because he was not just a stirring hitter: at his very best he was a stirring hitter who hit on and on. His top three Test innings were 319, 309 and 293: you don’t get there by witless slogging. No: if Sehwag was a slogger, he was the slogger as finished artist. He brought slogging to the highest level of achievement and made it a new orthodoxy. By doing so he expanded the possibilities of cricket. He was cricketer of unfettered joy: who took a boy’s see-ball-hit-ball glee and turned it into the method of a champion.
 	  	Simon Barnes writes about sport and wildlife. He was chief sportswriter of The Times for 12 years. He is the author of more than 20 books, including The Meaning of Sport.
 	
 	
 	He was a terror to bowlers: Bhajji
 	
 	 		 Harbhajan Singh has paid glowing tributes to Virender Sehwag calling him the “Viv Richards of the modern era”. “I have seen many greats batting, but I have never seen anyone bat like Virender Sehwag,” the veteran off-spinner, currently on a comeback trail to the national team, told Mirror.
 		 	 		Harbhajan said it was the dashing opener’s thinking and reaction to a deliver that was the standout feature in his batting. “It’s unbelievable, the way he played, the way he saw things. No one could even imagine — that things could be done this way also. He used to bat in such a fearless fashion.”
 		 	 		Having played with Sehwag for close to 10 years, the Sardar said the former opener instilled fear in opposition bowlers. “He used to intimidate the bowler. The opposing team and its bowlers used to feel the pressure while bowling to him. He used to hit sixes and fours off good balls. He was the most dynamic, most dangerous, most fearless and most gifted player — we can say anything for him.” 	 		
 		Harbhajan has no doubt who was the most dangerous batsman the world had ever seen. “Viru no doubt,” he said. “And it used to be great fun watching him play — the kind of shots he chose to play. He was always two steps ahead of the bowler. Be it a spinner or a fast bowler, he played them equally well.”
 		 	 		The striking feature about Sehwag’s batting, according to Harbhajan, was that he never changed his style. “In a day he could play a knock of 290, and when he was told ‘play aaram se’ he said, I reached 290 by playing my game. He was totally different.”  — Vijay Tagore