Perched amidst the Bhagwan Mahaveer wildlife sanctuary, the Doodh Sagar waterfall cascades down from a height of 600 feet in three different phases.                 

Away from the beaches and gothic churches, there is a part of Goa that appeals to the adventure-inclined. So while you will see this coastal region wearing the “off season” tag during the monsoon, the wanderlust-driven know better. The rainy season in Goa unfolds a plethora of opportunities for those who like the green — trekking in rain-soaked destinations being one of them. 

Sandwiched between the Arabian Sea and Western Ghats, the eastern areas of Goa within the jurisdiction of Sanguem, Ponda, Canacona are often compared with the tropical forest of Amazon and Congo for their rich biodiversity. Though not easy to explore, the forest areas with steep valleys, covered in thick fog and heavy rains create a perfect ambience for a rain trek for seasoned trekkers. Trekking along  the Konkan railway line, through dense vegetation and dark railway tunnels spanning several kilometres with the rain, pounding all the time, to discover the beauty of the falls, is worth the effort.    

STORIES GALORE

Perched amidst the Bhagwan Mahaveer wildlife sanctuary, the Doodh Sagar waterfall cascades down from a height of 600 feet in three different phases. The falls is said to be the boundary between Karnataka and Goa and is around 60 kms from the Goan capital of Panaji and 30 kms from Margao. Monsoon is the best time to get a peek of the falls as the flow of water will be quite forceful at this time.  

People often trek to the falls in two different routes. A few find it easy to  trek from Madgaon side while others take the Castle Rock route, the last railway station from Karnataka side.  But trekkers starting from Madgaon have a better advantage over others in capturing the beauty of the falls as  they can trek along the falls for a longer distance. But be prepared for blood sucking  leeches and steep hillocks, that make walking a tad diffcult.

Frequent trains plying between Belgaum and Madgaon will drop you close to the trek route. Starting from  Madgaon side, trekkers begin their ardous trek from Sonalim station which is 10 kms away from Doodh Sagar. Further up you will encounter makeshift huts of railway gangmen. Hailing from the hamlets nearby, these workers will hasten to narrate folktales about how falls got the name ‘Doodh Sagar.’

Legend has it that a powerful king lived atop the mountains of Western Ghats along the Goan frontier. His palace is said to have been built with pure ivory and embellished with precious stones, with gardens of exotic flowers.  Towards the end of the forest which marked the boundary of his palace, there was a huge lake used by the princess for taking bath. Taking her ritual bath, the princess would always sip sweetened milk served to her in a golden kettle. Once, while she was bathing in the lake a prince from the neighbouring kingdom passed by and stopped at the lake after hearing sounds of giggling. 

Noticing his presence the princess poured the entire milk into the lake to shield her body from the glances of the stranger. 
Thus the name — locals say that is the reason why the cascading water resembles milk being poured down the hills!  

QUAINT PARADISE 

As you go along, some of the natives introducing  you to medicinal herbs and plants growing in the region. All this time, you can catch the glimpse of the falls off and on, emerging from behind the thick canopy. An hour’s trek from the shelters of the gangmen will bring you right under the falls. This is a paradise for shutterbugs and if you are lucky enough you can catch a passing train just under the water. 

Two watch towers, one in front of the falls  and another just next to it allows you a great view without getting yourself wet. If you are determined to get drenched, be careful while standing on the tracks and keep listening for the chugging sound of the train. 

There are no lodging facilities to speak of; the station master’s house at the Doodh Sagar station will offer you some respite. You will get a few cups of tea and crispy local biscuits with which you could ward off the affect of the cold winds for a while. At the end of your sojourn, catch a train towards either Castle Rock or Madgaon - just board without a ticket as the Doodh Sagar station does not give out any. Travel free of cost upto Kulem or Castle Rock and then  buy a ticket. Since the region has not been overtly promoted as a tourist destination, it is largely unspoilt and it is mostly genuine trekkers who spread the word around about the pristine falls.

WHAT YOU NEED WHILE YOU TREK

1. Take along well-worn hiking boots that will protect your feet and withstand the terrain.

2. Carry a raincoat, that can cover both you and your backpack and keep it somewhere where you can find it fast. 

3. Carry matches in plastic or waterproof bags and also a torch. 

4. Travel light, your backpack shouldn’t become a burden while trekking. 

5. Carry enough stuff to eat, so that you don’t starve on the way.  

6. Carry a map of the region and if possible a compass so that you don’t get lost.

7. Talk to the locals and read up on the place that you are going to trek.