Amidst complaints from ecologists that the recent floods and landslides in Kodagu were due to the indiscriminate exploitation and destruction of forests, some geologists have ruled out manmade causes for the calamity. Terming the excessive rains and landslides as ‘natural that could occur once in 200 years’, they have stated that in such ‘a freak’ calamity, even mountains could collapse and the strongest trees could also be uprooted. The media has reported that one exploration geologist Lychettira Machaiah has said that “overnight ecological experts are calling the catastrophe manmade”. Now, while this has given a bail of sorts to the encroachers, poachers, timber mafia, planters mafia et all, it is also true that we are at a critical stage of losing out on our ecological resources if we do not take precaution. A group of individuals and organisations have come together to put out a consolidated report about the dangerous projects that are ongoing as well as the ones proposed that will destroy a large amount of forest in our Western Ghats. 

It has taken an entire year for Sahadev Shivapure, a techie from Koppa, a member of the Pashchima Ghatta Jagruthi Vedike, to consolidate all the information from various parts of the Western Ghats. He says, “People from various parts of Western Ghats are unaware of what’s happening in other parts. For instance, the Kodagu people were protesting against the railway line and are clueless about what’s happening in North Karnataka. North Karnataka people are unaware of what’s happening in Shivamogga. Neighbouring districts are unaware of the situations in each others areas. Hence consolidating the information across the Western Ghats was important. The final report is scary. The combined projects, ongoing and proposed, will destroy a mind boggling 15,85,000 trees. Hence we — SARA, an environment related centre at Dombekoppa, Hosanagara, headed by Arun Kumar HG, Pashchima Ghatta Jagruthi Vedike and Coorge Wildlife Society — decided to petition the Chief Minister to stop these projects.”

The eight-page open petition about the critical need to protect our natural resources in general and Western Ghats in particular, consisting of 29 points gives in detail the harmful effects of the projects undertaken by the government. A table lists the number of trees cut /proposed to be cut. The 400KV High Tension power line from Mysuru to Kozhikode completed in 2015 was accomplished by cutting 54,000 trees. Under the ongoing projects, the major ones are Bengaluru to Mangalore Industrial corridor, NH75 widening in Hassan and Dakishina Kannada Districts will cut 13,500 trees, Netravathi River diversion project in Sakleshpur Taluk , Hassan, will claim 20,000 trees, NH169 road widening from Shivamogga to Mangaluru, 500 trees, Tunga Lift irrigation Project, Chikkamagaluru district , will cost 24,000 trees, National Highway 4A widening between Belagavi and Panjim, will claim 38,000 trees.

Major proposed projects include transmission lines for Kaiga nuclear power plant capacity expansion (1,00,00 trees), Hubli- Ankola railway line in Uttara Kannada district (2,00,000 trees), Sagar –Sigandur-Nitturu- Kollur NH road through Sharavathi and Kollur Wildlife Sanctuary (1,00,000 trees), Shivamogga- Honnavar Road to be developed to a 4-lane road (1,00,000 trees), Shikaripura –Hosanagara-Nagara-Nitturu- Byndoor NH 766 C 2/4 Lane project (2,00,000 trees), Thirthahalli- Malpe 4 lane National Highway through Augumbe and Someshwara Wildlife sanctuary (1,00,000 Trees), Shishila - Byrapura new 4 lane project in Chickamagalur district (35,000 trees), 2,000 MW pumped storage hydro power plant in Sharavathi valley Wildlife Sanctuary (150 hectares of dense forest lands), National Highway from Somavarpet to Manantwadi in Kerala and Mysore to Thalassery in Kerala Railway line (3,00,000 trees), Lifting water from Linganamakki to Bengaluru (1,00,000 trees), Talaguppa to Honnavara railway line (2,00,000 trees). There are also other projects like Mysore- Virajpet- Kannur : State highway widening to National Highway, Mysuru, Kushalnagar, Madikeri, Mangaluru railway line, Jog Falls all-season spectacle which will see more trees being cut.

The petition to the CM is being circulated among the people and Sahadeva Shivapure has appealed for every citizen to read it, understand the seriousness of the situation and be a part of this initiative to stop destruction of our natural resources. If we don’t act now, before it is too late, we will be left with a manmade calamity striking us hard.