By Iffath Fathima

They say turtles are facing increasing threats from pollution

When dead fish and snails were found floating on the banks of Madiwala Lake due to rising pollution recently, the city was rattled. In another shocking event, a turtle was found dead near the Puttanhalli Lake at JP Nagar. 

Prasanna Kumar, a wildlife activist and an expert in turtle rescue, said: “When locals called me, I rushed to the spot. But it was very unfortunate that one turtle was found dead after being run over by a car. Turtles would have come out of the lake due to pollution in the lake. The recent downpour may have brought in sewage water. For fish, they have no choice but to stay in polluted lakes. While for turtles, they can come out of the lakes.”

Kumar said for the last five months, he has rescued at least 15 turtles from main roads near Vidyaranyapura Lake, Pattangere Lake, Ulsoor Lake, Yediyurur Lake, and Kenchannahalli Lake. “These turtles do not have the right habitat to live in and they are on the brink of extinction. They are many incidents where before I even reach the rescue location, turtles are found dead. It is really said.”


POLLShould toxicity studies of Bengaluru's water bodies be conducted on a war footing?YesNoCan't Say61 + 5 = VOTE 

In a bid to save turtles, Kumar and his group of 40 volunteers make daily visits to different lakes and rural areas.

 “Earlier we would visit rural areas where people immerse turtles in the wells because they think that they help in keeping wells clean. Some others think turtles bring good luck. Earlier, lakes were very beautiful and the water tables were high. But with water tables depleting, most wells have gone dry. And the turtles are just left in the well with no water. Now, we have even started making regular visits to lakes around the city to find them. We rescue them and leave them in the nearest habitat which is good for them,” he added.

Kumar talks about instances where he found turtles injured around the wells and lake. “In wells, the turtles are found with their shells cracked.The shells don’t crack easily. Some locals must have stoned them to death. In our lakes, what we see are red-eared slider turtles. Few of them keep them as pets. But these grow fast and end up ‘biting’ people. Some of them attack other turtles which is another cause of their deaths and injuries,” said Kumar. 

Kumar and team take classes in schools to educate children about different aspects of wildlife.