By Akhila Damodaran & Reya Mehrotra

It turned out to be a rescue weekend in the city as a slender loris and a deer were rescued from poachers. The slender loris was d umped in the city as some superstitious practice makes people buy the animal during new moon day and the deer was rescued from NICE Road on Sunday. 

The slender loris was rescued from Sadashiva Nagar on Saturday by the BBMP Forest cell. The animal was found injured by a resident of the area and is currently undergoing treatment at Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC). Wildlife enthusiast Ananth Aravamudan says, “We heard a shrill cry on Friday late evening. My daughter and I went outside with a torch to check but couldn’t see anything as it was too dark. The next morning, a boy who was playing in the area said he saw a monkey like creature and I went to look and found the slender loris on a creeper. It was injured.” 

He called the BBMP for rescue of the animal. Also a wildlife enthusiast, Aravamudan says, “We were scared that it could be attacked by the dogs and as it is a nocturnal species, it cannot tolerate bright light. So we took it with a cloth and placed in a box in a cool place till the rescuers arrived. As it is a protected species, I had to give a letter saying I found the animal in my garden.”

PS Anand Nair, a facility manager and rehabilitator at WRRC, says the adult species is on antibiotics and painkillers. “It’s got electrocuted. It has already lost one of his hands due to severe burns. It’s a tree species and preys on insects. So when it would was trying to catch insects, it could have got electrocuted,” he says. He adds that they might not be able to release him back into the wild if he loses his other limb too. “We need to check for any organ failure too. We will know in a couple of days if it shows any symptoms of organ failure,” he says. Keerthan R P, a BBMP forest cell volunteer, says slender loris is common in the city but difficult to be spotted as it gets easily camouflaged in trees and is active only in the night. Recently a slender loris was rescued in Cubbon park. 

We were scared as it is a nocturnal species, it cannot tolerate bright light. So we took it with a cloth and placed in a box in a cool place till the rescuers arrived. ­–Ananth Aravaumudan, wildlife enthusiast 

Meanwhile, at 6:30 am on Nice Road on Sunday, a jogger noticed a 5-month-old Spotted Deer being attacked by four feral dogs. He contacted the BBMP forest helpline number and in another half an hour, a BBMP rescuer had rescued the deer. Prasanna Kumar, wildlife warden, says, “The deer was dehydrated and unable to defend itself. Usually spotted deers are very shy and get nervous when they encounter too many humans. They can also get heart attacks under such cuircumstances. So we took the deer into a nearby tool gate room and covered its face with a cloth and checked for injuries. It was unhurt. Since it was too young, it had got tired after the attack so after letting him rest for some time, we released him back in the forest area.”