In clear violation of guidelines, a heavily pregnant elephant, Nethravathi, gave birth to a calf just hours before the Shivamogga Dasara procession began on Tuesday. Nethravathi was brought from the Sakrebailu camp to Shivamogga for the Jumboo Savari. According to Karnataka Forest Department officials, while a medical examination, as per ETF guidelines, was performed before selecting elephants for the procession, neither the officials nor veterinarians had information about the pregnancy.

“We decided to get a pregnancy test done this year after a pregnant elephant was taken to Mysuru for the Dasara procession last year unknowingly. Doctors conducted sample analyses, and regular health checkups were conducted too. However, the signs were not visible for reasons unknown,” said a senior official from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

While officials claim ignorance, the incident has brought back the issue of guidelines for the care and management of captive elephants not being followed.

According to the guidelines of Project Elephant 2008 from the Ministry of Environment and Forests, cow elephants in an advanced stage of pregnancy shall not be transported by trucks. No owner shall put to work any elephants having a pregnancy of 12 months and above. It also iterates that any cow elephant having a sucking calf of age below 6 months or any elephant of height below 5 feet using “peti” (belly band) on cow elephants in an advanced stage of pregnancy shall be considered acts of cruelty to elephants and is prohibited.

Wildlife conservationists and experts highlight the lack of trained wildlife veterinarians in the Karnataka Forest Department. They opine that a wildlife specialist would not have missed the condition of the elephant.

“Project Elephant guidelines make medical, fitness, and transport certificates mandatory for any such participation. The medical certificate process should have highlighted the pregnancy. The issue that needs to be addressed is the lack of a trained wildlife veterinarian with KFD. The department does not have a single wildlife veterinarian. A wildlife specialist would have spotted the condition,” said Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

There are many signals. For instance, every female elephant above 10 years of age undergoes an estrous cycle every three months. When in the reproductive cycle and not pregnant, they pass white discharge along with urine. When an elephant is pregnant, this discharge stops. Such information should be passed on, added Belagere.

The KFD officials agreed. However, they also pointed to the shortage of female elephants in elephant camps.

“There is a major shortage of trained veterinarians in the department, and all doctors are brought in from the Animal Husbandry Department. However, we are contemplating training our doctors so such lapses do not occur in the future. We are also looking at developing better protocols of observation and analysis while providing health and fitness certificates to the animals. Moreover, camps mostly have male elephants, as they are the ones involved in the majority of the conflict cases,” said the KFD official.