You may think it is harmless to throw a couple of Parle-G biscuits at a white-breasted waterhen or a handful of crispy fryums at a little egret you spotted at your nearest waterbody.
 
However, ornithologists and bird enthusiasts have warned against feeding birds processed food that humans consume. Alarmed by increasing incidents of birds feeding on human-processed food loaded with sugar, carbohydrates, unhealthy fat, and chemicals, experts said it can have short-term and long-term impacts on the birds’ health - a prolonged diet of human food can kill the birds too.

From popcorn to aloo bhujia, leftover cooked food, colourful mixtures to spicy namkeen, birds at Bengaluru’s lakes and parks are feeding on loads of unnatural food.

“We have been witnessing walkers at lakes throwing bread and biscuit pieces at birds oftentimes in the past. But now more and more people are feeding birds food items such as chips, popcorn, biscuits, spicy fried items, etc. While most of the items are picked by pigeons and crows, other birds too end up feeding on these more often than not,” said JN Prasad, a city based bird enthusiast.

Experts noted people do not realise that feeding unnatural food can lead to life-threatening complications in birds such as aspiration, indigestion, and bloat. Moreover, feeding grains to insect-eating birds or bread to raptors can severely affect gut mobility and disrupt the gut microbiome. According to Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC) rescuers, wildlife has specialised diets and need to maintain the right nutrients to function. Providing supplemental food can have long-term effects on the health of the animals. For instance, ducks and waterfowl are often fed bread by ‘well-meaning’ individuals, but this can result in ‘angel wings’, where the wings don’t develop properly and become severely twisted, compromising the birds’ ability to fly and putting them at risk of predation.

Moreover, it alters their natural behaviours and results in conflict situations. It can lead to overpopulation of some species and affect the ecosystem balance. “Wild animals will lose their natural fear of people and identify them as a food source instead. What is an enjoyable activity for one person might become a nuisance for another when wildlife approaches them for food, resulting in potential conflict situations.
 
In the wild, the population of animals is strongly controlled by the availability of natural resources. Providing supplemental food can result in a higher reproductive rate, resulting in the overpopulation of some species.

 .
 
The overpopulation of certain species can disturb the delicate ecological balance. Overpopulation cannot be supported by the natural food supply when the supplemental food source is removed,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager at the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC).

Ornithologists told BM that human-fed birds tend to lose their instincts to hunt and forage, severely affecting them in the long run.

“Such items can have long-term effects on birds. For instance, tourists at Ranthambore National Park in Rajasthan feed treepies - a bird species - regularly. However, as soon as the park closes for tourism during monsoon months, many young treepies die as they cannot find food on their own. Such activities can be fatal for birds,” said Shashank Dalvi, ornithologist and director, Eco-Connect Ventures and Vannya bird app.

 It’s essential to strike a balance between compassion and conservation—Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC

Experts further added that there should be increased awareness and signage at every lake - home guards should be trained to educate people about the importance of not feeding wildlife.
 
“While feeding wildlife may seem like a good way to connect with them, people should look at the long-term impact and not short-term gratification and learn to appreciate them from a distance. If we want to save wildlife, conserving habitats, keeping it clean and disturbance free is key. It’s essential to strike a balance between compassion and conservation. Lake groups and bird-watching clubs could play a pivotal role in spreading awareness, in addition to implementing proper policies established by lake management,” added Venkatesh.