HC asks state why it has not yet evicted an institution that hogs eight acres of government property
 
 The public interest litigation (PIL) filed by SR Hiremath's Samaj Parivartana Samudaya (SPS) in the High Court of Karnataka against the encroachment of government lands across the State has got a new twist. In an interlocutory application filed by the petitioner earlier this week, it has been alleged that “those within the administration are seen to have connived and conspired in many cases with private encroachers.” The IA is specifically against the Sri Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Educational Institutions and the SJB Institute of Technology it runs. The Vokkaliga community's Adichunchanagiri Mahasamsthana Mutt runs the trust and institution. The college is alleged to have encroached upon nearly eight acres of forest land. After agreeing to be evicted in return for dropping of criminal cases against it, the institution has continued to hold on to the encroachment, the IA says. The HC has now asked the government to respond to the IA. 

 	Along with the IA, the SPS has placed before the HC several photographs of the alleged land encroachment. 

 	The IA says, “Adichunchanagiri Mahasamsthana Mutt, a religious organization, has established and continues to administer an engineering college by the name of Sri Jagadguru Balagangadharanatha Institute of Technology within the Turahalli Reserve Forest in daring contravention and violation of applicable laws and without any manner of resistance from the Government of Karnataka.” 

 

 Explaining the history of the alleged encroachment, the IA says the forest department filed two first information reports on October 10, 2006, against the educational trust of the mutt, the principal of the college and the head of the mutt (Sri Jagadguru Balagandharanatha Swami, who is now deceased). The three allegedly violated the Karnataka Forest Act by clearing forest land, altered forest land and used reserved forest for non-forest purpose at the Turahalli patch jungle in Turahalli Reserve Forest, Kaggalipura, Kengeri. The two FIRs were related to survey numbers 67 and 68. The land allegedly encroached was 15 guntas in survey number 67 and seven acres 20 guntas in survey number 68. 

 	The IA says that on August 29, 2009, the assistant conservator of forests passed an order of eviction against the mutt and asked the encroachers to be evicted within 30 days. The IA also says the eviction never actually took place and “the petitioners had come into possession of several other documents that would show the extent of pressure that came to be applied upon the officers of the forest department by leading ministers at that point of time.” The IA says the mutt agreed to be evicted from the encroached land in return for criminal proceedings against it being dropped. 

 	However, two years later, the mutt filed an appeal against the eviction. According to the IA, the appeal says that since the forest department did not take back the land, the appeal should succeed. The IA says, “It would be difficult to imagine a more absurd or perverse argument to make on appeal in the circumstances of this case.” This appeal is still pending while the encroachment continues, the IA says. 

 	The IA blames the government for failing to evict influential encroachers due to lack of administrative will. 
 	
 	
 	TURAHALLI FOREST
 	
 	 		Spread across 800 acres, Turahalli State Forest is one of the last remaining forest lands in Bengaluru urban district. It is a shrub forest 	 		and home to local wildlife. It was notified as a state forest in 1935 by the then Maharaja of Mysore. However, large-scale development of surrounding areas has taken place, with builders promising a 'forest view' that has choked the forest.