Malleshwaram temple sets an example, chooses compassion over tradition
 
 A temple, in a revolutionary move, has come forward to end a superstition propagated by TV astrologers that led to death and violence among turtles at their pond. 

 	From last Saturday, the Nandi temple near the famed Kadu Malleswara temple, for which Malleshwaram is named, has stopped the release of ‘blessed’ turtles into its pond. People believe that by releasing a turtle, or Koormavatara of Lord Vishnu, they get prosperity. It is also a belief propounded by TV astrologers that releasing a turtle with five toes brings enormous prosperity. 

 	“We have decided not to encourage the practice of letting turtles at the pond anymore. We, along with the wildlife activists, have made up our minds to put an end to this. This is our step on the onservation front and we hope it will help others follow,” C K Swamy, one of the temple trustees told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	The pond is inside the temple, so the temple authorities can keep an eye and not allow anyone with a turtle inside the premises. Also, the priests will refuse to bless the turtles, sources said. 

 	Swamy and wildlife conservationists are concerned because the small pond was overflowing with more than 100 turtles left by the devout. On Saturday, wildlife volunteers rescued 24 Indian pond terrapins (Melanochelystrijuga), 50 Indian flapshell turtles (Lissemyspunctata) (juvenile-16, sub-adult-18, adult 16), 24 Red-eared slider (Trachemysscriptaelegans) (juvenile-4, sub-adult-13 adult-7), 01 Indian Tent Turtle, and 01 Black terrapin from the pond. 

 	The turtles would fight among themselves for space in the pond, and very often, the Indian species would be eaten up by the more exotic turtles like the red eared sliders -- which are cannibalistic and carry the Salmonella bacteria -- left by some of the believers. This is a violation of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act that protects Indian Pond Terrapins, Indian Flapshell turtles and other local species. 

 	“An emerging case of trade in 5-toed turtles is fast increasing and also superstition is leading public to rescue/source turtles and then release it in religious places like the one in Malleshwaram. This has resulted in rescue of about 100 turtles yesterday. It was basically public relations, wherein we were allowed to do the rescue right inside the middle of the temple without interfering in the rituals. The temple authorities have set an example to be followed by rest,” said activist Sharath R Babu.