They ask Alva to drop Kudremukh Nisargadhama project that plans health resort in the middle of reserve
 
 	After the Coastal Karnataka Bird Watchers’ Network, comprising more than 1,000 naturalists, urging the government to drop the proposed health resort within the limits of Kudremukh National Park, several environmentalists have written to Mohan Alva, chairman of Alva’s Education Foundation, asking him to drop the proposal.
 	  	The appeal has been endorsed by Ullas Karanth (wildlife biologist and conservationist), Girish Karnad (author and playwright), M Chidananda Murthy (author and Kannada scholar), H Sudarshan (health and tribal welfare activist), VGKK, Biligiri Rangana Betta and Bengaluru, GS Jayadev, educationist, Deenabandhu Trust, Chamarajanagar, Shekar Dattatri, wildlife film maker and conservationist, Chennai, Girijashankar, journalist and environmentalist, Chikkamagaluru, DV Girish, Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust, Chikkamagaluru, Shreedev Hulikere, Wild Cat-C, Chikkamagaluru, GN Ashoka Vardhana, conservationist, Arohana, Mangaluru and Ramki Sreenivasan, wildlife conservationist, Conservation India, Bengaluru.
 	  	Bangalore Mirror had carried a report on the issue, Greens red flag resort within Kudremukh Park on September 19. The appeal states:“We are surprised and shocked to hear from media reports, that your reputable institution has started a Nisargadhama, which is a luxury resort in the heart of this ecologically fragile area. This Alva’s Kudremukh Nisargadhama is using the existing structures of KIOCL to promote tourism in the heart of the national park. The resort and the premises on which it stands are on government lands illegally occupied by KIOCL, which has no right to sublease or sublet any part of such land. We also understand that the Karnataka Forest Department has already issued a notice to KIOCL in regard to this violation.
 	  	“Therefore, the decision of your institution to establish the resort also constitutes an ill-advised breach of conservation laws and a clear defiance of the Supreme Court’s judgment, in collusion with the guilty mining company.
 	Furthermore, establishment of such a tourism facility is in total contravention of orders of the higher courts across the country, in many cases, and the guidelines of the ministry of environment, forests and climate change, which
 	stipulates that all such tourism infrastructure must be shifted out of protected areas.
 	  	“We are all shocked and appalled by your decision to collude with the mining company in this ecological folly in gross violation of the orders of the highest court of India. We are earnestly appealing to you, at least at this stage, to avoid sullying your substantial reputation by participating in this misadventure promoted by KIOCL to meet its own selfish goal of illegally occupying the centre of the national park.”
 	  	They mainlined that Kudremukh National Park is a unique repository of national biodiversity and a critical watershed for millions of people in Karnataka. It records the second-highest rainfall in the country, and supports rich wildlife such as the tiger, elephant and gaur, and is also the birth place of three major rivers of south India — Tunga, Bhadra and Netravathi, which nourish millions of farmers in south India.
 	  	Due to the immense ecological damage caused by open-cast iron ore mining by KIOCL for three decades, conservationists and ecologists fought a decade-long legal battle after 1994 to legally evict this company from the area, after the termination of its lease. Many literary figures and intellectuals also joined the battle towards the end of this struggle. The company was ordered to shut down by the landmark judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Oct 2002, that gave KIOCL a 3-year period to wind up all its operations — lock, stock and barrel and quit the area, which is at the heart of the 600 square kilometre Kudremukh National Park. Although the company ceased its mining operations as per court orders in 2005, it has continued to squat illegally in the area since then, trying to revive its activities by filing various ‘curative petitions’ in courts, all of which have been rejected. At this point in time, the company’s presence over most of the area it squats on is in serious violation of the wildlife and forest laws, and, constitutes clear contempt of the Supreme Court’s judgment and subsequent orders.
 	  	The SC has directed that all mining and related activities of KIOCL need to be stopped and the entire land needs to be handed over to the government for full protection under the law as a part of the national park. They have appealed Alva to immediately terminate all arrangements with KIOCL, stop all activities of the said Nisargadhama and withdraw fully from the area.
 	
 	
 	 		‘Not building a luxury resort’
 		 	 		Mohan Alva clarified that he is not building any luxury health resort in the Kudremukh area. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, he said, “I am only running the existing Sahyadri Bhavan Guest House. Before me, someone else was maintaining the guest house. I will be maintaining it for the next three years. I got the contract through a bid.” He asked people to visit the place and check. “You please visit the place and see yourself. I also request those sitting in their house in Bengaluru spreading the rumour to visit Kudremukh and check. We have not touched a single tree. I have only undertaken repair works. I have not constructed anything new. It is a baseless,” he said, adding that he has not received any petition or appeal.