Activists step up campaigns to save lung space as wildlife board meets to decide whether to accord Hesaraghatta grassland conservation status

The countdown has begun for the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife to take a final call on the status of Hesaraghatta grassland. The board under the chairmanship of Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai will meet on September 5 to decide whether to stick to its earlier decision cancelling the proposal to notify it as a conservation reserve or accord the status. However, the city’s green activists are in no mood to let go of the issue.

Activists have joined hands to save the city’s last big lung space. From organising on road campaigns to social media campaigns and bird watching to documenting the rich flora and fauna, the green activists are preparing a dossier to the State Government as to why it should mandatorily save one of the grasslands.

5,010 acres of lung space
First, let’s understand the importance as to why Hesar­aghatta grassland needs to be protected. This is a unique ecosystem with a mixture of grassland, scrub land and lake in Namma Bengaluru. In fact, it is a 5,010 acre of huge green space including 347 acres of grassland, 1,000 acres of scrub jungle, 1,500 acres of lake bed and the rest of greenery is under various government owned departments.
 
Mahesh Bhat, who has been leading the campaign to protect the Hesaraghatta grassland said, “This is a huge lung space for Bengalureans. In the South, we have Bannerghatta and in north Hesaraghatta and in between we have patches of lung spaces like Cubbon Park or Lalbagh.
 
The Hesaraghatta lakebed area and its surrounding scrub forests and grasslands in the catchment area in northwest Bengaluru are important repositories of biodiversity, and critical to the water security of the city. This is an important watershed and protection of this area will also help the proposed rejuvenation of the Arkavathi river basin.”

Home to 39 native species
According to a study done by S Subramanya, Prof of GKVK and a member of Bombay National Society on the biodiversity of Hesaraghatta grassland indicated that this land hosted 39 native species of scrubs, 10 species of mammals, five species of reptiles, 133 species of birds apart from several butterfly species, etc.


 . 
Yeshwanth HM, an entomologist who has done vast research in Hesaraghatta said, “We have discovered insects unique to Hesaraghatta grassland. In fact, one of the insects have been named as “Astroscopometopus hesaraghattaensis” and the other Macropsis krishna sp. nov. and Alcecoris globosus Carvalho. Hesaraghatta grassland can be considered as a landing airport for many forms of fauna.
 
As it has a scrub jungle alongside, it is a nesting place for many huge birds. The grassland is a unique habitat and home to many insects which play a very important role in the food chain. There are no grasslands near Bengaluru. We had one near Madure which is now being encroached. So, let us protect Hesaraghatta for our future generations.”

Unique campaigns
The activists are now stepping up pressure as the September 5 fast approaches. Earlier, the Karnataka High Court had directed the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife to once again consider the proposal to declare the 5,010 acre grasslands in Hesaraghatta as a Conservation Reserve. The Board had rejected the proposal in January 2021.
 
“We have taken up a number of campaigns to exert positive pressure on the board and as a result a number of activities have been planned. We have been inviting bird watchers to Hesarag­hatta grassland and encouraging them to post images and on their social media so that we can garner everyone’s support.
 
There was a bird watching programme organised on Sunday as well. Besides this, we are running a social media campaign where we post videos on the importance of Hesaraghatta grassland. We are requesting people to record a short video on their mobile phones on the importance of grassland and share it to as many people as possible.
 
We are planning to meet various bureaucrats and submit a memorandum as well. We hope that the board will give due consideration to our request as this is a very important issue,” said Bhat adding that birding is an important aspect as during winter many birds from Central Asia and Himalaya flock to Hesaraghatta lake bed.

Pressure on State Government
He says that the government should declare Hesaraghatta grassland as a conservation reserve at any cost. “There are numerous advantages like there will be multiple layers of protection besides no one can alienate the greenery here with concretisation.
 
The real estate activities which are gulping the greenery across the city will be curbed here and the land will remain as it is,” added Mahesh. The green activists are ruing the fact that the politicians and government has been eyeing the precious grasslands for various activities. Earlier, the State Government had planned to construct a film city at Hesaraghatta which had raised concerns.
 
The green activists have been pressuring the government against handing over 140 acres of land in Hesaraghatta for development of film city claiming that the area is part of a fragile ecosystem and should be preserved at any cost.