By Akhila Damodaran

BBMP Forest Cell volunteers say they have been receiving over 100 calls a day for snake rescue from the city in the past three weeks. These are for rescue operations of mainly newly-hatched snakes such as cobra, Russel viper and rat snakes. The maximum calls are from outskirts such as RR Nagar, KR Puram, Whitefield, Yelahanka and Hesaraghatta Road. They say a minimum of 20 to 30 calls a day are from RR Nagar and Yeshwanthpur. 

They expect the number to go up to 160 a day in the upcoming monsoon. 

Rajesh Kumar, a volunteer of BBMP Forest Cell, says, “The reason is the change in temperature. It rains one day and the next day, it gets hot.” Rajesh adds that he has been noticing changes in the life cycle of these snakes since he started rescuing them a decade ago. “Adults snakes should go for hibernation by now. The timing of laying eggs, mating and hatching have changed,” he adds. He says one should especially be aware of the baby snakes. “Many believe baby snakes are harmless and do not have venom but they are more dangerous. They have venom and do not know how much to ingest. They release more venom when they panic,” he says. 

Keerthan RP, another volunteers adds, “We requests people not to handle these snakes and call verified snake rescuers. When we rescue, we put them into cotton pillow cover and later release into natural habitat. The major challenge is not animals but human beings. There are many unauthorised snake rescuers, who one must beware of.”

Dos and Don’ts if you spot a snake inside your premises

 Stay at least five feet away from snakes Do not chase or kill the snake Call a wildlife rescuer immediately. In case, they are taking some time to reach, police hoysala team can also be reached.  Keep a track of its whereabouts so that it could be easier for the rescuer to rescue the reptile Keep the premises clean, avoid storing any junk in the house.  Keep a check on the rodents in and around the house If you keep your shoe rack outside, check them before you put your shoes on Do not panic or bother if you spot one in empty plots
Helplines

BBMP helpline number - 080 - 22660000,22221188

PFA 

9900025370, 99803 39880