By Garima Prasher

Forest fires are common, but any rise in their frequency is worrying

Karnataka has reported 5,784 cases of forest fires in the last season (November 2020- June 2021), says the State of Forest Report 2021 released recently. However, the number of forest fires registered from November 2019 to June 2020 was 4,232, indicating that the frequency has gone up by 36%.

While forest fires are a recurring and common phenomenon, a surge in their frequency can be a reason to worry.

“Higher incidences of forest fire show that our management strategy is not appropriate. While such incidents can be natural or human induced, most of the fires in recent times are human induced; done for vested interests such as land encroachment. Every time there is a fire, we are losing biodiversity in the form of ground flora and fauna,” said Dr. TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences, IISc.

Experts say there can be a myriad of reasons behind the surge in forest fire frequency. “Change in climatic conditions can be one of the most important aspects.

 Moreover, the Forest Survey of India (FSI) and Karnataka Forest Department are well-equipped with latest technologies such as ‘detection software’ and high-resolution satellite imagery. These factors contribute towards an increase in reported cases. However, one cannot deny lack of public transparency and accountability in the department. Money is available but utilisation of that fund in the right way is the need of the hour,” said DV Girish, wildlife conservationist and environmentalist.

According to experts, selection of inappropriate species for large-scale afforestation and monoculture plantation are some other reasons, indirectly leading to forest fires.

“Our study shows that the streams and rivers in forests with native tree species carry water across all the 12 months. However, in areas with monoculture plantations, water is available only during six to eight months; this number goes further down to four months in case of a degraded landscape. Moreover, pollinators in the vicinity of a native forest are more diverse and higher in number. Availability of water, coupled with a rich pollinator base doubles the crop yield. There will be less human induced fire incidents if livelihoods of those living in the vicinity of forests are improved with higher crop yield,” said Dr. Ramachandra.

Centre’s data ‘inflated’
According to the Forest Resource Management wing of the Karnataka Forest Department, the data on the frequency of forest fires in Karnataka, furnished by FSI is not spot on. “FSI records fire alerts and there can be multiple alerts for one incident. Also, while we have digitised our forest boundary, FSI does not have this system. Any fire outside 50 m of our digitised boundary is not counted in our system. Moreover, unlike FSI that relies only on National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) data, we take assistance from other satellite data too,” said Prabhas Chandra Ray, additional principal chief conservator of forests, Forest Resource Management, Karnataka Forest Department.

Brace for more fire
According to the Karnataka Forest Department officials, 2022 will see more fire incidents compared to last year. “We are expecting more incidents this fire season. There has been extensive rain leading to vegetation growth, which will witness more human induced fire by the villagers in the surrounding areas. We are taking precaution and have alerted our people to be ready. While some incidents are by accident, most of them are started by the villagers,” said Prabhas.
Experts too do not deny the role of extreme weather conditions. 

Fund crunch?
The state forest department officials say that there is a mismatch between fund availability and requirements on the ground. “We are in the process of extending our fire lines and maintenance work; but, we can only do so much with the available budget. To maintain a forest area of 38 lakh hectare, we receive an annual budget of Rs. 28 crore, all sources combined. This means that our management cost per hectare is less than Rs. 1. The Centre must disburse more money towards forest fire management. If we have more funds, we can have outreach programmes with the villagers and can incentivise those living at the forest fringes,” said Prabhas.

Experts stress upon the importance of evaluation of forest services to attract more funds.
 
“We have not impressed upon the economists and decision-makers the importance of forest, especially from the hydrological and biodiversity point of view. We need to tell them that the forests have a role to play in the economy of the country. Till date, the government has not done an evaluation of forest services,” said Dr. Ramachandra, adding that the need of the hour is more foot soldiers in the form of forest guards and RFOs.