Food - Sunil Dhawan, Executive Chef, Hotel Royal Orchid  In Bangalore, I love visiting Barbeque Nation in Indiranagar. That's mainly because I love the concept of tables with built-in barbeque stands. One can use the sauces and condiments that one wants and while the kebabs are done, one can chat with friends. Their buffet is also nice but the service is rather slow, may be because the place is choc-a-bloc though I am not surprised. Another one of my favourite eateries is Mahesh Lunch Home in Mumbai which is a sea food speciality restaurant. Here I love to dig into their Crispy Rava fish (fish marinaded and dusted with rava before frying) which is a very good starter. I also like their Pomfret Kalimiri. Even though they don't serve alcohol, their Kokum drink is very refreshing. 


Music - Shantanu Moitra, music director

I’d recommend the album, John Denver - The Wildlife Concerts. The reason this masterpiece deserves special mention is that it is a recording of Denver’s last concert, after which his death occurred in a terrible aircraft crash. He was a pioneer of using music as a tool for generating awareness about environmental issues. And this was much before issues like global warming became popular. His contribution in this regard towards Alaska has been phenomenal. One song in this album, for instance, is dedicated to a lady who was an environmentalist in Alaska. Besides this angle, some of the finest Denver songs have been performed live in this album. The DVD of the concert is also available, with the CD, for those who want to catch the last of this legend visually as well.


Book  - Lillette Dubey, actor and theatre personality I love to read, although I don’t get much time to read all that I want to. Hence I end up reading four to five books at a time. In fact, there is a book at my  bedside, another one at office and even a book in my car, so that I can just pick up a book and read. One of the books that I am reading right now and really like is Ian McEwan’s Amsterdam. Khaled Hosseini's Kite Runner is a book that I don’t think is written beautifully but the story is moving. Then I’ve just started reading Sea of Poppies by Amitav Ghosh — interestingly we had done a small private reading of his book sometime ago, but I am reading it now. Then there’s Tarun Tejpal’s book that I’ve also been wanting to read. One of my favourite authors, who I always go back to is Daniel Martin, his writing is so beautiful. In all, this is the eclectic mix of writers I’m currently reading. 
Film - Sudhir Mishra, Filmmaker 

I'm recommending The Chaser, a Korean film I caught at the Cannes recently, to everyone interested in the thriller genre. The DVD should be available at the rentals soon, if not there already. The best thing about this breakthrough cat-and-mouse thriller is that you don't know who to sympathise with — the chaser or the chased — as they're both portrayed as negative. It takes the conventional character of a serial killer and turns it around — by having him chased not by a cop, but a pimp. The emotional content is superb. The technique never shows itself off. It's a lesson for thriller makers on how to use sound and silence. At moments in the film the atmosphere seemed to scream, without a single sound. The casting of each character was ideal. The dialogues, acting and cinematography were blended perfectly. I've never felt more manipulated by a film.


Fashion - Archana Kanoria, designer

Before I started designing myself, I used to wear only Anamika Khanna’s designs. The way she puts colours together is amazing, in that the dress never looks gaudy, yet is smart. With colour and craft as her forte, she uses embroidery in a smart way too. She is always keen to experiment with new cuts. Her designs assume a global look, but they have a little bit of Indianness in them. Her pret line borders give the word trendy a new definition. And, her saris are really gorgeous as she stylises them with great detailing.