Paving the way for eco-tourism in the name of Greater Canara Trails trek route inside the Kali Tiger Reserve in Uttara Kannada district, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has come under the radar of the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA). Seeking a factual status report about tourism activities inside the tiger reserve, the NTCA has shot off a letter to the KFD.
 
 Carrying forward the oral instructions of the previous tourism minister RV Deshpande, the KFD had sought release of funds totalling Rs 1.07 crore to undertake civil works including setting up of infrastructure for the ambitious Greater Canara Trail Project inside the Kali Tiger Reserve. Laying down certain conditions, the tourism department too had sanctioned the amount and accordingly, works were carried out in some patches of the Tiger Reserve by the KFD. The works, without the approval of the NTCA or National Board for Wildlife (NBWL), were seen as violations of Section 38 O (1)(C) of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 and a complaint was registered with the NTCA by local conservationists.
 
 Acting on the complaint, NTCA’s Dr Vaibhav C Mathur, Assistant-Inspector General, has issued a notice to the Chief Wildlife Warden to submit a report including factual status and updates in the matter so that action can be taken as per the prescriptions of the approved tiger conservation plan and other normative guidelines issued by the government. BM had published a report about the tourism activities and civil works carried out by the KFD inside the tiger reserve in its edition dated January 12, 2017.
 
 Even though the NTCA guidelines and Wildlife Act forbids any tourism activity inside the tiger reserve, prior permission of either the NTCA or NBWL is mandatory to accommodate any such activity, if the agencies think that such activities are inevitable in the interest of the public. Yet, the department, without seeking the consent of the higher agencies chose to carry out works inside the tiger reserve. The works included setting up of concrete platforms to pitch tent for trekkers, laying pipelines for water supply to these tents and setting up of toilets, erection of signages and development of a trekkers’ path, all totalling Rs 1.07 crore.
 
 Promoting the lucrative eco-tourism across the state, the tourism department had come up with the ambitious Greater Canara Trail trekking project spanning a length of 288 km with as many as 17 camps en route. The trek, with a duration of 28 days, would pass through Kali Tiger Reserve area in as many as seven routes that cover 97 km distance. However, the KFD, according to the Chief Wildlife Warden BG Hosmath, had permitted only 11 camps citing that the rest fall within the core area of the protected National Park. Tourism minister Priyank Kharge too had clarified that his department would not venture into the Tiger Reserve without the permission of the centre. But the execution of civil works in the backdrop of these developments has now put the department in the dock, attracting stringent action for violating various sections of the Act.