With Bengaluru turning urban jungle and the nearby jungles being encroached, the sightings of wild animals are on increase. While elephants have been spotted in east Bengaluru, another leopard sighting is being reported by residents of west Bengaluru.

According to Joseph Hoover, a wildlife activist, after sightings of leopards in Turahalli, Yelahanka and Kengeri, a leopard has been spotted on the outskirts of west Bengaluru near Chinkurchi and the residents have their share of scare.

“Leopards are brazenly snatching sheep and goats right under the nose of shepherds. Residents, mostly farmers, are scared of venturing out of their homes fearing an attack by leopards,” he said.

“Farmers are not asking for compensation for the loss of their cattle. They merely want the department to capture the leopards and relocate them to a forest. According to eyewitnesses, there are at least three leopards in the 200-acre land (shrub-jungle),” he added.
 
“The forest personnel surveyed the area but no bait has been laid to capture the leopards yet. With the government destroying forests everywhere, leopards, one of the most adaptive wildlife species, have taken refuge in Bengaluru,” he explained.

Meanwhile, wild elephants have been spotted near Anekal outskirts. Many villagers claim to spot elephants in and around 20 villages. In fact, many have captured pictures of elephants crossing the highway. The villagers are now petitioning the forest staff to take measures to rescue these elephants.

Recently, a bear was spotted near Bannerghatta as well.

Earlier, wildlife scientist Sanjay Gubbi wrote to the chief minister (CM) stating that 50 per-cent of the human-leopard conflict incidents occur in districts like Ramanagara, Tumkur, Mandya, Mysuru and Hassan.

However, these days the number of conflict incidents is also on the rise in Ballari, Koppal and Kolar districts.

“Of the 27,418 revenue villages in Karnataka, there is an occurrence of human-leopard conflict in over 700 villages and is increasing day by day,” he said.

“Outside protected areas (national parks and wildlife sanctuaries) poaching of leopards’ natural prey such as chital, sambar, four-horned antelope, barking deer, black-naped hare, and jungle fowl has increased. Leopards shift their diet to domestic animals such as sheep and goats due to decreased natural prey outside protected areas,” he added.

The circulation of fake information over social media is also creating fear among people. The impact of human-leopard conflict is very high on economically underprivileged communities, he further added.

Gubbi has asked the state government to start a curriculum of a minimum of one-week of training on human-wildlife conflict.