A selfie could win you brownie points, but it could be dangerous given the way people are going about it. A family, who tried to click a selfie (or should we call it elphie?) with an elephant at Bandipur, had a close shave when the pachyderm charged at their car and had their bag containing debit cards, cash and gold taken away. The scenes of this alarming incident were captured by a Kerala-based wildlife photographer Austin Cherupuzha.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Austin said the incident occurred on Friday in Bandipur at 5 pm when a couple -- yet to be identified -- travelling towards Ooty decided to take a selfie with an elephant with its calf in the backdrop. “I was on an assignment to Bandipur and it was then that I noticed this strange incident. On spotting the elephant and its calf, the family parked their car on the roadside and stepped out of the vehicle. They began clicking pictures. It may have been the camera flash which disturbed the pachyderm, and it charged at them. The couple managed to escape. The car's windows were open. It was then the bizarre thing happened. The elephant took a bag -- said to be made of leather -- from the car, devoured it, and then left.”
 
 Soon, a crowd of mostly travellers assembled at the spot. "The victim was seen telling people that the travel bag had eatables (fruits), gold, and debit cards in it.
 
 Being a wildlife photographer I can vouch that the obsession for selfies leads to dangerous situations. Despite strict orders not to stop vehicles and click photographs, most tourists have their vehicles stationed on Bandipur roads,” Austin said. Authorities say this is not an isolated incident.
 
 Conservator of Forests and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve H C Kantharaj told Bangalore Mirror, “Travellers clicking pictures is turning out to be a big headache. While allowing people to pass through our gates, the guards repeatedly tell people not to stop midway to take photographs. In fact, we have put up boards all along, warning people not to even park their vehicles. However, people pay no heed to our warnings. We have now sent a proposal to deploy a highway patrol in the forest where a three-member team will keep watch on offenders. Stern action will be taken against culprits.”
 
 Austin said the elephant had chains (see the picture) on its legs, indicating that it couldn’t have been a wild elephant. Added Kantharaj “There are 24 domesticated elephants in Bandipur forest. To keep a tab on those elephants, authorities put chains on their legs.” Environmentalists say this has become a daily norm among most tourists. “I think the only way is to impose tough fines against those taking such photographs,” said an activist.
 
 ‘IT COULD LEAD TO BLEEDING’
 
 The bag consumed by elephants will definitely affect the elephant’s internal organs. If it’s a ladies’ bag, it would have cosmetic items, jewellery or shining embroidery works and chains. These things when consumed becomes tough for the animal to digest. If a bag has plastic or metal objects, probably it might lead to injury and internal bleeding. Hence the caretaker, under the guidance of veterinarians, must keep the elephant under observation and provide it with laxatives so that the bag or the material is discharged.
 
 —Dr Arun A Sha, wildlife vet, Bannerghatta Zoo