New circular sets guidelines, asks for more vigilance and patrolling
 
 The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) seems to have gone a step ahead in safeguarding its flora and fauna by strengthening its 414 anti-poaching squads (APS) and 225 forest protection squads (FPS) with a new set of instructions.
 
 Based on the guidelines issued last week by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, the field staffers have been on their toes carrying out constant patrolling and putting up high vigil at sensitive locations.
 
 The 414 APS are in addition to the existing Anti-Poaching Camps (APCs) in wildlife divisions. The KFD has also set up 225 FPS in territorial divisions to check smuggling. While in most of the divisions these units have been provided with permanent infrastructure, a few have been functioning at makeshift facilities. The latest circular, a copy of which is with BM, said, “These camps must be located at every 5 kms distance and each squad has to supervise over 2,500 hectares of forest area. All staffers must wear uniform and compulsorily reside at these camps.”
 
 Considering that these units will be set up at remote areas with no access to electricity or telecommunication network, the department has decided to provide all units with solar power and walkie-talkie to coordinate with other members and control room. “Every squad has been given PDA and it will track the activities of staff with the help of GPS reading. Their patrolling activities will entirely be mapped on day-to-day basis.
 
 “On entering the forests for patrolling in any time of the day, the team must click a group photo and upload it to the app. Similarly, a group photo must be uploaded during lunch time and after returning to the camp. If there is a problem with availability of network, pictures and patrolling details must be uploaded by going to the area where signal is stronger. Under no circumstances the camp must be closed and each person can take a day off on rotational basis,” the circular said. The staffers must look out for encroachment of forest land, tree cutting, poaching, forest fire, collection of forest produce and prevent such activities. The field staff must ensure that only licensed local population must be allowed inside to collect forest produce.
 
 The HoFF has also warned that if there is a lapse that result in monetary loss to the exchequer, "the loss will be recovered by the officials concerned.”