Techie’s photos that won laurels at Natural History Museum will be on sale
 
 Raviprakash SS, a city techie who became the first Indian in 26 years to win an award at the prestigious Wildlife Photographer of the Year (WPY) event, will be showcasing his photographs at an exhibition this weekend. 

 	Bengalureans will have an opportunity to own these photographs for a price. Raviprakash, however, intends to give away the proceeds from the sales to a charity that sponsors free surgeries for the poor. 

 Raviprakash won the prize in the Amphibians & Reptiles category of the award organised by Natural History Museum, London, and BBC Worldwide. Another photograph of his was among the final shortlisted in the People’s Choice Award, a category instituted only last year in the 50-year-old WPY. 

 	Raviprakash’s photograph ‘Divine Snake,’ of a green vine snake was judged by an international jury. 

 	This photograph, taken in the backyard of Raviprakash’s native home in Sringeri is now exhibited at the Natural History Museum for a year. His second photograph, ‘Pure Magic’ of a spider’s web is one of the five finalists from among 40,000 entries. Both will also travel to 80 destinations across the world as part of a travelling exhibition. 

 	Raviprakash, who works as an associate consultant at TCS, is a hobby photographer. He calls himself a ‘weekend photographer,’ and specialises in macro photography which includes shooting small animals like insects, and worms. 

 	The two photographs along with 23 others of Ravipraksh, some of which have won other awards will be on display at the Venkatappa Art Gallery from January 30 to February 1. Raviprakash says, “At this three-day exhibition, you will have an opportunity to buy any of the 25 photographs on display. All the proceeds will go to charity through the People Tree Foundation. They endeavour to help poor patients who need complex surgeries. They have already reached out to around 40 patients and provided them with money for operations.” 

 	Prices  

 	The photograph that will be the centre of attraction will be Divine Snake. It will be priced at Rs 50,000 while Pure Magic will have a tag of Rs 40,000. The only other place one can get to buy these two photographs will be at the Natural History Museum, London.