People who are seriously injured or ailing can, one way or another, get by with help from their fellow-human beings. Our furred and feathered friends are hardly as fortunate, especially if they are in the ‘developing’ parts of our human-centric world. Consider the precarious situation of 21 Alexandrine Parakeet babies who were rescued in the city on Thursday. They are less than three weeks old and are hanging on to life due to the non-availability of their feed which needs to be imported.    To ensure that they can survive for at least another six months, when they would be ready to fly, the fledglings have to be fed every two hours with the special feed, which has to be imported from Australia and costs a whopping Rs 4,000 a kg. They have a temporary lifeline with the donation of 800 grams of the feed by a Bangalorean, but that will get exhausted in the next five days.    “They are really tiny and are being looked after at the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror. “They need a lot of care as they were snatched from their mothers. Getting their feed has turned into a big challenge, but we are trying our best,” he said. The parakeets were seized from a city-based IT consultant, who was in the process of selling them online. The man was arrested and sent to judicial custody, while the CID forest sleuths who rescued the birds sent them to the WRRC in Bannerghatta.   These rare birds, which come under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, can grow to double the size of native parakeets, have distinct physical features like a big head and a long red beak, and can live up to 25 years. As they are very young, they have to be syringe-fed with a solution of Kaytee and A1, which is manufactured in Australia. According to wildlife experts, the 800 grams provided by a donor has added a week to their lives and they need to be continued on the feed for the next six months. This is the only alternative to the mother’s feed and anything else will kill the birds, the experts added.    “During the breeding season, the mother feeds them with crop milk (food partially digested food by her) till they are mature. The feeding may go on for one, two or three months. But the rescued birds don’t have their mother, and we cannot formulate their feed. We have no option but to feed them with the Australian formulation. They have to be fed precisely every two hours and require dedicated care,” Sharath said.    However, their caretakers haven’t given up hope and are looking for generous donors to fund the import of the birds’ feed. “They require a special diet that is imported and expensive. They have to be taken care of and given this feed, specially meant for parakeets, till they are ready for release in a conducive habitat. As the feed is very expensive, we require some financial aid from animal lovers. We are doing our best to take care of them,” Suparna Ganguly, trustee, WRRC, and member, Animal Welfare Board of India, told Bangalore Mirror.    Donors may contact: Suparna Ganguly at wrrcbrc@gmail.com, or the BBMP wildlife cell helpline — 9880108801