By: Disha Dinesh
 
 A focus on the sheer beauty and majesty of tigers, not inspiring messages, will inspire conservation, believes filmmaker Subbiah Nalla Muthu
 
 	Seven-eight months ago, a tiger was injured in Rajasthan. The forest squads and medical care tranquilised her to operate on her. Her three cubs moved away from the scene, intimidated by the crowd that the incident had drawn. The operation lasted 20- 25 minutes. And when the revival injection was administered, two things happened. The mother staggered, in a dazed state, and uttered a faint roar, a call of sorts. And in less than a minute the cubs that had disappeared, arrived, seemingly out of nowhere. It is emotional attachment like this that endears one to these creatures, says Subbiah Nalla Muthu, multiple award-winning wildlife filmmaker. 
 	  	Muthu, who has been working extensively on tigers for a decade now has been following tigress Machili of Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve and her family, in Rajasthan. He is gearing up for the release of his fourth documentary, a retelling of seven years with a tiger’s family. The three previous others shot in Rajasthan – Tiger Queen, Tiger Dynasty and Tiger’s Revenge – dealt with Machili’s cubs; her struggle to survive once she moved from Rajasthan to Sariska and the rivalry, jealousy and love stories of tiger siblings, respectively. And each experience has fed his fascination with the big cat. 
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Muthu’s belief is that “one needs to associate one’s life with these creatures” in order to understand and care for them. Which is why he doesn’t set much store by the multiple NGOs that claim to take up the cause of the tiger. “There are more NGOs in India than tigers,” he exclaims. “So why are tigers still endangered?” Calling for focus, he says all people do is shout jargons and slogans, but do very little on the ground. “We have endless numbers of ‘Save the tiger’ films, but what is really needed is a change of mindset to effect change on the ground,” he believes. And his mode of choice is emotional and dramatic cinematography, not environment-based films or conservation films. While wildlife conservation films have been around for over 15 years, he feels after a point, they lose meaning. Emotion, however, sticks. “When people make a connect, it makes a difference,” he explains.  	That is what his films attempt to do. Currently at the World Wildlife Week in Rajasthan, Muthu believes the mindset is changing. People are warming up to the idea of cinematographic takes of animals, as opposed to when he started out. At the time, he had no funding. And no one understood his style of filmmaking, refusing his footage even when he offered it for free to the government and wildlife conservationists. “No one would come forward to make these films because they were seen as commercial,” he says.  	His journey began as a specialised cameraman who would track rocket launches at the Indian Space Centre at Sriharikota. This entailed following movements of pelicans and flamingoes with the lens. Researchers would use takeoff and landing footage of these birds to extrapolate data that they would apply to rocket launch studies. Working closely with animals and birds in the wild, he was enchanted by their charm and quit his job to do something for them. Wanting to reach the masses with his cinematography and to show people what he had experienced with his proximity to life in the wild, he made documentaries for National Geographic and BBC. Using the best, most advanced technology available at the time helped him pick up nuances of filmmaking from the best. He then set out to do something big.
 	  	And the opportunity came when the tiger’s survival in our country began to be threatened. Muthu had found his purpose. Competing with international standards, he sought to do things differently. While people were doing conservation-based films with slogans and “inspirational words” stretched across their frames, he decided to just follow the creature and live its life through his lens. And he has been doing that ever since. 
 	  	A crowd is likely to care when it relates to things being displayed on screen. So Muthu believes in highlighting the beauty and characteristics of tigers. When a tiger mounts a kill, the first time, the second time and then fails a third time, he swears that he has seen it shake its head sideways and murmur, much like a human would do on messing something up. Almost like she were lamenting to herself. Jealousy, anger, patience – these are emotions that are on full display especially when on a hunt, which reminds him so much of humans.
 	  	The majestic creature’s hunting rituals have much beauty. Often, the tiger will wait till its prey – like Sambar deer –moves further ahead to a distance of 30 feet – almost as if to give it a chance to get away. Once they enter that range, the kill is definite and cold. And it wouldn’t matter to the tiger if its prey had cubs or was pregnant. “That is just how they are.”
 	  	But then what you see depends on how you interpret it. And Muthu captures on film what he sees in the lives of these animals. And he relies on his films to tell the story.