Ex-CM urges new govt not to push on with plan to build Metro shed in Aarey

The first policy initiative of the new Maharashtra Chief Minister Eknath Shinde and Deputy Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis to revive the contentious Mumbai Metro car-shed in the eco-sensitive Aarey Colony forests kicked off a major controversy here on Friday.

In the first cabinet meeting after their swearing-in ceremony late on Thursday, Shinde and Fadnavis decided to give a push to various infrastructure projects, including taking measures to bring back the Mumbai Metro-3 car-shed project to the Aarey Colony jungles.

Former Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray, his son and ex-Environment Minister Aditya Thackeray had scrapped the project and shifted it to the Kanjurmarg salt pans site -- which the then Opposition Bharatiya Janata Party had opposed strongly.

Later, following issues pertaining to the Kanjurmarg land ownership raised by the Centre, the car-shed for the crucial 33-km long Metri line remains stuck in litigation.

Raising the issue on Friday, the Shiv Sena President called upon the new regime “not to vent its anger against him on the people of Mumbai” on the issue.

“With folded hands I request them on behalf of the people of Mumbai not to bring back the Metro car-shed back to Aarey Colony forests... It was in the interest of Mumbai, please cancel the proposal to save the city’s environment. There is a lot of wildlife there, and I am feeling very sad about this,” Thackeray appealed to Shinde-Fadnavis.

Referring to Kanjurmarg land given by the erstwhile Maha Vikas Aghadi (MVA), he said that even that stretch of land belongs to the people and must be put to good use for the masses. Congress State President Nana Patole warned that shifting the car-shed to Mumbai would be detrimental to the health of the people and the city.

He pointed out how the environmentalists and the people of Mumbai had strongly protested the car-shed at Aarey Colony and even staged demonstrations against the earlier BJP government headed by Fadnavis in October 2019 when over 2,000 trees were chopped down in a single night using the police force.

Taking cognisance of the barrage of criticism from the opposition and greens, Fadnavis this evening seemed to have softened his stance and said the government will “respect” Thackeray’s sentiments while deciding on the contentious matter.