What the officials failed to do for five years, a leopard does in 10 days. After a lapse of over five years to get a Quick Response Team (QRT), which the recent leopard row at Vibgyor High School exposed, the city finally gets a rapid action force (RAF) vehicle to address human-leopard and human-animal conflict issues.
 
 	
 	Though the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in its first guideline in April 2011 on leopard-human conflict had specified setting up of Emergency Response (ER) and Primary Response (PR) teams – meant to handle rescues, and work as a long-term solution in tackling wildlife issues, no such team was present in Karnataka. An unprepared rescue operation on February 7 had triggered the debate again.
 	
 	  	Experts too had voiced the need for a specialised team to handle such situations in a city like Bengaluru, which often witnesses wildlife encounters. Now, in a swift response, the government has set up the rapid action force, which will swing into action during rescue calls.
 	
 	  	Specially meant for leopards, the vehicle is mounted with a leopard cage on the vehicle tray. The vehicle can accommodate a 10-member rescue team besides a rack to keep guns. To handle such situations, especially where people management is a challenge, this vehicle comes with a public announcement system.
 	
 	  	“The vehicle has all basic infrastructure including nets to address a leopard crisis such as the recent one,” Jagannath Reddy, DRFO, KR Puram range, told Bangalore Mirror.
 	
 	  	The vehicle stationed at KR Puram range will be used for rescue operations specific to Bengaluru urban, sources added. Welcoming the move, experts say that this is the beginning of change in setting up a QRT. They feel a team of officials has to be specially trained for the purpose of RAF or QRT or ER.
 	
 	  	“The government should act with the same swiftness in identifying and training a team of officials who will have firsthand information on the wildlife in and around the city. They should be trained exclusively on the issue, and the team should includes expert veterinarians, specialists to trap and handle animals and a team to manage crowds,” Jaishankar V, a wildlife conservationist told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	
 	
 	 		Rescue update
 		
 		 	 		On Thursday, the fourth day of leopard’s mysterious escape from Bannerghatta’s high-security rescue centre (RC), forest brass continued their efforts to track and monitor the leopard. Making it clear that the ongoing efforts were not meant to capture the leopard, the brass maintained that three camera traps have been set to monitor and look out for the elusive leopard. Meanwhile the inquiry by a committee set up to look into the incident continued. 
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 	 		“We have set camera traps in Bannerghatta range and the monitoring is on. We have other camera traps too. If we get any images out of these cameras, then we will look into that further. So far there have been no rescue or sighting calls. Sensitising people is on. The lookout is not meant to capture it, but to monitor, especially in this leopard’s case, and in the interest of leopard and people. It may have moved into wild,” Sunil Panwar, DCF, Bannerghatta National Park told Bangalore Mirror. 
 		
 		 	 		However, the intensive search exercise for leopard within the vicinity by over 40 officials has been halted. The brass maintained that leopard may have moved into wild. Pug marks found in Huchanakunte village, sources said, are being verified to see if it was of same leopard’s as it will confirm its movement into forests, a source explained. While the forest brass maintained there was no reason to panic, rumours made rounds on a leopard sighting near Electronic City. But the forest sleuths denied any sighting.