Yasmine Claire and Jayprakash Satyamurthy never turn away a cat. The couple have 15 of them at their home near Manipal Centre and more than 20 other felines in the care of a network of friends. The couple not only offer shelter for cats and kittens free of cost, but also charge nothing to help sterilise the felines.
   “This is a place for cats and kittens in trouble,” Claire said. “A lot of importance is given to dogs in the city, but very little attention is being paid to cats and kittens in households as well as to strays. To address this, we have launched a foster home and a network to take care of cats that need lots of love and care.”
   The foster home is the result of running a care centre for cats and kittens for the last six years. The couple had sheltered and cared for cats rescued from the street or briefly left in their care by professionals travelling abroad. They now want to run a permanent home for the animals on the lines of ‘Cattitude’, the Chennai-based non-profit organisation dedicated to caring for cats. At the moment, the foster home is being run on a trial basis and the couple has roped in friends and relatives to help out.
   They have launched a campaign requesting people not to ill-treat or kill cats and also offering to sterilise felines for those who cannot afford the costs. They also encourage adoption of the animals, but reveal that a strict screening process is in place.
   “Not all are eligible to adopt cats in in our care,” Claire said. “Only those who have genuine interest and love for the animals are selected. We carefully screen those wanting to adopt and only after we are fully satisfied are the cats given away. Some use the animals just to show-off while others want to give cats away as a present to their boyfriend or girlfriend. We do not encourage such things.”
   The foster home also has a network of veterinarians.
   “There are plenty of misconceptions about cats,” Claire said. “The foster home will address these issues and create awareness, besides providing shelter for cats and kittens.”
   Wildlife experts believe the initiative will prove handy in a city where issues pertaining to cats are increasing every day.
   “They are doing a good job,” Sharath Babu R, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban said. “This will help the BBMP address issues pertaining to cats effectively. We too attend to calls pertaining to cats everyday, but a foster network for cats will certainly help.”
 
 
 The couple now want to run a permanent home for the cats