Government decides to permit individuals with wildlife artefacts to return them within three-month period; illegal holdings include tiger claw, elephant tusk, deer horn, and more

The window to surrender wildlife items will soon be opened. In the cabinet meeting held on Friday, the Karnataka government finally agreed to provide people who are in illegal possession of wildlife articles with an opportunity to not get booked under the Wildlife Act for illegal possession of these items. The government has given a three-month window to return these artefacts after the proposal was approved by Chief Minister Siddaramaiah.

According to the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and the recent amendments made by the Central Government in 2022, illegal stocking, trade, etc. of wildlife articles is a punishable offence. A similar 30-day window was opened under Wildlife (Conservation) (Karnataka Rules) in 1973 for 30 days and then again in 2003 for 180 days to obtain a certificate of possession of wildlife items.

A notification in this regard will be issued by the government soon, and an outline for the process will be prepared. During the next three months, those who did not obtain ownership certificates in 1973 and 2003 will have to surrender the wildlife artefact in their possession. These include tiger claw, elephant tail ring, deer horn, elephant tusk, tiger, deerskin, bison horn, lion, leopard, deer, wildebeest, bison, and elephant. Any wildlife trophies, decorative items made of elephant ivory, etc. Those who have obtained such certificates are still allowed to keep such items.

The opportunity is being provided as many times as people own these items but are unaware that it is a punishable offence. People also keep or wear wildlife articles as pieces of jewellery due to certain beliefs and superstitions. All such possessions will be considered illegal, and action will be taken after the expiration of a three-month window from the date of the announcement.


  According to the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and the recent amendments made by the Central Government in 2022, illegal stocking, trade, etc. of wildlife articles is a punishable offence


“Any person found in possession of or involved in the trade of wildlife products after the expiry of this period will be prosecuted under the Wildlife Protection Act,” said Karnataka Forest, Environment, and Ecology Minister Eshwar Khandre. According to sources from the Forest, Environment and Ecology Department of Karnataka, the date of the opening of the window, along with other details such as the procedure to surrender the artefacts, will be announced on January 9 (Tuesday).