In the last two weeks alone, BBMP volunteers have received over 400 calls of snakes hiding in washing machines, LPG cylinders, bikes and shoes. Breeding season and the rains put Bengaluru at risk
 
 
 	The city’s monsoon is full of surprises — be it a pothole that you swore wasn’t there on your way up, or a snake that apparently snoozed off inside your shoe. Either way, it tends to keep the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) on its toes. 
 	
 	  	Lately, it’s a team of 33 volunteers of the BBMP’s wildlife rescue cell that has its phone ringing off the hook. In the last two weeks, when the city saw plenty of rain, it got more than 400 calls for snakes alone, which constituted about 60 per cent of all the calls made to the volunteers.  	
 	
 	The tricky rescues have seen volunteers finding snakes hidden in the strangest of places too: inside bikes, car engines, kitchen cabinets, shoes, cylinder base and washbasins.
 	
 	  	BBMP’s wildlife advisor Sharath Babu R said: “For the last 15 days, we have been flooded with calls to rescue snakes and birds. The BBMP control room diverts the calls to our volunteers. We’ve had calls from government buildings including Vikas Soudha, Vidhana Soudha and High Court premises. We have found snakes inside washing machine, TV rack, stabiliser and cars. Bikes seem to be most vulnerable these days. Each volunteer has received more than 90 calls.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	From bathrooms to gas cylinders, snakes were found almost everywhere
 	
 	
 	  	A volunteer from the Wildlife Control Bureau and BBMP wildlife unit, Prassana Kumar, said while they received calls from across Bengaluru, most of them came from Vidyaranyapura, JP Nagar, Nagarbhavi, Rajarajeshwari Nagar and Whitefield areas. “May to July is breeding time for snakes. When they can’t find good shelter, they get inside houses in search of a corner to settle in. After rescuing, we release them safely into the forests,” he said.
 	
 	  	Most of the snakes they’ve rescues, he said, were found in areas that had garbage dumped nearby, or in an unused part of the house. As rain water filled up drains and
 	manholes, the snakes would come out looking for shelter. 
 	
 	
 	
 	This one may be smaller than a Rs 100 	 		note, but if bitten, you’ll pay more 	
 	  	All snake bites are curable. Antivenoms were available for all venomous snakes found in Bengaluru city.
 	
 	  	Ganapathi GH, a JP Nagar resident, recalled one such incident recently. “My house was flooded with drain water after Friday’s heavy rain. While we were clearing out the water, we found a snake inside the house. We immediately called the BBMP control room, and they put us through the wildlife volunteers. Their timely intervention saved us from getting bitten,” he said.