Get a glimpse into the lives of River Terns — tiny birds that flock in thousands to the Western Ghats every March to May
 
 They come in flocks of thousands during the peak breeding season between March and May. Silver-grey birds with a stark yellow bill and a black head — River Terns are a visual delight in the backwaters of the Bhadra River, nestled amidst the Western Ghats in Chikmagalur. But for the city’s birdwatchers who missed the opportunity, River Terns of Bhadra, a film that captures the tiny bird’s saga, will be screened at UB City this weekend.
 
 The film captures the life of the River Tern — from the way it breathes and hunts for food to mating rituals, laying eggs and parenting. But when filmmaker Amoghavarsha was approached for this project, he wasn’t really excited. “I was skeptical because it’s extremely difficult to shoot River Terns. They are quick birds. So when I was shooting their courtship, I had to be really quick to capture when the male bird hunts for a fish and feeds the female bird — all this happens within a span of two-three seconds,” he says. But his team managed to shoot 200 hours of footage during the season and had to compress it into a 23-minute film. “It’s the beauty of thousands of birds flocking together that makes it so visually appealing. We shot for five months — during early morning and late afternoons and would edit the footage till late in the night.”
 
 “It was particularly challenging during the monsoon because we were shooting in the open, but nothing was as difficult as tracking and capturing the quick birds. Sometimes there would be hundreds of birds on a tree and by the time you’d focus, the bird would have flown away,” he says. Commissioned by River Terns Jungle Lodges and Resorts, it is India’s first Creative Commons wildlife film. “Documentaries are usually not accessible to everyone. We want people to see what we have in Karnataka and if anyone wants to screen it, they can write to us and we will send a DVD,” says the filmmaker.
 
 
 River Terns of Bhadra film screening, October 6, 7 pm, Amphitheatre, UB City