Fears of depleting groundwater in Kodagu, while rivers in DK grow thin

The Kerala government has asked for studies to be conducted on the abnormal drying up of wells and rivers right after the state experienced its worst flood in decades. Now, the situation in flood-hit Kodagu is such that even getting potable water has become difficult in some areas here. 

In Uppinangady, there is a drastic reduction in the water level in river Netravati. Farmers from Dakshina Kannada have expressed concern about streams growing thin. 

The state government has maintained that 70 per cent of Karnataka is vulnerable to drought and that it has witnessed severe drought conditions for 13 years in the last 17 years. This year too, apart from the Coastal and Malnad districts, major parts of interior Karnataka are reeling under drought conditions. The South West monsoon covered the entire state by June 8. The rainfall pattern during South West monsoon was erratic and there was substantial variability within the monsoon season, including fluctuations between periods of normal/heavy rainfall and prolonged dry spells.

Environmentalists said vanishing trees and sand mining is responsible for the erratic climate. Sundar Muthanna, Bengaluru Co-ordinator for Coorg Wildlife Society, said, “Like Kerala, the abnormal drying of rivers, wells are likely to affect flood-hit Kodagu too. The water level in river Cauvery in September resembles that of how it should be in January- February. Drought and flood cycles work in ecologies that are not healthy. It should not happen in a place like Kodagu or anywhere in Malnad.”

 Karnataka: Activists join in to look for a wounded jackalJackal may be victim of meat ball bomb placed by hunters  
 He said the 54,000 trees cut for the High Tension power line proved to be the turning point for local ecology. “Temperature has become warmer then. About 7.35 lakh trees may be cut for upcoming highway projects in Karnataka most of which are in the Western Ghats region,” he said.

Shree Padre, Editor, ‘Adike Patrike’, a Kannada agricultural magazine, who is popularly known as the rain water man said, this phenomenon is totally unexpected. “I am afraid that much of the areas are affected seriously and it is happening a fortnight after months of continuous rains. We have six hard summer months to face. I do not see any big chance of rains making it up in the coming months for the deficit, even if we have flash floods or full day rain because of cyclone. This is an unprecedented water crisis,” he said.

He requested authorities to prepare people for the water crisis. “Construct inexpensive series of check dams (sand bags) across rivulets and streams so that the water flow can be retained for a long period. The State needs a drought cell in every district under the Deputy Commissioner,” he said.

V Govindankutty, Assistant Professor, Geography, Chittur Government College, Palakkad in Kerala said ground water depletion is normal after floods. “One of the reasons is the opening of sandbars along coastline, which was earlier blocking the flow of the water into the sea. The opening of sandbars results in realignment as per the sea level. Also, the river bed itself has changed. There could also have been a re-distribution of groundwater due to opening up of fractures and movement water into these new areas. When the water in river declines the neighbourhood water table also goes down, hence drop in water levels in wells could be noted,” he said.

When asked if there has been a fall in the ground water table in Dakshina Kannada, P Janaki, senior geologist Ground Water Directorate, Dakshina Kannada, said, “We visited parts of Sullia on Saturday and noticed a reduction in water levels, but this is a normal decrease because of natural evaporation. We will compile the data by the end of this month and get an idea if there is an actual fall in the ground water level.”

 Karnataka’s Indiana Jones brings to life an 11th century Ganesha templeNaganath V Yadgir, an Ayurvedic doctor from Kalaburagi, is known for restoring old Kalyanis. On his birthday, September 12, he was all set to plant saplings at a particular spot at Sharana Shirasgi in Kalaburagi, when locals told him that an old Ganesha temple is hidden under the debris.