Proposes convoy travelling at 30 kmph and cutting night ban by 2 hours as Siddu stays adamant
 	  	
 	Cutting through Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR), National Highway 212 and 67 have turned out to be bone of contention for Karnataka and Kerala. Following the High Court order, Karnataka imposed a ban on night traffic. Kerala, on the other hand, has been exerting pressure to lift the ban which otherwise would affect commercial activities. 

 Again on Wednesday, CM Siddaramaiah refused to lift the ban, at the fifth consecutive meeting with a Kerala delegation led by Kerala CM Oommen Chandy. The latter then proposed some novel ideas with which the Kerala government wants to safeguard the lives of wild animals along the stretch. 

 	The Kerala CM mooted a convoy system with forest department jeeps escorting transport vehicles at 30 kms speed per hour. “The forest department jeeps can escort the transport vehicles (10 from Karnataka and 10 from Kerala) from both the sides. The vehicles will only move at 30 kms per hour speed which will not cause any damage to the wildlife,” he said. 

 	Chandy said, “We (Kerala) are not against wildlife conservation. Kerala is doing well in that regard. But people are also affected by the ban. If the situation arises, we can even put barricades on either side of the highway along the stretch to prevent wildlife from colliding with moving vehicles. Speed-breakers can also be installed along the stretch.” 

 	When Siddaramaiah refused to lift the ban on night traffic citing court rules, Chandy urged him to reduce the timing from the existing 9:00 pm to 6:00 am to 10:00 pm and 5:00 am. “The reduction in time helps more vehicles to transit on the stretch,” he said. 

 	But when asked whether the request has any scientific backing, Chandy had no answer. Officers who were present during the meeting told BM that one of the MLAs from Wayanad argued that more animals have died during the day than night. But the Karnataka officials had valid details and statistics to counter Kerala’s view. 

 	After patiently listening to the requests of the Kerala CM and his delegation, Siddaramaiah said, “I have requested for two months’ time to think about what the Kerala CM has suggested. I will consult with law experts, forest department officials and wildlife experts before taking the decision and communicate the same to the Kerala government.”
 	
 	
 	Read: Will Kerala be 4th-time lucky on Bandipur night traffic?
 	
 	 		Read: ‘Forests belong to animals’