Wildlife rescuer finds three pond terrapins trapped in a well for over two months

A wildlife rescuer recently got a call for the rescue of a black kite which was stuck in a manja thread with its wings injured in Banashankari. After he rescued the kite, he was shocked to see three pond terrapins left abandoned in a dry well for over two months in the same premises. With no food and water in their vicinity, the turtles looked dehydrated and starved.
 
Mohammad Ashfaq, the wildlife rescuer at People for Animals (PfA), disclosed that when he rescued the kite, he was also informed about three pond terrapins lying in a dry well for over two months. Ashfaq found them in the 10-feet-deep well with vegetables like cabbage thrown around them. He said, “The person who called me pointed out that these pond terrapins were released by a person in the well. They were also presumably in captivity. 

They were kept in an ill maintained well. There was no trace of water. The cabbage that was given to them for eating remained untouched by them.” Pond terrapins require water for their survival. They primarily live in water and are found in lakes, swamps, and ponds. However, with rapid urbanisation and water bodies drying up, they could become extinct in the near future, he said.

Ashfaq contacted a Senior veterinarian Dr Madhav HV for advice.

The pond terrapins generally have an omnivorous diet. They prey on fish, worms, insects, snails, and other bugs. As the three terrapins had not gotten any of the above for about two months, they were in a terrible state.
Dr Madhav said, “Terrapins mostly live and eat in water, and staying out of water will cause dehydration and starvation. After rescue, the terrapins were placed in a small water tub supported with multivitamins. They were given subcutaneous fluids for faster recovery. They are now healthy and have been shifted to a bigger enclosure.”
  They are now healthy and have been shifted to a bigger enclosure 
The terrapins are getting better now and will be released into their natural habitat in the coming week.
 
Pond terrapins are said to be important for the freshwater ecosystem. They help in creating a healthy habitat not only for themselves but also for other species. They also help with seed dispersal, controlling population of other species, and maintaining the food chain. They are omnivorous, carnivorous, and herbivorous, so they play an important role in the ecosystem.