Forest dept wants anyone interested in snake rescue to undergo periodic certification programme for rescuers and handlers

The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has decided to weed out unauthorised snake rescuers and handlers in the state. According to higher officials from the department, an instruction has been issued from the Wildlife Division to start training programmes for volunteers and people who are interested in snake handling.

“The instruction from the Wildlife Division was given over a month ago. Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF), Wildlife issued instructions to all CCFs to conduct training programmes for snake handlers to go as per the SOP. The training will be given by experts, and sessions will be coordinated by district offices of concerned divisions,” said a senior official of KFD.

After the training, based on the capabilities of the volunteers, they will be certified by the department and permitted to handle snakes.

“The department has been given the liberty to conduct this training programme at the division level. The duration of the programme will be around 2-3 days. This rule will be applicable even on snake handlers that are conducting rescues under Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike,” said the official.

The instruction was issued after the department came up with a draft operational manual in 2022 to effectively mitigate human-snake conflict. The idea was to institutionalise the process and make it compulsory for the handlers to seek a certificate from the department.

As per the manual, anyone interested in snake rescue will have to undergo a periodic certification programme at institutes notified by the department. The department had then mentioned that the handlers will have to undergo the certification and assessment programme every two years. The programme will cover topics such as crowd management, understanding snake conflict, humane snake handling practices, snakebite management, and understanding snake biology and ecology, to mention a few.

KFD officials also informed Bangalore Mirror that any individual or organisation found to be rescuing snakes without attending the training programme and obtaining certification would be deemed to violate sections 9 and 12 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and suitable action would be taken against them.

Serpentine fixSnake experts and city-based rescue centres say while summer sightings of snakes have gone up in the city, BBMP has only seven authorised snake rescuers to attend to all rescue calls. This shortage is leading to unlicenced rescues similar to the aforementioned instance.
According to the department, the idea is to provide standard operating procedures to guide a rescuer in managing a conflict situation and build a system of accountability to regulate snake rescue across the state.

Upon successful completion of the programme, the department will issue time-bound and division-bound permission to the rescuer.