Over 46% of the total sanctioned posts in Bengaluru circle of the Karnataka Forest Department are lying vacant, BM has found out.While the total number of sanctioned positions in the circle is 804, as many as 367 posts were unoccupied as of July 19, 2022. Out of the total vacant positions, 38 posts have been defined as critical.
 
The vacancies are of deputy range forest officers (DRFO), forest guards (FG) and forest watchers (FW). About 16% of the posts of DRFOs and about 42% of FGs are lying vacant.

The situation is quite alarming when it comes to vacancies of FWs. Bengaluru circle has 95% of the positions under this category lying vacant at present. While the total number of posts available is 175, as many as 167 posts have no incumbents.

According to officials, the department does not have the required number of hands at the lower levels — this is impacting day-to-day functioning.

“Forest patrolling, protection and management are done by forest guards and forest watchers. They are our frontline foot-soldiers. Overall, over 3,O00 posts are lying vacant in the department. While the situation is slightly better in the north Karnataka circles, forest and wildlife areas to the tune of 50% or so are facing the staff crunch,” said a senior official from the department.

As per official records, the lowest number of vacancies in the Bengaluru circle is of DFROs. While the total available posts under the cadre are 251, only 42 posts are vacant. However, experts said, surveillance of forest areas and protection of wildlife cannot be done sitting in air-conditioned offices.

“When it comes to forest surveillance and management, no shortcut works. The department can hoard up all the possible technology including drones and satellite imagery, but patrolling on foot cannot be replaced. The forest guards and watchers walk on foot and ensure that the forest and wildlife are safe. Otherwise, we are compromising on safety. These vacancies should be filled up fast,” said Sharath Babu, wildlife activist.

When compared to the vacancies across all 13 circles in the state, Bengaluru circle is one of the worst. With almost 46% of the posts across all three cadres unoccupied, it is in the second position only next to the Chamarajanagar circle with almost 48% of the posts vacant.


 .
Perilous situation
When all vacancies are combined across 13 circles of the department, around 36% of the posts are dysfunctional. Overall, the department has a sanctioned strength of 8,946 officials and as many as 3,234 posts are lying vacant. Out of these, 812 positions are ‘critical’.

Yet again, most of the posts that are unoccupied are of FGs and FWs — frontline personnel of the department who guard against incidents such as forest fires, wildlife poaching, timber smuggling and other activities that pose threat to the forest ecosystem.

Across Karnataka, while 83% of forest watcher posts are vacant, as many as 35% of the forest guard jobs are without incumbents. According to officials, while the regular recruitment process is on, the great vacancy void created during 2005 is still lingering.


 Forest patrolling, protection and management are done by forest guards and watchers, our frontline foot-soldiers. Over 3,000 posts are lying vacant…– KFD official
“There was a complete ban on recruitment across many departments in Karnataka, including the forest department, till 2005. That led to this great vacancy vacuum. However, we are recruiting people in phases. All the positions cannot be filled up at the same time.
 
It has to be staggered because filing up all the posts at one go will exert a lot of pressure on resources. Moreover, all incumbents will reach the retirement age together as well, which will be difficult to manage. That said, the process can surely be accelerated,” said the official.