Working professionals, auto drivers and residents pour in during three-hour function to honour two macaques
 
 Staff and residents of Raheja Residency, working professionals, auto drivers and residents in the neighbourhood, took time off from chores and work to attend the shraddhanjali (tribute) function to mourn the death of two bonnet macaques at the apartment complex in 3rd Block, Koramangala on Tuesday. The condolence meet began at about 9 am and concluded at 12 noon. 

 	Right through the three-hour meet, a steady stream of visitors poured in as homas and havans were performed in honour of the simians. The macaques were allegedly shot dead by one Roopesh, a resident of Raheja Residency. The killings triggered an outpouring of sympathy for the monkeys that, though mischievous, were looked on as an integral part of residents’ lives as reported by Bangalore Mirror (To mourn death of two monkeys, residents call for condolence meeting, January 24). 

 A case under several sections of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, has been filed against Roopesh, but forest officials are yet to track down the alleged culprit, although the shooting incident occurred 11 days ago. 

 	Tuesday’s function, a solemn event to pray for the monkeys, also served to create awareness on the environmental importance and benefits of protecting wildlife. 

 “I was surprised to read about the meeting and I made it a point to pay a visit,” V Gopal, a resident of the area, said. “People began gathering here since the morning and homas were performed at the entrance gate. It was like any other condolence meet organised after some dear ones passes away. Food was served to everyone who participated in the poojas.” 

 	For Anil Shetty, co-founder Peace Auto, whose uncle resides in the complex, it was anything but “another condolence meeting”. "It was an event of religious harmony,” said Shetty. “Over a hundred auto drivers alone participated, besides many residents including five Muslims and eight Christians. They prayed, cooked food and stayed till the end. That is why it was religious harmony.” 

 	Shetty indicated that the shooting incident showed the people were still unaware of laws governing wildlife. “In this case, the man allegedly shot them even after realising it was wrong to shoot animals,” Shetty said. “Moreover, some people are trying to protect the accused by not disclosing his whereabouts. We will ensure he is brought to trial.” 

 	That view appears to have been shared by several others in the gathering. “Almost everyone who attended the meet felt the culprit should be punished,” said D S Kiran Kumar, a wildlife enthusiast. “It is a warning for everyone to be kind to animals." 

 	Eranna B, range forest officer, K R Puram range, revealed that every effort was being made to nab Roopesh. “That he is on the run suggests guilt. We hope to secure a breakthrough soon.”