US citizen succumbs in Wuhan; experts warn of shortage of masks

The new coronavirus epidemic in mainland China is almost certain tobecome more deadly than SARS on Saturday as the toll passed 700, health experts warned of mask shortages and more cases were confirmed on a quarantined Japanese cruise ship. 

The toll in mainland China jumped by 86 to 722, and is poised to pass the 774 deaths recorded globally during the 2002-2003 pandemic of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), another coronavirus that jumped from animals to humans in China.

Meanwhile, the US Embassy in Beijing says a 60-year-old American citizen diagnosed with the new virus died in Wuhan, apparently the first American fatality of the outbreak.

The number of new infections in China's Hubei province, the epicentre of the outbreak, rose on Friday from a day earlier, Chinese health officials said, reversing two days of declines and showing thedifficulty of predicting the epidemic's peak.

So far only two deaths have been reported outside mainland China - in Hong Kong and the Philippines - from about 332 cases in 27 countries and regions.

After China recorded its first daily drop in the number of new infections on Thursday, the World Health Organization (WHO) said it was too early say whether the outbreak had peaked.

The first cases in December were traced to a seafood market in the Hubei capital of Wuhan, where wildlife was sold illegally. "It is hard to say how lethal this novel coronavirus infection is - that is, what proportion of people with infection will eventually die of the infection," Professor Allen Cheng, an infectious diseases expert at Monash University in Melbourne, told Reuters.

Hubei officials on Saturday reported 81 new deaths, 67 of those in Wuhan, a city under virtual lockdown. Across mainland China, excluding the 2,050 people who had recovered and those who had died, the number of outstanding cases stood at 31,774.

Three more test positive for virus on cruise ship 

Another three people on a cruise liner off Japan tested positive for coronavirus, bringing the total number of confirmed cases from the ship to 64, Japan's health ministry said on Saturday. 

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Friday said the United States was prepared to spend up to$100 million to assist China and support coronavirus efforts by the WHO. 

The WHO said out of $675 million it is seeking for its coronavirus response through April, it has received pledges of $110 million, $100 million of that from the Gates Foundation.

Naming the virus 

The UN health agency’s official temporary name for the disease, which it has designated as aglobal health emergency, is “2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease”.