With a safari, star gazing and guided nature trek as part of the package, it gives the term urban jungle a whole new twist. A Jungle Lodges resort, packages start from Rs 1,000 onwards per person. For more information, contact Jungle Lodges at 25597021/ 25597024 / 2559702.Also check http://www.junglelodges.com/V2/Bannerghatta.htm

WILDERNESS AHOY!  
Dandeli, the wild life sanctuary, which is around one and hour away from Hubli, has everything the intrepid adventurer can ask for. Rappelling, canyoning, river rafting, crocodile hunting or merely trekking and bird watching, Dandeli is where you should be headed to over for a long action-packed weekend. 
Eco-friendly resorts like Jungle Lodges’ Kali Wilderness & Adventure Camp or the Bison River Resort are good places to stay. For an gives an exhaustive lowdown about the place, 
check http://www.dandeli.com

A SPELL OF SPELUNKING 
It’s location, 95 kms away from Bangalore, makes this a popular and much explored destination for avid travelers. The locale promises a little bit of hill climbing, the Shiva temple adds a touch of the celestial and then there is the spelunking which we strongly recommend. 
Tip: Ensure you have a guide before you go cave exploring to avoid getting lost.

Nature Getaway in the city 
Camp GeeDee is a rugged 65 acre property that has Bannerughatta National Park as its neighbour. Equipped with the basic facilities and a host of activities like trekking, bird watching, mountain biking and rock climbing, camping here is a delightful experience. The minimum group size required is 15. For more details, contact 26722750 or 9845442224.

FLY AWAY  
Want to feel the wind beneath your wings. Go parasailing at the Hoskote Lake bed. The event is conducted every weekend by wildlife biologist Karthik G K. Nisarga even conducts water sports and mountain adventure sports at their own campsite near Magadi. For more information, call him on 9980017105. Also visit www.nisargaindia.com.

GET ATOP THE MONOLITH  
Barely 65 km from the city, 
Savanadurga is the weekend haunt for all nimble trekkers and rappellers who can be seen precariously hanging by a rope trying to climb the mammoth monolith. Trust us when we say the feeling on reaching the top is simply breathtaking.

WATER RUSH 
With its 3, 4 and even 5 class of rapids, Barapolae in South Coorg is the ideal go-to destination for sheer adrenaline-pumping white water rafting. For more information on the activity, contact Vipul at 09642517029 or check the site www.lifeisoutside.com.

HANGING BY THE ROPE 
The activity Tyrolean 
traverse is as groovy as it sounds. The activity entails crossing a river between two elevations, with the help of ropes and the requisite paraphernalia. The sport is conducted at Bheemeshwari, Ramanagaram and even Antargange by Ace 
Paddlers, an established adventure sports company. For more information, contact Umesh at 9901990909. Or visit www.acepaddlers.com

WIND BENEATH YOUR WINGS 
So what if you couldn’t become a pilot. If you have always fantasised about flying, you might want to check out Bangalore Aerosports — 
India’s only Microlight Flight Training Center. Sign up for their Trial Instructional Flight to get a taste of flying a Microlight. And if it has you all excited, you could enroll for their course. For enrolling and more information, contact Captan Vinitha Mariappa at 9845937599. Visit www.bangaloreaerosports.com.

MOONLIGHT TREKS 
Trekking or climbing hills in the night is growing to be a big hit among techies in town. Walking up a hill with your group of friends in the still of the night with just the moon and a few torches… we can see why the idea is so bewitching. Nandi Hills, Skandagiri and Ramanagaram are the popular haunts for this mid-night fun activity.