There’s something delightfully magical about the rainforests of Agumbe, especially during the monsoons. Also called the Cherrapunji of South India, it receives the second highest rainfall in India, Agumbe is a hamlet in Thirthahalli Village, nestled atop a plateau on top of Someshwara Ghat in Shimoga district.
 
 	
 	Trekking through the rainforest of Agumbe is quite a popular escapade for Bengalureans. Walking through a thick jungle, crossing streams, with near-constant rainfall – the scene is pretty much out a wildlife adventure movie. 
 	
 	  	But it can be physically challenging. The trek culminates at Narasimha Parvat, which is the tallest peak in the Agumbe Ghats, and is accessible from two sides – Agumbe, and Sringeri. It’s the journey from the former that can exhaust you, more so if you’re not an experienced trekker.
 	
 	  	Ideally, trekkers begin by camping at Agumbe village for the night, and begin their journey the following morning. The base of the trekking point is typically foggy during the early hours, and you will need to be dressed worm. And you’ll need a guide, usually a local from the village to help you cross the forest. There’s not much climbing required, particularly in the beginning of the trail, but then again you’ll soon realise that there are no marked paths either. You literally have to make your way through the woods. In fact, there will be moments when you’ll be convinced that there can be no way forward, and this is precisely where the guide’s expertise will come in handy. They know their way around. 
 	
 	  	Agumbe is know for being a habitat of the King Cobra, and while you might not spot one easily, not unless you’re lucky, you will definitely find traces of other snakes around you. And just in case you find a reptile brushing against your foot, don’t panic. Ignoring them is the best way to prevent hurting them, or being hurt in return.  	On a happier note, you’ll discover beautiful varieties of butterflies over here, some big enough to compete with a small bird. Keep your eyes open; watching them is an ethereal feeling. And where there is a rainforest, there are leeches. And that is something you have to be prepared for. There’s not much else you can do about them. 
 	
 	  	Each time you come to a stream, and there will be at least two to three that you will have to cross, stop for a moment and take a look around. The surrounding waterfalls, and hills, will take your breath away. 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	You can also make these points your pit stop to recharge your batteries. Don’t try to swim across these streams, cross them with the help of wooden logs, or branches that dangle over the water body. 
 	
 	  	The end of the trail will lead you to a mighty waterfall. You can take a look down and see how far it goes. It is from here that you can see the absolute beauty of Agumbe rainforest – the thick canopy of trees, the waterfalls, the alleys, and the sounds of birds and insects. All of it is unforgettable. 
 	
 	  	From this point, the Narasimha Parvat is 4 km, and there is a climb to deal with. The path is foggy, and slushy, and sadly out of bounds during the rains. If you go after the monsoons, you can climb all the way to the top because that experience is quite incomparable. Another time perhaps! 
 	
 	
 	
 	GETTING THERE
 	
 	
 	Agumbe is around 380 km from Bengaluru. It can be reached via road or a train where you can either alight at Sringeri or at Shimoga, and do the rest of the trip by road. 
 	
 	  	–Kumaran P