In a jumbo leap for wildlife protection in India, Conservation NGO - Wildlife SOS has established India’s first and only fully equipped Elephant Hospital in collaboration with Uttar Pradesh Forest Department. The hospital has modern medical facilities for treatment of injured elephants in distress like Wireless Digital X-Ray, Laser Treatment, Dental X-Ray, Thermal imaging, Ultrasonography, Hydrotherapy, Tranquilization Equipment and Quarantine facilities. The hospital is located near Agra, in the Farah block of Mathura near the Elephant Conservation and Care Center (ECCC) run by Wildlife SOS.

The Elephant Hospital was inaugurated by the Commissioner of Agra, Anil Kumar on Friday. The Wildlife SOS Elephant Hospital is designed to treat injured, sick or geriatric elephants and is equipped with a medical hoist for lifting elephants requiring critical care, a pathology laboratory, digital weighing scale, Elephant Restraining Device (ERD) with a dedicated indoor treatment enclosure for longer medical procedures. An observation deck will allow veterinary students and interns to observe and learn elephant treatment routines from a safe distance.

India’s first elephant hospital is jumbo sized with a built-up area of nearly twelve thousand square feet with observation area for overnight monitoring of elephants under treatment using Close Circuit Infra-Red CCTV cameras. Training courses will be organized by Wildlife SOS to spread knowledge on elephant medical care, humane elephant management and veterinary procedures to spread compassion.

Maneka Gandhi, Union Cabinet Minister for Women & Child Development said, “It is a matter of great pride that the welfare and care of India’s magnificent heritage animal is finally getting the attention it deserves.”

Anil Kumar, IAS - Commissioner Agra said “Agra now has one more reason to be world famous with India’s first and only Elephant Hospital in addition to the Taj Mahal.”

Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder & CEO Wildlife SOS said, “This is a huge milestone for elephant protection in India. This hospital will help us take better care of injured elephants in distress. We hope this hospital will put India on the map as a scholarly destination for humane management of elephants which will go a long way to address the protection and conservation of elephants in India!”

Geeta Seshamani, co-founder & Secretary Wildlife SOS said, “Our dedicated team of veterinarians and trained elephant care staff work round the clock to cater to the needs of rescued elephants requiring medical care. Seeing the spiked chains cut away from elephant Raju and his rescue from 50 years of slavery was a heartbreaking revelation in July 2014. While the past cannot be changed, a dedicated hospital will support the Wildlife SOS team in their important work healing the wounds and giving the majestic elephants in their care and others that will find their way here a better quality of life that is truly deserved.”

Wildlife SOS established the first Elephant Conservation and Care Center (ECCC) in 2010 which is currently providing lifetime care and treatment for over 20 rehabilitated pachyderms, rescued from illegal captivity and circuses where they were ill-treated and subjected to cruelty. Today, the ECCC is a living, breathing model of humane elephant care and treatment and a result of a collaboration between Wildlife SOS and the State Forest Department of Uttar Pradesh. The Elephant Hospital was built entirely with private donations and CSR support.