Hyderabad: In a strange incident, a leopard was found dead, hanging from an electric pole on the peripherals of a forest in Telangana’s Nizamabad town on Monday. The male leopard was electrocuted to death after it probably got stuck between wires on the pole at about 15 feet high. 

Forest officials say leopards usually climb trees and this leopard might have tried climbing the electric pole.The pictures have gone viral on social media.

The tragedy occurred near an agricultural field in Mallavaram village about 18 km from Nizamabad and most likely on Sunday night. Officials say movement of wildlife has been reported in the area for quite some time.

Forest officials brought the dead leopard down with the help of electricians. Revenue, police and forest officials conducted an inquest at the spot before sending the body for postmortem.

Though it was initially suspected that it could be the handiwork of poachers, Nizamabad District Forest Officer VSV Prasad ruled out the possibility and the postmortem too confirmed his statement.

Read Also:
Bengaluru had a wild side that hadn't been seen

The postmortem found that the leopard was between four-and-a-half and five years of age, and it weighed nearly 80 kgs. It was electrocuted and its skin, teeth and nails were not damaged.

The village is less than a kilometer away from the forest, from where the animal is believed to have strayed. However, what prompted the wild cat to climb the pole remains a mystery. Officials did not find any prey on the pole that could have tempted the animal. And there were no trees close to the pole to infer that it had got onto it from a tree.

A year ago, carcasses of a leopard and her cub were found in the Tenagadapa reserve forest near Abbugudem village in Khammam district. Postmortem on the decomposed bodies at Laboratory for Conservation of Endangered Species (LaCONES) and Center for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) here found that the animals had been poisoned. The paws of one of the leopards were chopped off.