Environmentalists and wildlife conservationists have demanded the removal of wildlife biologist Sanjay Gubbi from the ‘Corridor Committee’ set up by the Karnataka Forest Department to draft guidelines to enable the government to buy corridors between two forest areas.
 
Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Wildlife Board, wrote a letter to Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai and Principal Chief Conservator of Forest RK Singh demanding the removal, citing conflict of interest as the prime reason.
 
“We are told Sanjay Gubbi continues to be in the Corridor Committee. However, there is a conflict of interest as the wildlife biologist has constructed permanent structures in the Kaniyanapura elephant corridor, Yelchetty, Bandipur Tiger Reserve. These violations committed by the biologist have emboldened others to build ranches and homestays in the ESZ.
 
Bandipur and Nagarhole tiger reserves are teeming with new resorts and homestays,” alleged Hoover.
 
The committee was constituted by the forest department last year to formulate a new policy to enable the govt to purchase corridor areas between two forests for the smooth and uninterrupted movement of animals. It is expected to look into elephant corridors, tiger reserves or wildlife sanctuaries and national parks.
 
Other members of the committee include the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, (Wildlife) as the chairman; the Chief Conservator of Forests of Bengaluru, Mysuru and Hassan circles; the Chief Conservator of Forests, ICT Cell, Bengaluru; scientists from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc); representative of Wildlife Trust of India and the Deputy Conservator of Forest, Bannerghatta National Park. Conservationists say while it is important to re-establish the corridors looking at the surge in human-wildlife conflict cases over the recent past, there will be a conflict of interest if necessary steps are not taken. The committee is expected to engage with farmers for their land in favour of monetary compensation.