By Rachana Ramesh

Activists demand immediate collaboration to save wildlife and fisheries habitat

Data from the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) has revealed an alarm regarding the deteriorating water quality of lakes in Bengaluru. The report reveals that in July 2023, out of the 41 lakes surveyed, a staggering 39 were graded Class-E, signifying a perilous level of pollution. Over the course of 18 months, from January 2022 to July 2023, an average of 29 lakes were found to be consistently polluted every month. Lake activists say that the water is unfit to support wildlife and fisheries, and have urged authorities to collaborate in order to reduce pollution.

Raghavendra B Pachhapur, a lake activist, said that Class E is designated for the use of irrigation, industrial cooling and controlled waste disposal only. “All the water within lakes must fall within Class D, the class which can support the population of wildlife and fisheries according to the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), if one wants to maintain a habitat. Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) as the custodian of lakes makes many promises to create and flourish a habitat, however, they do not monitor the water quality to ensure it,” he said. He also added that while the municipal body might not have the required specialisation, theymust hire contractors or employ workers with the required knowledge to ensure a healthy habitat within lakes.

Pachhapur also pointed out that there are many water quality parameters including pH, biological oxygen demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS), dissolved oxygen (DO), and total coliform bacteria. However, while the KPSCB collects samples and conducts tests consistently on a monthly basis, they do not put out the collected data along with details of all the parameters, he alleged. “The KSPCB has jurisdiction over 223 lakes across the state with 115 lakes being within the boundaries of Bengaluru alone. The parameters help us understand what is happening within the water of these lakes. 

For example, if coliform is found through testing, it means that the water is seeing a significant inlet of feces, pointing to problems with maintenance of sewage treatment plants (STPs) or other sources of sewage entry,” he said, urging the KSPCB to make all the collected information public for better use. ActionAid Association, where Pachhapur is a programme officer, had earlier conducted a survey regarding data put out by the various pollution control boards across the country and had urged the KSPCB to make data with regard to parameters also public.

 However, there has been no change. He further said that either of the departments must make an active effort to collaborate with each other to ensure minimum 
pollution of water within lakes.

Lake activists and residents living around lakes have also pointed out that there is a lack of a proper mechanism for grievance redressal in order for them to flag off signs of pollution. Pachhapur said that every lake should display basic information regarding the contacts of the BBMP engineer responsible as well as the designated maintenance person. “This information can help the local community members to alert them when there is an issue,” he said.