Recently, a female elephant was electrocuted in the Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve. This happened when the elephant came into contact with an illegal electrical fence that had been erected by a farmer to protect his farmland, mainly from the attacks by wild boards. The elephant died on the spot. Unfortunately, this is not a lone incident of adult elephants dying due to electrocution from illegal electric fences in the state.

According to the data from the Karnataka Forest Department, over the last two years (between January 2021 and March 2023), while 35 elephants have died due to unnatural causes, 22 of the deaths (63 per cent) were due to electrocution. Overall, 134 elephant deaths were recorded in the given period and 77 of them were males.

Officials say that all the recent cases of electrocution have been caused by illegal electrical fencing unlike a few years back when elephants fell prey to sagging transmission lines passing through forest and adjacent areas. A decade ago, the department worked together with electricity supply companies (ESCOMs) to ensure that transmission lines were raised, in a coordinated effort.

“This exercise was taken across the state between 2008 and 2012. Since then, regular patrolling has been going on, and any sagging is reported and rectified immediately. All the recent electrocution-related deaths in elephants are due to farmers drawing high-voltage electrical wires into their farmland fences. When elephants move out of forest areas at night, they encounter these wires and get electrocuted,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

According to wildlife conservationists and experts, the electrocution of elephants should be treated as equivalent to poaching and strict action must be taken against the defaulters.

 However, while cases are being filed by the department, a poor conviction rate is the main cause of concern.

“Giving direct electricity to any fence is illegal and both the forest department and electricity board must treat it as a heinous crime. The forest department officials should look at such cases as poaching and ensure that defaulters are convicted. While cases are being filed by the department, convictions are nil, leading to no deterrent,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife conservationist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

Forest department officials agree that the conviction rate is low. However, they say that since the certainty of being caught is equally impactful, immediate arrests are being made to create fear amongst the perpetrators.

To negate resentment among the farmers regarding crop loss due to raids by wild animals including elephants, the government has doubled the compensation rate this year.

“Crop damage compensation has been doubled and we are also trying to create awareness in fringe villages. Our guards and watchers have been talking to farmers about the impact of snares and high-voltage electrical current. We are also installing barricading, and thus a large forest area is already safeguarded. This will reduce the outflow of elephants and further reduce the number of electrocution cases,” said an official from the department.