Animals are not mere animals anymore. They are political statements. Everybody gets touchy every time you mention a cat or dog or chicken or cow or buffalo or bull or pig or monkey or snake or parrot or any animal for that matter, for various reasons ranging from religion to party manifestos. Anything you say about any of these, you are sure to step on someone’s toes and it can drag you into unimaginable controversy. Social media is full of sarcastic posts about why certain other animals cannot be called national animal or sacred. The cow politics has certainly made a huge difference in how we see our animals today.
 
 The Animal Welfare Board of India has set up rules about cruelty to animals and there are any number of evidences to prove that animals have a tough time in today’s world. Going by the trends in dairy farms, meat, pig and poultry industry, it is beyond doubt that the world has come to believe that animals are there for man to consume. Anything that walks or crawls or flies or even hides under the ground can be food for man. The debate between vegetarians and meat eaters will never end.
 
 However, animals as pets is a totally different issue. Now, the AWBI has listed several animals that are banned from being kept as pets, even. All endangered animals, birds, reptiles are banned as pets. But people being people want to have anything exotic in their possession and one gets to hear exotic animals kept as pets. The question is should we see all pets as “living under stressful conditions” or should we see it as a normal, harmonious man-animal coexistence? In fact, we have had a rich tradition of farmers living in perfect harmony with animals. When did this change into, having pets for pet’s sake and eventually become an expensive/fashionable
 hobby? 
 
 For instance, the Wildlife Protection Act bans trapping and trade of endangered species and indigenous birds. Yet, black market trading of such birds thrives openly. Illegal hawkers bribe the officials and while animal rights activists make loud noises to grab media attention, the real culprits do not get noticed at all.
 
 Weird news like a man marrying a snake believing it to be his dead girlfriend reborn makes headlines in media but the man never gets arrested by the police. Even as topics like ‘should we have zoos at all’ are being debated, the market for exotic animals as pets is expanding at great speed. There is a great confusion among public with regard to the pet industry v/s animals used in entertainment or for other purposes. Jallikattu is one case that could not be decided as to whether it is a sport or cruelty or pet hobby. 
 
 Animal activists and organizations sometimes go overboard. In fact, the entertainment industry is always suspected of shouting for animal blood in every case and one really wishes they would show at least half of that concern towards actors. 
 
 There are any number of instances where the AWBI has bent backwards to assume that the filmmakers have harmed animals while filming. Even a drone shot in which a bird flew into the frame, uninvited, was asked to be cut, because the filmmaker had not taken permission. It was a Kite and the argument was that it did not belong to anyone; it flew into the frame uninvited, and that they did not engage its services. Hence, from whom should they take the permission?
 
 The three certificates – one prior to the shoot, declaring the animal is in fit condition to participate in the shooting, the second to say it was not harmed during the shoot, and the third - after the shoot that it is hale and hearty -- that should be submitted to the board can very easily be created with some money exchanging hands. So who is fooling whom? (Even otherwise if, for instance, such a procedure were in place with regard to actors, the Masti Gudi film shooting tragedy could have been avoided.)
 In such a situation, how does one react to a pet show? Says M Satya Narayan, of Blue N White, that organises pet shows: “There is a need to educate people about
 keeping a pet. And also those who trade in pets. Many of the pet shops in Bengaluru are in bad condition and we need to create awareness about treating animals well. 
 
 The pet market is thriving because there is a demand. But everybody involved - buyers and sellers - should know that they should not deal with any endangered species. 
 Also, how the pet shop should be maintained. If you see several pet shops in Bengaluru, they are in a very pathetic condition. Animals are cramped in small cages.
 
 Proper, healthy food and water is not provided. This should be checked. For instance, in Mumbai, there is a rule that pet shops are banned next to meat shops.”
 
 He believes that pet shows will help in creating awareness among public about pets. He says they are following all rules with regard to pet keeping and they have taken all the required permissions from AWBI and are involving PETA, CUPA and BOTA (Bangalore Opts to Adopt) and others involved with animals to participate in the pet show in the coming week. Bengaluru is considered a pet-lovers paradise and at this show, the organisers are keen on promoting pet adoption. They are even having the first-ever International Feline Conference, tied up with the Cat Fanciers’ Association of India. The organisers say proceeds from the show will go towards promoting activities of Tiger Protection Society and Kickstart Foundation.
 
 They also quote Ritika Goel, Founder of BOTA, as having said, “We not only promote adoptions, but also provide end-to-end holistic support for the adopted animals’ journey through life with their families - from providing adoption counseling to fosters and adopters, medical benefits and discounts, canine behavior assistance, home-made food at discounted rates, legal aid in the event of an incident, low-cost pet boarding options, to training in animal-welfare skillsets to the fosters and adopters!” Wow! Catch you at the Fourth edition of Bangalore Pet Show.