Amidst cases of many birds getting injured after getting entangled in manja or due to other reasons, a sanctuary named ‘Whistling House’ has been set up at the People for Animals (PfA) Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre, providing hope for parakeets in need.

Donated by the ‘Towards Equal Foundation’, this space serves as a haven for rehabilitating parakeets, highlighting the crucial role of such enclosures in wildlife hospitals.

Rescued from perils like fortune tellers’ cages, manja threads, and electric wires, parakeets will now find refuge in the enclosure. Tailored care helps them recover from injuries, practice flight, and rediscover their natural instincts. In situations where parakeets endure cruel treatment, such as feather plucking by fortune tellers, the centre conducts feather implantation procedures and rehabilitation to help them relearn how to fly.

‘The Whistling House’ is designed to maximise the well-being of its avian inhabitants, with ample space, enrichment activities, and exposure to natural sunlight fostering both physical and psychological recovery.

Col. Dr Navaz Shariff, Chief Veterinarian at PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre, said, “Our primary goal is to ensure comprehensive care and rehabilitation for these beautiful birds.

 Every aspect of the enclosure has been meticulously planned for their recovery. Home to a diverse array of parakeet species, the facility includes separate areas for short-term confinement and observation.”

As of January 2024, PfA has rescued nearly 2,000 parakeets belonging to five species. In 2022, 138 parakeets were rehabilitated and released, and in 2023, the numbers soared to 176.

Speaking about the benefits of the enclosure, Dr Shariff said, “Activities aiding complex recoveries to strengthen wings and limbs, partly transparent roof, allowing vital Vitamin D exposure for the parakeets and continuous ventilation ensuring a well-ventilated and healthy environment. This apart, there is use of eco-friendly materials to a great extent and installation of tape across glass to prevent birds from flying in, ensuring their safety.”