By Manoj Sharma
 
 It’s not just the trees that the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike proposes to uproot when it brings down the Queen’s Road Veterinary Hospital. It’ll also destroy the habitats of birds, reptiles and insects inside the compound; over 220 species thrive in the many trees in the complex.
 
 The civic body plans to raze the old structure to make way for a multi-storeyed super specialty veterinary college at a cost of Rs 16.5 crore. Over 60 old and healthy trees will fall victim to the BBMP’s plans. Spontaneous protests have erupted after Bengalureans got to know of the plans.
 
 Just like the thousands of Bengalureans who dote on the city, Rajesh N, a wildlife enthusiast who has been rescuing birds and animals for the last 8 years, is aggrieved that the building plan will bring down several trees and the fauna that they nourish.
 
 “Do you see that branch of this giant tree,” he asks when Bangalore Mirror meets him in the government veterinary college campus. “This tree has given shelter to several birds over many years. This is the hatchling season and all their nests have eggs. Even if a single tree is chopped, the entire family of these birds will be killed,” he continues. The 23-year-old diploma holder from SJC watches birds in his free time and has spent considerable time in the veterinary college.
 
 Rajesh then went on to count the numerous birds that call the campus their home. “Common tailorbird, common myna, jungle myna, red-rumped swallow, red-whiskered bulbul, black drongo, black kite, cow, Indian robin, purple-rumped sunbird, Asian koel, lesser pied kingfisher, white-throated kingfisher, spotted owlet, barn owl, greater coucal, rose-ringed parakeet, bee-eater, large pied wagtail, spotted dove, coppersmith barbet, pale copped barbet, white-cheeked barbet, oriental magpie robin, house swift, oriental white Eye, ashy prinia, bush chat, pipestrille bat, fruit bat…,” he rattles off names of birds without pausing for breath.
 
 Warning BBMP that it cannot push ahead with the project without public consultation, he said: “If any bird or nest is destroyed during demolition of the building, it amounts to hunting these protected birds and perpetrators will have to face legal consequences under the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. Neither the government nor the department of animal husbandry has planted these trees; they have grown naturally,” he said.
 
 
 
 
 
 MB Krishna, a renowned ornithologist based in Bengaluru, is equally miffed. “Trees tell the storyline of a landscape apart from the very important biological and ecological role that they play. They are part of the history of a place. Why did the powers that be not design the new hospital to include these trees in their design? Where has the competence gone,” he asked.
 
 Ullas Anand, another birder, said he cannot imagine Bengaluru without its majestic trees or the several species of birds found in them. “During my school days, we could see so many kinds of birds. But they are slowly disappearing now as number of trees are declining in the city. If trees continue to be chopped at the same pace, all these birds may migrate from the city,” he said.
 
 It is said that if all the bees in the world die, humans won’t survive. Substitute bees with birds and Bengaluru with “the world” in that sentence and you’ll get the
 picture.