Nagarhole Tiger Reserve to be entirely monitored by camera traps
 
 	Tiger conservation in the state has gone one step further than any other state in the country. Serving as a model to many other states that boast of healthy tiger populations, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve (NTR) has become the first tiger reserve in the state to be fully covered by cameras for recording wildlife population and movement deep inside the forest. Spread across 643 sq km, comprising thick evergreen and deciduous for ests, wildlife in NTR will be monitored by a whopping 600 camera traps! A camera trap is a remotely activated camera that is equipped with sensors and is used for capturing wild animals on film when researchers are not present. 

 	The entire NTR, which has seven ranges, has already been divided into several grids, each measuring about 2 sq km, for installation of camera traps. Giving details of the camera installation, NTR Director and Conservator of Forests R Gokul said, “NTR has already installed 400 cameras which have pro vided valuable details about presence of big cats and other endangered animals. All these cameras could cover 75 per cent of the NTR, but now with another 200 sets of camera traps, the entire NTR can be covered.“ Scripting a new history in conservation, Bengaluru based CSS Corp on Wednes day donated 300 cameras to the forest department for in stallation in NTR and Anshi Dandeli Tiger Reserve in Utta ra Kannada district. 

 	Tirumalai Govindan Ra mesh, aka Tiger Ramesh, CEO, CSS Corp said, “As part of our corporate social responsibili ty, we are seriously committed towards providing complete support to the forest depart ment in their endeavour to wards a scientific tiger census. After extending our support to NTR, we are now support ing Anshi-Dandeli reserve too.“ Out of the 300 cameras, 200 will be installed in NTR while the remaining 100 will be installed at Anshi-Dandeli reserve. According to sources, each camera would cost about Rs 15,000. With supporting accessories and other equipment, the cost of 100 cameras would reach anywhere between Rs 25 to Rs 30 lakh. 

 	“The high value of the cameras has also attracted thieves who have laid their hands on the cameras in Nagarhole. We lost 16 cameras to theft. Hence we have come up with theft-proof cameras that have been fixed within a locked iron box. We hope that this will prevent thieves from stealing these cameras,“ Gokul said. 

 	While the tiger density at NTR is pegged at about 13 tigers per 100 sq km, the density in Anshi-Dandeli stood at 3 to 5 tigers per 100 sq km.