By: Mihika Basu
 
 While protected areas play a key role in conserving intact forest landscapes, according to estimates by ISRO, Bengaluru, just 4.4 per cent of the area of intact forest landscapes fall inside the existing 47 protected areas, which means that 26,932 square km of intact forest landscapes remain outside of protected areas, and need urgent conservation planning.
 
 
 
 
 
 Distribution of intact forest landscapes in protected areas of Karnataka, for instance, shows that in Brahmagiri wildlife sanctuary, there are two intact forest landscapes currently, covering an area of 63.6 square km.
 
 Stating that intact forest landscapes are vital for protecting biodiversity, ISRO-Bengalu-ru, ISRO’s forestry and ecology group of National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad and Indian Institute of Space Sci-ence and Technology, Thiruva-nanthapuram, have created a spatial database on intact forest landscapes of the country.
 
 Experts said that delineation of intact forest landscapes is a cost-effective solution for the conservation of biodiversity.
 
 According to them, the term ‘inactness’ implies that all “ecosystem components are present and ecological processes are functioning” within their natural range of variation. At the national level, 237 forest landscapes and 5.4 per cent of total natural forests remained intact.
 
 “Current intact forest landscapes of India consists of blocks larger than 10 square km, covering an area of 34,061 square km. A total 47 protected areas represent 7,129 square km of the area under intact forest landscapes. Thus, the total area covered by the intact forest landscapes accounts for about 1.1 per cent of the country’s natural forest area currently protected. It is estimated that 4.4 per cent of the area of intact forest landscapes fall inside the existing protected areas. Hence, an additional area of 26,932 square km of intact forest landscapes remain outside of protected areas in India,” the research team in their findings said. The findings says that the results of the analysis are best suited as input for the process of identification of new protected areas.
 
 “As much as possible, these forests should be encompassed in protected areas, especially in regions with little intact forest remaining,” the findings said.
 
 The results have been obtained by using data over a period of 80 years, and the researchers recommend fine-scale mapping of biodiversity within the intact forest landscapes, to prepare efficient conservation plans. “The conservation of the intact forests is a rare opportunity and should be a priority activity for proper management.
 
 The results suggest that inclusion of intact forest landscapes as last wilderness areas are appropriate to be incorporated in the extension of protected area network. The monitoring of changes that occur inside and surroundings of intact forest landscapes help in future conservation programmes,” they added.
 
 Results further show that of the total area under intact forest landscapes, Eastern Himalayas represent 76.7 per cent of the area, followed by Western Himalayas (8.8 per cent), Andaman and Nicobar Islands (6.2 per cent), and Western Ghats (5.7 per cent). Major intact forest landscapes are found in Eastern Himalayas and most of these are in blocks larger than 500 square km. The largest intact forest landscape block, which occupies an area of 3342.9 square km (9.8 per cent), is in Eastern Himalayas of Arunachal Pradesh.
 
 According to the analysis, the temperate climatic zone represents highest intact forest area (56.6 per cent), followed by subtropical zone (19.2 per cent), tropical zone (18.6 per cent) and alpine zone (5.6 per cent). Assessment of intact forest landscapes across the forest types indicates 39.1 per cent of the area under Himalayan moist temperate forests followed by subtropical broad-leaved hill forests (14.2 per cent), wet evergreen forests (12.2 per cent) and montane wet temperate forests (11.7 per cent), said the research paper.
 
 
 HIMALAYAN COVER
 
 
 Of the total area under intact forest landscapes, Eastern Himalayas represent 76.7 per cent of the area, followed by Western Himalayas (8.8 per cent), Andaman and Nicobar Islands (6.2 per cent) and Western Ghats (5.7 per cent). Major intact forest landscapes are found in Eastern Himalayas and most of these are in blocks larger than 500 square km. The largest Intact forest landscape block, which occupies an area of 3342.9 square km (9.8 per cent), is found in Eastern Himalayas of Arunachal Pradesh.
 
  FOREST STATS
 
 * According to estimates by ISRO, Bengaluru, just 4.4 per cent of the area of intact forest landscapes fall inside the existing 47 protected areas
 * n 26,932 square Km of intact forest landscapes remain outside of protected areas
 * At the national level, 237 forest landscapes and 5.4 per cent of the total natural forest remained intact
 * The results have been obtained by using data over a period of 80 years, and the researchers recommend fine-scale mapping of biodiversity within the intact forest landscapes, to prepare efficient conservation plans.