The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Forest Department has decided to construct a rescue holding house and enclosure at the Butterfly Park near Bannerghatta Biological Park for the welfare of small mammals, including bonnet macaques, fruit bats, monitor lizards, porcupines, etc.

The BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forests floated a tender on January 19, inviting bidders for the construction of the rescue holding house and enclosure at an estimated cost of Rs 81 lakh.

“For the first time, we are constructing a rescue holding house and enclosure for injured and rescued birds. We thought Butterfly Park was an ideal location for the construction of the rescue holding house and enclosure as veterinary services are available at Bannerghatta Biological Park. We release the injured and rescued birds at the same locations after providing treatment to them,’’ said BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forests BLG Swamy.

Although animal activists have welcomed the decision to construct a rescue holding house and enclosure for the benefit of rescued and injured birds, they are apprehensive about the safety of birds and species.
 
“It is not advisable to take rescued and injured birds to the Butterfly Park from different parts of Bengaluru, as it would affect the health of birds and species. For example, 16 deer died due to some disease at Bannerghatta Biological Park,’’ said Arun Prasad, an animal activist.

Jayanthi Kallam, Executive Director of Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (AARC), said that the decision to construct a rescue holding and enclosure is appreciable, and the BBMP is focusing on urban wildlife by constructing a cage for temporarily holding rescued small mammals. “Wild animals are prone to extreme stress in captivity, and stress can kill them, so care should be taken to ensure the cage is not open to public viewing and is away from visitors in a secluded area. The animals thus rescued should also be taken to rescue centres quickly, so they get the necessary treatment and can be released back into their natural habitats soon,’’ said Jayanthi.