The Central Zoo Authority had made it mandatory for all major facilities to employ qualified professionals
 
 
 Zoos and biological parks across Karnataka that are looking to scale up or meet international standards are hunting for biologists who can help them care for animals more scientifically and provide expertise during emergencies.
 
 The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) had mandated the appointment of biologists at all medium- and large-sized zoos and biological parks across the country.
 
 While the Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP), which has the country’s highest density of carnivores, has already called for applications for the post, the mini-zoo at Bhutramanahatti on the outskirts of Belagavi has put on hold its plans to scale up to a medium-sized zoo, for want of a biologist.
 
 While the BBP has invited applications for a walk-in interview, the Belagavi zoo is urging the government to create the post of a biologist and recruit a qualified wildlife biologist so that it can go ahead with its plans to scale up, which is expected to cost around Rs 50 crore.
 
 
 
 Zoos need biologists
 
 
 Biologists are crucial in running zoos, explained executive director of BBP Santosh Kumar. “From designing the habitat to understanding animal behaviour and assessing their health on a daily basis, biologists stay in the thick of everyday life of a zoo. After assuming charge at BBP, I noticed that there were no full-time trained biologists on the premises. We’ve been getting biologists from outside every time there has been an emergency such an outbreak of a disease or an animal casualty at the park,” he said.
 
 The Kittur Rani Chenn­amma Nisargadhama (or the Belagavi zoo) had submitted a proposal to CZA to scale up its mini-zoo to a medium-sized one. The zoo authority, however, put the project on hold till the appointment of a biologist.
 
 Basavaraj Patil, deputy conservator of forests, Belagavi, said: “We had submitted a detailed proposal for upgradation of the existing zoo over 60 hectares through the Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK).
 
 However, about a month ago, CZA said it would approve the proposal only if there was a biologist at the zoo along with six other staff, including a veterinary doctor and compounder. We have written to the state government for the creation of such a post. Soon, we will be able to appoint a suitable candidate.”
 
 	A trained biologist has a better understanding of animal needs and behaviour, and can help zoos take greater care of the animals. “Biologists are trained in every aspect of wild animals, including origin, behaviour, diseases, habitats, life cycle and genetics. They judge the mood and behaviour of animals and prepare diet or treatment plan accordingly. They help in setting up and maintaining a good environment at the zoo that stimulates animals physically and mentally. They also educate visitors about wildlife and conservation. Veterinarians and biologists complement each other and are of great use during the outbreak of diseases,” explained Avani Kumar Varma, principal chief conservator of forests (rtd).
 	
 	  	The BBP has, till now, received two applications that are being considered. “We have conducted the interview and will announce the results in a few days. 
 	
 	  	The post will be on a contract basis. These will be crucial hires as we are currently in the process of redesigning the zoo to meet international standards,” said the executive director.