Most holiday preparations focus on buying cheap tickets, trendy clothes and picking the best camera. Chuck that. The Andaman Islands, dear mainlander, is not your regular destination. It will reach out to every part of your soul. Here are a few pointers on how to prepare yourself for this experience. 

 	Hit the treadmill  	At the Havelock jetty, as my friend and I were returning to our cycles, a gentle old lady started speaking to us in Bengali. Tamilians, neither of us could understand what she was saying, i.e. till we followed her gestures, pointed specifically at our shorts and towards some men who had landed on the island for a political rally (this was April 1). We managed to catch one word which helped us make sense of her message — “sharam”. Pros at handling this situation, we smiled at her and quickly climbed on to our cycles. 

 	She, however, was an aberration. With tourism being the mainstay of the economy, most locals are used to tourists and won’t give you a second glance if you are laying on the sand in beachwear. Throw in the turquoise waters and there’s little reason to wear much else. If love handles or cellulite are a concern, let this be the prime reason to get into shape. 

 	Accept free fries 	The best part of travel is the stories you return with — the owner of a gift shop (Havelock) who claims that a U-pin crafted by him was such a hit with a Israeli Olympic runner in a picture on his wall that she spent Rs 60,000 there; a local who was employed with the government at the Phoenix Bay jetty at Port Blair talked about the various islands he’d been to (some are not open to visitors). The locals here talk, and most tourists are friendly too. One night, a couple from Germany, having got a larger serving of French fries than they were expecting, offered to share their plate, which I refused politely. The fries promptly went to another tourist who gobbled it up and spent the night exchanging stories with this couple. It could have been me. And it can be you. 

 	Go for Vipassana 	Because the opposite is always true in India, the Andamans is also a place to enjoy solitude. The islands are safe (the owner of Breakwater Resort at Neil Island says no one here will offer a lift to a stranger) but it’s also a place of poor network — at Neil Island I got network a kilometre away from the beach, on the rocks near the Natural Bridge — meaning no FB posts or long phone conversations. So, if you plan to travel alone, learn to enjoy your own company. Grab a few books (I went through five in 10 days). With few touristy sites, unless you are busy island hopping (ideally stick to two, with a day’s trip to Port Blair, in 10 days), you will find a lot of time on your hands. Don’t fret if your day’s itinerary looks like this — wake up, go for a swim in the sea, eat, sleep on the beach, repeat. Your only company will be the mandatory beach dog. 

 	Plan Well 	April was end of season. Yet, getting a government ferry to the various islands meant either jugaad or long queues. Private ferries charge thrice the rate and timings are awkward. Ask your hotel/resort or a local tour operator to book your ferry tickets in advance (a week is ideal). 

 	Book in advance if you have a specific destination in mind. A day trip to Baratang Island, solely because the journey involved a through the Jarawa forests, didn’t work out as all buses were booked. 

 	Learn to float 	This has, both a literal and a philosophical meaning. We will come to the literal later. 

 	Baratang wasn’t the only plan that fell through. An overnight stay at the Water House in Port Blair, run by Dinaz Noble, didn’t work out because there wasn’t enough company — the wooden lodge is in the middle of a lake and has no water or electrical supply and thus, is best enjoyed in the safety of company — and a night kayaking trip also had to be canned because of permission troubles. At Neil, I was recommended the AND Resort right next to the beach, but preferred the quietude I had enjoyed at Havelock’s Emerald Gecko, and briefed auto driver (Shyamlal) accordingly. He took me to Break Water which turned out to be the hippie colony I was looking for. 

 	Lesson: Plans will fall through. Learn to go with the flow. 

 	Sign up for a few BNHS walks 	As I dumped my bag in my cabin at Neil, I noticed a frog next to the concrete bed. With exceptional calm, I asked the owner to have it removed. Later, the exercise had to be repeated. The next morning, the frog had returned. This time, I let it be. 

 	The frog isn’t going to be your only brush with wildlife. If you choose to stay in bamboo huts and not concrete resorts (choose huts, please), you will be woken up by petulant birds. If you stay at the research facility run by Andaman Nicobar Environment Team at Wandoor (Port Blair), you will have to stomp off snakes as you make a loo run in the middle of the night. There are also jelly fish that don’t sting, but are icky to touch. And, at Ross Island, deer will nuzzle you in exchange for coconut. Carry insect repellant to stave off nasty sand flies. 

 	Read up  	You can’t go to Andamans and not dive (however, certain ailments will prevent you from doing so, consult your GP). Freaked out at the thought of entering the water by flipping backwards, I refused to read up about the experience. Big mistake. If you are comfortable in water — use these four months to learn swimming if you are not — it’s a must-have experience, made even more enjoyable by knowing your clown fish from sea cucumber. All dive schools have a ready reckoner. Let that be your pre-dive read. 

 	Appreciate history 	These two stops are a must — the Cellular Jail at Port Blair and Ross Island (for which you will get a ferry from Phoenix Jetty, Port Blair). The jail was where Indian freedom fighters were locked up and tortured by colonial rulers. The jail museum will give you names and faces (Veer Savarkar, for instance) and the history of their struggle. Appreciate the freedom they gave up, so we could have ours. 

 	In the two hours that you have at Ross, walk through the ruins of the island and take in the eerie silence of the walls that once witnessed numerous soirees, but are now home to parasitic roots.