Gunshots were used in HAL airport to shoo away birds to prevent them from striking planes during take-offs and landings. Soon, the airport will have a solution that will divert birds away from the flight path, but gently and without noise. Just a year ago, a retired wing commander was charged with poaching for scaring away birds at HAL airport.    A retired squadron leader is offering a solution to make flights at the airport - which facilitates VVIP movement - free from bird hits. Both the airport and BBMP wildlife cell have joined hands to address the problem of bird strikes. The airport, which sees over 20 flights (including private aircraft) taking off and landing everyday on its runway, is home to more than 69 species of birds.   The latest solution, called a 'hazard mitigation module', aims at diverting the path of birds that pose threat to flights during take-off and landing without disturbing the existing eco-system.   ""Initial talks have been completed. The solution will be provided by Via Life Sciences, a city-based company,"" Sharath R Babu, environment advisor to BBMP, told Bangalore Mirror. The company is said to have provided similar solutions to 15 other airports across the country.   HAL and Via Life Sciences were asked to go ahead with developing the solution last week. Their teams will soon study the ethology and movement of birds up to a radius of 25 km from ARP (Aerodrome Reference Point) of the HAL airport. The study will also comprise bird attraction factor analysis, perch risk evaluation and mitigation, airport risk index study, day-time and night-time evaluation and multi-seasonal risk analysis.   ""HAL airport authorities are in communication with us. We are going to study the pattern of bird movement,"" said Sqn Ldr (rtd) S S Mahesh, who head Via Life Sciences.   ""We have had talks with a firm which has sought a month’s time (to find solution to the problem of bird strikes). The solution won't be easy and it requires a sustained effort,"" said a senior airport official on condition of anonymity.