As a city’s heritage steps back to a whole new world of development, many things get lost into oblivion. Not much is spared, right from architecture to anecdotes. In Bangalore, Whitefield is one area that is still trying to retain its charm in spite of new entrants like ITPL, gated communities and malls. And backing this community is a film-based conservation effort documenting oral histories that emphasise the intrinsic value of a heritage precinct –  The Whitefield Diaries.
 This project consists of six short films which are an outcome of conservation architect Krupa Rajangam’s long term research. “Whitefield was designed to be a model for other Anglo-Indian communities in other parts of the country. The Whitefield Diaries is part of a larger project called the Neighbourhood Diaries wherein we explore the significance of various neighbourhoods and their built heritage. This project followed on from the earlier work based on the growing awareness that Whitefield’s uniqueness lay not just in its planning and buildings but also in its rich store of oral history.” In association with French artist and director Clemence Barret, Krupa compiled a picture of Whitefield as a settlement where “everybody knew everybody”. She and Archana Prasad, founder of Jaaga Media Centre, are the co-producers of the films.
 
 Krupa throws light on the days when the settlement was conceived as a unique model by D.S. White way back in 1882. 
 The Concept
 When D.S. White thought of a settlement, it was with the idea to make Anglo-Indians self-sufficient. He wanted them to stand on their own feet without depending on both, the Indians and the Britishers. The Mysore Maharaja, Chamaraja Wodeyar, donated 3,900 acres of land to the Eurasian and Anglo-Indian community who looked forward to an idyllic almost “utopian” life as visualised by White. “There was some basic capital requirement to be part of the settlement and soon many retired officials came in here. In a way, Pensioners’ Paradise was the tag that the city of Bangalore borrowed from Whitefield where actually retirees came to live,” says Krupa. Settlers included the Pecks and Archers, whose descendents still live in Whitefield. Michael Ludgrove, descendent of D S White, has in possession a rare copy of White’s original Guide to Anglo-Indian Settlements, which details the vision. There were sneers and caustic remarks by British officers who were of the general opinion that one could never make a farmer out of an Anglo-Indian. The Whitefield Settlers' & Residents' Association, was formed in 1905 to overlook the affairs of the community. It happens to be the oldest residents association in the city. 
 The Life
 A termite-ridden Annual Report (1905) written by Reverend Peck was found in a trunk which talks of how the settlement, 12 years after its inception, was cultivating ragi and complained that there wasn’t much water. “The land was on an elevation and rain water drained out into the valley that was Varthur Lake and Nellurhalli Lake, behind the Ecumenical Christian Centre. So, what could the settlers do?” says Krupa. The mango groves came up but soon, the settlers started taking in weekend visitors in their homes. These homestays catered to the British officers who came in to do some bird and fox hunting. “Hyenas roamed in the inner circle where there were plenty of lantana bushes. After dark, one seldom ventured out and if they did it was with bright lanterns,” says Krupa. According to Deepa Peck, who has married into the Peck family, until the sixties, there was no electricity. “The first telephone came to my husband’s aunt, Kathleen, in the early seventies on special grounds of age and failing health,” she informs. 
 
 The residents were gung ho about wildlife sauntering in, even as recent as the 1960-70s. Deepa recounts of how her husband as a kid had an encounter with a cobra. “My husband was helping his grandmother sew when his aunt entered the room. She told him to stand still and then took a stick and whacked the cobra that was coiled around his legs. That was it - no commotion,” she notes. 
 
 The Very Reverend A H Peck, who was the oldest member of the community passed away in the late seventies, lived up to a ripe old age of 90. He had documented events and happenings meticulously in several notebooks. “It was a very valuable source of information which was lent to a journalist who never returned it. Attempts to trace the books were futile as the journalist had passed on and his family did not know where the notebooks were,” says Deepa Peck of her husband’s granduncle’s handwritten treasures.
                                   Residents of Whitefield at a tea party          
 A Famous Visitor
 The residents were, by and large, a happy lot who would also fight and bicker on occasions. But, as Krupa says, “they were laidback and there were balls, socials and tea parties whenever the occasion demanded. The joke was that you would know what’s happening in your house from your neighbour.”
 
 One visitor stirred things up with his visit to the Waverly Inn, which incidentally is the only original building remaining. Vivian D’Souza, owner of Waverly Inn, speaks of seeing a rock with a graffiti that is so common with youngsters.  “He claims to have seen a rock in the area (referred as the Rocks – behind the outer circle) which was inscribed with the initials WSC and RH – Winston Churchill and Rose Hamiltion – in a heart. It was popular amongst the residents that Churchill used to come to the inn to court the innkeeper’s daughter. The rock is not there as the area gave way to a gated community,” says Krupa.  “We like to believe that this bit of oral history is true although I personally have not seen the rock,” comments Deepa.  
 The diaries
 The Whitefield Diaries consists of the following films: Circle Without Circle - An introductory episode with different people's take on Whitefield and what the name and place means to them. We see it as a preamble to the other films; Church Tales - Maggie, long term resident of old Whitefield, reminisces about her personal link with Memorial Church, once the centre of village life. She narrates stories and anecdotes related to it and tells us of the imminent threat of demolition that looms over this important cultural hub; The Past is a Foreign Country - J E Giddens, one of the oldest Anglo-Indian residents of Whitefield, talks  about  the change and transformation of Whitefield. He is pragmatic, someone who prefers to live in the present rather than worry about what might have happened; Time Capsule - Vivian D 'Souza, another long term resident talks about Waverley - once the village Inn and now a lone bungalow in the midst of newer developments. He shares his struggle to maintain the place and its character, because for him man is defined by his past; Those Were the Days - Christa Moss narrates her nostalgic poem on Whitefield. She and her husband Lionel, express their regret that the 'good old days' of Whitefield are gone; The Whitefield Tea Party - key residents of the original settlement of Whitefield get together to discuss the films and the neighbourhood's future, given the rapid urbanisation that it has seen and will continue to witness.
 
 The Whitefield Diaries is not just a trip down nostalgia lane, but also holds a mirror to the present and future of one of the most charming communities of Bangalore.
 
 
 Nuggets of history
 » Whitefield settlement was conceived by D S White in 1882
 » Bangalore got the sobriquet Pensioners’ Paradise from Whitefield which was originally the place that retirees actually came to live in
 » Apparently, Winston Churchill used to court the local inn keeper's daughter Rose Hamilton 
 The Whitefield Diaries will be featured on September 24 from 7.30 to 9 pm at Jaaga, No.68, KH Road.