The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has yet again reached out to the Karnataka Forest Department regarding the matter of illegal construction and infrastructure development in the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve.
 
NTCA has written to the chief wildlife warden of Karnataka after wildlife conservationists in the area raised concerns about the development work of the recently inaugurated orchidarium, despite NTCA taking cognizance of the matter and directing the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka Forest Department to take action against officials of Kali Tiger Project and NTCA southern zone for violating the Forest Conservation Act by allowing illegal construction activities.
 
“…another representation vide email has been received by this authority regarding videos and photos of a person painting the Orchidarium compound wall in the core tiger zone of Kali Tiger Reserve. In this regard, I am directed to request you to furnish (a) factual report to this authority at the earliest,” said the letter dated May 22 by the assistant inspector general of forest, NTCA.
 
Wildlife conservationists say they were alarmed by recently circulated photos and videos of a man painting on the walls of the Orchidarium on social media sites.
 
“It is not clear whether he was invited by the forest officials of the Kali Tiger Project. Even so, a detailed probe has to be conducted,” said a conservationist.
 
NTCA has many times has reached out to the state forest department seeking action against officials responsible for some of the structures in the core zone. One of the letters also sought a high-level probe about CSR funds and Tiger Foundation funds for constructing the Orchidarium.

 Relook at what’s going on at tiger reserveAddressed to the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state government, the letter has cited yet another representation made by wildlife activists through the news report on alleged illegal construction activities in the core areas of the reserve. 
This was after locals and wildlife conservationists highlighted the issue of illegal construction activities inside the reserve forest. Orchidarium, jungle safari, and canopy walks were some of the unlawful activities brought to NTCA’s notice.
 
“By rule, the public is not allowed inside the core zones. NTCA should probe it instead of seeking factual reports leading to no conclusive outcome,” said a wildlife activist in the area.