Subhadra, currently in Krishna Udupi temple, is sick again; she may be sent back to the Sakkrebailu elephant camp
 
 Can elephants be atheists? Twenty-six-year-old Subhadra sure looks like one. Each time she is taken out of her home -- Sakkrebailu elephant camp where she lives with he family -- for a ceremony at the Udupi temple (which owns her), she falls sick.
 
 She was recently brought to the Udupi temple for the Paryaya ceremony and has been keeping unwell since. She is likely to be sent back to Sakkrebail elephant camp for recuperation.
 
 In 2016 too she fell sick when she was brought to the temple for the Paryaya ceremony.
 
 Dr Vinay S, Senior Veterinary Officer, Shivamogga Wildlife Division, who has been monitoring the health of Subhadra, told Bangalore Mirror that it was in 2015 that he was first informed about Subhadra’s condition. He said that captive elephants usually suffer from certain common ailments and loneliness; in Subhadra’s case, it got aggravated as she was missing her natural habitat. There were allegations that her mahout was not taking good care of her, aggravating her foot rot condition.
 
 “When we brought Subhadra’s condition to the notice of the Krishna Mutt management, the temple committee replaced the mahout (who hailed from Kerala) with another one from the Sakkrebailu elephant camp. A kavadi was brought too,” Dr Vinay said.
 
 However, as the foot rot condition requires continuous medical treatment and it was not possible to travel to Udupi from Shivamogga every day (about 150 km) they suggested she be brought back to the camp. With permission from the Forest Department, she travelled to Shivamogga and recovered. Dr Vinay said she recovered quickly as the vegetation at the camp is good.
 
 He said in 2016 too she was unhappy about moving to the temple. “An elephant needs to walk about 7-8 km every day, they need to take a good bath several times a day; they love to put mud on their body to avoid ticks and mites. Also, if once affected by foot root, the elephant must be given continuous medication and
 supplements,” he said.
 
 As soon as Subhadra reached the temple, she refused to listen to the mahout’s commands. Her medical examination too became difficult and hence the injuries aggravated.
 
 “She is happy in the camp. The elephant was born in Sakkrebailu. Elephants are social animals, intelligent and have a good memory. She is happy with her mother, grandmother and her family. This elephant is still young. Elephant bulls separate from the herd once they mature, but the cows prefer to travel together and protect the calves,” Dr Vinay said.
 
 Subhadra has been at the temple for the 2018 paryaya, but is feeling sick again so the veterinarians have suggested that she be brought back to the camp. The Mutt committee has been supportive and has approached the Forest Department, seeking permission for shifting of the elephant.