What began as a suggestion for a weekend vacation at a watering hole in Bangalore took four of us - I, Sampath, Prahalad and Chandrashekar - on an adventure to the watering holes of wild elephants in HD Kote taluk.

Nugu Dam, a relatively unknown micro hydel plant on the Nugu river (a tributary of Cauvery), is surrounded by the Nugu Wildlife Sanctuary, about 60 km from Mysore. The sanctuary itself is not open to tourists (it is connected to Bandipur, Nagarhole and Mudumalai forest ranges, but is surrounded by numerous villages. The closest, Beeralu, is just a stone’s throw away. The only place you can stay is in a house in the village, if you have a relative, or in the inspection bungalow, if you are lucky and well connected!

Villagers avoid the last few kilometres of road to the dam and its reservoir just before dusk as wild elephants take this route to reach the reservoir.

Naika, a villager from Beeralu, who had been chatting with us earlier, came back around 5 pm saying many wild elephants were on the hill on the other side of the road. It did not take much time to reach the spot with Naika enjoying his first journey in a car.

IS HE JOKING?
When we reached that spot, Naika said he could hear the elephants trumpet. He pointed at a tamarind tree and claimed elephants rub against it they they cross the road. The tree was smeared with mud.
Naika stood on the ridge of a trench dug parallel to the road (the beasts, however, have managed to cover it at several places), pointed at the hillock and shouted: “There, there is one more that side.” 
But all I could see was a ‘brown stone-like thing’ amidst greenery. The stone ‘moved’ and we could make out the outline of an elephant. And then, a few more appeared in the horizon. “They have covered themselves in mud and so they look red,” said Naika. 

The distance between us and the elephants was at least half a kilometre and no amount of zoom focus on the camera could get us a clear view.

RUN FOR LIFE
Then, Chandrashekar took a bold step and jumped over the trench. We followed him while Naika remained on the ridge and asking us to come back. We hardly took a dozen steps when - in a deviation from their path - we saw three elephants grazing with their backs to us. They were so close to us all along and we had not noticed. I clicked, thrilled at watching wild elephants so close and that too on foot. One of the three pachderms turned towards us and I focused the camera to get this wonderful picture. Prahalad too focused his camera and the other two smiled for the snaps of their lives.

What happened in the next two seconds still gives us goose bumps. Branches were snapping and we felt a big shape charging at the four of us. This was another pachyderm, a huge bull, from a completely different direction. We didn’t realise he was watching us from behind just a few trees. Prahalad and I bolted and shouted at the other two to run for their lives as well! It was no more than 10 metres to the road. We dared not look back until we were in the car. The bull had stopped chasing us. We were ‘speechless’ for a few minutes and we coudln’t stop Naika from yelling at us.

PLEASE GET LOST
After recovering from the ‘near-death experience’, we decided to watch the elephants cross the road while remaining in the car. Just then, a jeep carrying forest department personnel arrived at the spot. They did not take kindly to our request to watch the elephants and chased us away. With a heavy heart, we drove slowly towards the village.

Though it was just 6 pm, there was darkness all around. Just half a kilometre ahead, Chandrashekar screeched the car to a halt. Some 20 metres ahead of us, elephants were crossing the road. Tuskers, babies and the rest of them walked majestically.

From a bridge ahead, we saw the elephants enter the water. We could make out their individual shapes because of the darkness. But it was a memorable day.

Later, we waited to narrate our tale to two more friends who were to join us that evening. Rajeeva (Rajesh), a former president of Idiyala gram panchayat, arrived. We were eager to share our experiences with him, but he had his own story to tell. “Even the Mysore maharajas have not seen leopards in these parts. We saw one near the bridge on the way here,” said an excited Rajeeva.

ELEPHANTS DO SWIM
We spent the night discussing elephants and the leopard. Naika had told us elephants regularly swam across the reservoir. But Chandrashekar was not ready to believe.

The next day, we spotted four elephants, two of them calfs, on the other side of the bank. At dusk, the four reappeared and took to water. Chandrashekar watched as the elephants swam more than a kilometre to our side of the reservoir. They came out of the water right before our eyes and walked away on the banks, trumpeting every now and then. We could only catch a glimpse of their huge shapes in the darkness and through the thick foliage.

We left for Bangalore the same night. The euphoria lasted two days until news arrived from Nugu. Villagers had chased away nearly 40 elephants that raided their farms. In the stampede, a baby elephant had died. A few days later, another elephant struggled to its death as it had got stuck in loose soil.

Friends from Mysore sent the pictures of villagers chasing away elephants. We wonder if there will be any elephants there the next time we visit.