A talk about wildlife
Politician and animal rights activist Maneka Gandhi will be in the city today to be part of ‘Living with the wild’, an evening organised by People for Animals Wildlife Hospital, the aim of which is to explore the conservation of urban wild animals, the health of a fast-growing city, and the role of its citizens. The evening will also witness the release of a short film by Mahesh Bhat and a panel discussion with Prof Harini Nagendra, Leo Saldanha, Dr Aravind Madhyastha, Rajeev Gowda and Sanjai Mohan. 

 WHERE: Bangalore International Centre, Domlur
 WHEN: 3.45pm-6pm, September 28 
 CALL: 25359680

 Slow down
Let this weekend be about meditation sessions, transformational workshops, panel discussions, spiritual concerts, speaker talks, mind shifts, deep connections, incredible adventures and unique opportunities to expand your possibilities. The occasion is the 12th edition of Global Festival of Spiritual Sciences. For kids, they have lined up yoga, storytelling, pottery and other workshops.

 WHERE: Pyramid Valley International, Sadanandanagar WHEN: September 28-October 1 ENTRY: gfss.thriive.in

Ready to cosplay?
Comic Con 2019 is almost here, so why not do some prep? Hosted by India’s Championship of Cosplay Winner 2019 Akshay Churi along with Bengaluru’s top cosplayer Sana Khan, this workshop is just about that. It will teach you the dos and dont’s of what it takes to be a true cosplayer.

 WHERE: The Beer Cafe Biggie, ST Bed, Koramangala 4th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 3.30pm-5.30pm, September 28
 ENTRY: Free

Shop till you drop
The Crafts Council of Karnataka has always kept alive the proud tradition of sari culture and awareness through its flagship exhibition called Vastrabharana. The good news is it is back for the 27th time in the city and this time the focus is to showcase varieties of handcrafted cholis, bespoke kanjaris, abhas by using handloom yardage fine-tuned with subtle detailing. Also, choose from Uppada and Paithani saris, natural dyed weaves, linen Ikat and Gadwals and more.

 WHERE: Chitrakala Parishat, Kumara Krupa Road
 WHEN: 10am-7.30pm, September 28-October 2 CALL: 9845030838

 A show of fantasy
Antariksha Sanchar is a fantasy Bharatanatyam dance opera inspired by the magical cultures of South India and the dream theories of math genius S Ramanujan, scored by a Carnatic-electronic ensemble and accompanied by stunning visuals from India’s first cultural adventure video game. Bharatanatyam exponent Jayalakshmi Eshwar leads the troupe, while Avinash Kumar is the mind behind the video game.

 WHERE: Good Shepherd Auditorium, Richmond Town
 WHEN: 7pm onwards, September 28 
 ENTRY: `300-900, redbull.in/antariksha

 All for acoustics
Midnight Poppies, one of city’s most celebrated acoustic western folk band, will perform live a selection of their original material, centered around themes of love, human behaviour and aspirations of a better way. Consisting of Rajni Shivaram (vocals), Adrian Moses (guitar) and Sangeeta Hosea (vocals & guitar), the band is heavily inspired by artists of the 1970s such 
as Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez, Crosby Stills & Nash and Neil Young.

 WHERE: Aruna Sunderlal Auditorium, The Bangalore School of Music
 WHEN: 7pm-8.30pm , September 28
 ENTRY: `500, bookmyshow.com


To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’