A team of people who take part in amateur radio (also known as ham radio) has decided to assist the Kudremukh Wildlife Division, Karkala for restoring the wireless network to combat poaching and fire incidents effectively.
 
 Confirming this, Dr Pruthviraj U, Assistant Professor of Department of Applied Mechanics and Hydraulics National Institute of Technology Karnataka (NITK), Surathkal, said the institute has the required equipment and valid wireless licence to execute the project.
 
 “NITK Amateur Facility under Faculty in-charge Dr Gangadharan K V, along with ham radio volunteers from Udupi, Manipal and Mangaluru region have decided to take up socially relevant projects like improving communication facility to enable better forest and wildlife conservation, along with disaster risk reduction communication systems,” Pruthviraj told Mirror.
 
 In this regard, a pilot study was taken up at Kodachadri peak along with Sarvajna Peetha on Feb 6 and 7. The health of present wireless communication system was studied. Suggestion and recommendation for improvement is proposed to Kudremukh Wildlife Division.
 
 At Kodachadri peak, the team erected five different kind of antenna working in different amateur radio frequency bands and studied wireless propagation conditions for 24 hours.
 
 
 The antennas they used are:
 
 Ø VHF (144-146 MHz) omni directional antenna
 Ø Directional beam antenna with rotator
 Ø 6m Delta antenna
 Ø Multi Band Inverted V antenna for HF
 Ø VHF-UHF mobile antenna
 
 The team is expected to visit Karkala on Sunday and make a detailed presentation and suggestions to the concerned officers on how to improve the wireless network in the Kudremukh range.
 
 
 Hamin’ around
 Ø Amateur radio, also known as ham radio, is a hobby enjoyed by over a million people worldwide. Amateur radio operators call themselves “radio hams” or simply “hams.”
 
 Ø Wireless amateur communication is done on numerous bands (relatively narrow frequency segments) extending from 1.8 MHz (a wavelength of about 160 meters) upwards through several hundred gigahertz (wavelengths in the millimeter range). The more privileges a class of license conveys, the more difficult is the examination that one must pass to obtain it.
 
 
 Ø Amateur radio operation is fun, and that is one of the main reasons hams do it. But ham radio can provide communication during states of emergency. Ham radio works when all other services fail.
 
 The team from NITK
 Dr Gangadharan KV, Prof. & Head, Dept of Mechanical Engg
 Dr T Laxminidhi, Dept of E&C Engineering
 
 Dr Pruthviraj Umesh, Dept of Applied
 Mechanics & Hydraulics
 
 From Mangalore Amateur Radio Club
 Rohit S Rao, President
 Srikanth B Bhat
 Dr Manumohan, Dept of Pulmonary Medicine, KMC Manipal & Member, MARC
 Devdas Bhat, Dept Bio Medical Engg, MIT
 Manipal
 Ananth Pai
 Prakash B Shetty
 Dr Sampath Kumar H
 Abdul Majid
 Dr Krishnanand Karanth
 Abhinav Rao and
 Anusha Shetty