City mayor D Venkatesh Murthy has invited the ire of Member of Parliament Maneka Gandhi for announcing an honorarium of Rs 6,000 per month to a man who claims to rescue snakes from urban areas and release them in forests.
   S Devraj, alias ‘Snake Shivappa’, had on Friday staged protest demanding a job in the forest department and financial help. He went so far as to release wildlife, including a cobra and Russell’s viper, in his house in a residential area. This prompted the mayor to announce an honorarium. Gandhi, who is known for pursuing issues related to wildlife and conservation, spoke to Murthy on the phone and insisted that he had rewarded a man who ought to have been arrested for violating the Wildlife Act. Secondly, she alleged, Shivappa’s act had put both the public and wildlife in danger. On Saturday, she followed up the conversation with a letter. “Snake madaris are banned under the Wildlife Act. Instead of rewarding this man for breaking the law constantly, you should have got him arrested,” Gandhi wrote.   The issue Shivappa is from Mandya district. He claims to have been rescuing snakes for the past eight years and releasing them in forests. Over this, he claims, this became his full-time occupation. In 2008, he submitted a petition to the wildlife department requesting that he be employed full time.  With no response from either the forest department or the BBMP, he staged a three-day protest last week. It was during the protest that he released snakes, which he had rescued, in his own house in Banashankari and stayed with them.
   He told Bangalore Mirror , “In 2008, I requested the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests to appoint me to any suitable post in the forest department as rescuing snakes has become a part of my life and I don’t know other work. He had given a letter that I can be given Rs 5,000 per month. But, things didn’t move from there. I have been running from pillar to post for a job. Hence, I decided to stage a protest. For three days, I released snakes that I had rescued inside my own house and stayed with them. I called off the protest after the mayor announced a payment of Rs 6,000 per month.”
   This offer irked Gandhi. In a letter to the mayor, she accused Shivappa of wrongdoing and using wildlife for personal gain, which is illegal. “Shivappa also holds snake exhibitions for political parties and other shows. For instance, he displayed a cobra at the gathering of Baba Ramdev’s followers to keep the crowd amused. This is totally illegal and he should have been arrested on the spot. When the forest department went to arrest him, he threw all the snakes on the floor in order to get away,” Gandhi has alleged in her letter.
   Shivappa told Bangalore Mirror  , “There are no cases against me.”
   But, the BJP MP’s letter has made Murthy cautious. He told  Bangalore Mirror  , “Shivappa had staged a protest seeking help from authorities as he is in distress. I heard he was into helping Bangaloreans by rescuing snakes and releasing them in forests. The news was aired by a TV channel. As I was asked for a reaction on camera, I assured him of help, asked him to call off the protest and meet me. However, by the time he came to me, Maneka Gandhi ma’am had called me and told that he should not be entertained as he constantly violated wildlife laws and faces several cases. I requested her to send details of the cases booked against him. If she sends them, the same will be attached with his application seeking honorarium and a decision will be taken after an inquiry.”