Bengaluru’s forests under siege: over 1,000 hectares lost to Illegal encroachments

In little over four decades, nearly 1,000 hectares of forest area in Bengaluru has been encroached upon. While the total forest area in Bengaluru urban division is 6875.21 hectares, 924.4 hectares are illegally occupied.

Bannerghatta National Park division alone recorded encroachment of 587.15 acres and witnessed 347 encroachment cases filed.

The information was shared by Minister of Forest, Environment, and Ecology, Eshwar Khandre in the state assembly session on Monday.

Responding to a query, the minister also informed that as many as 704 encroachment cases have been filed against these encroachments since 1978. Out of these, 65 encroachment cases were registered in the Bengaluru North sub-division, 20 cases were registered in the Yelahanka sub-division, 250 in Bengaluru East sub-division, 283 in Bangalore South, and 86 in Anekal sub-division.

Environment experts and conservationists say an encroachment of 14% of the total forest area is a sizable number.

“Looking at the total available green patch, 924.6 hectares is a big number. According to a judgment passed by the Supreme Court in 2002, no fresh encroachments of forest land should be allowed. In case of violations, the official concerned, which is the Deputy Conservator of Forest (DCF) of the sub-division should be held liable. Any forest department officials giving the opportunity to encroachers can also be prosecuted,” said a city-based forest and wildlife conservationist.

Activists and conservationists say while a handful of cases against forest land encroachments have been filed over the last 45 years, hardly any of these cases have reached their logical end.

According to a judgment passed by the Supreme Court in 2002, no fresh encroachments of forest land should be allowed–Forest and wildlife conservationist

“In most of the cases filed, the officials have initiated actions and have followed the procedures mentioned under section 64(A) of the Forest Act and have filed FIRs. However, this is where it all ends. The department must come up with year-wise encroachment numbers and eviction conducted so far. Most of the time, appropriate legal action is not taken and on other occasions, officials crumble under political pressure,” said the conservationist.

Experts say on-foot patrolling, boundary perambulation, and sensitising people about the legal aspects of illegal possession of forest land are some measures that can be taken to bring down the extent of encroachments.