It was apparent that he had upcoming Bruhath Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) polls on his mind when he announced large sums of money for developing infrastructure in the city. However, there was nothing concrete in his proposals. In fact, many of his announcements on Friday were made earlier by his confidantes E Ashok and Katta Subramanya Naidu.

In the 2010-11 state budget, the CM allocated Rs 18,872 crore for the City in the next three years. He also spoke of contributing Rs 600 crore for commissioning Namma Metro’s first phase. As announced earlier, he stated that the state government was ready to bear 50 per cent of the cost to introduce local trains in the city. He also said a special economic zone will be developed on 12,000 acres of land near Bangalore International Airport.

BSY budget for Bangalore

Rs 1,000 crore
for multi-storied vehicle parking centres
Rs 200 crore
for development of 25 tanks
Rs 3,000 crore
for city roads, footpaths and overbridges
Rs 100 crore
to upgrade water & drainage pipes
Rs 5 crore
for government ayurveda hospital
Rs 5 crore
to Mata Amritanandamayi Institution to set up a super-specialty hospital in Kengeri
Rs 1 crore
for Mahatma Gandhi Memorial in Kengeri
The number of BangaloreOne  centres to be doubled

SOME MORE PLUSES

MONEY IN EDUCATION
Guess where CM Yeddyurappa wants to spend extensively? Well, it is in education sector. He plans to spend Rs 10,505 crore on it. Don’t ask how! POLICE PERKS
Cops have a reason to smile as the government proposes to increase the daily allowance paid to them for working on holidays from Rs 50 to Rs 100. But a constable in Vidhana Soudha quipped, “The promise was made last year too!” LONG LIVE STARS
Fans of Vishnuvardhan, who readily paid Rs 3,000 for his last movie, will have another reason to cheer. The chief minister has sanctioned Rs 10 crore for constructing a memorial in his name and Rs 4 crore for the ongoing works on the Rajkumar memorial.
 
BYE BENGALURU HABBA
Bengaluru Habba will be held in the name of Nadaprabhu Kempegowda. The organisers, whoever they are, will get Rs 2 crore to put up a good show. FARMER COMPENSATION
An assistance of Rs 1 lakh will be provided to families of those farmers and agricultural labourers who lose their lives after falling from coconut/areca trees or because of snakebites. Reason: Such cases are reported more from Yeddyurappa’s home district Shimoga. FOREST GAIN
Yeddyurappa has allotted Rs 5 crore for the development of a new forest and wildlife study centre near Chakra water project of Hosanagar taluk. Isn’t that ironical? GURU COOL
In a bid to encourage youth to take up training in traditional crafts such as carpentry and sculpture and to adopt modern technology, Gurukula Training Centres at a cost Rs 5 crore will be set up. The question is, who will run these centres —- some swamiji or a politician? MATA’S SUPER SPECIAL
The CM granted 15 acres of land and Rs 5 crore to Mata Amritanandamayi Institution for establishing a super-speciality hospital in Kengeri. Political circles dubbed it Yeddyurappa’s ‘return gift’ for the 100 houses she built in Raichur district for the flood-hit.
 
RICE IS NICE
International Tech Park, Bangalore will not be the only tech park in the state. The CM announced that Rs 10 crore will be provided for establishing a high-tech rice technology park in Karatagi of 
Gangavati taluk.  CENTURY FOR HOPCOMS
Bangalore will see 100 more Hopcoms being launched and these will be maintained through private partnership.  CAPTAIN PLANET
Now there will be more than Nandi Hills to see in Chikkaballapur district, with Rs 1 crore being allocated for a planetarium near Nandi Hills. Another one will be established at Pilikula near Mangalore.