Says it has not approved the Thalassery-Mysuru rail link
 
 A burgeoning environment movement across Kodagu was put to halt — albeit breifly — by the state government on Wednesday.
 
 Putting an end to the rising levels of anxiety among thousands of Kodavas and green activists, the state government clarified that it has not approved the controversial rail link connecting Thalassery (Kerala) with Mysuru (Karnataka) via Kodagu. Further, the state government clarified that it would not even allow preparation of detailed project report (DPAR) for the proposed rail link as the project would jeopardise the fragile ecosystem of the pristine Western Ghats.
 
 Allaying the fears of thousands of people, RV Deshpande, Minister for Large and Medium Scale Industries and Infrastructure, told the state legislature that the government expressed its opposition for the project. Drawing the attention of the state government, BJP MLA from Virajpet KG Bopaiah alleged that both Karnataka and Kerala already met once and agreed to carry out survey for the proposed rail link amidst stiff opposition from the local population.
 
 Deshpande acknowledged that a meeting between secretaries of Karnataka and Kerala did take place recently, however, the Karnataka government had not consented for the project. “Holding a meeting does not ensure our approval for the project. We have not consented for the rail link project. Further, the project is yet to be approved by the Railway Board and thereafter a formal request has to be made by the Kerala government. Only then, we will be able to take a decision,” Deshpande revealed.
 
 Going further, Deshpande stated, “We already had discussion about the project at government level. Our forest department has not only expressed reservations but also opposed the project as it would jeopardise the green cover and affect elephant corridor through which the rail link passes. Hence, the state government in principle has not consented for the project.” According to Bopaiah, as per the Railway minister’s reply in the Lok Sabha in December 2017, a joint meeting between Kerala and Karnataka secretaries had resolved to take up survey along the route only if the Kerala government submits a proposal to Karnataka provided it does not cause disturbance to wildlife areas. Interestingly, the rail link spanning more than 200 km would pass through Wyanad of Kerala and enter Kodagu at Kutta to pass through thick forest regions like Balele-Nittor-Canoor and Thithimati to reach Mysuru.
 
 Perturbed that the new railway line with a project cost of Rs 6,685 cr would result in clearing of about 40 per cent of Kodagu’s forest, Kodavas, including retired defence officials, planters, environmentalists and public had staged massive protest rallies recently at Kutta and Madikeri. Fighting against the projects that would spell doom over the fragile eco-system of Kodagu where the River Cauvery originates, people from Kodagu, Mysuru and Bengaluru had launched Save Kodagu and Cauvery campaign led by Coorg Wildlife Society. Col (Rtd) Muthanna had even accused Kerala political leaders, including Congress parliamentarian KC Venugopal, of misusing his office as the Congress in-charge in Karnataka by leading Kerala delegations to push for destructive projects cutting through Kodagu benefiting Kerala.