By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 Monkey and squirrels – these are the two members of Bengaluru’s wild community that you are most likely to come in contact with. I’ve already spoken about the monkey (bonnet macaque) in these columns. Monkey encounters are much more in-your-face, where raiding parties enter your home and make off with whatever they can lay their hands on. Squirrels, on the other hand, are shy creatures that bolt at the slightest provocation. If you do come in close proximity with one, it is probably in some kind of distress. And that’s how a tiny piece of Bengaluru’s urban jungle found its way into our home and our hearts the other day.
 
 A neighbour brought in a squirrel’s nest that had fallen off a tree in their compound. It had one little resident, curled up into a ball, eyes tightly shut. I had to make a quick call – do I rush it to one of the city’s wild rescue centres for professional help, or rely upon my past “on-the-job” experience to keep the little one alive? Circumstances forced me to go with the latter option. No one was more delighted than my daughter, who promptly named the baby squirrel Kishmish. We set him up in a cosy box, warmed round the clock by an incandescent bulb, and started dropper-feeding him with infant formula. A few feeds later, Kishmish became quite active and playful.
 
 There was excitement all around when Kishmish opened his eyes. Soon, we started weaning him by feeding him bits of mashed banana. He would happily scamper up any hand that was offered to him. He became a darling of friends and family, and every visitor wanted to play with him. I wish I could say that he lived happily ever after. Just when we were chalking out plans to release him, something went wrong. Kishmish stopped feeding, became very weak, and in just a few hours, breathed his last. We were left with so many questions. Did we get his diet wrong? Did we wean him too quickly? Did too many people handle him and pass on some infection? We didn’t have the answers, but it was a painful reminder that wildlife is just that – wild – and any human contact can have unpredictable results.
 
 This bittersweet experience aside, I find the antics of squirrels fascinating to watch. The species found in Bengaluru (and the rest of south India) is called the Indian or the three-striped palm squirrel. These creatures use a variety of calls, in conjunction with tail movements, to communicate with each other. I can quickly tell that a predator (cat, snake or shikra) is in the vicinity when I hear the frantic alarm calls of the squirrel sentries. Scientists are divided on the purpose of the squirrel’s stripes. Are they meant as camouflage from predators that swoop in from above? Or do they (as is the case with zebras) serve to confuse biting insects that may carry deadly infections? I, for one, prefer to go with the explanation given in the Ramayana.
 
 When Rama and his monkey army had to cross the sea in their march towards Lanka, the monkeys started building a bridge. As they hauled huge rocks to the water, they found a little creature getting in their way. It was a squirrel, bringing in his mouth tiny stones for the bridge. “What a nuisance”, they said, and hurled him away. Rama caught the squirrel and chided the monkeys. “Show kindness to the weakest of creatures”, he said, “for you never know how helpful they will be”. He stroked the squirrel’s back, leaving lines where his fingers caressed the fur. Sure enough, the little pebbles brought by the squirrel held the bridge together by sealing the gaps between the bigger boulders. I miss little Kishmish, but console myself with the hope that he has reached a warm and safe place like the hands of Lord Rama.