Heard those loud croaking sounds in the night? They are from male frogs wooing females for mating. But now you will be able to identify the exact species of the frog emitting those sounds. A team of researchers from Gubbi Labs is launching 'Mandookavani' (‘Mandooka’ in Sanskrit means frog and ‘vani’ is speech), the first-ever Indian acoustic guide in Bengaluru to identify frogs and toads of the Western Ghats, many of them found in the city too.
 
 “The guide’s first version presents call records of 70 species collected over 10 years across the Western Ghats,” Gururaja KV, chief scientist at Gubbi Labs and Batrachologist, who in the year 2002 completed his PHD on fragmental effects of frogs, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Gururaja said frogs and toads (together called anurans) have evolved to communicate vocally. Anurans produced sound by vibrating vocal chords as air is pushed over them through the lungs. The sound thus produced gets amplified in a balloon like vocal sac. Each species has a unique calling pattern and hence can be used as an identification key in the field. “A database of anuran vocal calls would help not only in identification but also in understanding their behaviour and habitat requirement,” he said.
 
 Mandookavani is an attempt to bring to you a curated anuran call database. Apart from serving as an auditory treat Mandookavani is intended to serve as an acoustic field guide to help identify which species is emitting those croaks.
 
 The Western Ghats harbours 217 species of amphibians, of which 192 are anurans. This is about 50 per cent of India’s amphibian diversity.
 
 Gururaja said “We have been documenting frogs of the Western Ghats since 2004. There have been scientific papers on the call patterns. Call duration varies for different species. Among the 340 species recorded in India, only 20 species have been researched on. Recording species is a difficult task as visits are during monsoons and we have to take care of the instruments too.”
 
 Gururaja has written a book on frogs and toads of the Western Ghats in 2012 and two enthusiastic software developers decided to take the book off the shelves and onto mobile phones. FrogFind, an Android app, was launched in 2013 and is available on Google Play. It brings sounds of 55 of the 157 known species of amphibians from the Western Ghats.
 
 Besides Gururaja, the team comprises of Ramya Badrinath, research associate at Gubbi Labs and is currently working on building an acoustic data base; Seshadri KS, PhD student at National University, Singapore, and works on breeding behaviour of frogs; and conservationist Ramit Singal who recently won the Zeiss Wildlife Conservation Award 2015. Ramit said this project is very interesting and exciting and is something that has never been done in India. Very soon, the online documentation will also be undertaken, he said.
 
 Dr Subramanya S, Professor in Entomology, University of Agricultural Sciences, Gandhi Krishi Vigyan Kendra, Bengaluru, will release the audio guide on April 19 at Jaaga Startup between 6.30 pm and 8 pm.
 
 Don’t mess with toads
 
 From the time they’re eggs, toads have parotoid glands, which create and release foul-tasting toxins if a predator tries to seize them. While these toxins don’t hurt people, you should wear gloves or wash your hands immediately whenever you handle a toad. Toads also can camouflage themselves, burrow underground, play dead and even puff themselves up, becoming too big for a predator to eat. Source: Pawnation
 
 Frogs vs Toads
 
 Frogs have long back legs that enable them to jump, while toads only hop because of their short hind legs. While frogs and most toads are born in wetlands, frogs remain in and near ponds, streams, swamps, canals or other areas with standing water. Toads also need moisture but can survive far away from permanent wetlands. Some species even live in deserts, where they burrow underground to keep from drying out during arid seasons, emerging during rainstorms to eat and breed.