IISc team studies effects of logging, climate change on bird communities in tropical mountains and stresses on need to guard primary forests 

Researchers at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have studied the effects of forest logging and climate change on bird communities in tropical mountains, by examining over 10 years of data.
 
In a study published in Global Ecology and Conservation, the IISc team used mist netting and bird ringing data to answer how the composition of the mid-elevation Eastern Himalayan understory bird community changed in primary (undisturbed) forests as well as in logged forests.
 
The analysis was conducted on 4,801 insect-eating birds that live under the canopy of large trees, belonging to about 61 species. Data was collected from the Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary, Arunachal Pradesh, situated in Eastern Himalayas and home to over 500 bird species. The area saw intensive logging until 2002, and the logged regions have major differences compared to intact forests, making them ideal for the study.

The team found that many bird species have shifted to higher elevations due to rising temperatures. Logged forests have higher average temperatures and lower humidity than primary forests, thus hastening the transition. Additionally, birds that are smaller in size seem to colonise these logged forests better because they can tolerate higher temperatures. In contrast, the density of larger bird species appears to be increasing in the primary forests.
 
Researchers found that logging can lead to the loss of large-bodied, old growth-dependent species, and decrease the overall biodiversity. Understorey insectivores, which are often found only in specific niches, are negatively influenced by logging and show steep declines in numbers. Logged forests also have lower densities of foliage-dwelling insects, reducing the resource availability for the birds. Since large species have higher energy requirements, this disproportionately reduces the abundance of large species. 

Find their niche
“Tropical montane forests are critical centers of biodiversity. In tropical mountains, each species has a particular niche where it is found. This restriction creates much more diversity in a small space,” explained Ritobroto Chanda, former project associate at the Centre for Ecological Sciences (CES), IISc, and corresponding author of the study.

Birds along with much of the flora and fauna of tropical mountain ranges are extremely temperaturesensitive and are responding to global heating rapidly ­–Umesh Srinivasan, CES 
Experts say forest loss and climate change present major threats to these ecosystems. “Birds along with much of the flora and fauna of tropical mountain ranges are extremely temperature-sensitive and are responding to global heating rapidly. Also, most of the world’s terrestrial biodiversity is concentrated in tropical mountains,” says Umesh Srinivasan, assistant professor at CES and another author. However, very few studies have explored the joint influence of these threats.
 
The study highlights the need to safeguard primary forests to mitigate climate change’s effects. “Logging managers should ensure that undisturbed forests across large elevational gradients are protected. If species encounter degraded forest while they shift upwards, certain species will most likely go locally extinct,” said Srinivasan.