People for Animals introduces reptile enclosure ‘Slytherin House’, which can house up to 30 snakes at once

Based on the fictional world of Harry Potter, which features four houses at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, the city has introduced its own ‘Slytherin House’ at the People for Animals (PfA), a wildlife rescue and rehabilitation centre in Bengaluru. This Slytherin House has created a specialised reptile enclosure that carefully controls temperature and humidity levels.

This is the first state-of-the-art facility found at a rescue and rehabilitation centre in the city. Taking advice from international conservation centres and experts, PfA came up with the concept of having this enclosure dedicated to the reptiles. The Slytherin House can have 30 snakes kept inside at a time, while there are other separate enclosures wherein other reptiles like terrapins, lizards, tortoises, and more can be kept.

According to Colonel Dr Navaz, Chief Veterinarian at PfA, in the past 20 years, PfA has rescued more than 10,000 snakes, including 7,000 spectacled cobras, 2,000 rat snakes, and 1,000 russell vipers. Around 500–600 mildly venomous or non-venomous snakes have also been rescued.

Dr Navaz said, “The Slytherin House has a temperate climate; humidity and moisture are automatically controlled. Snakes will get the same atmosphere and temperature as they are deep in burrows, which is their habitat. We will have all surgeries, treatments, and other facilities in the enclosure. We took input from international rescue and conservation centres to make this enclosure. However, the cost was higher, and we had problems with the funds, but to our luck, the Ashraya Hastha Trust came forward to fund the cause, and the work to make the enclosure had begun.” As PfA has rescued more than 10,000 snakes and another 1,000 reptiles, it needed such an enclosure.


 . 
As there is a lot of urbanisation taking place in the city and with man-animal conflict, there are many wildlife rescues lately, and they need a dedicated space for their rehabilitation after the treatment is carried out, he added. Pointing out some of the snake injury cases, Dr Navaz revealed, “Most of the cases we get are fractures of the spinal cord in snakes. The JCBs are used to clear out some of the fields, due to urbanisation, that are the snakes’ dwelling places. The snakes get caught in this, and the spinal cord gets fractured. We carry out a digital X-ray to find out the fracture and set it right, which takes 45–50 days. The portion below the fracture gets paralysed due to nerve disruption. Now we are using the latest physiolaser combined with traditional veterinary Chinese technology.”

By using these methods, PfA is able to cut the rehabilitation time by 25–30%. With many rescue cases of snakes, the enclosure is a boon to them. Each of the enclosures has a built-in water body, wherein the snake can go to the body when the heat is higher. There’s also burrow-like structures in the enclosure where the snakes can go inside.

 Snakes will get the same atmosphere and temperature as they are deep in burrows– Colonel Dr Navaz, PfA

Dr Navaz further added that PfA now also has a dedicated surgery and treatment room for reptiles. “Earlier, we were performing the surgical procedure at the general operation theatre (OT). Now, with the dedicated treatment room, we can perform the reptile treatment in its dedicated centre. Apart from spinal cord injuries, we get other cases like head injuries from the snake or intestinal injuries, with people trying to attack them,” he informed.