The sprawling 1,112-acres Bengaluru University campus situated in the heart of the city serves as a lung space, oxygen bank, and groundwater reserve.

The campus also boasts of developing the first ‘Bio, Geo and Hydro Park’ in the country. The mission of one man, retired Professor T.J. Renuka Prasad, designated special officer by the Government of Karnataka for Bio Park has turned this bushy, empty landscape into a mini forest.

“Biodiversity is the only way of life and when it needs to be implemented, there will be challenges, especially in the urban areas. However, through ensuring of public, wildlife enthusiasts’ participation, transformation is being brought,” said Professor Renuka Prasad. The forest cover is being brought with continuous efforts of more than two decades.

After the development of thick vegetation, life is thriving in the campus. Volunteers Dr Girish, Guruprasad along with E bird watchers have prepared a list of 162 and odd varieties of birds. “Campus is an abode to lakhs of birds,” Renuka Prasad explained.

Vivek Sarkar, an alumni presently working at WildLife Institute of India had recorded 150 and odd butterfly varieties. Bio Park includes flora and fauna in the form of butterflies, birds, peacocks, rabbits, snakes, mongoose,” he said. The green cover in the campus also includes Miyawaki, Semi-Miyawaki forests for which plants and tree species have been brought from the Eastern Ghats regions such as Vijayawada, Vaizag, Rajahmundry.

It also has a fruit garden which has 168 varieties of 2,500 to 3,000 trees. Four Sahyadri Vana’s which have rare plant and tree species Western Ghats and Malnad region of Karnataka. Aroma Plant Garden, Appemidi vana (endangered mango species) and Charaka Vana (medicinal plants) are also part of green cover.

The rare plants and varieties have crossed 1,000 mark and there are six to seven lakh trees and plants in the campus. Charakavana has 300 to 400 varieties of medicinal plants. Aroma Plan Garden has rare plants such as “Deva Kanigale” used in temples but not cultivated, “Vishnu Kranthi” and Charaka Vana has rare species “Purusha Ratna”, which has high medicinal value.