Team from neighbouring state will meet Karnataka counterparts on night traffic ban at Bandipur 
 
 Despite Karnataka declining it on several occasions, neighbour Kerala seems to be in no mood to give up its efforts to revoke the ban on night traffic between Kerala and Karnataka through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 
 In yet another attempt, a high-level delegation from Kerala will stake its claim with their Karnataka counterparts on Tuesday in Bengaluru on how to work with the orders of the High Court of Karnataka banning night traffic through the tiger reserve.
 
 The spurt in traffic between Mysuru and Gundlupet (NH-212) and Mysuru to Ooty (NH-67) resulted in increased road kills at the tiger reserve. The HC, hearing a petition, banned vehicular traffic during night hours between 9 pm and 6 am through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. An alternative road longer by only 35 km was also built by the Karnataka government to overcome the inconvenience.
 
 While most are happy to travel on this road, the Kerala government has always made it a point to revoke the ban and allow vehicles to pass through the tiger reserve.
 
 Previously too Kerala has tried five times (in vain) to revoke the ban with the Karnataka government. However, Karnataka has politely turned down the proposal citing the HC verdict and conservation of wildlife. A senior official of the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) said, “On Tuesday there will be a meeting of officials from National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA), Government of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and officials from the Ministry of Surface Transport to discuss on revoking the ban on night traffic through Bandipur Reserve.”
 
 Unable to withstand pressure from Kerala backed by lobbyists and political leaders especially Karnataka leaders of Kerala origin, the state government had announced it would form a committee to suggest alternatives. The experts advised the government to maintain status quo and consider starting the ban from 6 pm. 
 
 But a worrying factor is that Karnataka Legislators with roots in Kerala have been volunteering to liaison between Kerala and Karnataka to open the road for night traffic. 
 
 Kerala has also challenged High Court’s order in the Supreme Court. Sources also confirmed to BM that one of the petitioners from Kerala is currently facing forest offence cases, including poaching of an elephant and encroachment of forest land. The NTCA, the premier body on tiger reserves in India, has also filed an affidavit before the Supreme Court supporting the Karnataka’s government’s stand on closure of night traffic.