The downpour last Thursday triggered a number of problems, but for residents in low lying areas, it brought on a peculiar problem — snakes. Over a dozen snakes, including baby cobras, have been rescued in the last six days from residences in different parts of the city. The snakes were found in a tumbler in one residence, on a bed in another and under the dining table in yet another. In all cases it proved a close call for residents. 

 	The BBMP wildlife rescue team says it has had its hands full ever since the downpour. “There has been a sharp increase in the number calls to rescue snakes,” said Mohan Kumar, BBMP wildlife rescue team member. “Three snakes, including a baby cobra, were rescued on Tuesday. One was found under a dining table. Baby cobras are far more dangerous as they tend to strike out of fear. They also inject maximum venom unlike adults, which neither strike immediately nor release maximum venom.” 

 	Wildlife rescuers say the problem of snakes entering houses is due to two reasons: water logging and ongoing drain repair work. They say the season (June, July and August) when eggs hatch is just over and water logging and work on drains are forcing the young snakes out. 

 	The wildlife team says it now receives about two to three calls a week to rescue snakes from residences. A month-old spectacled cobra was rescued from a house in HBR Layout, while a rat snake was rescued from Hebbal Kempapura. Another cobra was rescued from a residence in Ramamurthynagar. Nine of the 12 rescued were baby cobras, two were rat snakes, and the other was a Russell’s viper. 

 	The BBMP team says the calls to rescue snakes have come mostly from Indiranagar, Ulsoor, Ramamurthynagar, Hoysalanagar, Hebbal Kempapura, HBR and HRBR Layout. They have warned residents in these areas to be cautious and take extra care to ensure doors and windows are securely fastened. 

 	“Residents living in areas close to forests, green patches and water bodies and in areas where drain repair work is on must be extra vigilant,” Sharath R Babu, advisor to BBMP forest cell told Bangalore Mirror. “Snakes may slip into the house or into warm areas like vehicles. With kids playing around, this can prove deadly. Our team of volunteers is working round the clock, so if residents do sight a snake they can call the helpline.” BBMP helpline: 22221188 or BBMP wildlife team: 9880108801