Here is a cautionary tale for cat parents in the city, especially those in Frazer Town and Cooke Town.

Pulakeshinagar police have registered a first information report (FIR) against two persons accused of killing a cat at Bachammal Road at Cox Town. The FIR was registered under the Section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The accused convicted have to undergo three years imprisonment under Section 379.

According to the FIR, two accused Uday and Pratap from Lazarus Road stole a pet cat. The CCTV footage shows the accused catching the cat with a net and strangling it to death on the spot.

It is learnt the complainant and her mother visited the area nearby where the accused are said to be from and asked the locals to return their cat if it is alive, but they were allegedly told that the cat was eaten.

Expressing concern over the incident, Pamela Parashar, a resident of Cooke Town, said that there have been previous incidents of killing of cats at Cooke Town and surrounding areas. “We have complained to the authorities about this, but no measures were taken to prevent the killing of cats or to punish those responsible,’’ said Parashar.

Terming the killing as terrible, Bhavita Toliya, a wildlife rescuer, said that she had heard this news last month and had reached out to a few animal welfare activists.

“I was advised that we needed proof/some footage that captures this act. And now we have the footage. This clipping has left me shivering and in tears. My hands tremble as I write this. I have had sleepless nights since then. A picture is more powerful than words. This video proved it. Imagine the state of the cat being caught, put in a cover and strangled just so it does not meow and alert people,’’ said Bhavita Toliya.

Stating that a pet is like a child that a family has brought up and what had happened to their child is devastating, she said that to think the cat was killed and eaten is even more so. “There are more cats missing. House pets as well as community cats who are taken care of by kind cat lovers. This animal abuse and cruelty has to stop. It was shocking that people onlookers did nothing. Their apathy is unbelievable,’’ she said.

Emphasising on the need to stop cruelty against animals, she said that more such instances are being reported. “The criminals need to be punished. It cannot just be a penalty or a few months in jail, but a stronger punishment that teaches a lesson,’’ she said.

Demanding that the authorities act tough against those responsible for the killing, Rakshita S, an animal activist from RR Nagar, said that she has noticed a decrease in the number of stray dogs and cats in and around RR Nagar too.

Are you an East Bengaluru resident? We’d like to hear from you. email: seena.menon@timesgroup.com