Venugopal’s appointment as Karnataka in-charge may prove to be advantageous for Kerala and its demands for night traffic through Bandipur and the Nanjangud-Nilambur railway line
 
 The appointment of KC Venugopal as Congress in-charge in Karnataka may have come as a blessing in disguise for Kerala, which has found an effective channel to push its long-pending projects with the Karnataka government along the border. Further, with Congress in power in Karnataka, it has only made leaders from Kerala happier as the state might give nod for projects that have been stalled for years because of opposition from conservationists and wildlife enthusiasts.
 
 On Friday, through Venugopal, Kerala leaders submitted a formal proposal to Chief Minister Siddara­maiah urging him to support the Nanjangud-Nilambur railway line.
 
 Since 2008, Kerala has been after Karnataka to open night traffic through the Bandipur National Park and recently, the centrally sponsored ambitious railway project connecting Nanjangud in Mysuru district with Nilambur in Malappuram district of Kerala via Bandipur.
 
 Considering the heat from wildlife activists and conservationists, Karnataka has been turning down the proposals every year.
 
 In fact, the former Kerala CM Oommen Chandy had approached Karnataka for six consecutive years with various delegations, demanding approval for these two projects.
 
 On Friday, the presence of Parliamentarian from Kerala, Venugopal, along with CM Siddaramaiah turned out to be a perfect occasion for Kerala leaders to pursue the pending demands. Sources in KPCC told Bangalore Mirror that Kerala opposition leader and former Home minister Ramesh Chennithala and Kerala Congress president VM Sudheeran met Siddaramaiah and put pressure on the government to agree to the projects, especially the railway line.
 
 
 
 
 “The railway line passes through Bandipur National Park, which is a protected area and requires clearances from the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) and Central Board for Wildlife, besides the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). The leaders expressed that if both states jointly pursue the project and exert pressure on the Centre, the project could see the daylight and help prosper the region economically,” a KPCC office-bearer, who was privy to the meeting, told BM.
 
 Interestingly, when a couple of Kerala-origin Congress workers met Venugopal with a set of demands, the MP from Alappuzha refused to interfere with the government and clarified that he has been sent only to strengthen the party.
 
 It can be noted that the Karnataka High Court, while hearing over a writ petition, had rejected the project, ruling that it would cause considerable damage to the ecosystem. The 236-km railway line passes through the tiger-populated Bandipur park for about 22 kms. Out of this, close to 15 kms pass through the core area of the tiger reserve. This has made wildlife activists oppose the project. Even though CM Siddaramaiah has not promised anything over the proposal, sources said he would look into the matter and take legal opinion.