Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu to start doing elephant census across 65 forest ranges

Karnataka, in association with the forest departments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, is taking up a three-day elephant population estimation exercise. Scheduled on May 23, 24, and 25, the exercise will be conducted across 65 forest ranges and 563 beats by engaging 1,689 staff.

The announcement was made by Karnataka Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre on Monday. The Minister said the elephant population estimate would provide valuable insights into population dynamics and potential conflict scenarios. It would also help in sketching out conflict management strategies.

Between January and May so far this year, 22 human deaths owing to human-elephant conflict cases have been recorded in Karnataka.

In the wake of high human-elephant conflict cases and elephants’ movement across the landscape of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, an Interstate Coordination Committee (ICC) was set up by Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu. An ICC Charter was signed by the Forest Ministers of Karnataka, Kerala, and senior forest officials of Tamil Nadu in Bandipur National Park on March 10, 2024. The Charter mandated a synchronized population estimation exercise of the wildlife in the interstate region.

The estimation work will be conducted in ten forest divisions of Karnataka, located on the interstate boundary with Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Andhra Pradesh. The divisions in which the exercise will be conducted include Kolar, Cauvery Wildlife, MM Hills Wildlife, BRT Tiger Reserve, Bannerghatta National Park, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, Nagarahole Tiger Reserve, Madikeri Territorial, Madikeri Wildlife and Virajpet.

Block sampling or direct count exercise will be carried out on May 23. The data of the beats, which have elephant presence, were collected for the exercise conducted in 2023. Of these beats, 50% are chosen randomly, followed by selection of sample blocks from each forest division of size 5 sq km. This is done taking into account the diverse vegetation, altitudinal and rainfall patterns.

A team of two to three people would survey each of the selected blocks and walk a minimum of 15 km to cover a 5 sq km block and record all elephant sightings. The area of each sample block will be marked on a map. The staff will also record the age and sex of all animals spotted.

A line transects exercise will be held on May 24. The on-ground staff will walk the 2-kilometer transect line and record data about elephant dung piles on either side of the line. The perpendicular distance of the dung pile from the line and the freshness of the dung pile will also be recorded. Outcomes from these two exercises will be used for the abundance estimation of elephants in these habitats.
 
Further, a waterhole direct count exercise with photographic evidence will be held on May 25 at waterholes, salt licks, and open areas that are frequented by the jumbos. A fixed-point observation will be undertaken from 6 am to 6 pm at these selected locations to record information such as the size of the herd and the age and gender of the individuals with photographs. This data is used to assess the age and sex distribution (demography) of the elephant populations. The data will be analyzed by researchers from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc).