A file photo of a jumbo on the rampage in Mysore in June that left one person dead          
 In a bid to reduce man-animal conflict, the state forest department plans to go after 25 rogue elephants that have been turning life topsy-turvy in different parts of the state and relocate the animals in the Cauvery Wildlife Valley along the Tamil Nadu border. 
 The mission, one of the biggest in South India’s wildlife history, will cost the state exchequer Rs 1.5 crore. But the figure pales considering that the government coughs up close to Rs 75 lakh a year on compensation. It has already paid Rs 3.5 crore for damages in the last three years.
 
 Morever, at least 28 elephants were killed and four electrocuted in this period. “If the menace continues, it will further bleed the government. So we have decided to capture and relocate them,” explained forest officials. However, experts warn that the project could just be an expensive waste of time. 
 
 Though getting a clearance from the union government was believed to be the biggest hurdle, the Ministry of Environment and Forest has given its oral consent. A formal order is expected in a few days.
 
 “Since it has been agreed upon in principle, we prepared the project and it will be taken up in December,” forest minister C P Yogeshwar told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Forest officials plan to round up rogue elephants in Hassan district — around Kattepura and Doddabetta reserve forest areas which were earlier linked with Nagarahole National Park. 
 
 “Since the Harangi, Hemavathi and Chaklihole infrastructure projects, the backwaters truncated the habitat of about 50 elephants, isolating them in these forests. With limited resources, these elephants began venturing into estates and fields,” explained a senior forest department official.
   Scientific relocation
 The entire operation, planned on scientific grounds, will be taken up on two levels. “At first, we will capture the elephants and relocate them in the Cauvery valley, considered a famous elephant corridor in South India and which includes Bannerghatta and Kollegal Wildlife Division. Once this is done, we will keep a tab on their activities either through constant vigil or radio collaring. We are optimistic that the new atmosphere with enough resources will compensate their loss here. If they continue to behave in the same destructive way even after relocation, we will go for the second phase which includes training at elephant camps,” Yogeshwar said.
   From wild to captivity
 The elephants will be tamed under isolation at the training camp, said officials from the forest department. “The idea is to correct their rebellious nature. After the isolation, they will be trained along with other elephants at camps and used for departmental purposes. Now we will first identify their families and jumbos will be captured accordingly. The chances of them coming back and causing mayhem are lesser if they are relocated with the family,” the minister said.
 
 Even though the government had earlier planned to pack the elephants off to Orissa and Madhya Pradesh, it has now decided to relocate them within the state. 
 
 
 
 
 Elephants never forget their route
 
 
 Prof Surendra Varma
 Elephant researcher, Asian Elephant Conservation Centre at IISc RELOCATING elephants is not an easy task and the government should consider several factors. The most important factor is the geography of the new area. A detailed study on the chosen area needs to be conducted. Limited 
 resources such as food may not support a sudden increase in population of these animals. If this is the case, it will only lead to man-animal conflicts in the new area. The elephants will have to adjust to the new environment and this is likely to take some time. A study should also be conducted on behavioural changes in these animals. 
 
 
 Harish Bhat, 
 Bio-diversity expert It is uncertain whether transporting these animals to a new location would mitigate the problem. Elephants have a strong memory and do not forget their route. They might even decide to return to their native habitat. If that proves to be the case, then this project is a sheer waste of money. It would be better if the government focuses on the grassroots. Man-animal conflict is a result of increasing encroachment of forest areas either by greedy farmers or because of development work. The animals need a forested corridor to move around. But years of greedy expansion has resulted in fragmentation of forests.