In what could be a first in the annals of wildlife conservation in the city, the Hebbagodi police have seized two African elephant tusks from the son of a retired army officer.    The tusks are said be between 30 and 40 years old and were supposedly brought from South Africa. The police, who have arrested three persons in connection with the seizure, are probing the origin of the tusks and the channel through which they were brought into the country, as well as the army connection in the incident.    “For the first time, we are seeing the seizure of African elephant tusks in Bangalore,” said a source. “Asiatic elephant tusks are what we usually see during seizures. But African tusks are not found even with professional poachers,” the source added.    This is the second time in a month that elephant products have been seized. In June, two Asiatic tusks weighing 48 kg and valued at around Rs 2 crore were seized by forest sleuths in Sakleshpur.    Guru (62) was caught red-handed while trying to sell the two African elephant tusks in Hebbagodi of Bangalore Rural on Wednesday. The tusks are around 2.6 feet long, weigh around 6.5 kg, and are worth Rs.25 lakh in the international market.    “The accused has said the tusks were brought from South Africa by his father who had served in the army. He has said six tusks were brought 30 years ago, of which four were given to other persons and two were kept with the family,” a source said. “The accused’s associates were also arrested,” the source added. The trio were  arrested under various sections of the Wildlife Protection Act and section 379 (theft of state government  property) of the IPC.   “This is a first-of-its kind case in which African tusks have been seized. Demand for such ivory is high as not everyone has access to elephant habitats and sanctuaries in South Africa,” said an official.    N Nagaraj, additional SP, Bangalore Rural, declined to divulge details. “An official is working on it and I prefer not to comment on the matter,” he said.    Related, but different: There are noticeable differences between Asian and African elephant ivory. While Asian ivory is soft and opaque white in colour, African ivory is harder and has a translucent, yellow appearance. African ivory is brittle and difficult to carve while Asian ivory is widely used for carving. Asian ivory is valued at 20-30 per cent more than its African counterpart in the international market, according to wildlife expert Sharath R Babu.