Raju, India’s last “dancing bear”, who was liberated from the centuries-old cruel and barbaric practice celebrates seven years of freedom with Wildlife SOS. This iconic male sloth bear is no longer beaten or forced to carry out ‘dance’ routines on demand.
 
 In 2009, Wildlife SOS made history by taking the last dancing bear off the streets of India – bringing an end to a centuries-old tradition that inflicted terrible cruelty on thousands of highly endangered sloth bears. Raju was rescued from Chikkaharavalli in Karnataka.
 
 The organization’s ‘Dancing Bear Rehabilitation Project’ was supported by The Ministry of Environment and Forests and the state forest departments. In turn, they rehabilitated, sponsored education and provided alternative livelihoods for the Kalandar communities who, for centuries, were dependent on sloth bears to earn a living.
 
 Raju bear had spent the first eight years of his life living in a deplorable condition. As part of his indoctrination as a dancing bear, a red hot iron poker was forcibly pierced through his soft muzzle and a rope was then strung through the fresh wound. 
 
 Geeta Seshamani, co-founder & Secretary of Wildlife SOS, said, “Like most sloth bears who were subjected to this brutality, Raju’s muzzle wound was never allowed to heal and his Kalandar master would tug on the rope to make him dance and jump from the pain to entertain the masses. Till date we have rescued over 600 dancing bears. Our only objective is to give these animals a life of dignity and freedom they deserve.”
 
 Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder & CEO of Wildlife SOS, said, “Watching Raju take his first steps towards freedom stood testament for everyone at Wildlife SOS as we finally closed the curtain on India’s dancing bear trade. In order to put an end to this cruel, inhuman practice and protect the indigenous sloth bear population, we had to begin at a different point – starting with the upliftment of the Kalandar community.”
 
 The practice of dancing bears was made illegal in India when the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 came into effect. However it wasn’t until the end of 2002, when the Wildlife SOS Agra Bear Rescue Facility established in collaboration with the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department opened its doors, that there was anywhere to house confiscated dancing bears.