Roads, rail tracks run through state’s forests; experts call for better planning to prevent collisions with wildlife

So far, over 1,000 hectares of forest land in Karnataka has been diverted for as many as 94 road and railway projects.

While many linear transport infrastructure (LTI) projects are running through forest patches, strategies to address the negative impacts of these projects on wildlife have been few and far between.

In the given scenario, some wildlife conservationists point to a recent handbook by IUCN specialist groups on eco-friendly engineering and technical solutions. They say implementing these ideas might bring down the number of wildlife dying on roads and railway tracks due to collisions.

The IUCN handbook highlights that poorly planned LTI development can have severe impacts on ecosystems and species. These include loss, fragmentation, and degradation of habitat, increased rates of hunting and poaching of wildlife, increased resource extraction, such as legal and/or illegal mining and logging, pollution due to noise, light, vibrations, and chemicals from vehicles and trains, increased frequency and intensity of wildfires, land speculation or land use change, and illegal settlements and increased human activity. 

According to the handbook, several criteria such as structure type, size and openness, approaches to structure, and structure spacing and site selection are some important factors that must be considered when designing effective crossing structures to address the negative impacts of linear infrastructure for elephants.

 “Train collisions with Asian elephants are a significant and well-documented source of mortality, especially in India. Various factors contribute to this mortality, including ecological factors, railway physical factors (steep embankments and curves), technical factors (train speed, frequency, and time of travel), elephant behavior, and lack of awareness among operators and planners. Train-related elephant mortalities are higher near curves and areas adjacent to heavy forest cover that reduces visibility,” noted the handbook.

Careful analysis needed
However, some wildlife conservationists say these guidelines should be carefully analyzed before implementing them in a landscape such as that of Karnataka. They opine that implementing the guidelines and modifying structures will impact the ecology and biodiversity of the area. While all the measures mentioned in the handbook might bring down the number of cases in the case of rail tracks, the situation with highways in Karnataka is different due to the state’s topography. “The state’s landscape itself is wildlife friendly. 

Thus bare minimum interventions are required to bring down the number of road kills inside reserve forests and protected areas. Installing scientific speed bumps and reflectors at every bend and corner of these roads should be sufficient. The frequency of speed bumps can also be increased so they act as deterrents for people to use these routes. In addition to these, ramblers should be replaced with speed bumps. The National Highway Authority of India has guidelines on the design and installation of speed bumps, which should be closely followed,” said Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.