By: Kushala Satyanarayana
 
 
 Biologist’s document will teach people to tackle big cats in human areas
 
 
 How do people react when a leopard enters an urban space? They burst crackers, throw at it stones and sticks, make loud noises and try as much as possible to get a glimpse of the big cat, and in the process agitate it no end. Enacting such acts, thus, is not done. In fact, they are the absolute don’ts in the situation, for such acts only function as dampeners when handling a wild animal that has entered a place inhabited by humans.
 
 
 After enduring immense difficulties at controlling the situation when a leopard entered a school in Marathahalli, and wiser after realising bloomers the forest department committed at the time, the man who got drawn into the thick of the action, has come out with a comprehensive document on how to “handle the situation when a wild animal enters a dense human area”.
 
 
 Even as Bengaluru is not new to leopards straying into it, the Vibgyor School incident it was, which set the ball rolling for the project. The documentation – brought out by Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF) in association with the state forest department – among other things, talks about insurance and how to handle the anxious public.
 
 
 In February, wildlife biologist Sanjay Gubbi of NCF, who was called for help by the forest department to trap the leopard at Vibgyor School, got badly injured after the animal attacked him. The behaviour of the huge crowd that gathered at the spot was the main reason for the leopard becoming aggressive, according to experts. It panicked and pounced on Gubbi when it could not escape. After a complicated medical procedure to repair the damage, Gubbi along with a team of experts, put together the document.
 
 
 The book dwells on four conflict areas – when leopards enter areas with dense human population; when the animal accidentally falls into a well; when a leopard gets trapped in a wire-snare set for catching other animals; and when a leopard is captured in a cage by the authorities.
 
 
 The crucial among these is when leopards enter human habitation, and in such a situation, the don’ts are exactly what people do. To educate people on handling such situations, the book lists a set of dos and don’ts, some of which are:
 
 
 n First and foremost, don’t disturb the animal at any cost.
 
 
 n Don’t try to force the leopard to come out of its hiding by bursting crackers or making loud noises as the animal can panic, especially when it tries to escape and run out, which could result in serious injuries to people.
 
 
 n Don’t allow curious onlookers to open doors, windows or roof tiles to catch a glimpse of the leopard.
 
 
 n Don’t allow anyone to take photographs, videos through windows or any other openings.
 
 
 Though the dos are simple, they are still not followed in most cases: Securely lock the room where the leopard was spotted, and close all of its windows and other openings. Keep equipment such as ropes, ladders and a large net handy. Make a mental map or a rough note on paper of the key places in the house where the animal could be hiding. People should be kept away – at least 500 metres from the building.
 
 
 The documentation also dwells on recording leopards using camera traps in areas where human-leopard conflict prevails. This may be done to identify the number of animals in the area, assess their movement pattern and possibly to identify problematic individuals.
 
 
 Another area that borders on thin line of doubt is differentiating pugmarks of a leopard from that of a dog. With pictorial representation, the book shows how a dog’s pugmarks differ from those of a leopard. While the pad of a leopard’s footprint is broader, claw marks are not seen in its toes. A dog’s footprint is smaller and its toes show the claws.
 
 
 “Many a time, dogs’ pugmarks are mistaken for a leopards’. Since loss of livestock and disappearance of dogs are the first signs of a leopard in the vicinity, it is always linked to a dogs’ pugmarks. This documentation brings out every aspect of handling leopards including ways to tranquilise them. It is a complete ready reckoner,” Gubbi says of the book.