Hyderabad: The killing of tigress Avni, also known as T-1, in the forests of Maharashtra’s Yavatmal district on November 2 drew international focus with animal rights advocates, including Union Minister Maneka Gandhi raising objection to the ‘brutal operation’. 

The man who killed the tigress is Asghar Ali Khan, the son of noted marksman Nawab Shafat Ali Khan, who hails from Hyderabad. They are the descendants of the Nizam's family. This is the first independent operation for Asghar, who, of course, had earlier accompanied his father in many operations. 

        Tigress Avni. Photo: AFP Photo/Maharashtra Forest Department      

The Maharashtra forest department had actually assigned the task to both Nawab Shafat Ali Khan and Asghar but, Nawab was away when the operation was carried out late in the night on November 2.

The father and son interact with Mirror about the operation and the criticism they have been facing from advocates of animal rights.

What exactly was the assignment given to you?

Nawab Shafat: The assignment given by the Maharashtra Chief Wildlife Warden has two points. One, to capture T – 1 without any harm or to kill it if warranted, to prevent human loss. The second is to capture the two cubs. The first point was accomplished and the operation will continue till the second responsibility is fulfilled.

How happy are you with the operation and the death of Avni?

Asghar Ali: Avni’s death in the operation is very sad. I was shocked to realise that she had been gunned down. It was a failed operation. We did not intend to kill her. Our intention was to capture her alive. But, when she charged towards us, the only option I was left with was to shoot Avni, to protect not only myself but also the five forest officers around me. We all were in an open top jeep. There was not even a second's time for me to deliberate on it, except for shooting at it. It was a reflex action.

Nawab Shafat Ali: One way, for the understanding of Maneka Gandhi and the animal rights activists, Avni died a peaceful death to one bullet. What would they have done if she was captured? They would have put it in the animal rescue centre (ARC) and it will be let to die slowly, with less food.
      
Nawab Shafat Ali congratulates his son Asghar Ali. 

Do you feel sad for the cubs?

Asghar Ali: No need to be sad about them. They have grown enough and can now survive on their own. They are no longer cubs. They are semi-adults. Unfortunately, it was found that they were also man-eaters. The last three humans killed by them in the last one month, were by the cubs. This was scientifically proved through the saliva test. Adult tigers attack humans on thighs and eat the flesh. Cubs tend to attack on the neck and face. Our operation will continue till they are captured and put in the ARC.

What is your response to Maneka Gandhi’s comment on the killing of Avni?

Nawab Shafat Ali: I challenge her to prove her charge that I am an anti-national. If she cannot prove it, she should step down. Else, I will sue her for her derogatory comments on me. She has always been critical of our service to mankind. We are doing social service, taking no fee or seeking no publicity. When I killed a leopard in Maharashtra on October 5, 2017, she said that I fired a wrong leopard. I told all those critics that time would bring out the truth. Not even one human was attacked by leopards in that area in the last 13 months. Earlier, the leopard used to attack one person every week.

Maneka also said there are cases against me. There is not even one case. There is no First Information Report (FIR) in any police station in the country. In 1991, a police officer slapped a false case on me that I was carrying an unlicensed pistol. He had a personal grudge against my father for refusing to part with a property. The case was stuck by High Court and later by the Supreme Court.

We are a family of hunters. We cannot go wrong in identifying a specific animal. You show me a pug mark, I can recognize the gender, age and health status of the animal.

I would also like to tell the activists that if you refuse to lose one tiger, you will lose the tiger (the whole species) because of the increasing conflict between man and tiger. Culling of animals is happening across the world, including China and Europe, as a part of the wildlife conservation. 

Activists say you have flouted norms that say that animals should not be attacked between sunset and sunrise. 

Nawab Shafat Ali and Asghar Ali: Nobody can fix an appointment with a tiger. The activists must understand the basic point that T-1 was not attacked in the core forest. Not even in the buffer forest. For the last two years, it had been moving in the semi-forest areas, where people live and cultivate. The rules do not apply here. If we do not capture or kill it, we are on the wrong side of the law. Section 11 of the Wildlife Protection Act stipulates that the Chief Wildlife Warden should capture or eliminate a wild animal when it poses danger to human life. 

Activists have called you a hunter with a list for animal blood?

Nawab Shafat Ali: (with an expression of aversion) We don’t like killing animals. Killing happens only when it is inevitable.

How could you accomplish a task that experts from Karnataka, Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh could not do so in two long years?

Nawab Shafat Ali: We are a family of hunters. We stayed there for 40 days, strategising to capture the T-1 alive. We have been capturing animals for three generations. In 1991, I captured a rogue elephant on request by the government. In this operation too, we interferered on the request of the Maharashta government. We never ask governments to use our services. We do not hesitate to help, if governments seek our help.

(To Nawab Shafat Ali) Did you congratulate your son after the operation? 

We all must congratulate him. I congratulate him now (shakes hand with Asghar, who thanks his dad). In fact, the government should confer the President’s Award on my proud son for having prevented further human loss.