60 bonnet macaques were sedated, tied up in gunny bags and were dumped on Sakleshpur highway

In a joint operation by the State police and forest department officials, seven people have been taken into custody for killing 38 bonnet macaques on Sakleshpur highway. The accused are Ramu and Yashodha, a couple, and five others — Prasanna, Manju, Ramanujam, Srikanth, and Rudragowda. They have been booked under Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

On July 29, around 60 bonnet macaques were found — most of them were dead and some unconscious — on the highway at Belur in Hassan district. They were tied up in gunny bags and were dumped on the roadside. The Karnataka High Court took up a suo-motu case against the accused.

The investigating officials found out that villagers of Chowdenahalli had approached the couple and others from Hakki Pikki tribe to get rid of the monkeys that allegedly created nuisance in their plantations. They hired the couple to get rid of the monkeys for a contract amount of Rs 40,000, forest sources said.

The couple and their associates started feeding monkeys with biscuits, buns and bread crumbs to attract them to a particular spot. According to forest officials, their plan was to relocate the monkeys after allegedly sedating them and carrying them to a faraway location. On July 29, the couple and their associates attracted the monkeys to the same spot and fed them with foods possibly laced with sedatives. After the monkeys passed out, they stuffed them in gunny bags and loaded them in a goods vehicle. They drove towards Belur on the Sakleshpur Highway. 

Midway, they stopped the vehicle and found out that a few monkeys stuffed into a gummy bag had died. They dumped all the gunny bags on the highway and left. A few locals felt something amiss and opened one of the gunny bags to find dead monkeys. They later opened all the bags in which some of them were alive, but hardly able to move. The locals gave them water and a few of them even moved into the forested cover.
The locals alerted the police who informed the forest department. The officials rushed to the spot and moved the dead monkeys for post-mortem. “The FSL reports are awaited,” said a Range Forest Officer.

The police and the forest officials took the other living monkeys to a veterinary hospital and treated them. Later these monkeys were released and they were tracked to their territory in Chowdenahalli village. These monkeys reached the same spot where the couple and their associates used to feed food. The officials found the identities of the accused after questioning the villagers. Forest officials were also told by the accused that they did not poison the monkey and that they had died of suffocation and shock. However, postmortem reports will reveal that, a senior forest officer said.

Wildlife conservationists and observers say the police and forest department has mishandled the case by not booking the accused under the Wildlife Protection Act, and only by sections of IPC and PCA which are toothless when it comes to cruelty against animals.