Hope to prevent government misuse of Rs 35,000 crore on ‘meaningless tree-planting’
 
 Conservation India, a non-profit, non-commercial, knowledge-sharing portal, has launched an online petition to prevent over Rs 35,000 crore from being wasted on meaningless tree-planting projects. The petition is demanding a better Compensatory Afforestation Bill. The campaign was launched on Wednesday. So far, it has been endorsed by over 1,000 concerned citizens.
 
 The campaign demanding that the Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2015 be revised and recast, was inspired by an article written by Praveen Bhargav and Shekar Dattatri in a national daily on compensatory afforestation. Bhargav is Managing Trustee of Wildlife First, an active conservation NGO based in Bengaluru. Dattatri is a wildlife filmmaker and conservationist.
 
 Both Bhargav and Dattatri have served on the National Board for Wildlife.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, a Conservation India representative said, “We strongly believe that the bill in its present form is likely to result in ecological disaster and foster massive corruption in the forestry sector. We are suggesting ways by which the Compensatory Afforestation Management Planning Authority (CAMPA) corpus can be utilised for the genuine benefit of the country.”
 
 The petition holds that the bill is fundamentally flawed as it assumes that the loss of forests or other natural habitats as a result of development projects can be compensated for by simply planting trees elsewhere. The truth is that forests and other natural habitats are extremely complex ecosystems that have evolved to a state of ecological equilibrium over millions of years, with their full complement of pollinators, seed dispersers, predators and prey. These natural habitats are the repositories of India’s extraordinarily rich biodiversity, which is already under tremendous stress. The compensatory afforestation that this country has witnessed so far predominantly consists of raising artificial plantations of non-native species of trees, which have zero biodiversity value. It is also meaningless to plant trees in lieu of diverted natural habitats such as wetlands or grasslands, which have their own distinct ecological value. Sometimes, over-zealous tree planting in the wrong place can badly affect a natural ecosystem. Afforestation in general has had an abysmal record in India. Massive amounts of money have been spent with little to show on the ground. In Maharashtra, a recent official evaluation of 10-year-old plantations in all 11 forest circles showed that 74 per cent of plantations have failed, 13 per cent were shown to be partially successful and only 13 per cent were deemed successful.
 
 Compensatory afforestation has had an even more dismal record, with numerous instances of money allotted for afforestation being misused for purchasing vehicles and installing air conditioners. According to some studies, Goa used 69 per cent of its compensatory afforestation allocation on buildings, vehicles and computers. Similarly, Andhra Pradesh wanted to spend 43 per cent on construction activities. When other agencies such as Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) have committed Rs 15,000 crore rupees for 22 forestry projects in 13 States, CAMPA funds could be channelised towards much-needed conservation purposes.
 
 Use CAMPA efficiently, says petition
 
 The petition has made suggestions for the effective utilisation of the funds. It has demanded that the bill be modified to allow a major percentage of CAMPA funds to be utilized for defragmenting and consolidation of the remaining large blocks of natural old-growth forests. Other measures, could involve strategic land acquisitions, extinguishment of old leased lands in thickly forested areas, and voluntary resettlement of people from sanctuaries and National Parks. The money can also be used for acquisition of land for establishing wildlife corridors, as well as facilitating natural regeneration of degraded forests. The approach here must be to first identify degraded forest areas with existent rootstock, and invest only on appropriate protection measures such as trenching, fencing and fire prevention. The degraded forests will then recover through a natural process at a very nominal cost to the exchequer. Funding for artificial plantations should only be considered in extremely degraded areas with no existing rootstock. The petition states, “CAMPA, being a sovereign fund, is the only one available for such ecologically vital activities. If the CAF Bill 2015 is recast on the basis of sound science, it can create the foundation for a far-sighted, and genuinely beneficial strategy to protect India’s forests. If not, it may result in the squandering of Rs 35,000 crore rupees on corruption-ridden ‘afforestation’ projects involving digging pits, buying polythene bags for raising saplings, and planting trees that can never become forests.”