Ahmedabad: As a mother, would do anything in power to rescue her child in distress, the two lionesses in Dhari too have proved same emotions are present in animals as well. In an endearing case, a video of a lioness coming back to get her cub scared to jump across a rivulet has gone viral. In Krakraj area in Amreli, a lioness picked up her cub with her mouth and crossed the rivulet as she found out her cub’s apprehension of making the jump.

 The video has gone viral on social media. In the ravines of Shetrunji river, these two lionesses with five cubs were crossing a small rivulet in the ravines in the area. The lioness with three cubs easily crossed, while the other two cubs were left behind. One of the cubs got stuck on a slope. The lioness, realizing that her cub was in danger, walked back. The other lioness also followed her to help. The lioness probably, the mother lifted the cub in her mouth, and crossed the rivulet. The other cub who was also finding it difficult to cross followed the mother.

 The mother then carried the cub to a safe distance and the other four cubs followed them.
 	Watch: Here’s how a lioness rescued her cub who was afraid to cross a rivulet in #Ahmedabad https://t.co/tAUERoxYgH— Ahmedabad Mirror (@ahmedabadmirror) 1503770076000  
According to officials, there are several instances where lions have shown human like behaviour. Officials said in Gir, in not less than five instances, the senior lionesses in the group take care of the cubs in case of the death of their mother. 

 H S Singh, Member of the National Board for Wildlife and a lion expert, said, “Usually when the mother lioness realizes that her cub is in trouble, she would lift the cub in her mouth in such a way that the cub does not get injured with the teeth. This is not only for the new born cubs but such rescue are seen in six months old cubs as well. Looking at the video, it appears that it was somewhere in areas of Shetrunji river in Amreli.”

 Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, AP Singh, said that this is the video of Shetrunji river and such incidents are getting reported rarely. However, through this is the video of Amreli, they will have to verify if it is a fresh incident or an old one.⁠⁠⁠⁠