It was hell and back for constable Nagesh P G when a baby cobra popped out from the handlebar of his bike and gave him a beady-eyed stare. 
 
 Perhaps taken aback by Nagesh's round-as-saucers eyes and mouth, the snake slithered back into hiding. But Nagesh was not going anywhere as he tried to come to terms with the fact that he was riding with death for over two hours and across 50 km.   
 High drama Saturday started normally enough for Nagesh, who is attached to Chikpet police station. He took out his bike early in the morning from his J P Nagar home, travelled to Majestic, then to Magadi Road and continued for about 25 kilometres. He then travelled back to Majestic. 
 All was well till he saw a baby cobra popping its head from the handlebar. Terrified, he left his bike at Majestic near Janardhan Lodge, shivering at the thought that the vicious little reptile had been travelling with him for over 50 km. Petrified, he immediately called BBMP wildlife activists for help. “I was shocked,” Nagesh told Bangalore Mirror. “I couldn't believe my eyes when I saw the snake, swaying with its head reared, right in front of me. I’m fortunate to be still alive. For almost two hours it was with me, and could have stung me any time. The moment I saw it, I stopped my bike and called wildlife volunteers.”   
 Rescue operation After reaching the spot, wildlife volunteers promptly removed the headlight dome and petrol tank, the two places where snakes usually hide in a bike, but couldn't find the reptile.
 
 As Nagesh refused to touch the bike until the snake had been retrieved from it, the bike was taken to a nearby garage. Its parts were dismantled there, and the baby cobra was found nestled inside the speedometer.
 
 “This is the first time we have come across such an incident. In most such cases, we remove the dome and petrol tank. But this time, we didn’t find it in those places. Since Nagesh refused to touch the bike, we took it to a nearby garage after consoling him. The mechanic removed the spare parts one by one. We still couldn't find it anywhere. Finally, we found it inside the speedometer. This was a first for us,” Rajesh, a wildlife volunteer said.
 
 “Last week, some snakes were chased in our area,” said Nagesh. “I think this small one belonged to that group.”
 
 
 Could have been fatal
 “Things could have gone horribly wrong,” Rajesh said. “Cobras are born venomous and a baby cobra is no different. In fact, we consider them to be more dangerous than an adult since the latter understands things and strikes when it wants. However, a baby cobra will simply strike and as they are venomous, they can easily kill human beings. He was lucky that it didn't strike despite the disturbance.”
 
 The young cobra was later released. As for Nagesh, who still breaks out into a sweat at the thought of the snake, he is now thinking of selling the bike.