Activists raise concern over infra development in core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve, forest officials insist activities completely okay 

Wildlife activists have raised the issue of illegal construction and infrastructure development in the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve. They say various illegal construction activities have been taken up inside the reserve area without approval.

An orchidarium, jungle safari, and canopy walks are some of the alleged illegal activities that the activists have highlighted.

Activists say the recently inaugurated orchidarium in a nursery area located in the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve thus violates the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and the Supreme Court’s order. All construction activities in the core areas of tiger reserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and national parks are banned as per a Supreme Court order.

“The orchidarium has recently been inaugurated by the forest department. To build this facility, nine fully grown trees were felled down in the core area of the tiger reserve. When locals opposed the activity and raised questions, the department informed them that the trees are being removed to ensure the safety of a nearby water tank. However, the water tank was also removed later and the orchidarium was constructed,” said a wildlife activist in the area on condition of anonymity.

Apart from that, jungle safari being carried out at the Castlerock area of Dandeli sanctuary, which is under the administrative control of Kali Tiger Reserve, has also raised concerns. Concerned locals say there is no mention of a jungle safari in the tiger conservation plan of Kali Tiger Reserve.

“The canopy walk is illegal as there is no mention of it in the tiger conservation plan of Kali. Although complaints were given to NTCA, instead of taking action against illegal construction, NTCA gave a report in favour of canopy walk stating no separate approval is needed thereby contradicting their own 2012 tourism guidelines which clearly states no new tourism infrastructure shall be set up in and around the tiger reserves. Further, the Karnataka Tourism Policy clearly states No new tourism infrastructure shall be set up in wildlife-protected areas. Many private resorts and homestays have come up in the Castlerock area which highlights canopy walk as one of the major attractions,” said the activist.

Locals allege that while several complaints have been raised with the forest department in the past, no action has been taken so far.

“We have been raising the issue of illegal construction in the core area of the tiger reserve for a very long time and have also submitted photographic evidence along with complaints to the Principal Chief Conservator of Karnataka Forest department. However, no action has been taken so far,” said Ravi Redkar, a wildlife activist working in the area.


As far as the orchidarium is concerned, it is being done only from the conservation angle. Orchids are rare species and we need to study them to propagate them better. Moreover, only a couple of domes have been built–Kumar Pushkar, APCCF
When BM reached out to the officials from the forest department, they said these issues are being raised by some disgruntled locals and all the activities being taken up inside the reserve are legal.

“These kinds of allegations are probably from some disgruntled people. As far as the orchidarium is concerned, it is being done only from the conservation angle. Orchids are rare species and we need to study them to propagate them better. Moreover, only a couple of domes have been constructed in a spot that had a forest nursery on the roadside. And, while Castle rock is part of the forest area, it is not in the core zone and vehicular movements are anyways restricted,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.