After spending Rs 2 lakh to catch just 20 rats, civic body hopes to be second time lucky in its fight against rodents
 
 
 The Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike may have been humbled the first time it set out to trap rats on its premises. Having set aside Rs 2 lakh to rein in the rodents, the civic agency managed to catch a dismal 20, raising the cost of catching each rat as high as Rs 10,000. The result was that the rodent menace continued unabated in the BMP offices. 

 This time around, the BBMP is aiming to catch 240 rats a day, equipped with gum plates and mere hope! GS Giri Shetty, BBMP's assistant executive engineer, multi-purpose engineering department (MPED), said, “Though we have not done any survey of rats getting tapped in the BBMP offices, we have received many complaints, especially from the meeting halls and other offices. On regular basis, the medicines and gum plates are kept. But the success rate is somewhat uneven: If on a good day around 50 rats are trapped, on other days, there is zero success.” 

 	He said the number of rats is calculated only when they are trapped in the gum plates and they realise that a rat is trapped only when the place begins to stink. 

 “These rats die after consuming the medicine (Bromodiolone),” he said. 

 	Shetty said, “Once the demand comes from any BBMP office – the BBMP head office, main building or Annex Building 1, Annex Building 2, Council Building or IPP building at Malleswaram – we ask the contractor either to put the medicines or keep the gum plates. Records are maintained once the person goes to clean the trap location of rats.” 

 	This time, the BBMP has planned to keep an estimated 60 gum plates for BBMP head office’s main building on a daily basis, while 75 gum plates each are planned for Annex Building I, II and III. Council Building will have 40, IPP building 45 (thrice a week), Bromodiolone Baiting in BBMP outside the common areas (thrice a week), and IPP outside common area (twice in a week). This apart, general pest control services will also be taken in the 45,000 sq. ft. area every quarter, he explained.GUM PLATES MIGHT TRAP BIRDS, SQUIRRELS TOO 

 	BBMP’s wildlife chief warden Sharath Babu has has demanded a ban on gum plates. He said “Till these plates are used to catch the rats it is ok, but disposing them has become a big headache for us. Once the rats are caught in this trap they are not disposed of accordingly, like burying them. After these gum plates are used to trap rats, they need to be disposed of in a proper manner.” 

 	He said it is not always that rats are trapped in the gum plates. There are other creatures like birds, snakes or squirrels too which get attracted and trapped. This renders the whole purpose of mitigating the rodent problem useless.
 	
 	
 	
 	ONE OF THE CRUELLEST METHOD TO KILL ANIMALS
 	
 	
 	 		Aglue trap consists of pieces of cardboard, fiberboard, or plastic coated with a sticky adhesive designed to ensnare any rodent or small animal who wanders across or lands on its sticky surface
 		
 		
 		
 		 			WHAT HAPPENS AFTER A RODENT IS TRAPPED IN A GUM TRAP?
 			
 			 		 			* Glue traps rip patches of skin, fur, and feathers off the animals’ bodies as they struggle to escape, and many animals even chew off their 		 			own legs trying to get free.
 			 		 			* Some animals get their faces stuck in the glue and suffocate, which can take hours.
 			 		 			 * Glue traps are completely indiscriminate. PETA fields calls on a regular basis from distraught individuals who have discovered birds, 		 			lizards, snakes, bats, chipmunks, squirrels, and even their own animal companions hopelessly stuck to these sticky boards. 
 			 		 			SOURCE: PETA