Though budgeted, taxation panel vetoes honorarium citing dissatisfaction with their work
 

 

 Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike’s (BBMP) wildlife advisor Sharath Babu, along with the five other volunteers in his team, rescues more than 3,000 reptiles, mammals, and birds from various parts of the city every year, but the civic agency doesn’t even have Rs 7.32 lakh to spare for meeting the team’s annual honorarium. 

 	Though BBMP made a budgetary provision for paying the annual honorarium to the wildlife rescue team, the taxation and finance standing committee turned down the proposal made by commissioner M Lakshminarayana for financial year 2013-14. 

 	According to documents accessed by Bangalore Mirror, the commissioner wrote a letter addressing the administrative, and taxation and finance standing committees on December 11, 2013. The letter was written to take approval from these two panels, and later from the council. An expert, however, says there was no need to send the letter when the taxation and finance standing committee had already made the provision while presenting its budget. 

 

 	Sharath Babu and his team were appointed during 2007 after BBMP was formed merging 100 wards of the erstwhile Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BMP) with seven City Municipal Councils (CMCs), one Town Municipal Council (TMC), and 111 villages around the city. As BBMP’s jurisdiction was expanded from 225 sq km to 800 sq km, complaints about snake and other reptile menace started gaining traction. Since 2007, the team has been continuously working to rescue wild animals and even visiting various spots to save people from possible reptile attacks. 

 	According to sources, the taxation and finance standing committee rejected the proposal as they were not satisfied with the performance of the volunteers. Though Sharath Babu had submitted a consolidated report on the activities done within BBMP limits, the committee ignored it. 

 	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Babu cited some of their recent work like the December 8, 2013, rescue of three monitor lizards followed by the registering of a case by the CID forest cell at the Attibelle police station; seizure of 12 rose-ringed parakeets from astrologers near Sajjan Rao Circle; rescue of an injured kite hanging from a tree at a height of 45 ft near Wilson Garden with the help of volunteers and rock climbers on February 4, 2014; and the February 13, 2014, recovery of a peafowl from the Bangalore University Campus. 

 	When contacted, BBMP’s chief conservator (forest) Brijesh Kumar said he is unaware of the standing committee’s decision. But if the committee has decided to withdraw their services, then Sharath Babu and his team doesn’t have any rights to rescue animals or reptiles within the civic agency’s jurisdiction, he said.