Check out this photo exhibition
Don’t miss this photography exhibition capturing the breathtaking beauty of Leh-Ladakh, by wildlife photographer Prathap DK. The show is a visually enriching journey for the viewer to experience the stunning vistas. While Leh-Ladakh is famous for its monasteries, high-passes and iconic lakes, Prathap has taken a detour from the norm to bring out a fresh perspective. The images showcase some of the iconic and lesser known landscapes, as well as vibrant lakes of Leh-Ladakh in an awe-inspiring way.

 WHERE: Sublime Galleria, UB CIty, Vittal Mallya Road 
 WHEN: 11am-8pm, on till January 29 
 CALL: 22221667


Love that chocolate
If you’re staying in north Bengaluru, this workshop might be worth a try. Swarup Chandrashekar will teach you how to put together chocolate-based desserts to add to your culinary repertoire. You’ll begin by learning how to bake a cake and move on to icing, frosting, and using a bend scraper and star nozzle. The class will also cover how to make chocolate mousse, chocolate cupcake with buttercream frosting, chocolate banana tea cake. 

 WHERE: 1A, Regency Orchard Apartment, 2/2 Bellary Road, Opposite White Petals, Next to Croma, RMV Extension 
 WHEN: 2.30pm-6pm, January 9 (limited seats)
 FEES: `1,500, eventshigh.com

 Sing and dance
It’s double whammy at this joint tonight. Not only is it Ladies Night but it’s also time to karaoke with none other than Martin DSouza and DJ Chirag. So gather your girlfriends, especially the ones who love to sing, and head out for a night of fun, food, and music. And if you happen to be there before time, you also get to take advantage of their happy hours which end at 8pm.

 WHERE: Loveshack No 541-543, 5th Floor, Amarjyoti HBBCS Layout, Koramangala Intermediate Ring Road, Domlur
 WHEN: 9pm, January 9 
 CALL: 40959154


 Go for this art show
Drop by Masters on Show – an art exhibition that features the works of seven of the prominent Indian masters, including S H Raza, Hemendranath Mazumdar, Thota Vaikuntam, Riyas Komu, Bose Krishnamachari, Kandi Narasimhalu and M F Husain. 

 WHERE: Gallery g, Lavelle Road
 WHEN: 10am-6.30pm, on till January 10
 CALL: 22219275


 A treat for meat lovers
This meat feast, ROC-B-QUE, presents a barbeque spread of small and large plates that include Charred Hawaiian skewers, 7-spice Alfaham Arabic Grilled Chicken 
skewers, and Sticky Texas Wings, among others. Every offering on the menu has been paired with a complementing LIIT to add an extra zing to your dining experience. Also try the other spiked iced-teas such as lavender, aam panna, kala khatta, and the zesty jalapeno.

 WHERE: Venue: Hard Rock Cafe, St Marks Road
 WHEN: 12pm onwards, on till January 31
 CALL: 41242222