Forest department inquiry confirms wrongdoing, but fails to act; whistleblower Prabhu then approaches Lokayukta
 
 A forest department inquiry confirms encroachment of tiger reserve land by their own man, an assistant conservator of forests (ACF). 

 The report, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, confirms that the ACF has encroached upon a crucial patch – buffer zone of the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, which is part of a critical habitat to Asian elephants and tigers. The ACF (wildlife), K D Belliappa, and his family, the report states, have encroached upon land measuring 18.20 acres of Devamachi Reserve Forest. 

 

 	HOME to rare species 

 	A complaint and an inquiry report dated October 10, 2014, was filed before the Lokayukta on Friday, seeking action against forest officials involved in the encroachment. The fragile and sensitive zone is home to rare, endangered and threatened flora and fauna. The allegation first came to light in 2012. The forest department had initiated an inquiry after that. The final report came recently in an inquiry in October by chief conservator of forests (CCF), Kodagu circle, Madikeri, B B Mallesh. “Devamachi reserve forest is a high eco-fragile and eco-sensitive zone. The encroached area and its surroundings fall under the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve buffer zone. The eco-sensitive area falls under the ancient Mavkal-Devmachi-Madhare-Dubare-Anekad-Authur-Yedavanad elephant corridor. Belliappa and his family have encroached upon 18.20 acres in survey no. 76/1 of Devamachi reserve forest. I have ordered action against the encroachers and eviction of all unauthorised constructions at the earliest,” Mallesh has written in his report. 

 	The issue was first raised by a local activist, M B Prabhu, who had lodged a complaint with the forest department on the massive encroachment in the buffer zone of the tiger reserve in 2012. Subsequently, an inquiry was taken up by forest sleuths as Nagarhole Tiger Reserve forms a large part of the Western ghats, which has the largest number of Royal Bengal tigers. 

 	As it also forms part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve and an important elephant habitat under the Mysore Elephant corridor, Devamachi Reserve forests and Maukal reserve forests of Kodagu played an important role in cushioning the critical core area as an extension to rare, endangered and threatened species. Hence, the inquiry was initiated by the department. 

 	Devamachi reserve forest was also declared a buffer zone in 2012 as it was a supplementary habitat for animals including tigers. Strangely, Belliappa, in Nagarhole wildlife sub-division, was meant to protect the forest and wildlife, but instead was found to have encroached upon a huge chunk of the critical land. 

 	“As per section 143 (1) (f) of the Coorg Land and Revenue Regulations Act (1899), a government servant is not permitted to hold and acquire government land without authorization,” a letter dated October 21, 2014, ordering eviction by Mallesh to DCF, Virajpet, division, states. 

 	However, no action was taken despite the serious finding. Prabhu, the whistleblower in the case, said that despite the inquiry finding serious violations, neither an FIR was filed against the officer, nor action to evict him and save the critical forest was taken. 

 	“I had lodged complaints thrice with documents including a sketch copy and photos of the violations. Later, an inquiry was conducted and the charges were found true. Though eviction was ordered, nothing has been done till date as the local Virajpet officers are hand-in-glove with Belliappa. I have also lodged a Lokayukta complaint,” Prabhu told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	As forest department officials haven’t acted yet owing to the case being sensitive, another complaint was lodged with the anti-corruption watchdog on Friday. “We have received the complaint and have called for evidences,” Justice Subhash B Adi told Bangalore Mirror. 

 

 	Charges refuted 

 	However, Belliappa refuted the charges of encroachment and maintained that he was ready for any probe. “This is a 70-80 year-old issue, whereas I was born in 1960. I haven't encroached upon any land. My ancestors have been farming ever since 1940. Further, it's not just me, but more than 200 families are staying and doing farming there. These charges are levelled against me as I carry out enforcement activities like relocation in Nagarhole and act against offenders. I haven't encroached upon any land. Let the issue be probed in detail. I'm honest and dedicated to the department and won't do any wrong. I'm ready to face action if I have done anything wrong," Belliappa told BM.