Thanneer, the 40-year-old radio-collared wild elephant that was captured from Wayanad District in Kerala on the night of Friday (February 2) died at Ramapura elephant camp in Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Saturday morning. The jumbo was captured after being tranquilised and allegedly died due to an overdose.

This is the third elephant death recorded in Karnataka over the last two months in a wild elephant capture operation by the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

Wildlife activists and conservationists say Thanneer’s death should be investigated and all the ongoing elephant capture operations in the state should be suspended.

“The number of elephants that we have lost recently in capture operations is alarming. While Arjuna, the Dasara elephant, was killed in one such operation on December 2, another elephant died in Mudigere on December 2 due to an overdose of tranquiliser. Thanneer was a docile elephant. However, he was still captured, radiocollared, and relocated. We cannot afford to lose elephants due to shoddy capture operations. These operations should be suspended immediately until the department has all the necessary infrastructure in place to deal with emergencies. Thaneer’s death should be probed,” said Joseph Hoover, a former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

Thanneer was captured from Hassan nearly a month ago and a radio collar was fixed by KFD before he was released in Bandipur. On Friday, it was spotted in Mananthavady town in Kerala.
 
Later, the authorities from Kerala Forest Department ordered that the elephant be taken back to Karnataka. Wildlife activists underline that action should be taken against the officials of the Kerala Forest Department for their actions. “An official from the Kerala Forest Department mentioned that since the elephant belongs to Karnataka, it should be taken back to the state. It is disheartening to see a Forest Department official making such remarks. Elephants do not follow political boundaries,” added Hoover.

Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre has described the incident as unfortunate and asserted that labeling wildlife based on state boundaries is unacceptable.

“Associating an elephant or any wildlife to a particular state and sending it back is not acceptable. This matter will be discussed with the Forest Minister of Kerala,” said Khandre.