By Reya Mehrotra

Fishing nets are scaring birds, killing snakes; BBMP wants better laws to protect fishermen, wildlife 

Spot Billed Pelicans, Painted Storks, Garganey, Northern Shoveler, Wood Sandpiper and Little Ringed Plover are just some of the birds that used to be seen at Mahadevpura Lake between October and March. Nowadays, however, only two or three local bird species can be seen. Ecologists blame fishing nets and thermocol blocks being floated in the lake by fishermen. They say these scare away the birds. It has also been pointed out that fishing nets at Mahadevpura Lake have also led to deaths of snakes that get trapped in them.

Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is in a fix. Several complaints have been lodged, but BBMP officials say that the government will have to clearly define fishing laws that benefit both the fishing community and the wildlife at the lakes. 

Jagannath Rao, Deputy Conservator of Forests, BBMP says, “We are calling a meeting soon with the Fisheries Department to ask them to stop fishing until the next fishing season comes as the water has receded in the lake. We are not against fishing but it has to be done in a regulated manner so that birds are not affected. The economically weaker section of the society that makes a living from fishing too has to be supported. Also, if fishing is completely stopped, it will lead to overpopulation of the fish. But I suggest that fishing should not be done in small lakes. Ultimately, the government will have to lay down proper rules for fishing in the lakes. This topic has been in discussion for a long time now.”

The residents and nature lovers propose that the nets are laid only at night and removed at dawn as these scare away birds. Currently, the contractors have been laying nets at around 6:30 pm and removing them between 6am and 8 am, when birds already start coming at the lake. Several times, nets are also laid during the day.

Mihir Patel, an amateur wildlife photographer who stays near the lake says, “From June to October last year, fishing nets were permanently laid at the lake which led to complete disappearance of migratory birds. Thermocol blocks were also floated during the day by the contractors to scare away birds. In October last year, I saw 30-40 kg of fish being collected from the lake in a day.”

A fishing contractor at Mahadevpura Lake says, “Currently, the water level at the lake is receding so we only lay nets twice a week. Fish are also dying and so we need to collect as much fish as we can. BBMP has directed us to visit the lake in the morning or evening for laying nets and removing them. They asked us not to go when the walkers come. The authorities want us to fish and the residents object. Whom should we listen to?”

BBMP has sent a proposal to the government to allot Rs 2.5 crores for Mahadevpura Lake to undertake maintenance and development works at the lake. The Palike also plans to develop at least 50-60 other lakes in the city. Jagannath Rao confirmed, “We are awaiting the sanctions, based on which we will go for tenders for lake development.” Some of the lakes included in the BBMP list are Kalkere Lake, Rampura Lake, Hulimavu Lake, Chikka Begur Lake and Doddakallasandra Lake. 

BBMP needs Rs 2.5 crore to develop Mahadevpura Lake

Proposal: BBMP wants the government to allocate Rs 2.5 crores for Mahadevpura Lake
Priority projects: Cleaning up and de-silting the lake and maintenance of the storm water drains
Other work proposed: Maintenance of the soil and gravel walkways, construction of toilets, inlet and outlet water pipe corrections and deployment of more security guards
CSR funding: United Way Bengaluru has signed an MoU to invest Rs 28 lakhs to maintain the lake. They plan to install benches and a yoga platform at the lake. They will secure 1500 sq. feet for a children’s park