By Melvin Mathew

BBMP says monkeys fall from buildings, get severely injured as residents feed them, attract them to apartment complexes but others sedate them to drive them away

Monkeys are constantly spotted in apartment complexes in the city, looking for food. It could be said that they’re haunting places that used to be their home before urbanisation took over their natural habitat. Due to this, numerous cases of monkeys injuring themselves by falling from buildings have been reported. As per BBMP people’s habit of feeding wild animals only fuels this menace.

A bonnet macaque was recently brought to PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre due to a fractured humerus bone. Usually, monkeys endure such fractures due to falling from buildings or getting electrocuted at apartment complexes. Usually, such falls cause monkeys to fracture their humerus bone (part of upper limb) and ulna bone (part of forearm).

“After taking a digital x-ray, very thin intramedullary pins are inserted into the medullary cavity. The pins go through the broken pieces and are kept there until calcification. In more severe cases, a bone plate is attached along with the pins for additional support. The regrowth of the bone is constantly checked every 10 to 15 days to decide when to remove pins. Usually, after 45 to 55 days the bone heals completely. In case it’s still brittle, we add a plaster cast for a few days more,” said Dr Nawaz Sharrif, Chief Veterinarian at PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre.
 
Once the bone heals completely, it goes through some mobility exercises before it is released into the wild again. At least 10 to 15 cases are brought to the hospital every month. Such cases are quite common. Currently, the PfA is nursing four injured monkeys.

“Monkeys are injured due to various reasons. They get chased by dogs and fall from trees due to panic or due to accidents on NICE Road, or by getting electrocuted while swinging from cables, and falling from apartment buildings,” Sharrif said.
Experts told BM that residents of apartment complexes act hostile towards monkeys when they start becoming a menace. There have been cases of people bursting crackers, hitting the animals with sticks and some are even dosed, sedated 

“In our observation, all conflict begins with human intervention. A section of these people will feed monkeys due to religious beliefs and when they start making a ruckus, they are given sedatives or are poisoned. Monkeys can’t just fall from buildings, they are usually dosed,” said B Reddy Shankar Babu, Special Commissioner for Lakes and Forest, BBMP.

Due to food shortage in their now sparse habitat and the availability of excess food in urban localities, monkeys are also prone to becoming regular visitors here. Experts suggested that residents must stop feeding monkeys. “If you don’t feed them for a couple of days, monkeys will go away,” said Dr Sharrif.

DCF Govinda Raju noted that monkeys also tend to loiter around old temples. “Usually temples will also have a surplus amount of food lying around and easily available for monkeys to snatch,” he added.
 
While in the wild, monkeys have to work for their food, the easy accessibility of food lures them to these spots. To stop residents from resorting to violence BBMP has urged citizens to call the 24X7 available zonal centre’s number to report monkeys. A dedicated group of trained animal rescuers will be dispatched to the location to rescue and capture the monkey as per guidelines.


 Pic of another monkey on a tree with a cold drink, possibly stolen from a home

“We are also planning to start a dedicated task force with a proper team to rescue non-injured monkeys from urban habitats and release them back into the wild. We are currently surveying the right green cover for this purpose, I have already given the green signal for the purchase of vehicles for this purpose,” added Babu.
 
BBMP does not have the authority to simply capture and release a group of monkeys and has to take the permission of Wildlife Warden for each case.

Babu added that rescuing and relocating monkeys is a very complex process. “We can’t leave the monkeys in the jungle immediately. Having gotten used to the processed food and with persistent feeding, these ‘urban’ monkeys have lost the ability to forage their food. We know of cases where after relocation, these monkeys starve to death. We have to make sure there is a sufficient amount of food for them until they get adjusted in the span of 3-4 months,” he said.

He explained that even if they manage to find food, they still have to account for territorial fights with native monkeys which also could endanger their survival.
BBMP relocates monkeys to Devarayanadurga forest in Tumakuru district and Sangama Wildlife Sanctuary near Kanakapura. However, the move has always been met with resistance from villagers from the area who complain of urban dwellers dumping their problems onto villagers which often leads to the destruction of crops and property. According to an official, there is a proposal being floated to relocate monkeys to Shivamogga forest as well.


 Monkey see monkey doThe high court recently directed the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike and forest department to chart a plan to protect both the residents and monkeys, and ensure the macaques return to their natural habitat.

To deal with unplanned urbanisation and increase forest cover, BBMP has been taking various steps. “Wherever it is possible, we are trying to develop biodiversity parks. But people often display resistance stating that they want a garden instead. We need to create designated safe spaces for animals that will be unaffected by human intervention,” said Babu.
 
However, DCF Raju noted that there is no space for large-scale expansion of green cover. “Plantation work is being implemented in Turahalli Forest and JB Kaval Forest and existing trees are being protected,” he added.