Tired of the monkey menace, people are now adopting the soft approach 

With the monkey menace spreading all across Karnataka, many people are now adopting various methods to scare away the simians and safeguard themselves as well as their produce.

While some are going for paper tigers, others are taking refuge in the form of tiger-shaped stuffed animals. They believe that by keeping these tigers, simian attacks have reduced.

Wildlife rescuers in Bengaluru said that they receive at least three to five calls in a week over the monkey menace.

Many mutts in Kolar district have also placed stuffed tigers as the monkey menace is high. Officials of the mutts said that these stuffed toys have been successful at are scaring the simians.

Sriharsha, a college student in the outskirts of Bengaluru, said, “Most of the residents here have been buying the stuffed animals like tigers. We keep them on our cars, terrace and farmlands. It seems to be working for us, so far.”

   Most residents here have bought stuffed animals like tigers to keep them on cars, terrace and farmlands. It seems to be working so far­–Sriharsha, student
Meanwhile, a meeting was held recently in the Maland region on ways to tackle the monkey menace. Following suggestions from experts, the villagers in and around Mudigere taluk have been putting up banners with images of tigers attacking the simians. They claim that it has met with initial success.

With the coffee harvesting season fast approaching, local coffee growers have expressed apprehensions about losing their produce due to attacks by simians. They said that the monkeys which were earlier in the forests are now heading toward the farmlands.

   .
‘Not a long-term solution’
Bharat Kumar TP, Assistant Professor (College of Horticulture, Mudigere) told BM, “As per research, the stuffed animals and banners have limited success. We have told people that they should be sparingly used. Monkeys are good observers. Initially, when they see these posters/animals, they may feel it is real and escape. However, if this continues for a long time and by chance, if they dare to touch these posters or stuffed animals, then these may be of no use.”

Instead, he said that they have come up with a new device. It is an audio-based speaker that produces unpleasant sounds. These sounds seem to have a negative effect on the simians and they refuse to come even 800 metres close to that place.

Meanwhile, Rajesh, a wildlife rescuer from Bengaluru said, “We receive three to five calls in a week about the monkey menace. In the state’s capital, we see bonnet macaque species all over. Usually, they move around in a group with an alpha male or female running the show. A few of the resident groups in the city are using speakers to scare away these monkeys.” 

However, the monkey menace is not limited to Karnataka alone. In 2016, Himachal Pradesh declared monkeys (the Rhesus Macaque) as vermins, opening up them to be hunted and killed. This move has, however, received much criticism.