By: Mihika Basu
 
 Researchers find strong relationship between construction of small hydropower projects and increasing levels of human-elephant conflict
 
 
 
 The number of conflict claims increased from an annual average of 248 claims pre-dam construction (1999 to 2004) to 2,030 claims post-dam construction (2005 to 2013)
 
 Are small hydropower projects (SHPs) responsible for an increase in humans-elephant conflicts? A field study now concludes that there is a strong correlation between the onset of humans-elephant conflict and construction of hydropower projects. The study by Bengaluru-based National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Foundation for Ecological Research, Advocacy and Learning (FERAL), and Wildlife Conservation Society-India, was conducted around the upper reaches of the Gundia river basin, an important tributary to the west-flowing Netravathi river of Karnataka. This region constitutes part of the Western Ghats and the study site included Kemphole, Kagneri and Kanchankumari reserve forests.
 
 The number of conflict claims increased from an annual average of 248 claims pre-dam construction (1999 to 2004) to 2,030 claims post-dam construction (2005 to 2013). “Elephant-related compensation claims peaked thrice between 1999 and 2013. The observed peaks in 2005, 2008 and 2010 coincided with the construction of one (18 MW), one (9 MW) and two (15 MW and 3 MW) SHPs, respectively,” findings reveal. The researchers said in their analysis that the study site, which comprises part of an elephant corridor, is characterised by steep terrain, which poses a natural constraint for elephant movement. Hence, they said, the proliferation of SHPs and their associated structures can further disturb and obstruct the free movement of elephants, possibly leading to increased humans-elephant conflict as elephants are forced to move into new areas. They added that conspicuous increase in such conflicts during periods of dam construction can be attributed to extensive blasting, working of heavy machinery and vehicular movement during this phase.
 
 “Though human-elephant conflict decreased post-construction, it remained significantly higher compared to the period prior to building of dams. This can be attributed to operational disturbances, human activity, forest fragmentation and SHP-related infrastructure development. This is supported by the report of Karnataka Elephant Task Force (2012), which states that SHP construction can increase such conflict levels by causing disturbance in elephant habitat and hindering elephant movement. Similar trends were observed along the Chilla-Motichur elephant corridor, where elephant movement was drastically affected by large hydropower development,” the researchers said.
 
 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy defines SHPs as those that produce between two and 25 megawatts of power. Unlike other hydel projects, SHPs in India are exempted from requiring environmental clearances due to the assumption that they have negligible adverse effects. For the current research project, the team assessed the perceived socio-ecological impacts of four small hydropower projects by conducting semi-structured interviews with local respondents. About 84 per cent respondents claimed that elephants rarely or never entered their villages in the past, and that conflicts with them had begun only in the last decade.
 
 The predominant reason given for this sudden onset of humans-elephant conflict (71.5 per cent) was the proliferation of SHPs in the landscape. “When asked to describe how SHPs could increase these conflicts, they said disturbances caused by sound, light and people movement in forests during dam construction and operation have triggered elephant movement towards villages. The respondents cited that dams have destroyed riparian vegetation, especially bamboo, a critical food source for elephants and hence, they started moving towards villages in search of food. They also said that linear intrusion such as canals and penstocks have blocked elephant movement corridors,” said the researchers.
 
 
 OTHER KEY FINDINGS
 
 The general level of awareness about small hydropower projects was low, and assurances of local electricity and employment generation remained largely unfulfilled, the researchers claimed. The researchers said, “We found that the lack of adequate scrutiny within this sector has resulted in the near absence of public participation, false claims being made in project reports and high levels of conflict with local communities. Given the ambitious targets of projected SHP growth, there is a dire need for further research, especially to better understand their cumulative ecological and social impacts.”
 
 
 Power unchanged
 
 According to the findings, eight of the nine surveyed villages were electrified prior to SHP construction and one village continued to remain un-electrified even after its commissioning. The perceived average electricity supply per day across villages was about five hours in the monsoon months (June to September) and 11.6 hours in the non-monsoon months (October to May). All but one respondent indicated that electricity supply had neither increased nor stabilised post-SHP construction, and their expectations of improved electricity supply had not been met, claimed the researchers. “The construction of all four SHPs was accompanied by the building of new approach roads, bridges, foot trails and transmission lines. All respondents reported that they did not benefit directly or indirectly from this infrastructure, since they were denied access to these amenities,” they added.
 
 
 Decline in fish catch
 
 The findings state that while most respondents did not experience any change in the ease of accessing surrounding forests due to SHP construction, access to the river was most severely affected, with 88 per cent of respondents claiming to have lost access to river stretches, which previously served as locations for sustenance fishing. About 68.5 per cent perceived a decline in fish abundance and attributed it, in part or whole, to the proliferation of such projects. Most respondents did not perceive any effect of SHPs on river water quality. However, about 40 per cent believed that river water quality had declined after dam construction as the water accumulated sediment when stagnant, got muddy during release and made the rocks more slippery due to sediment deposits.
 
 
 No extra jobs
 
 “Despite owning agricultural fields or plantations, most respondents sought additional sources of employment. Most respondents maintained that they did not get an
 opportunity to work at the dam, despite being assured of the same by dam developers. Those who received employment with the dam belonged to five of the nine villages surveyed. A small proportion of the respondents received temporary and daily-wage employment,” said findings.