The hub of IT revolution in India, the areas around Whitefield, Varthur and Sarjapur have witnessed rapid urbanisation in the last one decade. Semi-forest areas around these regions have paved way for several residential projects, private layouts and other real estate projects, crunching the space for wildlife to a tiny patch. 
 
 	
 	With the avarice for land only growing in the 25 sq km region, the man-animal conflict is expected to only aggravate in the coming days. However, experts from forest and conservation background opine that the only possible way out is the peaceful co-existence for humans and wildlife.
 	
 	  	Braj Kishore Singh, former PCCF (Wildlife), said, “Leopards are the most adaptable animals. In fact, in India they have been peacefully coexisting with humans. Out of the 14,000 to 15,000 leopard population across India, majority live out of forests close to villages.”
 	
 	  	“In Bengaluru, we are seeing it for the first time but all rural areas are full of leopards. Similarly, leopards hardly come in search of humans as their primary target (in an urban set up) would be dogs,” Singh said. He says that even if these animals encounter humans, they would hide themselves till the way is clear. Former PCCF (Wildlife) Avani Kumar Varma opines that given the present day context of Bengaluru, Whitefield in particular, ‘neither the humans nor leopards can be shifted to a new location’.
 	
 	
 	“Both have to co-exist and people must accept it as these animals are of no harm to humans as long as they are left for themselves,”
 	
 	
 	Varma reveals. Out of the nearly 50 wildlife attack deaths every year reported from Karnataka, elephants account for a majority while leopards kill of humans are just one or two, according to Singh.
 	
 	  	Citing the successful model of coexistence between leopards and humans in Mumbai around Sanjay Gandhi National Park, Varma says, “The same can be replicated in a set up like Bengaluru too. Much of the areas around Whitefield are poorly lit and one often sees garbage. Filth attracts dogs that are preyed by leopards.” 
 	
 	  	Wildlife scientist Dr Vidya Athreaya, who has worked on leopards in Maharashtra, said, “These incidents are new for many in Bengaluru. But I am sure that the forest department will respond quickly to resolve the issue. More than pointing fingers, all of us (police, forest, media, citizens and conservationists) have roles to play like we have done in Mumbai.”
 	
 	  	HC Poornesha, research associate with Nature Conservation Foundation who has taken part in some of the leopard rescue operations in the past, said, “Coexistence of leopards and humans is possible provided people are sensitized and educated about their roles. In several areas of Whitefield people have mistook dog’s pugmark for a leopard and spread rumours. These incidents must be prevented by creating more awareness.”