The lioness moves freely in the field, confident that Kantibhai&rsquo;s family (below) won&rsquo;t disturb her and cubs           For the past two months, a lioness and her two cubs have become a major draw for residents of Vadali village near the Gir sanctuary. The mother and her young ones have been living in close quarters with a farmer at his sugarcane farm.
 
 The lioness moves freely in the field, confident that the family of Kantibhai Lavajibhai Ukani won’t disturb her or her cubs. This is the second time a lioness has delivered cubs at Kantibhai’s 90-bigha farm, where he grows Kesar mangoes and sugarcane.
 
                          Kantibhai, who is sarpanch of the village, said the lioness has become a part of their family and their is no threat to the animals. When the lioness goes to hunt for food, she leaves her cubs in the farm. Usually, a lioness finds it more secure to leave the cubs in the forest, away from her pride.
 
 Kantibhai said, “The lioness is our guest. My entire village takes care of the guest. Our crops have been damaged and we have not being able to water the crops due to its presence, but we will not disturb the animal. We are careful that nobody comes in the way of the lioness.”  
 
 Kantibhai’s father Bhavanbhai who is 80 years old said, “I stay day and night near the lioness and her cubs at my farm. This is the second time that a lioness has delivered cubs at our farm. Lions and human beings are friends in Gir. We don’t harm the lions.”
 
 As per the 2010 census, there are 411 lions in Gir, of which 50 per cent have ventured out of the sanctuary. Around 30 per cent of lionesses have delivered cubs recently.
 
 The forest department which came to know of this incident has decided to reward Kantibhai. Chief Wildlife Conservator of Gir R L Mina said, “Farmers and maldharis are doing their bit to protect the lions. This has resulted in the rise in lion population. We are planning a small reward for Kantibhai and his family, to encourage others to protect the king of the jungle.”