A day after Bangalore Mirror reported that trekking was banned in Gopalaswamy Betta, techies and environmental groups reacted saying how they forced the forest department to ban trekking at the tiger reserve. You&rsquo;re not welcome at Gopalaswamy hill 
 The techies say that they had to first obtain RTI documents as to how many persons were visiting the place and how when they went to clean up the place. They collected one truckload of plastic waste and bottles. When they showed this to the forest department, trekking was finally banned. The big challenge for the group is to conduct the annual fair on Sunday when 60,000 people are expected at the temple on the hill. 
 Praveen Ramaswamy, city-based techie and founder-chairman of Vanya, a wildlife organisation, said,  “We have clearly demarcated places where people can go and for parking vehicles. There are a few water bodies around the temple which are used by tourists. This time, we have banned drawing water at the temple. Instead, we will supply water through tankers. The reason is that this is the only place which retains a green cover all year long. Many animals throng the place to drink water. If these water bodies become dry, it affects the animals.”  
 Prashant Yavagal, a wildife conservation volunteer working in Bandipur for more than two years, “Just one year ago, the place was full of tourists from across the country and abroad. We have witnessed people shouting at wild elephants and some trying to feed them. There are cases of lovers going deep into the forests for their private moments. Even a murder took place. A person from a nearby village was killed by a tiger. If a localite could not survive a tiger attack, do you think tourists will? The forest department had posted just two persons to monitor the area. If you were there on January 1, 2011, you could have seen the mess created by drunkards in the name of welcoming the new year. Since then, plastic is strictly banned. Visitors were guided about the rules and regulations. Offenders were punished. Now the beauty has returned to this picturesque place. Most important, wild animals are back in the hills. Recently, we saw some elephants next to the check post down the hill at 11 am. This is a healthy development. We could spot tiger pug marks near the check post.” 
 The greens said that the area comes under the Bandipur National Park-Project Tiger. Hence, it is not a picnic spot. Moreover, a rule passed in 1912, when the place was called Venugopala wildlife sanctuary, says only cattle and men are allowed for religious purpose only. The forest department allows people inside only due to the presence of a temple.  
 Even today, the Wildlife Act does not allow people to enter the forest for picnics or trekking.