Along the lines of Revenue department, which has resorted to demolition of buildings that have violated various rules, Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has cracked down on illegal structures. The KFD, which was till recently only serving notices to resorts, homestays that have come up within the eco-sensitive zones of protected areas has now taken a tough stand and demolished some illegal resorts around the newly formed Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary in Khanapur taluk of Belagavi district.
 
 
 
 Demolition drive: The KFD had been serving notices to the resorts for the last two years
 
 
 Cracking the whip on those failing to comply with an eviction notice, the KFD along with the Revenue department began to raze down such properties. Ordered by the deputy commissioner of Belagavi, revenue officials last week demolished the Soutira Resort and Mini Water Park that had come up in Chikale village of Khanapur taluk. The KFD had been serving notices to the resorts for the last two years and top brass of the forest departments including PCCF (Wildlife) had visited the site and recommended the demolition of the property if the owners did not comply with the eviction notice.
 
 Highlighting the operation of such illegal resorts around wildlife areas, BM had reported about the resort in its edition dated May 13, 2016 on its front page. Afraid of being rapped by Central agencies for failing to keep ESZs around wildlife areas free of commercial activities, the KFD has repeatedly served notices and booked several cases over the resort. Sources in the KFD revealed to Bangalore Mirror that the resort was functioning without obtaining permissions from KFD, KSPCB, tourism department and other agencies. “Except for an NOC from the local gram panchayat, the resorts had no licence from any of the established departments as stipulated by the state government,” said a revenue official of Khanapur taluk.
 
 Belagavi deputy conservator of Forest Basavaraj Patil too voiced the same concern, “The resorts were running without permission and are located well within the buffer zone of the wildlife sanctuary where human intervention must be at the lowest possible level.” Besides, the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission too had registered suo motu cases against them for various violations.
 
 Elated over the action of the Revenue department and KFD, a wildlife activist from Khanapur area told Bangalore Mirror, “It should not stop just at demolition. The deputy commissioner should form a separate monitoring committee comprising forest, tourism and revenue departments, the police and other departments to keep an eye on illegal resorts and homestays that are coming up in the buffer zone. People must also discourage such activities by not checking into such resorts and homestays as such activities would jeopardise wildlife.”