Hyderabad: The Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organisations (FIAPO) has appealed to the Union Forest Ministry to revisit the laws for protection of animals, in the wake of the recent incidents of cruelty towards animals at various places in the country. It stressed on the need for updating the punishments for such acts.

The Federation expressed shock over the most cruel way a monkey was hanged to death in Khammam district of Telangana.

Its legal manager Varnika Singh wrote to Minister for Forests and Environment, Prakash Javadekar and Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao requesting that the men who tortured and hanged the monkey to death should be given exemplary punishment.

Untitled Carousel Animal cruelty: Monkey hanged to death in Telangana A few youths in Khammam district of Telangana cruelly killed a monkey by hanging it from a tree and releasing dogs to attack it.  They picked up a rope and tied the monkey to a tree. They hung the monkey and released two dogs. The monkey's struggle to escape was very disturbing. The men remained unmoved and were even holding sticks to beat the monkey.

It may be mentioned that the monkey was hanged from a tree in Ammapalem village in Khammam district late last week. The forest officials have arrested three persons under various sections of the Wildlife Conservation Act. 

The FIAPO reminded the authorities of the recent incidents of death of a pregnant elephant in Kerala, a jackal in Tamil Nadu, a cow injured in Himachal Pradesh and hanging of a cat that had surfaced on social media.

FIAPO executive director Varda Mehrotra pointed out that the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act is woefully inadequate to deal with such violence. "We need a new law that punishes violent crimes against animals. Revisiting the penalties is important too," Mehrotra said.

Animals in India are protected under Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, and also by the Indian Penal Code. 

Untitled Carousel Cow injured after eating explosive-filled ball in Andhra PradeshClose on the heels of the tragic death of a pregnant elephant in Kerala’s Palakkad district after eating a pineapple filled with firecrackers, a cow in Andhra Pradesh's Chittoor district suffered grievous injury in a similar incident. The cow from local gaushala (cow shed) cracked a ball stuffed with explosive material. It suffered grievous injury in the lower jaw. The explosive stuff, mostly containing sulphur, was placed by some hunters aiming at wild boars.