A pigeon-sized bird is causing great excitement in the bird-watcher communities of south India. The Amur falcon, a small bird of prey, is being sighted in parts of Karnataka and Kerala where it has never been seen before. Last week, a battery of nature photographers camped out in Malampuzha dam near Palakkad, Kerala to photograph around a dozen falcons that had settled there briefly. An amateur wildlife photographer in Daroji wildlife sanctuary in Ballari district clicked a female Amur falcon resting on an electric line, a first-of-its-kind event in that region. Amateur birders in Mysore and Kodagu saw Amur falcons fly by a few days back. There have even been unconfirmed reports of sightings on the outskirts of Bengaluru.
 
 
 
 
 
 What’s so special about this pocket-sized predator? Why does its appearance in this part of the country stir up such a frenzy? To answer those questions, I’ll have to tell you this bird’s story – one of incredible endurance, terrible adversity and the eventual triumph of good sense over primal instincts. The Amur falcon derives its name from its place of origin, the Amurland region in south-eastern Siberia. This is among the coldest places on earth, so come winter huge flocks of these birds embark on their journey to the warm climes of southern Africa – a round-trip distance of 22,000 km, one of the longest known avian migration routes. Their journey takes them over India, in a path that traverses the north-eastern states and cuts across peninsular India from Vishakhapatnam to Goa, from where they cross the Arabian Sea towards Africa. They need to stop for rest and refuelling along the way, at a spot that offers enough food (insects) and roosting space for more than a million birds.
 
 For the last decade or so, huge flocks of Amur falcons have chosen to make a pit stop at the Doyang reservoir in Nagaland. Local villagers, with a long tradition of hunting, seized the opportunity and started trapping and killing the birds as they came down to the trees to roost. Though hunting Amur falcons was officially banned in 2010, the practice built up to illegally such an extent that almost 1,40,000 birds were being killed each year, in the ten days that they stopped at Doyang. Their meat was sold not just in the local bazaar, but across the state through a network of traders. In 2012, alarmed by the scale of slaughter and the irreversible damage to the falcon population, wildlife activists started a massive campaign to save this bird. Government authorities tightened their vigilance, and more importantly, local communities were educated about the benefits of protecting these birds and converting their villages into ecotourism hubs. The efforts paid off, and the killings completely stopped in 2013.
 
 Why are there increased sightings of the Amur falcon in Kerala and Karnataka? Every migrating flock has a few stray birds called vagrants. These individuals or small groups are thrown off course by natural phenomena like strong winds, storms or navigational glitches. They end up flying through or halting in places quite far away from their usual route, but eventually figure out the right track and head to their destination. Given the massive size of the migrating flock of Amur falcons, and the laudable success of conservation efforts, it is only natural that a correspondingly large vagrant population would be scattered on either side of the primary migration route. Thanks to increased awareness and the falcons’ growing celebrity status, birders are quick to record and publicize any sightings of this bird, creating a buzz about their presence in unusual places.
 
 If you ever cross paths with an Amur falcon, you can recognise it by its relatively small size, long wings (sooty grey for the male and brownish grey for the female), and orange legs. A closer look may also reveal oodles of grit, endless endurance and a steely determination to overcome all odds.