Shashank Dalvi travelled across India and recorded 1,128 species, 200 of these from Karnataka
 
 
 	Shashank Dalvi, 32, became India’s first birder to complete one ‘big year’ and record 1,128 species of birds from across the country. A big year is an informal competition among birders to see who can identify by sight or sound the largest number of species of birds within a calendar year and within a specific geographical area. Dalvi is currently in Bengaluru documenting his big year 2015.
 	
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror of the achievement, he said, “My big year began from Jan 1 and ended on Dec 31, 2015. We strategise birding activities and try to be present at the right place at the right time. Though it is a solo trip, I got in touch with friends who were in that area. I was rarely alone. At most places around coastal Karnataka, I was accompanied by Ramit Singal, a birder from Manipal. In Karnataka, I travelled extensively in Western Ghats, Agumbe, Sita Nadi, Durga Reserve Forest of Karkala – which was a part of the pelagic bird expedition – off Mangaluru coast, and places in and around Bengaluru – including Nandi Hills, Valley School, Ramnagara and went on to record nearly 200 species. I have also visited the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The reason for covering Western Ghats, Andaman and Nicobar was to see endemic species of birds not found anywhere else in the world.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	The important birds he sighted around Manipal include Sri Lanka Frogmouth, Malabar Pied Hornbill, Malabar Barbet, Orange Minivet, Greater Flameback, Malabar Lark, Grey-headed Bulbul, Yellow-browed Bulbul, Rufous Babbler, Black-throated Munia and Crimson-backed Sunbird.
 	
 	  	His 1,000th species of the year, White-bellied Woodpecker, was recorded at Sitanadi, Karnataka. Other important species recorded from the state are Pied Thrush at Nandi Hills, where it winters, Yellow-throated Bulbul at Ramanagara and during the pelagic trip off Mangaluru coast held in October Dalvi along with a team of birders from the state recorded Masked Booby, Parasitic Jaeger, Bridled Tern, Greater Crested Tern, Wilson’s Storm Petrel, Swinhoe’s Storm Petrel and Flesh-footed Shearwater. It was during this expedition that Jouanin’s Petrel was first recorded in the state and probably for the fifth time in India. Dalvi completed his Masters in Wild Life Biology and Conservation from Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Bengaluru, and has undertaken various studies on topics including Brahmaputra River and birds. He was also part of the team that undertook a campaign and prevented the massacre of the Amur Falcon in Nagaland along with Ramki Srinivasan, Banu Haralu and Roko Hebi Khostu. On an average, nearly 14,000 birds were killed per day there. Since 2013, there has not been a single killing of Amur Falcon, he says.
 	
 	  	“In India, there are not many studies on bird conservation. It is important for local birders to take up area-wise conservation,” Dalvi added.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	Important birds Dalvi recorded during 2015
 	
 	 		Some of the birds recorded include Nicobar Megapode and Nicobar Jungle Flycatcher in the Nicobar island; Long-billed Bush-warbler (this was last recorded in 1977), Tibetan Lark, White-rumped Snowfinch and Mongolian Finch in Ladakh; Chinese Francolin in Manipur; Spotted Sandgrouse in Rajasthan; and Lord Derby’s Parakeet, Black-headed Greenfinch, Yunaan Nuthatch and Godlewski’s Bunting in Arunachal.