Crucial meet today to take call on status of MM Hills and grasslands of Hesaraghatta

Karnataka has one of the highest numbers of tigers in the country. Now, all eyes are on the crucial meeting which will decide whether the state will notify a tiger reserve to protect the big cats or will it succumb to the pressure of the locals in not declaring MM Hills forest range as a tiger reserve.
 
The Karnataka Biodiversity Board meeting is scheduled in the city on Monday, chaired by Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai. The Board will also take a call on protecting the Hesaraghatta grasslands.

In the last few months, the centre gave in-principle approval for creating a tiger reserve at Male Mahadeshwara (MM) hills to protect tigers. But some ministers are against it, pressuring the government to scrap the proposal.
 
Minister for housing and Chamarajanagar district in charge V Somanna said, “The creation of tiger reserve is critical. There are more than villages staying inside the forest for more than five centuries. If this place is declared a tiger reserve, the villagers must move. ”
 
Somanna said that the villagers were the real inheritors of the place. Any project should help people and not displace them. Many villagers were affected when the BRT was announced. Now, another tiger reserve will cause additional problems to the villagers.
 
Environmentalists say that ministers should abstain from mixing politics with crucial environmental issues. “The centre has already approved it and only the official letter was pending. We have been working hard to protect the tigers and the reserve would have been a blessing. We request the politicians to stay away from matters like protecting forests and wildlife for votes,” an environmentalist said.
 
However, Forest Minister Umesh Katti has been opposing this. He said, “I have heard that my colleague Somanna has been opposing this. However, as a forest minister, I am in favour of tiger reserves. So, instead of fighting on the issue, Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai will take a final call on the matter.”
 
Recently, the Union Minister for Environment, Forest and Climate Change Ashwini Kumar Choubey said, “The approval of National Tiger Conservation Authority has been accorded to the proposal of Karnataka State Government to declare the Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary as a tiger reserve. The total area of the proposed tiger reserve (core + buffer) is estimated to be 906.18 sq km. Of this, the core area extent has been identified as 670.99 sq km, including Mahadeshwara Male, Hanur and Yediyaralli Reserve Forests. MM Hills reserve was supposed to be the sixth tiger reserve in Karnataka.”

For a tiger reserve
According to the National Tiger Conservation Authority, “Once a forest is declared a Tiger reserve, funding is provided through the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger for acquiring capacity in terms of infrastructure and material to deal with tigers dispersing out of source areas. Based on the carrying capacity of tigers, habitat interventions are restricted. In buffer areas around tiger reserves, habitat interventions are restricted judiciously enough to facilitate dispersal to other rich habitat areas only.”