Researchers at the department of environmental science of Bangalore University have identified 651 termite mounds on the Jnana Bharathi campus.
 
As per the findings, the termite mounds cover 7.91 acres of the campus out of the total 1,100 acres. The mounds have been built by five types of termite species.

Experts told BM that termites play an important role in a grassland ecosystem. They recycle and store nutrients, act as groundwater recharge stations, provide shelter to wildlife and help in herb regeneration.

“We conducted this study to assess the density and distribution of termite mounds on the campus. We also wanted to analyse the natural and anthropogenic threats that the mounds face. The campus has as many as 651 termite mounds, of which 512 are cathedral and 139 are lenticular. Our study showed the natural habitat had more mound density,” said researcher Vinutha Patil.

According to the researchers, while termites are nature’s best recyclers, they are also one of the most ignored components of an ecosystem. Termites aerate the soil by burrowing tirelessly, making the soil porous and allowing rainwater to trickle in to recharge the groundwater table.

“In a grassland or savanna ecosystem, these mounds are considered as groundwater recharge points. Burrowing enables the mixing of nutrients and ensures that the ground stays healthy and fertile. The insects also feed on cellulose, a structural component of plants, and break them down contributing to nutrient recycling. We conducted this study to ensure that people realise the important role that termites play in an ecosystem,” explained Dr BC Nagaraja, professor and head, department of environmental science, BU.

The mounds store moisture and prevent the soil from drying up too.

“A lot of interaction among wildlife happens inside these mounds. These also help the soil absorb water quickly through tunnel systems. Therefore, plants tend to grow and thrive around termite mounds,” added Dr Nagaraja.

Mounds under threat
While these porous earthen structures are incredibly useful for grassland ecosystems, around 25% of these mounds on the Jnana Bharati campus are damaged.

“Although there is a good number of termite mounds on the campus, they are highly ignored. As per our study, as many as 169 mounds out of the total 651 were found to be damaged,” Patil told BM.


  In a grassland or savanna, these mounds are considered as groundwater recharge points— Dr BC Nagaraja, HoD, environmental science, BU

The majority of these mounds have sustained damage owing to the unregulated movement of outsiders who enter the campus to worship these mounds.

“People from nearby villages enter the campus to worship these mounds and cause damage. They tie threads around these structures breaking them, applying vermillion leading to closed pores; they also litter the area with plastic and food items. Such rituals are performed at least three to four times a year. We have been requesting the varsity to have a few designated places for such activities,” said Dr Nagaraja.

The researchers further noted that termites boost ecosystem productivity and thrive best in a grassland and savanna ecosystem. The mounds in a natural setting should be protected and care should be taken as to not alter the surroundings.

“Although certain tree species are resistant to termites, a dense canopy will kill these mounds as they prefer open sunlight. While tree planting is being widely promoted as a full-proof solution to all climate-related issues, it should not happen everywhere. Grassland is a unique ecosystem with many plant and animal species that prefer an open and well-lit environment,” added Dr Nagaraja.