BMTC buses, which are used by around 50 lakh people every day, have had their fair share of weird commuters: intoxicated passengers, chicken, sheep and even dogs sometimes. 
 
 	But even that had not prepared the deputy manager at depot-37 in Kengeri on April 17 for what he was about to hear. When he got a call from one of the bus drivers on Friday, he was expecting a complaint about passengers or the bus breaking down or perhaps an accident. 
 However, Prashant was shocked when he heard the driver, Raganath, say that a pangolin, identified as chippu handi in Kannada, had deboarded the bus.
 	  	The bus was on its way to Bengaluru from Manchanbele. “I spotted a weird-looking creature step out of our bus and rush into the stands at the Kengeri bus depot,” the driver told the manager.
 	  	Raganath identified it as ‘Chippu Handhi’ the Kannada name of Indian Pangolin. 
 	  	However, he was not sure when the “weird looking creature” boarded the bus. 
 	  	“It might have boarded we started the bus or during the morning tea break. It was early in the morning and there were very few passengers may be that’s the reason the special commuter went unnoticed.” 
 	  	The distance between Manchanbele and Kengeri is around 24 km. In the morning hours, with less traffic, it would take around an hour to cover the distance.
 	  	Prashant informed People for Animals (PFA), Bengaluru, and rescue volunteers reached the spot at 8am. Ten minutes later, the two-member PFA rescue team of Naveen Kumar and Lakshith swiftly rescued the ant eater. Just last month PFA had rescued two female Indian pangolins.
 	  	The scaly ant eater was brought to the PFA shelter in Kengeri and examined. The male pangolin was found to be healthy and weighed eight kg. Apart from a few minor abrasions on its feet there were no injuries. However, there was a foul smell emanating from the body of pangolin. This made the volunteers suspicious about possible illegal trade.
 	  	“Pangolin skin has a lot of medicinal properties. Pangolin meat is used for various traditional home cures for diseases. It is an endangered species but there are a few pangolins in Savandurga forest which is near Manchanbele village. It is possible a villager tried to indulge in illegal trade of the creature,” said Naveen Kumar.
 	  	The pangolin will be kept under observation for a few days at the PFA shelter. 
 	  	Its behaviour and eating habits will be monitored and wounds will be treated. Once the range forest officer of Kaggalipura, Nagaraja, has deemed it fit it will be released back into the wild.
 	
 	The scaly mammal
 	
 	The pangolin is the only scaly mammal in the world. It is listed under Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act. It is also an endangered species, which was once found in large numbers in open areas in India. Its numbers have drastically decreased after the spread of urbanization. But the primary reasons for it to be endangered is hunting and poaching for its meat, skin and scales.
 	
 	
 	
 	Read: What’s got scales, a long tongue, rolls into a ball when threatened, and is endangered?