Karnataka has turned down what was anxiously awaited by the people across the country. The state government’s refusal to accept World Heritage tag for Western Ghats has not only come as a shock to many but even raised questions about the government’s stand on conservation.    According to sources, increasing lobbying from the timber mafia, mini-hydel projects, pharmaceutical industries and road contractors’ cartel is preventing the state government from accepting the world heritage tag to the Western Ghats. “Spread across six districts of the state, the Western Ghats has been the centre of attraction for several entrepreneurs. Though no one has ever assessed the potential of Western Ghats in terms of its monetary value, the Ghats have been the major source for several industries. They fear that the heritage tag will affect their activities of looting the forests,” said an environmentalist.   Environmentalists assess that timber worth at least Rs 1,000 crore is sourced every a year from the Ghats in several districts. “This apart, the Ghats have seen more than Rs 10,000 crore investment in mini hydel projects belonging to politicians and leading business tycoons. Some of these projects have also been charged with encroachment. With Ayurvedic drugs gaining popularity, many pharmaceutical companies are also dependent on Western Ghats for raw materials. The government-appointed Western Ghats Task Force itself had roughly assessed that Rs 20,000 crore worth of non-timber forest produce is extracted annually from Western Ghats for both edible and pharmaceutical purposes,” said Sunil J, an environmental activist from Sakaleshpur.   Forest minister C P Yogeshwar refused to comment on the role of lobbyists behind the stand, but said the government is more worried about the people and development in those areas. “World Heritage tag would put an end to the developmental activities in the region. Neither we receive any funds, nor do we get any assistance from the Unesco to protect these areas. When we ourselves have formulated stringent laws like Forest Rights Act, Wildlife Protection Act, Biodiversity Act and Karnataka Forest Act, why should we bring in an external agency?” he asked.    The minister, however, maintained that a final decision will be taken only in Friday’s cabinet meeting.   Jagadish Krishnaswamy of Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment and member of the Western Ghats Natural Heritage Management Committee constituted by the ministry of environment and forests, said, “The heritage tag will not bring in any restriction over the notified areas. The Unesco will not provide any monetary assistance for any kind of conservation acts. But the tag would reflect our government’s efforts at the global level. If the government says that they have enough laws, why are they signatory to several other international laws on human rights, health and nutrition? If they are opposing World Heritage tag, then they should also come out of all such treaties.   “It was the state government which had initially requested us to prepare technical details about the project that can be sent over for getting heritage tag. But it is a sheer surprise that now the same government has taken a U-turn. The move would empower the local people in an effective way. Global recognition would boost tourism prospects in the region and add to the economic well being. The centre should intervene to resolve the deadlock,” he said.