By Garima Prasher

Bengalurean Anish Banerjee is one of six youngsters running e-commerce site for animal rescue and rehabilitation 

A 20-year-old Bengaluru boy, Anish Banerjee has dedicated himself to wildlife conservation. The youngster, along with five other students from various countries, is running an e-commerce site called Think Wildlife Foundation and this group of 20-year-olds sell t-shirts, hoodies, and sweatshirts to help various organisations rescue and rehabilitate wild animals.
 
Currently studying zoology at the University of Manchester, Anish and his team recently raised Rs 20,000 for Wildlife SOS, a non-profit organisation rescuing and rehabilitating wildlife in India. “It has been a lifelong goal to establish a conservation foundation, particularly one aimed at rehabilitating large mammals, such as elephants and bears. It was during the first lockdown in the first year of my degree, when my school friends and I decided to launch an e-commerce platform.

 Currently, we are donating 25 per cent of our profits to Wildlife SoS to support the rehabilitation of Pari, a temple elephant rescued from captivity,” said Banerjee.
 
 The team sells merchandise on Think Wildlife Foundation’s e-commerce platform, including t-shirts, hoodies and sweatshirts; all designed by the youngsters.
 
 Currently, most profits are used to support the rehabilitation of rescued elephants. According to Banerjee, around 10 per cent of India’s elephants live in captivity.


 Anish Banerjee
 
 “Unfortunately, despite being an important part of religion, temple elephants undergo a life of severe torture. These elephants are captured from the wild and separated from their family at a fragile age, to be tamed by physical torture and live in unhygienic conditions with substandard diets.”
 
According to him, much work is being done to rescue 3,000 captive elephants in India. However, rehabilitating these captive elephants is an arduous and expensive process due to the severe physical and mental trauma they undergo. “It is for this reason that we decided to support the cause through e-commerce.”
 
 Think Wildlife Foundation is also collaborating with various other NGOs to conduct outreach events and the team also raises awareness about global conservation issues. “Some of our initiatives include adopting wildlife in rescue centres, tree plantations, and providing resources for conservation projects,” he said.


 Some of our initiatives include adopting wildlife in rescue centres, tree plantations, and providing resources for conservation project– Anish Banerjee
 
 Anish and his team are currently busy launching an awareness campaign against the online wildlife trade.
 
“With the onset of covid-19, much of the illegal wildlife trade has shifted online. Wildlife is traded illegally openly on major social media and e-commerce platforms. This campaign involves extensive outreach in the form of webinars, talks, workshops and digital marketing. 

 The youngster is all set to attend Imperial College London this year, for a Master’s degree in Ecology, Evolution and Conservation. “I aspire to attain a PhD in conservation biology and eventually join the Indian Forest Services. I also want to work in nature-based solutions of climate change and for community-based conservation,” signed off Banerjee.