Inspired by Saalumarada Thimmakka, Karnataka’s green crusader, a 70-year-old resident of Rajajinagar has launched a single-handed campaign to save trees from being axed in the ward, allegedly by the area corporator.
 
 N K Parvathamma, who dropped out of school after completing the eighth standard, accuses Gangabhairaiah, of the BJP, of chopping more than 15 fully-grown trees for personal benefit. She claims that the trees were being chopped on the pretext of facilitating work on drains. 
 
 Parvathamma has written to the governor, the Lokayukta’s office, the chief minister, the principal chief conservator of forests, the mayor and the deputy mayor and top-ranking police officials apart from several other officials, imploring them to save the remaining trees in the ward. In her letter, Parvathamma accuses the corporator of being hand in glove with the timber mafia and of acting without having the required permission. 
 
 “When Saalumarada Thimmakka can plant thousands of saplings, why can’t I protect a few trees in front of my house?” Parvathamma said. “Gangabhairaiah is illegally cutting trees in the vicinity. Although he is a law maker, he himself is breaking law. So I decided to do something. I hope somebody hears me and acts.”
 
 Parvathamma claims the trees are being cut are all at least 50 years old and would fetch a hefty price in the timber market. She claims only fully-grown trees are being targeted. 
 
 “More than 15 trees were axed in two days — Nov 17 and 18,” she said. “The corporator monitored the work himself. When residents asked to see letters granting permission, they could not show us any. The trees could have been trimmed, or protected by mesh instead of being axed. Only trees which are valued for timber were cut. It seems local officials are also involved in this racket. I have complained to all the authorities.” 
 
 Other environmentalists are now joining Parvathamma in her campaign. “This is a serious issue,” said Sharath Babu, a wildlife expert and a resident of the area. “When everybody is talking of conserving greenery, how can one cut trees like this? Parvathamma will not be alone in this fight. We will join her too.”
 
 
 I did no wrong: Gangabharaiah
 “The trees were cut for the welfare of people,” he said. “It was to facilitate work on drains. The roots had spread across the drains and had we cut only the roots, the trees would have posed serious danger to houses around. Keeping safety of people in mind, the trees were cut. All permissions were taken and there is no violation of the law. This is to help the residents and not me.”