But the other 146 forest staffers and personnel, who were part of the operation before 2004, will miss out
 
 Eleven years after the killing the dreaded forest brigand Veerappan, the state government has now woken up to reward six forest staffers who were part of Operation Cocoon — the mission to nab-or-kill the elusive bandit-poacher.
 
 Rapped by the HC for prolonged delay in awarding compensation, the state government on Monday ordered compensation to six forest officials who were working on the day Veerappan was killed.
 
 Rewarding the police personnel who were part of the Special Task Force (STF) operations to nab Veerappan between 1993 and 2004, the state government had announced cash reward and other incentive offers. While almost all police personnel had got their due, officials of the forest department were yet to receive the promised reward.
 
 Drawing a parallel from the incentives to police personnel, AT Venkate Gowda, range forest officer (retired) had filed a writ petition before the HC seeking orders from the court for grant of promised incentives as they too had been involved in the operations. The high court in January had set a deadline of two months to grant the promised reward for the petitioners.
 
 Following the HC orders, principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF), head of the forest force, had written to the state government in June recommending grant of reward to six personnel of the department who took part in the operations on the day Veerappan was killed and another 146 forest officials and personnel who took part in the operations against the brigand before 2004.
 
 The PCCF had also recommended incentives for 14 forest department staffers who were kidnapped by Veerappan and his team and another 134 forest staffers who were working in the Kollegal division, Kaveri Wildlife division, Chamarajanagar division, forest mobile squad and Mandya forest division, as these areas were under the jurisdiction of the commander heading the STF operations.
 
 However, senior officials who met in July under the chairmanship of chief secretary Kaushik Mukherjee went through the previous proceedings pertaining to the award of incentives. Accordingly, the officials found that the home department’s decision to distribute `10.5 crore worth of rewards included both police and forest officials along with civilian informers, and opined that it is impossible to bring another 146 forest officials, as recommended by the PCCF, additionally on to the reward list. The officials resolved to verify whether the applicants could be considered for the reward as the incentives were announced only for those who served during the specific time.
 
 Subsequently, the forest department in consultation with the finance department found that previous grant of rewards and incentives by the home department included 51 forest officers and personnel of various ranks and that it would be impossible at this stage (in 2015) to include another 146 forest officials for the grant of incentives worth Rs 2.47 crore.
 
 As per the order, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, the officials of finance department agreed to award incentives only to six forest officials who were on duty on the day Veerappan was shot dead.
 
 “As the government had previously awarded forest officials with reward and incentives, the government has rejected the recommendations of the PCCF to provide incentives to other officials of the department. However, the six officials who enrolled officially in the mission (Operation Cocoon) on October 18, 2004, to kill Veerappan can be provided with incentives on the condition of obtaining attendance confirmation and appreciation certificate from the STF commander who was heading the force then,” the order said.
 
 As per the latest order, frontline staffers of the department who had put in more than three years’ service with STF including M Santosh Kumar (forest guard), Maanikya (forest watcher), MR Subramanya (forest watcher) and Dummada, a daily wage labourer in the Ramapura range of Chamarajanagar division and another two daily wage labourers — Raju and Huchhaiah of the same range who had served in the STF for 2 years — are eligible for the special reward and incentive for helping to nab and kill Veerappan in October 2004.