Activists, wildlife conservationists flag violations, raise concerns, demand probe into matter

A city-based wildlife conservationist, Giridhar Kulkarni, has written to SK Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) and chief wildlife warden of Karnataka, regarding the issue of illegal resorts, hotels, and lodges mushrooming in the buffer zone of Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR).

According to Kulkarni, several resorts, homestays, and hotels are operating close to the core and critical tiger habitat of the reserve, including Castlerock Wildlife Range, which is notified as Dandeli Sanctuary and is under the administrative control of KTR. This has raised concerns about its impact on wildlife. The letter highlights that the majority of these commercial establishments have come up in the Chavarli, Phansoli, and Virnoli areas, situated within one kilometre from the boundary of the core of KTR. In some cases, resorts and homestays are situated at a distance of not more than 100 metres from the core area.

The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, states that no construction of commercial tourist lodges, hotels, zoos, or safari parks shall be undertaken inside a sanctuary except with the prior approval of the National Board for Wildlife. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) issued guidelines in 2012 for regulating tourism and prohibited the construction of new tourism infrastructure in and around tiger reserves. “Construction of homestays and hotels for tourism purposes within the limits of Phansoli and Castlerock Wildlife Ranges is in clear violation of the above act and NCTA guidelines,” said Kulkarni.

Other activists and conservationists in the area that BM spoke to shared similar concerns. According to a wildlife activist, many commercial units around the reserve have violated the conditions of homestays. Some of them, the activists allege, are operating without the required permissions. They say it is important that the agencies concerned verify whether the homestays are complying with the conditions laid down. “Some of the homestays have become full-fledged resorts and hotels and have facilities such as swimming pools, extra cottages, etc. They play loud music and keep the lights on overnight. It is important to verify whether they have any consent from the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board. A lot of waste is being discarded in the area,” said a wildlife activist.

 It is important to verify whether resorts, hotels have any consent from KSPCB-Wildlife activist

Kulkarni, in his letter, has also raised concerns around activities such as birding, trekking to sunset point, lakeside nature walks, road safaris, campfires, etc that need scrutiny as the majority of them are being conducted inside forests.