By:Afsha Khan
 
 ​Aakanksha Tavag has a way with animals. An hour in her company can calm a hyperactive dog and loosen up an elusive, uptight cat. A self-proclaimed pet whisperer, the 28-year-old freelance graphic designer is embarking on a new career path — professional pet photographer.
 
 	“I like pets and I’m good with animals,” says the 28-year-old Bangalore resident whose photos of Pepper, her 14-year-old German Spitz had friends marvelling at her angles and techniques. Hers was the first name that cropped up when a friend heard of a family looking for a specialised pet photographer a month ago. “Pet photography is relatively niche but it’s picking up fast,” says Tavag who has since photographed people’s dogs, cats and even rabbits.
 	  	You’ll find photographers marketing themselves on social networks and putting up posters and flyers at animal clinics and kennels. They’re even offering their services for free at pool parties, brunches and workshops in order to get more visibility.
 	  	A professional pet-photo shoot costs anywhere between Rs 5,000 - Rs 35,000 per day depending on the scale of the shoot and deliverables involved, but cost is no bar for pet parents who want to spoil their darlings.
 	  	“These days people want to hang their pet’s pictures on their walls, make albums and even coffee table books,” says 32-year-old Gaurav Thombre, who has been photographing pets for over five years and owns Gaurav Thombre Pet Photography, one of India’s first dedicated pet studios in Pune. 

 	 Hard work  	Clients come with different briefs and requirements. Some want portraits of their pets looking like perfect specimens of their breed. Others want something a little off-beat. Thombre recalls a particularly funny shoot he did of a guinea pig wearing a red hat, and another which had him %shooting six Havanese puppies, a toy dog breed, in a basket surrounded by apples and oranges.
 	  	He jokes about the calories he lost chasing the guinea pig which had to be allowed to roam free all over the studio, and didn’t take kindly to %instructions. The Havanese puppies on the other hand, would run off in different directions every time Thombre thought he had the shot it in the bag. It’s funny for an onlooker, %but can get tiresome for a professional on the clock.
 	  	“Working with cats and dogs is a lot like working with children. Neither take direction very well and are weary of strangers,” second Chenthil Mohan, a photographer who works with breeders, vets and non-profits in addition to individual pet owners. But as someone who also specialises in sports, weddings and other avenues of commercial photography, the 34-year-old finds pet photography interesting precisely because of the unpredictability. “You have to let go of all your inhibitions and play by their rules if you want to capture them in their element.” 

 	Patience is key  	The challenges come with the territory, acknowledge most pet photographers. “It takes patience to work with animals, both domestic and wild,” says Vishal Sabhrawal (31), a travel and wildlife photographer who has turned a room in his Jalahalli apartment into a studio. “It’s important to bond with pets first. We do this by bringing in props, squeaky toys and sounds.”
 	  	Lawyer Rani Boazz remembers the afternoon she had her two cocker spaniels photographed. Kuppu and Zaara, friendly by nature and quite accustomed to attention, were petrified of the static sound and lights going off in their living room. But after some time with the photographer, they not only got used to it but also took that as a cue to sit still and look at the camera. “We had decorated the room with balloons for the shoot. The next day when they started to burst, the two came running to the area of the shoot thinking it was time to pose again,” says Boazz with a laugh. “You don’t just need a good photographer. You need someone who really understands animals and what makes them tick.”
 	 

 	Slow and steady  	Pet photography may be gaining momentum, but most photographers still have alternative careers or dabble in other disciplines of photography to pay the bills. Many pet parents try to give photographers direction during shoots, while others try to bargain to keep fees at a minimum.
 	  	“It’s like haggling for vegetables in a market,” jokes Mohan, who points to the history of abandonment in Bangalore as an example of how many look at their pets as nothing more than prize trophies. “Only 20-30 per cent of the families you come across actually treat their pets and kids the same.” 
 	  	Then there are others who offer their services for free so long as it is for a good cause. Like Bangalore resident Ramya Reddy, a hugely successful photographer working on commercial projects who even has exhibitions. Her passion for “fur kids” as she calls them, has led her to use her talent to help spread awareness about Bangalore’s street dogs. She has done this by shooting Compassion Unlimited Plus Action (CUPA)’s calendar three years in a row, and bringing in sponsors and helping the organisation sell them. “I like to be able to use a skill I have to help creatures in need,” she says. “Since I am already engaged in commercial photography in other areas, I prefer to keep this one as something I do simply to help.”
 	 

 	Helps with adoption   	Pet photography also serves the purpose of facilitating adoptions online. Good photos make it easier for potential pet parents to take a decision. Photographer and activist, Indu Antony was once approached by a pet parent who wanted to find good homes for a litter of German Shepherd Doberman (GSD) puppies as they had no takers. The photographs she took, free of cost for the owner, helped find all of them good homes in no time.
 	  	CUPA (started in 1993) has ridden this wave. While word-of-mouth helped their cause until the mid-late 2000s, as the internet started 8becoming an avenue to raise awareness and help speed along adoptions, good photographs became really %important. It also helps them raise funds and draw in potential parents from other cities.
 	  	“People get on to the internet and see photos of the animals up for adoption,” says Sandhya Madappa, a trustee at CUPA who works with trauma cases and fund raising. “If they like the photo, they will come down in person to see the dog, bond with it and then take it home. This has allowed our dogs to be adopted in cities like Chennai, Mangalore and Ooty.” Of course many organisations still struggle with good photos as the volunteers coming forward are either limited or lacking the skill since it isn’t there area of expertise.
 	  	But with the rising number of photographers, and those wanting to do their bit for animals in need, this may not be an issue for much longer. “The important thing is that the photographer needs to cultivate a strong, unique style of work,” says Reddy, who believes this holds true if you wish to work both commercially and with non-profits. “Else it is very easy to get lost in a sea of mediocrity.”