Only 22 homestays from State registered in NIDHI portal

Though Karnataka has a high number of homestays, not many have shown interest to register in the NIDHI portal. Overall, 1,850 homestays have registered across the country in NIDHI, though only 22 from Karnataka have registered.

National Integrated Database of Hospitality Industry (NIDHI) is to ensure electronic delivery of various services and benefits to the hospitality unit. Union Tourism Minister G Kishen Reddy said the Union Ministry of Tourism has set up NIDHI as a single/common platform for various units in the Hospitality and Tourism Sector. “The registered units will be able to avail of various value-added services by using their registered identity including classification under the voluntary scheme of the Ministry of Tourism. We have not commissioned any study to assess the sustainability of homestays in India. However, with an objective to promote homestays, we encourage the home owners to enroll for approval of homestays and enhance their knowledge, skills and experience.”

Reacting to this, Uttam Hulikere, ex-president of Chikkamagaluru Homestays Association said, “Not many have registered under NIDHI due to lack of exposure or information. However, many homestays have already registered with the state tourism department and have got all the requisite permissions to operate homestays.”

Illegal operations
Meanwhile, many activists allege that the Forest Department has failed in preventing illegal resorts, homestays and hotels from sprouting up in protected forest areas including Bandipur and Dandeli Anshi tiger reserve. “Coffee plantations, too, have come up in the protected forest areas including wildlife and tiger reserve. In spite of the issue being highlighted in many audit reports, commercial establishments are being run in sensitive ecosystem zones and the forest department has done nothing. Eviction drives have become a challenge due to the lobby comprising industrialists and influential persons. While commercial activities have been restricted 10 km from the border of any protected forest, many hotels are being run inside sanctuaries in clear violation of forest and tourism policy,” said an activist. 

According to the activist, the department of forest and Karnataka State Pollution Control Board will have to shoulder the responsibility of controlling them. “A majority of homestays operating in the state are not registered and are operating illegally. As per the state tourism department rule, it is mandatory for homestay owners to display a board stating that their homestay is registered with the tourism department. The state government had earlier brought out guidelines to regulate homestays and directed all homestay owners to register their establishments. In the state, the highest number of registered homestays is operating in Kodagu district,” they said.


 Many homestays have already registered with the state tourism department and have got all the requisite permits to operate homestays ­–Uttam Hulikere, homestays group


Rules to be followed
An official told BM that registration with the local tourism department is a must. “Prior to registering their names, the owners must get a no-objection certificate from the local police and other agencies such as the gram panchayat and municipal corporation. If an owner has multiple homestays, he can register only one homestay where is staying. Only close relatives (father, mother, son or daughter) can operate homestays in partnership. However, one of them must reside in the homestay,” the official said.

Other guidelines include the owner of the homestay must own the land where the business is being operated. A maximum of five rooms in the homestay only can be provided for tourist accommodation. “The homestays should have good road links and ample space along with all basic amenities for tourists. Owners should inform rates applicable for tourists. It is also compulsory for the owner to make a computerised record of tourists who have availed accommodation, and generate bills among others.”