Pick from eight offbeat camps that’ll keep your kids entertained and teach them new skills through summer
 
 
 
 
 	With a long list of summer camps being held through April and May, there’s no dearth of activities for children — from exploring nature to grooming one’s social etiquette or mastering the art of eating with chopsticks! Here are some interesting ones to pick from. 

 	School of rock
 	  	If your kid likes to rock, maybe he or she would enjoy the camp organised by Half Step Rock. Here, children will go through the process of forming a band, which will culminate in a live performance. During the camp, 40 students will be inducted into the 60-day programme conceived to bring out their best through learning, practicing and working along with a team of renowned industry professionals (to name a few, Ajay Chanam — a popular MTV Indies artist and Zildjian cymbals artist Willy Demoz, who performed with Raghu Dixit among others). These students will form five to eight bands, each with vocalists, drummer, three guitarists and a pianist. The bands will select one classical rock track to perform at the end of 60 days before a home crowd of family and friends.
 	  	Where: Half Step Rock, 1st Block, HRBR Layout, Kalyan Nagar 	When: Auditions until April 15. Course for 2 months 	Call: 40912625 	Fee: Rs 12,000
 	 

 	Tribe of Tellers
 	  	At this summer bootcamp children between 8 and 12 years of age will be coached to become storytellers so they may carry forward the tradition of oral storytelling in the years to come. The workshop is being held as part of Jagriti Theatre’s Summer Carnival. There will be fun yet structured activities that involve developing and strengthening listening, speaking, reading and writing skills and theatrical techniques such as visualisation, voice modulation, body language and expression to enable them to tell a story in an engaging manner. The camp will culminate in a performance of the stories that the participants will have learnt during the workshop. 	Where: Jagriti Theatre, Whitefield 	When: May 11 to 16 and 18-23 	Call: 9916641717 , 9880119251 	Fee: Rs 2,500 per batch
 	
 	  	Nature camp for parents & kids
 	  	Wildlife photographer Phillip Ross will take you through natural history education at the Bannerghatta National Park at this two-day camp. Children can expect to develop a basic understanding of ecosystems amidst nature, learn exciting new skills, which includes bird-watching, trekking, fishing, and  	photography and participate in an interactive, inclusive event that aims to turn them into responsible, green citizens. The camp is for kids between the ages of 6 and 14 years. 	Where: Bannerghatta National Park 	When: April 25 and 26 	Call: 9900147018 	Fee: Rs 11,900 (for parent-and-child)
 	 

 	Sports camp in UK
 	  	After working with over 3,000 kids in Oman, Kuwait and Muscat, Spotou, a sports management company, has tied up with XLR8 in the city to provide school-going kids with a whole new experience this summer. They organise one to eight-week summer camps in the UK where kids between the ages of 12 to 17 will get to train with some of the world’s most respected football clubs such as Manchester United FC, Chelsea, Liverpool and Arsenal. 	 The study tour offers a mix of academic, sport and cultural activities. For cricket, the company will organise coaching programmes at Lancashire County Cricket Club, where players like Michael Artherton, Wasim Akram and Sourav Ganguly played. For badminton and tennis, the kids will get to train at David Lloyd’s academy. 	Where: London and Manchester  	When: April 10 onwards  	Contact: www.spotou.com 	Fee: Starts at Rs 1,85,000 for seven-day sports tour
 	 

 	Medley of activities 
 	  	At this five-week summer camp, children will be introduced to new concepts every week. Open to children in the age group of 2 ½ to 14 years, the workshops include medley (art and craft), cooking classes, revisiting ancient civilisations through story-telling, impression management sessions by an image consultant to improve social etiquette, puppetry and ‘Tell me why’ (where they will be taught concepts through scientific experiments).  	Where: I-Leap Academy, HAL 2nd stage and Chimes Montessori, 10th Main, 1st Block, Jayanagar 	When: April 13-17 	Call: 9945804444 	Fee: Rs 1,800 onwards
 	 

 	Finishing school
 	  	Through fun games and activities, kids can polish their social graces, table manners and dining etiquette. They will be taught how to eat with chopsticks, confidence-building, self-control and patience, understanding family values and respect for parents and elders, and dealing with an emergency like a fire or an earthquake. At the end of the course, the child will be taught the value of chivalry and anger management. It will close with one session of ballroom dancing. The 45-minute sessions is open to those aged 5 and above. 	Where: Groomx Knowledge  	Works, #26, 3rd floor,  	16th Cross, 5th Phase, JP Nagar 	When: May 4 to 23, 10 am-1 pm 	Call: 40966123 	Fee: Rs 8,000
 	 

 	MUSICAMP2015
 	  	At this age-no-bar summer camp by RejiChandy (Founder and Director of one of the city’s most popular choirs, Glorious,) get ready for outdoor activities, indoor games, talent shows, movies, rock concerts, choir concerts, competitions, trekking, cycling, picnics, etc. Those under six and over 80 have to be accompanied by a responsible guardian. 	Where: Glorious Promised Land, foothills of Nandi Hills 	When: May 2 to 4 	Call: 9243109701  	Fee: On enquiry 
 	 

 	Screen printing
 	  	Through interactive presentations, children will be introduced to the life and works of great artists. The workshop will also include screen printing for children, and will conclude with them producing their own artwork based on the artist that inspires them. The design ideas will be converted into motifs that they will use to explore the medium of screen printing. The camp is open to those between the ages of 8 and 14. 	Where: The Print Journal Studio, No 3, Linden Street, Austin Town 	When: April 13-24, 10.30 am to 12.30 pm 	Call: 9900565302 	Fee: Rs 3,500 (inclusive of most material) 

 	—With inputs from Nandini Kumar