The insectivore had fallen into a 35-foot deep well and rescue operations were hit by irate villagers who pelted it with stones. Wildlife volunteers lured it out with jackfruit
 
 ​Sometime on Thursday night, a young, wild sloth bear slipped into a 35-foot deep well in Belgumba, a village near Magadi. Villagers found it trapped in about three-feet of water at the bottom of the well at about 3 am on Friday and the next 22 hours were as trying for the badly-frightened bear as they were for the villagers. Wildlife volunteers from the civic agency needed all their patience and ingenuity to get the animal out. 
 
 The bigger task for wildlife rescuers was to get an irate mob of villagers out of the way. From the time the bear was spotted, villagers began gathering around the well. But the well being deep and with the bear agitated, the villagers could do little. Forest sleuths were then called, but by the time they arrived on the scene, the villagers had turned into an angry, agitated mob. 
 	
 	 		Villagers were pelting the bear with stones and rocks and the forest sleuths, outnumbered by the villagers, were quickly muscled out of the way. The villagers demanded that the bear be tranquillised, but the sleuths had no room to operate. 
 		 	 		At around 2 pm, wildlife volunteers at the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) forest cell were alerted and a team of 10 rescuers converged on the scene. Villagers renewed their demand for the bear to be tranquillised, but volunteers decided against it.
 		
 		“Tranquillising it could have killed it,” said M Rajesh, one of the wildlife volunteers at the end of the rescue operation. “We would have had to wait a few minutes for the drug to take effect, by which time the bear could have slipped into the water and drowned.”
 		 	 		The priority of the volunteers was to clear the area of the angry villagers. With forest sleuths and helpful locals chipping in, they formed a circle around the well, blocking off access to it. With the villagers out of the way, the bear soon became calm and volunteers began devising ways to get it out. The well has a wide, dry chamber at the top which gives way to a deeper, narrower lower chamber. 
 		 	 		Before the volunteers arrived on the scene, a tyre tied to a plastic rope was lowered into the well. When the bear tried to come out using the tyre, the rope snabbed. Next, two ladders tied together and reaching to about 35 feet were placed in the lower chamber. 
 		 	 		“The animal climbed out using the ladders and reached the top of the lower well. But with people shouting and throwing stones, it went back into the well,” said Sandeep G, another volunteer. “But we expected it to try the ladder again so we created a sort of hiding place with coconut palms in the upper chamber.” Knowing that sloth bears are partial to jackfruit, volunteers placed large portions of the fruit in the upper recesses of the lower chamber and the upper chamber of the well to lure the animal out. But the bear didn’t take the bait.
 		Not for another 10 hours at least. 
 		 	 		“From 3 pm till about 1 am on Saturday, it didn’t move from the water,” said Rajesh. The volunteers, however, stayed patient and were rewarded when the bear eventually climbed up and headed straight for the jackfruit. At around 1 am, it moved out of the upper chamber and scampered away.
 		 	 		“Sloth bears are more active during night,” said Rajesh. “We were sure it would climb out when it was still dark. It was a perfect ending: The bear was free and our plan worked brilliantly.”