Proliferation of illegal catfish farms around KIA has resulted in an explosion in the number of Pariah kites, posing a significant threat to aircraft taking off and landing
 
 	If someone asked you what posed the greatest danger to airline passengers, catfish would not be the first word that springs to mind. But in Bengaluru, the African version of the fish is doing just that.
 	  	The proliferation of these illegal farms around KIA has resulted in an explosion in the number of Pariah kites – which can fly at altitudes of 1,000 to 1,500 feet – that is now posing a significant threat to aircraft taking off and landing at the international airport.
 	  	These farms, coupled with poultry waste being dumped in and around Sulibele, lying in the KIA flight path, have raised alarms with wildlife experts. In 2013, the high court ordered the strict implementation of the ban on African catfich farming. After a massive demolition drive, the farms in Razaqsab Palya, Budensab Palya and Bagaluru villages, which surround the airport, were removed, but have now sprung up in places like Sulibele and Anekal. 
 	  	In 2013, the HC’s division bench, comprising justice K Sreedhar Rao and Justice S Abdul Nazeer on February 6, in DM Moulla vs The Union of India case, directed the state government to strictly impose the ban. In a petition filed by residents of Razaqsab Palya and Budensab Palya villages in Bengaluru north (where the illegal business was taking a toll on the environment and health), they sought the implementation of order by the ministry of agriculture, department of animal husbandry and dairying (fisheries division), dated June 29, 2000 prohibiting the rearing of African catfish, locally called as Magur, Marvay, Maroof and Ane Meenu (elephant fish).
 	  	Further, after scientific evidence furnished by the Fisheries Research Institutes of Indian Council of Agricultural Research, the high court directed authorities across the state to eradicate the African catfish and cease its farming. 
 	  	The main source of the problem now lies in and around Sulibele lake (in Bengaluru Rural district), as was discovered during a joint inspection by airport officials and a team of wildlife experts from Vanamitra, an NGO working on eco-friendly solutions to mitigate wildlife issues at KIA, last month.
 	
 	  	“Huge chicken waste dumped in lake bed attracts thousands of pariah kites which are threat to flight safety as catfish farms around the lake bed attract these birds. Breeders use chicken waste, meat and carcasses of animals as feed for the fish. If this continues in the long term, any epidemic could break out and there is a threat of one of these large birds colliding with an aircraft putting hundreds of lives at risk in the air and on the ground,” Jai Shankar V, an ornithologist and founder trustee of Vanamitra, told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	  	Shankar added that the problem is exponentially worse during the rains: “During rains, termites surface at KIA and the large population of scavenging pariah kites enter the airport area posing a serious risk as nothing can be done to stop them. A 13-km radius is the THZ (Tertiary Hazard Zone), where the place has to be sanitized for hazards as aircraft will be landing and hence flying at a lower altitude. The aerial distance in the case at hand is 9 km from ARP (Airport Reference Point). Though KIA has one of the best and most experienced teams in the country to control bird strikes, they cannot manage hundreds of pariah kites flooding the airfield,” Shankar added. 
 	
 	
 	 	
 	KN Suresh Kumar, a consultant with BASHM (Bird/Animal Aircraft Strike Hazard Management) and a National Bird Control Committee (NBCC) member, told Bangalore Mirror: “The problem in Sulibele is not just catfish farms but also the offal dumps. The failure to address waste management issues is also playing a major role here. This has resulted in a rise in the number of scavenging birds like pariah kites. These pose a major danger to flight safety because they have a habit of hovering and it is not easy to deter them. 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	“Inside the airport there are systems to chase the birds away. But if a plane is coming in to land at a 1,000 or 1,500 ft and is a couple of kilometres from the airport, then there is nothing the airport can do to protect it from a bird hit. This becomes the responsibility of the civic administration as well as the general public. 
 	  	“People think flight safety is the airport’s problem, which is not true. Flights when approaching the airport are flying really low. So communities closer to the airport pose a danger if there is a lot of garbage in the area. 
 	  	“When American Airlines flight 1579 crash landed in the Hudson river in New York after the aircraft was hit by a bird, it was a huge wake up call for the US government and they started working on measures with people’s participation. This has to be done here too. A huge responsibility lies with the general public and local administration.” 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Wildlife volunteers have already started sensitising local residents on the adverse effects of fish farming near the airport. 
 	  	The district administration said that the issue will be checked and redressed. “We will definitely act on the issue,” S Palaiah, deputy commissioner Bengaluru rural told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	  	
 	 		The quick money 
 		 	 		* African catfish are low maintenance, cheap and fast-growing. They adapt to any environment conditions. This species feeds on chicken and mutton waste which are available at cheap prices. 	 		* It preys on the local varieties of Katla, Ravu, and Mrugal 	 		* It requires an acre to rear 1,00,000 catfish 	 		* Each kilogram fetches Rs 120 approx (wholesale) and Rs 300 approx (retail) in the open market 	 		* Each catfish weighs around 1-2 kg
 		
 		
 		 			Catfish rearing and punishment
 			
 			
 			
 			
 			 		 			Catfish rearing is illegal and punishable under section 5 of the Environment Protection Act 1986. Rearing, farming and selling this breed if proved is punishable with five years of jail and Rs.1 lakh fine or 7 years jail and Rs.5000 fine on failing to meet the above, officials explained.
 			
 			
 			 				A FEROCIOUS PROBLEM
 				 			 				“It [African catfish] is a ferocious feeder. It eats anything, and when allowed in natural waterbodies, destroys the local/indigenous fauna and in turn affects the entire aquatic ecosystem. It is a very voracious carnivore, and can  			 				also injure humans. After a detailed research from different bodies, the government of India in 2000 banned rearing the species and ordered destruction of existing stock as it had a disastrous effect on the local ecosystem and in turn the biodiversity,” Gangadhar V Maddikeri, managing director, Karnataka Fisheries Federation Limited, told Bangalore Mirror.