Mysuru: A tiger on the prowl in villages bordering Bandipur reserve in Gundlupet taluk, Chamarajanagar, on Tuesday killed another villager within six weeks. This led to tension in the area even as the forest department said it will shoot the big cat if they cannot nab it. 

 Shivalingappa, a farmer from Chowdanahalli, was found dead at a farmland bordering the reserve in Gopalswamy Bettar Range. He had gone to graze cattle. Villagers saw the big cat attack him and tried to rescue him, but it was too late. The body was found in a bush at a secluded spot. Villagers near Chowdanahalli, mainly Hundipura and Kebbepura, which border the sanctuary, started protesting, blaming foresters for being lax in nabbing the tiger. 

 Police led by DySP Mohan rushed to the spot and tried to pacify them. While foresters told them the family of the deceased would be paid Rs 5 lakh compensation and another Rs 2,000 monthly to his wife, the protesters didn't budge. At one point, they refused to take the body for the last rites. 

Bandipur Tiger Reserve director T Balachandra told TOI that as per direction of the department's higher authorities, the tiger would be trapped and translocated within 48 hours. "If we cannot translocate it, we'll shoot it. Our primary focus is translocation," he said. The body was shifted to Gundlupet Government Hospital, he said, adding that foresters took the help of local MLA Niranjan Kumar to pacify protesters. 

Foresters said vets and other experts would reach the spot early Wednesday morning to launch the search operation.

On September 1, farmer Shivamadaiah was killed by the tiger following which a camera trap had been set up. Foresters noticed a sub-adult on the prowl in the area and deduced it was the killer. Though they placed a cage in the vicinity to nab it, they were not successful. An operation to locate it with the help of elephants also proved futile. 

 Additional principal chief conservator of forests (Project Tiger) Jagat Ram said he has spoken to PCCF (wildlife) and chief wildlife warden regarding the killing. After discussions, it was decided that the elusive tiger would either be captured or shot within the next 24 to 48 hours. He sought for public cooperation in this regard.