Forest Department cracks down on tiger claw locket trend

It has become a fashion for people to sport lockets made of tiger claws. However, for the last two days, the forest department has been hunting to find those sporting such lockets. Those sporting such lockets can even get jailed. Interestingly, even those posing pictures on social media wearing those lockets are now in the soup.

In fact, on Tuesday, the Forest department continued to book cases against those displaying tiger claws in their lockets. Two people were arrested in Chikkamagaluru for displaying tiger claws. The police also raided those selling tiger claws, but the accused escaped.

It all began with a dramatic turn of events on Monday when forest department officials apprehended a contestant from Bigg Boss Kannada for allegedly donning a tiger claw pendant. The arrest followed a complaint that Varthur Santhosh sported such a pendant on the telecasted show. A team led by Bengaluru Urban Deputy Conservator of Forests N Ravindra Kumar carried out the arrest on Sunday night at the show’s shooting location. Forest department officials confirmed the tiger claw pendant, leading to Santhosh’s arrest under the stringent Wildlife 
Protection Act of 1972.

Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Kumar Pushkar explained, “Our team verified the tiger claw he was wearing. After confirming that it was a tiger claw, he was taken into custody, and interrogations are ongoing. The Wildlife Protection Act is quite strict on this. We will be seeking his judicial custody for a few days because we need to investigate the case.” During questioning, Santhosh claimed to have purchased the tiger claw pendant near Karnataka’s border with Tamil Nadu, in Hosur town, for Rs 20,000 about three years ago.

 Forest officials plan to verify his claims and conduct further interrogation. Santhosh has been remanded in 14-day judicial custody after being produced before a magistrate.

Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre assured that legal action would be taken against the contestant once the seized property is confirmed to be a tiger’s claw. He emphasised that the Forest Department would not tolerate illegal activities, and officers were empowered to take action without succumbing to pressure. A forest official said, “It is illegal to procure such items.

 However, it is very sad to know that many people are trying to display by posting photos on social media. This can have a negative effect as by posting such photos; they are not only promoting illegal trade but encouraging others to buy such lockets, which can create demands for these banned items. Hence, we are taking action.”