Following the slump in the global iron ore market, the mining barons of Bellary have been having sleepless nights over their depleting wealth. Now, they seem to have hit an alternative jackpot — tourism. And they have a readymade golden goose in their backyard, in the form of Hampi!

Determined to make the world-famous heritage site a tourism hot spot, G Janardhan Reddy, minister for tourism and infrastructure development, said Hampi and its ‘crumbling’ infrastructure, including the existing poor connectivity, would soon get a facelift. “We have requested the chief minister to grant sub-divisional status, with a Dy SP in charge of law and order, for the better protection of Hampi and its monuments. The chief minister has okayed the proposal and the plan will be implemented in within a week,” Reddy told this paper.

Mix of hotels

Elaborating on his plans for Hampi, Reddy said, “When Sriramulu was tourism minister, the department had acquired 250 acres of land, and we have now acquired another 250 acres. The 500-acre area will have five-star hotels, middle-class cottages and budget hotels to suit visitors from different classes.” The minister also wants to set up three open-air theatres on the lines of the ancient Grecian amphitheatres for the purpose of portraying the history of the Vijayanagar empire.

“It is not just about hotels and cottages, we will also establish amusement parks which will provide wholesome entertainment to travellers and tourists. Both the Central and state governments have granted funds totalling Rs 80 crore, which is part of the Rs 200-crore allocation in the state budget for developing the infrastructure around Hampi. The process of calling for global tenders has already started,” he said. 

Night safari

The attractions will also encompass the flora and fauna of the area. The Daroji Sloth Bear Sanctuary, the first of its kind in South Asia, will be part of the project. “We are in the process of acquiring 450 acres of land close to the sanctuary. On the lines of the proposed night safari at Bannerghatta, a night safari will be introduced at Daroji too. Other wildlife-related activities, including a zoo, will be set up to entertain tourists,” Reddy said.

Mining link

When asked whether this passion for tourism development had anything to do with the falling graph of the mining industry — according to sources, many mining contractors are keen on bagging the tenders to set up hotels and restaurants in the area — Reddy deftly skirted the point. “I admit that in the last few months, the intensity of mining activities has come down. It is also true that many have been incurring huge losses due to falling demand for iron ore. However, the tourism projects are different from mining issues,” he said.

Grand finale to fest

Hampi Utsav-2008 ended on a grand note on Wednesday, with thousands of visitors and locals thronging the main street of the bustling Hampi bazaar in front of the historic Virupaksha temple.

The eye-catching procession included tableaus depicting key events in the history of the country. A total of 1,500 artistes added colour to the five-km valedictory march from the Queen’s bathing-place monument to the Virupaksha temple.

The performances of Sonu Nigam and Hamsalekha and their teams captivated the audience. Among the popular numbers were ‘Anisutide Yako Indu’, ‘Minchagi Neenu Baralu’ and ‘ Ee Sanje Yaakagide’.