Corporation earned abysmally low during the festive season
 
 
 The recently concluded Dasara celebrations at Mysuru have turned out be a tragedy of sorts for the cash-strapped Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC). Already reeling under losses, the state-run transport major was hoping to rake in some moolah by offering tour packages for tourists during the festival period. Contrary to its expectations, though, the KSRTC incurred further losses. As per official figures, this is the third consecutive year that the corporation witnessed dismal performance due to poor response from tourists.
 
 
 Considering the tourist inflow to Mysuru from different parts of the world, the KSRTC had come up with package tours to various destinations in and around Mysuru and adjoining districts such as Kodagu, Mandya and Chamarajanagar. The daylong package tours were divided under three categories that covered religious shrines (Deva Darshini), hill stations and wildlife sanctuaries (Giri Darshini), and river and reservoir visits (Jala Darshini) at an affordable cost.
 
 
 Starting from Mysuru every day during the festive holidays, these package tours covered a distance of 250-400 km per day, covering all tourist destinations. However, for the last three years, the response to package tours had been disheartening. Of the three, the Deva Darshini package seemed to be the least popular.
 
 
 As per the operational statistics made available to BM by KSRTC officials, as many as 28 different buses were operated this year during Dasara. Collectively, these could bring in earnings of just Rs 3.45 lakh, which turned out to be the lowest in the last three years. “During 2014, we had operated the highest number of buses (54) and earned revenue of Rs 7.70 lakh. Subsequently, in 2015 we operated 42 buses and witnessed revenue of Rs 5.63 lakh. This year, considering the Cauvery crisis and apprehension over inflow of tourists, we just operated 28 buses and earned revenue of Rs 3.45 lakh [in a week],” said a senior official from KSRTC in Mysuru.
 
 
 Elaborating on the poor show, a senior official said: “The Cauvery crisis cast a dark spell over this year’s Dasara. Although things had fallen into place by then, people were still apprehensive about blockades and protests. Considering the trend, we chose to operate only a few buses and hoped that there will be full occupancy. But our calculations went wrong.”
 
 
 Among those who availed themselves of the package tours run by the KSRTC, tours around rivers and reservoir-side destinations such as Golden Temple of Bylakuppe, Dubare Elephant camp, Cauvery Nisargadhama, Abbey Falls, Harangi Dam earned the highest revenue (Rs 1.53 lakh), followed by trips to hill stations and wildlife sanctuaries such as Bandipur, Gopalaswami Betta, BR Hills, Chamundi Hills and Nanjangud temple (Rs 1.40 lakh). Tours to temples at Nanjangud, Talakad, Mudukuthore and Somanathapura could earn only Rs 51,173.
 
 
 The fall in the revenue is attributed to the Cauvery crisis, said Rajender Kumar Kataria, MD, KSRTC. “The vehicular movement was completely hit between both states and there were not many tourists. Generally, tourists plan in advance and many of them were apprehensive about their safety. Anticipating these developments, we had reduced the number of buses and trips. Yet, the revenue has come down considerably. We are also thinking of making changes to the packages offered by bringing in new places and destinations as the year-end holidays are near,” he said.