More than a tonne of garbage collected by a team of 30 people
 
 
 After the battering of its ecosystem due to reckless acts of youngsters and cinema industry in recent times, the grassland of Hesaraghatta had a reason to smile on Sunday.
 
 Giving it a much needed relief from choking garbage, a team of about 30 volunteers from Bengaluru and local villages cleansed the humongous and long standing grassland of the IT city, and picked up more than a tonne of garbage.
 
 Endangering the fragile eco-system of the park, youngsters, freedom seeking love birds and cine industry people had not only posed threat to the grasslands but also littered the area, spanning more than 350 acres, with liquor bottles, plastic materials, sanitary pads, contraceptives and other garbage.
 
 While the Bengaluru city and rural police, alarmed by the growing threat to the unique habitat, had clamped down on illegal activities at the grasslands, local citizens led by Mahesh Bhat and BN Jagadeesh and supported by volunteers embarked on a massive cleaning drive of the grassland from morning till afternoon.
 
 Infested with several tonnes of garbage, it would require at least a month to clean up the grassland.
 
 Even though the turnout was minimal, the volunteers effectively managed to clear nearly half of the grassland from garbage in less than four hours.
 
 Bangalore Mirror had reported about the worsening state of affairs at Hesaraghatta grassland and citizens plan to clean up the area in its Sunday edition.
 Volunteers comprising journalism students of St Joseph’s College, adjacent government film institute, nearby Acharya Institution and businessmen turned wildlife enthusiasts divided themselves into groups and branched out across the grassland picking up the garbage and filling it in gunny bags.
 
 The staff of neighbouring resorts too helped the volunteers.
 
 “While the central part of the grassland had little garbage, the acasia grove and other parts were littered with garbage. Nearly 3-4 bags of liquor bottles and about 10 bags of other garbage were collected from just one stretch. Worst was that many had even smashed the liquor bottles and there were glass pieces strewn all around which pose a danger to humans and wildlife that often pass through the area,” revealed Jagadish, one of the organisers of the drive.
 
 Another organiser and local resident, Mahesh Bhat, said, “We cleaned up nearly 75 per cent of the garbage in the part we chose to clean today. The collected garbage will be ferried to BBMP’s solid waste collection centre near Yelahanka and will be handed over to them. Even though we managed to get volunteers and cleaned up the garbage infested grassland, the biggest challenge in future is how to prevent people from mindlessly driving on the grassland and litter the area.”
 
 Even as volunteers were busy picking up garbage, as many as 31 cars passed by the grassland towards an adjacent resort. Though all of them were busy clicking photograph of the stretch, none had a courtesy to stop and ask about what is happening.
 
 “Only two-cars stopped by and helped us a bit in collecting the garbage as they felt it was their responsibility too to protect the nature. People while enjoying the scenic beauty must also understand that they should join hands to conserve such beautiful place for others,” opined Mahesh Bhat.
 
 By afternoon the volunteers had collected garbage weighing more than a tonne. It was packed into bags and transported to BBMP’s segregation centre near Yelahanka.
 
 The Bengaluru city and rural police which have been camping in the area to prevent entry of people to the park had made arrangements for the refreshments for the volunteers.
 
 Related Story: Why we’re not allowed to enjoy this beautiful view