The department is foxed as to whether to OK the construction of a toilet complex near the temple, which, according to activists, is in violation of an SC order
 
 Hailed for having some of the best conservation measures anywhere in the nation, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) is caught in an odd situation. The existence of a temple inside the core of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve has left the KFD scratching its head. Even though officials have enforced a strict ban on various activities around the temple, the construction of a toilet complex close to the temple has sparked a controversy.
 
 The department is foxed as to whether to OK the construction of a toilet complex near the temple or stop it in favour of the tigers. BTR boasts a high density of tigers and is also a noted pilgrimage centre due to the Himavad Gopalaswamy Temple.
 
 Even before the area was declared a national park, according to KFD officials, an acre on top of a hillock, where the temple is located, was granted to the temple by the Mysuru Maharajas. While all religious activities were conducted within the temple area, now construction of a toilet complex outside has triggered unrest among activists.
 
 Wildlife volunteers based in Bandipur told Bangalore Mirror that the temple authorities have taken up construction of a toilet facility in the core of the tiger habitat flouting SC guidelines.
 
 “As per the provisions under Wildlife Protection Act, no person can destroy wildlife or divert the habitat of any wild animal without a permit and no such permit can be granted unless it is considered necessary for improvement and better management of wildlife therein,” explained Vaibhav, a wildlife conservationist.
 
 A senior officer from the KFD, on condition of anonymity, said “Conservation of wildlife and protected areas is the topmost priority of the government. In fact we have implemented a ban on various activities of devotees. The present situation is indeed a tricky one. Tomorrow if any devotee ventures into the forest for to answer the call of nature and gets trampled on or dragged away by wildlife, then we will be at the receiving end and will be held liable. On the flip-side, allowing the construction of a permanent structure without permission would make us face the wrath of authorities at the Centre.”
 
 However, countering the officials’ concern, another activist said, “In case of any human fatality inside a protected area, KFD is not liable to pay compensation as it would amount to trespassing. Allowing the construction of such facilities would only foster larger crowds, against the wish and plan of the KFD. Today it’s a toilet complex, tomorrow it’s another structure and in the end, these activities will defeat the main objective of the department. More than anything, construction of any permanent set up would amount to contempt of an SC order. The department has made all kinds of facilities at the foothill gate which is just six kms downhill and can be reached in less than 10 minutes.”
 
 Issuing a clarification, HC Kantharaju, Director, BTR said, “We have not allowed any activity in the core area of the reserve.
 
 All activities have been taking place on the land allotted to temple. In fact a couple of months ago we seized a generator, as it was kept outside the temple. Previously several cases have been booked against tourists for indulging in unlawful activities. With regard to toilets, we will bring this issue to the notice of senior officials.”
 
 All about Bandipur National Park
 
 * Bandipur National Park, established in 1974 as a tiger reserve under Project Tiger, is a national park located in the south Indian state of Karnataka. It was once a private hunting reserve for the Maharaja of Mysore.
 
 * Bandipur supports a good population of endangered and vulnerable species like Indian elephants, gaurs, tigers, sloth bears, muggers, Indian rock pythons, four-horned antelopes, jackals and dholes.
 
 *The National Highway (NH-67) &( NH-212 ) passes through Bandipur national park. This road has been a major concern as speeding vehicles have killed many wild animals in spite of frequent warnings from the forest department officials.