The monkey went into labour in a housing society and was in excruciating pain

An animal rescue is easy when it is injured, and a little first aid does the trick until professional intervention. But Binny Mill, a resident of ETA Gardens, was in a fix when he spotted a monkey in terrible pain while giving birth. By the time the doctors arrived, the baby monkey had died.

Bhavin Thakker, a businessman, said he received a call from his building’s security guard at around 9 am on Thursday. “I immediately called PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre as they had carried out two other rescues in the past in our 16-acre housing society. Our guard realised that the monkey was in pain as he noticed the baby was unable to come out.” The veterinarians reached the spot around 10.30 am.

Chandan Kumar, Rescue Coordinator, PFA, said this was not a regular rescue mission as the monkey, a Bonnet Macaque, was in labour. As a result, he had to rush with other veterinarians to treat the monkey on the spot. He said about 11 others from the animal group were surrounding this macaque to protect her and so, for the rescue team, keeping them away was quite challenging.

  As the baby was in a breech position, we began our treatment by giving an analgesic and a sedative to relax her pelvic cavity­–Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff, Chief Veterinarian and GM, PfA

Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff, Chief Veterinarian and GM, PfA, said he noticed that the baby was badly stuck, and the mother macaque was in excruciating pain. “Restraining the macaque was quite a task as she was unable to stay in one place. It took us about 20 minutes to confine her in one place. As the baby was in a breech position, we gave an analgesic and a sedative to relax her pelvic cavity. Then the baby’s head was manually manoeuvred and brought out. We removed the umbilical cord and brought the mother to the hospital,” he said, adding that the monkey was now doing much better and has started eating on her own. She still needs a minimum of two weeks before she is healthy enough to be released in the open.

Shariff added that with urbanisation, there were frequent encroachments into the territories of urban wildlife and hence, one should be compassionate towards them. “Due to various reasons such as electrocution, road accidents and dog attacks, we have been averaging a minimum of three Bonnet Macaque rescues every day. We sincerely ask the citizens of Bengaluru to call our free wildlife rescue service on 9900025370 if they see an animal in need of rescue,” he said.