In 2007, the then Deputy Conservator of Forests (Bangalore Urban) A M Annaiah had filed a criminal case against R Sharath Babu, senior manager of People for Animals (PFA), accusing him of illegal possession, transport and release of wild animals, illegal felling of trees and unauthorised occupation of forest land at Turahalli forest range. The FIR also mentioned that a quarter tonne of firewood was seized from the premises of PFA office in Kaggalipura range. While the investigation into the allegations is yet to be completed, the department appointed him as the Honorary Wildlife Warden of Bangalore city in September 2009.

                                        Sharath Babu with a monitor lizard he rescued                 

However, B K Singh, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), has a different take on the issue. He said Sharath was extremely useful to the forest department. “We have done major recoveries acting on his tip-off. There are no criminal charges against him. The charges are levelled against him with vested interests. So far, he has not been indicted by any court. If the charges against him are proved, he can be removed from the position,” he said.

The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, has laid down guidelines to the state government for the appointment of honorary wildlife wardens. It maintains that the eligible person should have a “personal record free of involvement in any activity detrimental to the interests of nature and wildlife conservation.” However, Singh claimed that the department has followed the guidelines in the Act while appointing Sharath to the post.

An honorary wildlife warden is appointed for every district to assist the state forest department in its endeavour to conserve wildlife.

Honorary wildlife wardens are deemed as public servants and hold the powers to inspect records of licences, search any premises, seize wildlife products and detain violators. Till now, only IISc professors and scientists from the field of life sciences have held the charge and the appointment of Sharath Babu to the coveted post has whipped up a heated debate among the nature lovers.