Ignorance can be a dangerous thing, especially when dealing with state-of-the-art equipment. What should have been no more than a 20-minute operation to rescue a pariah kite, turned into a two-hour ordeal — for hapless fire and emergency staff involved in the operations and for thousands of motorists and commuters who were caught up in the ensuing traffic chaos.    It began with the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike’s wildlife cell being called in on Tuesday to rescue a kite which had got entangled in manja high on a tree in front of Divyashree Business Centre in Langford Gardens. Since the kite was stuck in a branch about 85 feet off the ground for three days, wildlife sleuths called the fire department which pressed the recently acquired Bronto Skylift into service.    The truck-mounted hydraulic platform, which was procured by the state government at a cost of Rs 4 crore soon after the Carlton Towers fire tragedy, can be deployed to a height of 150 feet in less than 10 minutes. But it took fire personnel 45 minutes just to raise the platform and another 20 minutes to rescue the bird. The drama though unfolded when personnel began to retract the platform. Unsure of just how to operate the controls, they struggled for an hour before they finally got it back down.    Meanwhile, thousands of vehicles piled up all around. The road is a busy one as it connects Richmond Circle to Adugodi. The operation, which began at about 1.30 pm, finally ended at 3.30 pm. One shudders to think of the consequences had it been a fire emergency, or if it had been peak hour traffic.   Though the Skylift was used about six times previously, sources say personnel had never extended the platform to more than 60 feet. The extra 25 feet proved problematic. “They have the technology , but they don’t know how to operate it,” Kumar S, a wildlife volunteer, said. “If this had happened in an fire, it would have been disastrous.”   Wildlife volunteers say the kite had been entangled in the tree for three days. Residents around had previously called wildlife NGOs to rescue the bird, but none responded. Finally, the civic agency cell was contacted and volunteers rushed to the spot.   The Bronto Skylift was procured to help in swift rescue of people in fires such as the one which engulfed the Carlton Towers. Its standout feature is the capability to raise the platform to a height of 90 metres (270 feet) in 10 minutes. The one which the fire department has extends to a maximum 54 metres (162 feet).    Fire and emergency services top brass, however, rubbished suggestions that their staff were poorly trained. “It is wrong to say our staff lacks expertise,” D Rasheed, deputy director (administration), state fire and emergency services said. “There are several factors involved in rescue operations. There are several distractions too. There was a problem in the lay of the land. The truck needs to be planted on firm, flat ground before the platform can be extended. People should understand these technicalities. This vehicle is made in Finland and 30 of our staff are trained to operate it. We plan to train all our staff to handle this equipment. All our trained staff, however, have the expertise and allegations that they are poorly trained are false.”    As for the kite which very nearly died of starvation, its struggle continues. It is now being treated for the injuries inflicted by the manja and will be released when it recovers.