Even as doubts were expressed over whether the project had the required land, the forest department has zeroed in on four places for setting them up.
 
 Forest minister C H Vijayashankar said, “Although it was a tedious task to find such a vast extent of land, we have succeeded in identifying places where the ‘Cubbon Park-like’ parks can be set up.”
 
 He said an experts committee will take a final decision on these places, which would be developed into tourist spots. The committee will comprise environment experts, bio-diversity scientists, botanists and horticulture experts.
 
 Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa had announced nearly a year ago that four parks on the lines of Cubbon Park would come up in the city.
 
 According to sources close to the minister, Bangalore Urban district, which comprises two major divisions - North and South - has suggested five places for setting up the parks.
 
 In Bangalore North, the state government has identified Gulakmale range near Kaggalipura, Matalingapura near Anekal, Turahalli forest and Gunjoor Palya near K R Puram. Challahalli Gudda range near Rajanukunte has been identified for setting up the park in Bangalore South. On why these places had been identified, Vijayashankar said, “There are two types of forest land close to Bangalore: reserved and protected. As we can’t touch protected forest areas, we are focusing only on the reserved forests.”
 
 Trees that provide a thick foliage would be planted in these parks. “These places already have thick forest cover. By planting more saplings, we’ll make them more dense. This will help absorb much of the carbon dioxide spewed by the city,” said the minister.
 
 According to him, no private land will be bought for the purpose.
 
 These being forest areas, would there be any wildlife? Forest department sources say the wildlife in these areas consists of only small animals. “We cannot affect the habitats of wild animals. Hence, wherever there is less concentration of wildlife, we will develop these parks,” said an official.
 
 Only the indigenous trees would be planted at the parks rather than exotic species. “These might even act as seed banks in the future, which will help conserve the local species,” he said.
 
 Proposed park areas
 
 Gulakmale: Between Bannerghatta and Kanakpura Road
 Matalingapura: Near Anekal
 Turahalli Gudda: Near Uttarahalli
 Gunjoor Palya: Near Marathahalli
 Challahalli Gudda: Near Rajanukunte off Yelahanka