Over a dozen forest officials and volunteers were on an unusual assignment on Friday – they were scouring the city roads for two missing monkeys. Operation Simian Search may never have happened if it hadn’t been for an alert young woman. She noticed the monkeys, who had been rescued earlier, back at the same spot and shot off an email to wildlife activist Maneka Gandhi. A call from Gandhi set the rescue operation in motion.    The simians are a bonnet macaque and a rhesus macaque, species that are protected under schedule II of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act.   “Around 15 officials, divided into three teams, were on the roads searching for the monkeys,” a source told Bangalore Mirror. “We can’t understand how the officials could release the rescued monkeys just like that. Maneka Gandhi took it up with the department top brass, who ordered the search,” the source said.    Padma R, a techie and wildlife enthusiast who commutes to her office on Hosur Road via Queen’s Road, had noticed the macaques being used for begging on Wednesday. She called up wildlife volunteers, who rescued the monkeys and handed them over to the forest officials.    Padma was assured by the forest staff that the monkeys would be sent to rehab before being released in Bannerghatta National Park. “I couldn’t believe my eyes when I saw the monkeys at the same spot on Queen’s Road the next day. They talk of protecting wildlife, but this was a farce,” she told Bangalore Mirror. “I was shocked to see the simians being used for begging once again. They had obviously been given back to their ‘owners’ instead of being released in their own habitat. Worse, they had been chained round the neck, and I felt impelled to write to Maneka Gandhi,” she said.   Gandhi is understood to have taken up the matter with chief wildlife warden Deepak Sharma and honorary wildlife warden (Bangalore Urban) Sharath R Babu. “She replied to my email, saying she had spoken to the department brass to have the monkeys picked up again. That’s when they sprung into action,” Padma said.    The search teams went all around the Cantonment area, and at around 6 pm were able to spot and rescue the monkeys. “I have asked for a report on the incident by the DFO,” Sharma told Bangalore Mirror. He said the monkeys would be kept in rehab and then released in their habitat.