By Khushali Sadarangani

A photo clicked by him of his wife went on to appear on billboards across the world. But last week, photographer Ashish Parmar’s life ended in a flash

Popular photographer Ashish Parmar had the patience of a saint. From waiting to shoot a rare species of a zebra for 48 hours in Masai Mara, Africa, to getting the perfect shot of wild cats in the Ranthambore forest in India, this lensman from Bengaluru had done it all. And as recently as last September, on a trip to Masai Mara, he looked out for a week-old foal that was born with melanism, a rare genetic disorder that had changed its skin colour to brown and its stripes to spots. It’s said nothing could scare Parmar, not even an encounter with a cheetah.

And so, Parmar’s sudden demise recently, at the age of 40, has left not just his fraternity but all his fans and wildlife enthusiasts in a state of shock. After he suffered a series of heart attacks, he was admitted to a hospital for two weeks but succumbed ultimately. He is survived by his wife and mother.

He was most popular worldwide for the photograph he took of his wife Raina that made it to the billboards across the globe. As a part of the iPhone 6S campaign in 2016, he had snapped Raina holding a lamp in the cup of her palms wearing a red sari. “We were extremely jealous of him for this because this photograph was shot on a phone and had made it to billboards,” says photographer Kalyan Varma. This photograph is what had them be christened as the ‘iPhone couple’ amongst family and friends.

Not only was Parmar known for his wildlife photography but entertainment photography too - all self-taught. In 2010, Parmar was the photographer for Royal Challengers Bangalore. Actress Neha Dhupia once sent him a ticket to shoot a few fashion stills. But when Parmar got to the airport to get on the flight, she surprised him, saying that it was her wedding and that she wanted him to shoot. Parmar would share some gorgeous images of that hush-hush wedding till recently on his Instagram page that had a whopping 32.7 million followers.

Much before this, Parmar was also the official photographer for one of the seasons of the TV show Roadies. “Ashish was my go-to guy,” remembers DJ and host Nikhil Chinnappa. “He was always ready to get up and get out of bed. He was a wealth of knowledge.” True. Thanks to his skill in wildlife photography, he had an eye for details and this would help him a good deal in every other style of photography he pursued.

He was the only Indian photographer to be invited to shoot the Future Music Festival Asia - 2014 in Kuala Lumpur. “We shared a common love for the wild and photographing moments,” says DJ Tuhin Mehta over a telephonic conversation, sounding extremely saddened by the sudden demise of a dear buddy. He was also the official photographer for Vh1 Supersonic— India’s biggest music festival.

Electronic Dance Music (EDM) photography was his specialty, having worked closely with and photographing more than 200 national and international artists. Many of whom soon became his friends, than just clients. “He always had the enthusiasm of a five-year-old. He would keep everyone in the forest alive and laughing. All of us looked forward to spendin
g time with him,” shares Varma.

Above all, he was a people’s person. Parmar was also known for the tours he took people on — from the breathtaking Leh and Ladakh to the wilderness of Masai Mara and Kabini and the exotic locales of Sri Lanka. 

Not only will Bengaluru miss the legendary photographer and his craft behind the camera but the absence of his chirpiness will be felt in forests too.