By Garima Prasher

Registering an increase of 5.8% from the previous year, Karnataka recorded 343 environment-related offences in 2022 according to the latest National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data. 
However, over 70% of these cases have been registered under the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products Act, 2003.

When it comes to environmental-focused legislation such as the The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Noise Pollution Acts, and The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 — zero cases were registered.
 
Out of 343 cases, 250 were registered under the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products Act, 2003, 91 cases were registered under the Forest Act & the Forest Conservation Act, and one each under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986.

Moreover, no cases registered under environmental-related offences were disposed of in the state this year, taking the total number of cases pending investigation to 423 (80 pending cases from the previous year).

Experts said it is ironic that zero cases under the Water Act have been registered from the state whose capital has all its water bodies ailing. They underline that such statistics only show that agencies such as Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA), and Karnataka Tank Conservation Development Authority (KTCDA) are not discharging their duties in true spirit.

“All lakes in Bengaluru are choking under the weight of untreated sewage and industrial discharge. Under the Water and the Air Act, the state pollution control board has been empowered to take legal action against the defaulters. However, KSPCB has only been monitoring different types of pollution and not discharging other basic duties. In an RTI response, the board has admitted that no industries have been fined for polluting lakes in Bengaluru since 2017 and no closure notices were issued to the industries too. While untreated sewage has been entering lakea unabated, KSPCB has not imposed any fines on BWSSB or BBMP,” said V Ramprasad, founder, Friends of Lakes.


 While untreated sewage has been entering lakes unabated, KSPCB has not imposed any fines on BWSSB or BBMP—V Ramprasad, Friends of Lakes

According to environmentalist Dr AN Yellappa Reddy, while KSPCB has been tasked to deal with air and water pollution, the zero offence scenario explains why our water bodies are ailing and air quality is going for a toss. Environmental impact assessment rules, hazardous waste and electronic waste rules, and such are included under the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 — still, zero cases registered highlights lack of awareness about these crimes among enforcement agencies.

“There are thousands of complaints under various environmental focus legislation filed with KSPCB, but the board has been lackadaisical about taking up these complaints, filing cases, and penalising defaulters. EPA Act is not being enforced as well,” said Reddy.