With two young children, home-maker is traumatised by the snake that pays a daily visit
 
 
 Imagine a poisonous Russell’s Viper sleeping just five feet away from the bedroom of two children aged 5 and 2. The viper, like clockwork, comes daily at around 10 am and goes away after about an hour. It has not harmed anyone so far, but the parents of the two children are having palpitations. 

 The viper crawls out of the shrubs in a site neighbouring the three-bedroom house of Neethu P R, a home-maker, and her family in OMBR layout. For the last 10 days, they have been closing all windows and doors after sighting the viper from their room. They have contacted snake catchers, the BBMP, and even home minister K J George, who is the local MLA. But no one seems to have a solution to their problem. 

 	“It’s been 10 days and the snake has been seen at the same place. I am helpless,’’ Neethu told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	Neethu’s family has been living in that house for eight years. “The snake is on the other side of the compound. Every day, it appears at around 10 am, stays for about an hour and slips back. The compound is the only barrier between it and the window, and the distance is so close,’’ Neethu said. 

 	Snake catchers have visited them, and even collected fees, but not solved their problem. Reason: No one knows who the owner of the empty site is and they don’t want to trespass. 

 	“Everywhere we went, we had only request – either clean up the site or send a snake catcher,” Neethu said. “I had gone to the home minister’s office first on Friday. He was not there. However, one of his assistants sent a snake catcher who refused to do the job and went away. Thereafter, I must have called at least 10 snake catchers. The home minister on Saturday directed that notices be issued to the site owners to clean up the site. But that is not an immediate solution,’’ she pointed out. 

 	Snake rescuers in Bannerghatta said they could catch snakes only inside a house and not outside. After repeated requests, BBMP health officials and the BBMP wildlife rescue team visited the spot on Thursday and cleaned the area. Mohan K, BBMP wildlife rescuer, said: “The rescues are usually not carried out in open spaces as the snakes exist naturally there. A Russell’s Viper is haemotoxic and can prove deadly. Pain, swelling, vomiting, dizziness and kidney failure are common outcomes. The skin tissue gets damaged immediately after the bite if anything goes wrong while rescuing in such a place. In open spaces, the rescue is risky as we can’t corner the snake. We cleaned the area a bit, but it moved away before it could be rescued. We will continue our efforts.”