3 Asian palm civet babies found in balcony of Kengeri apartment rescued

The Asian palm civet, also known as the palm civet, is a native of southeast Asia. It usually resides in primary forests and can also be found in Bengaluru. According to experts, the Thurahalli forest had a good population of civets, but over the years, their population has gone down due to rapid urbanisation.
 
Civets can look like Mongoose, but they have black and white blotches. They also have black bands on their pearly eyes.

They are considered to be rare species. Recently, residents of SG Vanya Apartment in Kodipalya, Kengeri found three civet neonates in their balcony. They were separated from their parents because of urban settlements near the forests.

Nets were installed in the apartment, and the parents of the neonates could not come to take their children. The baby civets were lying in the balcony for about four days without any food or water and were extremely dehydrated. Residents informed the People For Animals (PfA) wildlife rescue and conservation centre in Bengaluru, after which rescuers came to the spot.
 
Rahul J, wildlife rehabilitator and senior rescue coordinator, PfA, said, “The neonates weighed 28, 33, and 22 grams when we rescued them. Ideally, they should have been around 80 grams. We surveyed the place to reunite them with the parents, but there was no sign of the latter. They were starved, so they were taken to the in-care unit of PfA.”

Speaking about the treatment given to them, Rahul said that since civets were nocturnal, they hydrated the neonates during 12 pm every day. After that, they started feeding them from 6 pm every two or three hours until 2 am. Only limited staff (veterinarian and rehabilitator) were appointed for feeding and nurturing them to avoid excessive human imprint. “The Civets are almost 50 days old now and all three of them have started self-feeding behaviour. In another month, they’ll be completely dependent on themselves,” he informed.

The rescuer pointed out that the animals moving out of the city is an indication that habitats are collapsing. So far, PfA has rescued 23 Asian palm civets and six small Indian civets.

Poaching of civets 
Rahul said that Asian palm civets are hunted for bushmeat and the pet trade in some places. It is threatened by poaching and illegal wildlife trade, and buyers use it for the increasing production of kopi luwak - civet coffee.

 The neonates weighed 28, 33, and 22 grams when we rescued them. Ideally, they should weigh around 80 grams. They were starved ­–Rahul J, wildlife rehabilitator, People For Animals
There has been a good population of civets in Indian forests, even in Thurahalli, but as the years passed, rescues of civets reduced and they were hardly found.
 
“Urbanisation turning the green city into a concrete jungle left the animals with no habitat. They usually share their habitats with big cats, so they cannot adjust in this concrete habitat anymore. In a couple of years, there’ll be no civets that can be seen in the city like they once were,” he added.

Civet breeding season
Civets are said to breed throughout the year and have up to two litters per year. They choose a resting tree to mate, give birth, and take care of the young. They stay there for the entire mating period, explained Rahul. Females give birth to between two and five pups after a gestation period that lasts for two months. Pups are born with their eyes closed and weigh around 80 grams.