Unsupervised painters working in Bannerghatta National Park inadvertently covered a few pelicans in green paint and then proceeded to clean them with kerosene!
 
 
 Prashanth Kumar, an ornithologist, was traumatised on his Saturday visit to Bannerghatta Biological Park – his regular place for birdwatching. While walking through the area at around 5.30 in the evening, he noticed the bird enclosure was getting painted. Upon taking a closer look, he discovered that along with the grill, some of the pelicans were also painted green.
 “Some of the birds had some green spots on them. However, it was shocking to see that some of the pelicans were completely covered in paint,” said an exasperated Prashanth. He found at least 10 birds with paint on them which included storks and pelicans.
 But it was just the beginning of the trauma for the birdwatcher who is an IT employee. He soon found that a few workers were using blades, thinner and kerosene to remove the paint from the feathers of the birds.
 “I am not sure if the paint was put on purpose or by accident. However, what I was sure of was that the whole thing amounts to animal cruelty. I was furious,” he said.
 He approached them and tried to stop them. “I requested them not to ill-treat the birds and instead call a veterinary doctor. However, they were not interested. I also told them that kerosene and thinners are not a solution for this and will just cause more damage to the birds. Instead of listening, they shooed me away,” he recalled while talking to Bangalore Mirror.
 Prashanth decided to complain to the officials immediately. And to add to his frustration, he failed to find any forest officer around. “There was no one in the office too,” he said.
 “I guess since it was a Saturday evening, the officials had already left. Not finding any one to complain and not having the heart to leave the place, I immediately wrote a letter and handed it over to a junior rescue officer.”
 Prashanth feels that the workers involved in the act were not a part of the zoo authorities. “They were not wearing any uniform. Also I visit the place regularly. Officers here know how to handle the animals. I suppose these were the guys who came to paint the grill. They may have realised the goof-up and wanted to avoid the officials.”
 When contacted, the chairman of the State Zoo Authority, Rehana Banu, said, “I am not aware of this issue. However, since it has been brought to my notice I will immediately inquire into the matter and find out what happened and the cause of it.”
 
 ‘This could be fatal’
 Dr Karthik, a veterinary doctor in People for Animal Wildlife Hospital, feels all the items together could actually even be fatal for the birds. “First of all, any paint contains lead. This is extremely harmful for birds. If it enters the body in sufficient quantity, it could kill the animal,” Dr Karthik says.
 Kerosene and thinners are extremely volatile, he says. “They create fumes as well. Applying such agents on feathers and skin would burn and cause a lot of pain and discomfort to the birds. The burns will also be intensified in this case as there may be wounds because of the blades being used. Also the fumes, when inhaled by the birds, can also cause pneumonia and other lung-related problems,” the doctor said.
 Dr Karthik said that the best thing to do in this case would have been either washing the bird with warm water when the paint was fresh or else if it is small spots they could have medically cut of the affected feathers and put the birds on rest until the feathers regrew.