Bizman in soup as imported furniture stuck in customs for want of certification
 
 
 A deadlock between the customs department, an NRI behind state-of-the-art townships, and the state government has again shown the need for a wildlife laboratory in the state. 

 	While customs officials, who suspect a few products in a consignment belonging to the NRI to be wildlife products, have held it back seeking a certificate on their genuineness, the state government doesn’t have any authority at present that can issue such a certificate.
 	
 	This has left the NRI Ronald Colaco, in the lurch.
 	  	The officials, following standard procedure, held back the consignment imported by Continental Builders and Developers from China in December 2014. Their bone of contention was that some of the contents looking like hides were wildlife products. But those who imported the items had different views. 
 	  	On January 22, 2015, an additional commissioner of customs wrote to the wildlife authorities in the state to certify the genuineness of the suspicious products. But till now, the state government has done nothing in this regard. Also, because the government has been sitting on the proposal to set up the state wildlife laboratory to test the authenticity of wildlife products, business is being affected. 
 	  	Although the establishment of branches of the Wildlife Institute of India was sanctioned in 2011, it is yet to become a reality. Things have only worsened with the Veterinary College in Hebbal, the only place which certified such products, stopping the practice since June 2014.
 	 

 	Only assurances so far
 	  	Following the trouble forest sleuths faced in crime prevention owing to the absence of such a lab, MLA Ravi Subramanya had raised the issue in the legislature last year, and the forests minister had also responded by promising to set up labs. However, no substantive efforts have been made in that direction. With the government failing to act, innocent people are being made to suffer, Ravi Subramanya said.
 	  	“I’m going to take up the issue with the state government and forest department,” he said. 
 	  	The delay has now led to a deadlock between the NRI and the customs department with the consignment being stuck for over two months. However, customs officials maintain that this was part of standard operating procedure. They also said that as there was no such lab in the state, they would send samples of the consignment to Hyderabad for testing. 
 	  	The importers, however, say they have done no wrong and are being harassed by a business-unfriendly administration. “We have imported some carpets along with lots of furniture. And these carpets are worth hardly a few thousand rupees. It’s the furniture that is costly. While customs officials suspect it is hide that is inside, we were told by our sellers that it is artificial leather. We have agreed with the officials to test the goods. If the government wants more commerce to happen, they should stop harassing people. If we have done something wrong like smuggling, action can be taken. But we have a credible history,” Balaji, CEO, Continental Builders and Developers, said.
 	 

 	Government’s say
 	  	“We have entrusted the task of certifying the products as sought by customs right now to the deputy conservator of forests (urban). If they can’t make it, then it has to be sent to one of the labs in Hyderabad or Dehradun. A proposal on setting up a lab in the city is with the government and we are waiting for its approval. Till then, the existing labs are the only alternatives,” Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (wildlife) said.