The forest department plans to mix reality and cutting-edge special effects in an effort to ease the strain on forests in the state. The department has mooted the idea of introducing 3D virtual forest tours with a 360 degree view of various national parks, complete with jungle safaris, at several sanctuaries in the hope of keeping eager tourists out of reserved parks.
 
 The 3D tour can be accessed even on mobile phones in the comfort of one’s living room and will give virtual tourists the “feel of forests” without them actually entering one. 
 
 “The concept is not new,” explained Sashwati Mishra, deputy conservator of forests. “It’s popular in hotel management and interior design courses where they offer you a 360 degree tour of hotels and its suites. During our virtual tours, there will be a voice-over narrating stories about the place and several anecdotes.” 
 
 The department has already developed the first 3D virtual walk of Karnataka’s highest peak Mullayanagiri in Chikmagalur district on the Western Ghats. 
 
 “The response has been so good that we have called for tenders to design tour trails for four other places,” Sashwati said.
 
 The mangrove forest reserves of Kundapur in Udupi district, Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary on the Kaveri river, evergreen forests of Pushpagiri wildlife sanctuary, a jungle safari in Nagarahole and Bandipur Tiger Reserve, and tourism activity in Kaveri Nisarga Dhama of Kushalanagar will be offered on the net. The project is expected to cost close to Rs 10 lakh.
 
 The 3D tours will also provide information on medicinal plants indigenous to the area and wild animals unique to these habitats. 
 
 The pilot project of the 360 degree 3-Dimensional tour of Mulayanagiri can be accessed at http://stg3.kar.nic.in/virtual_forest/
 
 
 WHY FORESTS ARE UNDER STRAIN
 
 A forest department study a few years ago revealed that Bandipur Tiger Reserve and  Sunkadakatte forest can handle up to 22 vehicles each day and Nagarahole no more than 16. However, the number of tourist vehicles flocking the parks is far in excess of the ideal figures. Bandipur alone handles over 40 vehicles.