State Wildlife Board members write to CM seeking urgent decision

Eight members of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board have written to Chief Minister Basavaraj S Bommai stating that there should be no more delays in announcing Hesaraghatta grasslands as a conservation reserve (CR).
 
Recently, the board meeting headed by the Chief Minister had decided to go for public consultation before any decision. Opposing this idea in the letter, board members said that Hesaraghatta grasslands was a rich area for biodiversity and needed to be protected at all costs.
 
However, the locals living in and around Hesaraghatta have been opposing the move. The locals have been holding meetings at various villages and demanding the government that the grassland should not be declared a conservation area as it will affect their livelihood.
 
Reacting to this in the letter, wildlife board member Siddharth Goenka in the letter to CM said, “The conservation reserve (CR) will not displace locals unlike the national parks and sanctuaries. A CR declared under Section 36A of the Wildlife Protection Act (WLPA) 1972 does not involve acquisition of land or settlement of rights of local people. Therefore, all legal rights of the residents in and around a CR will continue and the question of eviction simply does not arise.”


 Hesaraghatta grasslands: People’s will to decide its fateThe duty to conduct the public consultation has been entrusted to the Karnataka Forest Department. However, the members of the wildlife board can accompany the Forest Department officials for the public consultation sessions. 
He said that the local communities should not protest as it will actually help them. In the letter, Goenka said, “The local communities will have a say in managing the CR. As per Section 368 of the WLPA, the State Government would constitute a Conservation Reserve Management Committee (CRMC) to advise the Chief Wildlife Warden to conserve, manage and maintain the conservation reserve.”
 
The activists say that many are wrongly portraying that the conservation reserve will affect the communities. Goenka said, “Far from being displaced, the declaration of the CR cements the ownership of the local communities on the Hesaraghatta grasslands. They are to assist the Forest Department in the prevention of wildlife crime and fires. Hesaraghatta also plays a very important role as a catchment area in safeguarding against flooding, and providing water security to Bengaluru.”