That’s exactly why he is seeking funds through crowdfunding to complete his thesis on tarantulas
 
 
 
 
 
 There is very little funding for researchers in India especially if they are researching on wildlife at the undergraduate level. Zeeshan A Mirza, an independent researcher, believes that researchers need more encouragement in the initial stages, though there is a lot of funding for researchers at the PhD level and beyond.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Zeeshan said, “Though there are very few students who pursue research at the Masters or Bachelors level, more funding is required to encourage students to take up research. Also, a large part of funding for biological research is biased towards large and charismatic species such as birds and mammals.”
 
 28-year-old Zeeshan Mirza who has to his credit describing over 30 new species to science, which include spiders, scorpions, lizards and snakes for his masters, is working on a project on endemic tarantulas of Western Ghats for which he is seeking funds to do molecular work.
 
 The project is largely based in a lab where DNA will be extracted from museum and personal specimens. Advanced Bayesian analysis (molecular dating) will help trace the origin of tarantulas of Western Ghats. The lab work is to begin this month and continue for five months and a month work of analysis, he explained.
 
 He is currently seeking funds through a crowdfunding site experiment.com. The goal is to raise $3,600 in the next 28 days.
 
 He said, despite the fact that the Western Ghats are known for their biodiversity, the diversity of tarantulas is poorly documented. Tarantulas are indicator species and habitat destruction is taking a heavy toll on their population across Western Ghats and it is important to document their diversity to conserve tarantulas. “Tarantulas are large bodied and most species are obligate burrowers and have long been a favourite of biogeographers. The Western Ghats provides an ideal setting to study biogeography of this group due to its complex tectonic history and heterogeneity in topography, climate and habitat. I would be using advanced DNA data to assess diversity of tarantulas of Western Ghats and trace their origin and patterns of speciation,” he said.
 
 Zeeshan’s work has appeared in national as well as international journals and he has received notable awards like the Sanctuary Asia Young Naturalist Award and Wildlife Service Award for his work. He has travelled extensively across India’s remote corners in search of reptiles and arachnids.