Marine biologist also records the second sighting of the black tern in the country 
 
 
 Abhishek Jamalabad, a 25-year-old marine biologist who is conducting research on marine mammals, has recently sighted the white-eyed gull (Ichthyaetus leucophthalmus) in Karwar. Normally, this species is restricted to the coasts of the Middle East - that is the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.
 
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, he said, “This is the first instance of this species occurring in India, thus making it a new addition to the checklist of Indian birds. Many seabirds tend to disperse by following ships. Gulls often associate very closely with vessels - be they fishing boats or large ships. The white-eyed gull is a species that is known to do this, and previous sightings in Maldives are strongly believed to have been of birds brought there by ships. While we cannot be certain about where the bird we saw in Karwar came from, it is possible that this is the mode by which it got here, especially as it was sighted near a port,” he said.
 
 
 The new sighting of the bird has been published in the Journal of Indian Birds (volume 12), published on Friday. The author has also sighted a black tern (Chlidonias niger) on the same occasion. This is only the second confirmed sighting of this tern in India.
 
 
 The black tern is a small tern that breeds across Europe and part of Central Asia, and spends winters on the west coast of Africa. Its only previous confirmed sighting record from India was from Nalsarovar, Gujarat, in 2014.
 
 
 Speaking on the black tern, Jamalabad said, “This bird looks very similar to another species - the white-winged tern. So we sought opinions from multiple experts, who have previously identified this species in different parts of the Indian Ocean’s coastline and islands.”
 
 
 Explaining how it all happened, he said, “I was near the port that my dolphin surveys are based out of, with a couple of friends, in the month of July. This is when fishing in Karnataka shuts down. We were not even looking for any wildlife. However, we did notice the abundance of seabirds in the area – a huge mixed flock of great and lesser crested terns, sandwich terns, and a few bridled and common terns – that were perched on fish cages. Although none of us are seasoned birdwatchers, we noticed the two birds in question as being very different from all the others – one an unusual looking gull that flew very close
 
 
 
 
 
 
 to us and lookedunlike any other we had seen before; the other was a small, dark tern that was flying so fast and erratically that it was hard to keep track of. I visited the same site at the same time the next day and saw that the birds were still there. I was not completely sure of the identities of these birds. A long, exhaustive email discussion about my photographs of the birds followed, with many of my birder friends and other experts offering their opinions. Soon, the two birds were conclusively identified.
 
 
 “A few birders who were in nearby areas, joined me and helped make observations over the next two days, and others helped by keeping an eye on the birds in the area after I had left,” he said.
 
 
 According to Jamalabad, these birds ended up being documented only because he happened to visit that area by chance. It is not a location known to birdwatchers. “Although I am not a regular birdwatcher, the incident showed that it always helps to keep an eye out for all kinds of wildlife, for you never know what you might chance upon.”