It began one early morning in Bandipur. The mist played with the mountains, the dew had just settled in. It was cold and damp and the jungle presented itself to us - a collage of greens, yellows and browns. Shivering underneath our jackets and enjoying the nippy air, we were a motley crowd of wildlife enthusiasts driving through the forest in search of an unusual sighting. Giving us company were a German couple, who kept smiling and nodding their heads as they admired the greenery.

It was hardly a few minutes ago that we had been in the arms of deep sleep. A gentle knock had nudged us out of our beds. We opened the doors of our cottages to hot tea as the man from the resort invited us to the safari. The moon was peeping out of a blue sky. The mountains greeted us and starry eyed we started on our wild journey with a song in our heart.

SPOTTING A TIGER

A typical safari would read like this. It starts off as a smooth ride with a dash of excitement and plenty of hope. Then, before you know it, the jeep suddenly swerves into a narrow path, cutting amidst trees and tearing through the grass. Your adrenalin levels increase. The smooth roads turn into sharp curves as the driver deftly cuts through the vegetation. You spot an animal hide here and there, a shadow darting through the leaves, a rustle in the woods.

In the beginning are the deer, the spotted and the sambhar variety. In great hordes, skipping, frolicking, playing. The birds and the butterflies flit around as the peacock oblige us before darting behind bushes. Next in line are the wild gaurs, majestic and proud; looking at us askance. Rustling amidst the trees are the wild boars and then a herd of elephants make us pause in our journey.

The jeep slows and then halts. There is silence and a sigh as the Germans whisper - “Never knew this part of India has so much wildlife...amazing.” Pat comes the reply from the driver, an authority on wildlife - “We have more than 1,200 - 1,400 elephants and 70-80 tigers.” A crested serpent eagle, he points out, as one soars high in the sky, while we return to our base.

“Did you know that a few weeks ago, we had the most unusual sighting in Bandipur?” We munch on soft idlis as the manager, Ganga Swamy narrates the story. “A tigress and a pack of wild dogs were fighting and a leopard was quietly watching the scene, it’s very rare and amazing. We have pictures too.” The scene comes alive as animated discussions follow among those who have witnessed it.

“Would you be interested in visiting some villages,” asks the naturalist, Mithun. We agree and get on to the jeep again. The scenery is less dramatic. Forests have become overgrazed and lantana shrubs dot the landscape. The journey is a stark contrast to our morning tryst with the jungles as we realise that there is more to wildlife than just safaris. We drove through clusters of muddy villages bordering the forestlands. It is a thin line between tourism and conservation and the resort is trying to strike a balance.

A herd of cattle has just stopped our jeep from moving any further. “This is the problem.. you see cattle grazing right in the middle of a forest,” says Mithun, bringing me back to the present moment. “And you will find villagers complaining that animals walk into their homes and lift their cattle..but they are actually encroaching..” he adds in vexation. The cowherd Gaviyappa gives us some wild fruits and narrates how a tiger had made a kill here a couple of days ago. He points to a faraway hill and warns us of elephants as we continue our journey.

MAKING A LIVING

Our last port of halt before returning to our resort is a nondescript hamlet called Chikyelshetty where a group of locals are silently working on a conservation project. Supported by a couple of NGOs and led by a dynamic local, Uchayya, they are creating eco-friendly furniture out of the lantana weed. Ornamental and colourful, this weed reduces forests into shrubbery, he says. A classroom was filled with freshly painted furniture which Uchayya proudly says are already sold out. He believes that this project will not only make the tribals self sufficient, but will also ensure that they do not go into the national park and forests to make a living.

The sun goes down as we return to the resort. The warmth of the bonfire creates camaraderie amongst the crowd and all eyes are glued to the wildlife movie screened. Conversations echo around the fire as wildlife stories are exchanged. The touristy tales are drowned amidst laughter until someone mentions 100 elephants have been killed in less than a year in Karnataka. The conversation veers around conservation. Poisoned and electrocuted, the elephants are dwindling. Tragic tales of man-elephant conflict are narrated and unfortunately man seems to win even as a recent incident speaks of a herd of 60 elephants charging at a sugarcane field close by. The stars peep out as night embraces the forests. Elsewhere the denizens come alive. The jungle book has opened a new world to me as I return to the urban world, a little more humane.