Greens inflamed as Cabinet sub-committee rejects a second report on conservation of Ghats

A Cabinet sub-committee recently rejected the recommendations of the K Kasturirangan-led committee on conservation of Western Ghats. This has led to much ire among the environmentalists who say the Western Ghats are stressed and the government lacks vision.

A previous report on the state of the Ghats, submitted by a committee led by Madhav Gadgil had also not been acted upon. “We wish the government implemented the Gadgil report as he had presented the report after extensively studying the area,” said H Shashidhar Shetty, General Secretary, National Environment Care Federation (NECF).

Akhilesh Chipli, General Secretary, Save-Wild-Atmosphere-Nature & Man) said, “The forest department has a lot of laws and acts to save the forests, like the Tree Act, Wildlife Act and so on. But none of these are being implemented effectively. Western Ghats is a unique place and cannot be restored with money. The people in the Ghats should be given special privileges. The government must provide an international market for the items grown in the region. Neither the Centre nor State is worried about the forests. The Gadgil report was more democratic as he had proposed decentralisation of power, payment for ecological service and so on.”

Rejection of both reports by the government has given rise to concern. “Now that both reports have been rejected, we need clarity from the government on its policy to protect the Western Ghats. The state leadership is being short-sighted and is only looking at vote bank politics and making money. India is already a water stressed nation and Karnataka is the second driest state. Western Ghats is our water tank and we have to do everything to protect it. In the name of development, we cannot go on cutting trees because drinking water is needed for development. We have to learn from places like Cape Town. Environment must fit into economy and its plans. Today we are fighting with Tamil Nadu for water, there could be a time when Mandya will fight with Bengaluru for water,” said Sundar Muthanna, Bengaluru Co-ordinator for Coorg Wildlife Society.

No change in ESA for now

The Minister of State for Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Dr. Mahesh Sharma, clarified that the ecologically sensitive area (ESA) in the Western Ghats, spanning 56,825 square kilometres, in the States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, will not be reduced to 50,000 sq km. Earlier in the year, the concerned State governments had undertaken physical verification for demarcation of ESA and had proposed alteration of the ESA in each state.

“The Western Ghats not only harbour rich biodiversity, but also support high human population density. There is a need to conserve and protect the unique biodiversity of Western Ghats while allowing for sustainable and inclusive development. There will be no displacement or dislocation of the local people living within the ESA demarcated in the Western Ghats and practicing of agriculture and plantation activities shall also not be affected,” said Sharma, by way of assurance.