Karnataka has a whopping 208 elephants as pets or livestock!
 
 When the state governments lumped elephants with other pets like poultry and livestock for its 19th Livestock Census two years ago, many thought it was a crazy decision.
 
 	Even as they wondered at the feasibility of keeping elephants as pets, the final results of the 2012 census released a month ago revealed that Karnataka has a whopping 208 elephants as pets or livestock!
 	  	According to the census report, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, there are about 160 elephants in rural areas of Karnataka and 48 elephants in urban areas. Of the 208 elephants, 151 are male and 57 female. A top official from the animal husbandry department told Bangalore Mirror that the population of tamed elephants has increased drastically across the country and it was imperative to keep a tab on their number in the state.
 	  	"Elephants were previously not included under livestock census in Karnataka though they were counted along with livestock and pets in other states. Across the country, the elephant population has increased drastically from about 1,000 to 22,000. These are kept by individuals, circus companies and religious institutions," he said.
 Sanjay Gubbi, state wildlife board member and scientist at Nature Conservation Foundation, said these domesticated elephants do work in a manner similar to that of other livestock and only with this perspective had the Animal Husbandry department considered them as livestock and done their head count. “This would not affect the interests of the forest department in planning for their conservation and protection,” he said.
 	  	The previous census conducted in 2007 had revealed no elephants as pets in Karnataka. Elephants have been declared as protected animals under the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and the government had banned individuals from keeping or nurturing elephants. But the Act is having no binding effect on the people of Karnataka as many of them are increasingly taking to nurturing elephants.
 	  	Several states which had zero elephants during the 2007 census have shown an exponential rise in their number. Gujarat which had zero in 2007 is now revealed to have 7,333 elephants!