Snake catchers are under lockdown; people working for home have a lot of spare time and are spotting serpents in open plots

People are indoors but snakes are out and about. Many Bengalureans have reported spotting snakes in the last few weeks. Summers are usually a busy time for snake-catchers and many snakes are spotted slithering across vacant lands, bushes and piles of leaves and undergrowth.

On Sunday, a snake catcher was stopped by the police when he was heading to Banaswadi after rescuing a snake. When they questioned him and asked him why he was on the streets, the snake catcher shocked the policemen with the unusual contents of his box.

Snake catchers say that they’ve been getting a lot of calls in recent weeks, since residents who are in lockdown are noticing the movement of snakes.

Untitled Carousel Farm to home in Sarjapura road, thanks to coronavirusAfter the lockdown came into effect a couple of weeks ago, farmers in the area approached some resident welfare association members and business started rolling.

Some snake catchers attribute the increased spotting of snakes to empty and deserted roads. Emboldened by the lack of traffic on the roads, snakes are spotted where humans once used to walk.

Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer said that he has received at least 20 calls from various parts of Bengaluru, related to snakes in the last few weeks. “The lockdown is definitely helping snakes as they can roam around freely. As this is the breeding season, it is definitely helping them,” he said adding that people should nevertheless be careful as a five-feet cobra was found in an Indian toilet in Yelahanka and it was suspected that the snake could have come from the drain.

He also said that a family spotted a Russell’s viper in their pooja room in Kempapura while a rat snake went hiding inside a Maruti 800 car bonnet as people started chasing it and finally Kumar had to rescue it. The snake catchers also said that they were coordinating with the Department of Information and Public Relations as they were providing essential passes to them.


    .

Untitled Carousel Mango lovers, it looks like your favourite fruit is not going to hit the market any time soonThe Horticulture Minister KC Narayana Gowda assured to allow transport of mangoes. The minister, however, has remained incommunicado for the last two days 

February to mid-April is also mating season for snakes and hence they are spotted more than otherwise. ‘Snake’ Mohan, one of the popular snake catchers of the city said that he has been receiving a lot of calls from people who have reported spotting snakes on vacant lands. However, he has a word of advice. “Whenever I get a call, the volunteers and I rush to the spot where someone spotted a snake. But in most cases, by the time we reach, the snake would have vanished. I realise people are petrified at the sight of a snake and rush to call us but they don’t realise that it takes a lot of effort for us to dash across town. 

And in majority of the cases, the snakes are not to be found. Hence, I request the residents to call snake catchers only if the snake has entered their compound or house. As the mercury rises, snakes crawl out to shady spots. Though the cold blooded reptiles need sunlight for heat and energy, higher temperatures push them to find comfort in cooler places.” Mohan said Cobras, Rat snake, Checkered keelback and Russel’s Viper are quite common in Bengaluru.

‘Snake’ Nagendra, another popular snake catcher in the city said, “We get an average of 12 calls in a day during summer and as of now, we are getting four to six calls per day. It may be because of the lockdown effect too. Not many people are there on the roads now.” On Sunday, he said he rescued a baby Cobra from a sump tank in Vidyaranyapura, while a three-feet long rat snake was spotted and caught from Lakshmipura cross on the same day.

Untitled Carousel 23-day-old baby among 40 new COVID-19 positive patients in Telangana, state tally rises to 348A media bulletin on COVID-19 said the total number of active cases in the state has jumped to 348.