Decision led to rampant felling by timber mafia in Western Ghats
 
 
 Giving a free hand to farmers to cut mango trees across Karnataka, the state government had brought in an amendment to Karnataka Tree Protection Act in March 2015. The decision, rather than benefitting people, turned out to be a cause for concern with the timber mafia setting its eyes on rare mango species of Western Ghats. With several hundred species facing the axe due to the newly formed law, the government seems to have realised its mistake and has now decided to make a U-turn.
 	  	In its latest move, the forest department has recommended that the state government not allow cutting of rare mango trees along the Western Ghats. Less than a couple of months since the notification on exempting farmers from obtaining mandatory permission to cut mango trees, the department wants to enforce a ban on cutting of such trees for any purpose. Highlighting the misuse of the amended act by the timber mafia along the Western Ghats, BM had reported the issue in its edition dated April 9, 2015.
 	  	Following the report and several complaints, the forest department had directed all Chief Conservators of Forest (CCF) in Western Ghats area to report ill-effects of the newly brought in law and submit a feasibility report in this regard. The officials collectively submitted a report that the new rule has widely been misused, due to which the gene pool of rare mango trees was also facing threat. 	
 	“Western Ghats house several unique species of mangoes that are endemic to Karnataka. In fact, there have been varieties which have not been documented. The latest notification has spelt doom for such rare species as several of them have been mercilessly axed in the past few weeks. The trend, besides affecting the biodiversity and ecology of the region, would also deprive wildlife, avian population that is directly dependent on these trees,” the report submitted by CCFs to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) opined.
 	  	Following the opinion, GV Sugur, PCCF wrote to the government on Thursday stating that these mango species must be included back in the Tree Preservation Act which calls for mandatory permission by authorities before cutting. According to the recommendation, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, the department has urged the government to issue a fresh notification in this regard. “A fresh notification needs to be issued including the mango trees. Instead of these mango trees, permission to cut must only be given to those trees that are grown using graft technology or hybrid varieties,” the PCCF said in his letter to the additional chief secretary, Forest, Environment and Ecology. Sources close to the forest minister confirmed that the government would soon take a decision on banning axing of rare mango tree species.