By: Vishakha Chanchani
 
 What if we do not divide knowledge into science or biology, real or romantic… and look at the beauty or the truth of those exchanges?
 
 	'Today there are thousands of schools all across the city, and innumerable teachers teaching ever so many things. There is much that we know, and much that we don’t know. This ‘knowledge’ that we acquire, is it from direct experience, an intimate participation with life? The systems we inherit, fill us with facts, information, and hardly leave room for curious questions, healthy doubts; little space for making our own discoveries, or for mystery.
 	  	What makes for a sensitive script, a healthy exchange? Is it only about language, good visuals, and skilled layouts? Could it open us up to a quality of exploration? Inspire us with greater curiosity? Talk about our relationships and links with nature, help us look at our own natures? Why is emphasis given on ‘absolute’ answers, responses to fall into the ‘true’ or ‘false’ category? Have we inherited a way of arriving at answers, that itself needs questioning?
 	  	While we certainly need material that imparts information, gives us facts, or where authors share experiences in meaningful ways, we also need to be encouraged to shift the focus from acquired learning or knowing, to ways of observation and listening. Approach our ‘subject’ in tentative ways; create material that does not make dull, shut off the curiosity of readers, of whatever age.
 	  	For example when we think about wild life, can we look for small creatures around us? Create exciting insightful material about them for children and educators in schools? Suppose, we make a book that does not tell everything, just opens up new ways of viewing insects? And, most importantly, conveys a sense of wonder, the thrill of watching them, discovering their presence, the everydayness of their lives. Where insects are not regarded as just useful, or not useful to humans; not just good or bad because they protect or eat our crops. We have space to discover that insects are just being themselves, responding to their nature and the changes in the environment as intelligently as they can. 
 	  	What if we do not immediately divide knowledge into science or biology, native or folk, real or romantic… and look at the beauty or the truth of those exchanges? We can make a start and begin to respect, feel for the small. And remember also, that the human eye is not designed, or has not evolved enough to see the tiniest living particles of life.
 	  	Maybe some instruments can, and maybe our hearts can. How many of us walk by never to stop to notice insects on the road, or point them out to our children? Even as we travel by car, bus, train or auto rickshaw, we may have a moth, a damsel fly, or some six legged for company. I feel really sad when in some well groomed apartments, I chance by hoards of wasps or bees all in a helpless heap upon the grounds. Security personnel are instructed to use a spray so that ‘pests’ get stilled, and we can live unafraid!
 	  	I don’t know how many old or young feel for these deaths. Or how flowers might feel the loss. Nagarvasi, do you? How can we keep this hum, the buzz of compassion alive?
 	  	Till then, take care