A day after tigress Avni was shot dead in the forests of Maharashtra's Yavatmal district, Union Cabinet Minister for Women and Child Development Maneka Gandhi lashed out at the BJP-led Maharashtra government, calling the incident a "straight case of crime". 

Reacting to the murder, Gandhi criticised Minister of Forests Sudhir Mungantivar for giving the orders to kill her despite staunch opposition. “I am deeply saddened by the way tigress Avni has been brutally murdered in Yavatmal,” she tweeted.

While expressing her grief, she said that she will take this up as a test case – legally, criminally and politically. “This matter will be taken very strongly with Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis,” she further tweeted.

 After Shashi Tharoor’s 'Scorpio' remark, TDP politburo member Yanamala Ramakrishnudu calls Prime Minister Narendra Modi 'Anaconda'Less than a week after Congress MP Shashi Tharoor termed Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a 'Scorpio on Shilving', Andhra Pradesh finance minister and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) politburo member Yanamala Ramakrishnudu described Modi as an 'Anaconda'. 
While the villagers celebrated Avni’s death, it provoked sharp responses and massive protest from animal rights activists and wildlife experts.

Avni, also called T1, was shot by Asgar Ali, son of Hyderabad based famous sharp-shooter Nawab Shafat Ali, as she was believed to have been responsible for the deaths of 13 people in the past two years.

The Maharashtra Forest Department reportedly claimed that since Avni had consumed 60 per cent of human bodies, she was rightly classified as a man-eater. She is survived by her two cubs, who are both 10 months old.

Gandhi also questioned Maharashtra government's decision to take the services of Khan and his son.

 'Man-eater' tigress Avni shot dead in MaharashtraTigress Avni, believed to have been responsible for the deaths of 13 people in Maharashtra in the past two years, was shot dead in Yavatmal district of the state as part of an operation, police said on Saturday.