Express shock at Kerala CM’s ‘appreciation’ for Siddaramaiah for ‘supporting’ proposal  	
 	
 	 		Will Kerala and Karnataka build an elevated highway in Bandipur region? This has become a hot topic for discussion among wildlife enthusiasts who have been working in Bandipur area. A group of techies has now stepped up pressure by urging chief minister Siddaramaiah not to accept any such proposal. 	 		Speaking to Mirror, Sharat Govindappa, a techie, said, “The Kerala chief minister’s statement has sent shockwaves among environmentalists who have been demanding that the state government continue the night traffic ban at Bandipur. Now, if the state accepts the elevated highway proposal, then this will be the last straw for conservation activities.” 
 		 	 		Last month, Kerala CM Oommen Chandy, while addressing a forest ministers’ meet at Kovalam, had said, “As an example of cooperation, let me thank Karnataka chief minister Siddaramaiah, whose positive attitude on the NH 212 through a wildlife area helped us find a solution without harming wildlife by constructing flyovers, underpasses etc to provide safe passage to wild animals.” 
 		 	 		Oommen Chandy has previously visited Karnataka five times to meet four Karnataka CMs in this regard. However, his repeated requests for an elevated corridor through the forest region have been turned down time and again, showing Karnataka’s commitment to protect wildlife. 	 		
 		The wildlife enthusiasts ask how feasible a flyover could be. “The governments may have to pool in around Rs 6,000 crore to build a series of flyovers and underpasses on the route. Can they invest so much money? Being Bengalureans, we know how difficult it is for people in the neighbourhood whenever a flyover or an elevated expressway is built. The entire area becomes dusty, things come to a grinding halt and the work drags on beyond deadlines as we have seen in the elevated highway construction at Electronics City and Tumkur Road as well as Kempegowda International Airport Road. With these case studies, we can easily imagine what would be the impact of constructing an elevated corridor in Bandipur forest, which has a very fragile ecosystem,” said Pramod Venkatesh Murthy, a techie and part of Vanya, a wildlife NGO working for Bandipur traffic ban. He added that contrary to facts, Chandy had falsely claimed that his Karnataka counterpart had approved flyovers and underpasses on NH 212, the stretch that passes through Bandipur.
 		 	 		“Possibly to support the illegal sand, timber and livestock mafia which is into transportation across the border, some sections in Kerala have been trying to get the ban on vehicular traffic on NH 212 passing through Bandipur, lifted, said Sharat adding that, “While alternative roads have been provided by Karnataka to Kerala, and even spending money to upgrade them, Kerala is still persistent in its demand to revoke the vehicle ban through Bandipur. It is ironical that in a meeting that was called to discuss collaborations between southern states to curb illegal poaching and to protect wildlife, the Kerala CM makes a statement detrimental to wildlife which only panders to the needs of cartels that are into illegal activities. The statement of the Kerala CM is actually in contempt of the Hon’ble High Court order.”
 		  
 Why ban?
 
 The ban on vehicular traffic by the Karnataka government is based on the order of the Karnataka High Court dated March 9, 2010. The matter is currently pending before the Supreme Court of India in SLP (Civil) 13838/2010, 24865 and 24866/2012 as the Government of Kerala and some traders from Kerala have challenged the order. The Karnataka government has already stated that it would stand by its commitment to ban vehicle traffic through Bandipur and submitted the same to the Supreme Court. In addition, based on the HC order, the Karnataka government has already spent Rs 73 crore on the upgrade of the alternative road passing via Hunsur-Gonikoppa-Kutta-Kartikulam, which is only 30 km longer and to be used only during night time. 
 
 
 
 ‘Ban vehicles from Kerala’ 
 
 	The environmentalists have now been demanding that vehicles on the Kerala side of the forest also be banned. Sharat, who is also part of Vanya, an environmental group which is keeping the pressure on the Bandipur vehicle ban, said many green groups from Kerala were demanding vehicle ban on the stretch from their state as well. “As Karnataka closes the gates at night, a new trend has started in Kerala wherein the vehicles speed up so that they reach Karnataka before the gates are closed. Due to this, many animals either get injured or die. Recently, three spotted deer and a leopard were killed by a speeding vehicle,” he added.