Government has issued notices to officers seeking explanation for allowing illegal activities 

 	The Western Ghats, the most ecologically sensitive spot in the country, is home to at least 5,000 of species of plants, 139 species of mammals, 508 species of birds and 325 globally endangered species. Yet, this almost virgin range of mountains is being decimated, especially in Kodagu district, reportedly with the connivance of people entrusted with the responsibility of protecting it. 

 Forest department top brass has found that land has been illegally allocated for setting up hydel projects, trees have been cut to erect transmission lines and a dirt track for a car rally was constructed in the middle of forests. Following numerous complaints from various people, Punati Sridhar, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (APCCF), personally trekked through the area and assessed the damage in Hassan and Kodagu circles. Based on Sridhar’s report, the government has issued notices to deputy conservator of forests (DCF) rank officers in Madikeri and Hunsur seeking an explanation. 

 	Hydel project The report claims that officials had clandestinely allowed Kodagu Hydel Project Pvt Ltd to store equipment on two acres of what was virgin evergreen forest land near Kumarahalli village in Somwarpet taluk, Kodagu district. 

 	“On survey number I/P2, a vast area has been levelled to create space for vehicles, equipment etc. The two acres of disputed land is government paisari land.” 

 	The report goes on to state, “According to definition, paisari lands are property of the government which have not been notified as protected forests or as reserved forests. Hence the grant is a violation of Forest Conservation Act 1980. Despite notices and investigation, the power project work was still in operation during inspection. Hence, disciplinary action needs to be initiated against the DCF for issuing NOC and the matter reported to MoEF.” 

 	Trees felled The government had permitted the Power Grid Corporation of India to cut trees in a 27-metre area to lay transmission cables for a 400 Kv line between Kaiga and Kozhikode. However, on inspection it was found that trees were cut in an area of 52 metres. “The felling of trees has exposed the soil to erosion as the gradient at the stretch is over 60 degrees. The entire act is against the guidelines to the FC Act and shows sheer carelessness and negligence on the part of the DCFs concerned. The DCFs of both Hunsur and Madikeri are hereby directed to submit an explanation,” the report states. 

 These apart, the APCCF has recommended Forest Conservation Act (FCA) violation cases against organisers of a car rally in Kodagu last year. “The organisers using earth moving vehicles had bulldozed the existing coupe road facilitating the movement of rally cars amidst Bisle Reserve Forest. Besides allowing this large-scale destruction, the authorities have neither reported nor initiated legal action till date. Hence officials from forest guard to DCF should be held responsible for the lapse and disciplinary action must be initiated against them,” the report states. 

 Topping it all, a bungalow belonging to the forest department within Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary in Virajpet taluk was converted into an arrack shop. Acknowledging the violations, GV Sugur, principal chief conservator of forests (head of forest force), said, “The inquiry report by the APCCF has listed various violations and the department is committed to taking action against such errant officers. Currently, we have served notices to all the officers named in the report and are awaiting their response.”