A negligence case was booked against IFS officers after an elephant trampled a villager
 
 Forest officials in Karnataka are being haunted by negligence cases filed against them by the police. After negligence cases were booked against officers of Indian Forest Service (IFS) in Kodagu after an elephant trampled a villager, the IFS officers association has written to the Chief Secretary seeking immunity and quashing of FIR registered against their colleagues.
 
 A first in the history of Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), Siddapura police in Virajpet, Kodagu had registered an FIR against three forest officials including two IFS officers after an elephant recently trampled a coffee estate worker to death.
 
 Angered over the elephant attack, the villagers not only staged flash protest in Virajpet taluk but also lodged a complaint and alleged that the elephant belonged to the Karnataka Forest Department and hence a case of negligence was booked against officials claiming compensation of Rs 2.
 
 Accordingly, the police registered FIR against Lingaraja SS, Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF), Kodagu Circle, Maria Christa Raja, Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF), Virajpet and Gangadhar, Range Forest Officer (RFO), Virajpet at the Siddapura police station on January 23. The FIR against the officials have come as a rude shock to the KFD officials who have been working in an earnest spirit to protect the flora and fauna.
 
 Rushing to their rescue, the IFS officers association has written to Chief Secretary Ratna Prabha requesting her intervention in the matter. Manojkumar, secretary of the association, on January 24, wrote to Chief Secretary Ratna Prabha that foresters working relentlessly to protect the flora and fauna have been wrongly booked.
 
 “The wild elephants are the property of the nation and every citizen of the country owns them. As per the Article 51(A) of the Constitution, it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures.
 
 Further, according to the Article 48, the state shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forces and wildlife of the country,” Manojkumar said in his letter.
 
 The association appealed to the CS to write to the Advocate General and have the FIR lodged against the officers quashed by filing the required affidavit before the honourable High Court. This will restore their confidence in discharging their duties with due diligence, the letter said.