Illegally cast nets by fishermen from TN are hurting crocs in the Cauvery river waters
 
 
 
 Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have once again locked horns over Cauvery. This time it is about illegal fishing in the Karnataka side of the protected waters. Despite a ban on fishing in the river that passes through the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, fishermen from Tamil Nadu have been illegally putting nets in the water, particularly at night. This has led to some tension between the two neighbours.
 
 More than the fishing itself, the problem has been with the laying of fishing nets that has resulted in the strangulation of crocodiles, affecting the conservation programmes of the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).
 
 The KFD officials had detained two Tamil Nadu fishermen in the last week of March for allegedly killing a crocodile while laying fishing nets in the river within the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary limits. Yet another crocodile was found choked with fishing nets in the waters.
 
 While KFD officials, particularly from the Cauvery Wildlife Division, are cracking down on illegal fishing by Tamil Nadu fishermen, such incidents have been reported regularly along the border.
 
 An increase seen
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, a conservationist working along the border areas of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, said they were seeing an increase in fishing, of late.
 
 
 “Usually, it happens at night when the fishermen illegally enter the waters of the wildlife sanctuary area and lay nets. At the break of dawn, they wind up. A month ago, a crocodile was found entangled in fishing nets and it was rescued by the personnel and let into the water again. Similarly, a crocodile was strangulated due to the nets last week and officials had detained two fishermen over the incident,” he explained.
 
 However, despite the crackdown and vigilant patrolling by the KFD officials not many cases are booked against the culprits. Sources in the state government told BM that often such acts of booking forest offence case (FOC) against culprits get political, disrupting law and order.
 
 Forest minister Ramanatha Rai too acknowledged this. With Tamil Nadu witnessing assembly polls, the issue of fishermen or poachers’ arrest would only act as a political subject for the parties that will have a huge impact on the cordial relations between the two states.
 
 “Last time, when we arrested a poacher red-handed within the MM Hills limits, it led to a huge law-and-order problem on both sides of the border, and properties worth several lakhs were damaged. We do not want this to happen again. Hence we are treading cautiously and gathering all supportive evidences before booking FOC against such culprits,” he said.
 
 “But this does not mean that we let go of the culprits. Our men are vigilant and have been patrolling the borders regularly. In fact, poaching has come down drastically due to our stringent crackdown on such activities,” said Rai.
 
 P Ramesh Kumar, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, said while it was true that the crocodile was found dead, there was no evidence to prove that these people killed the crocodile. “In the absence of evidence, we could not register a case against them. However, we have warned them severely. But last month, in a similar situation, we booked cases against three people including one from Karnataka. In fact, in a few days, a chargesheet will also be submitted to the court. We and our men have been vigilant day and night and are trying our best to put an end to such illegal activities.”
 
 One-sided protection
 
 The river flows for more than a 100 km within the sanctuary area. While Karnataka has declared the forest as protected area on its side, it is free for such activities along the Tamil Nadu border.
 
 “People take up all kinds of activities along the Tamil Nadu border. In fact, Tamil Nadu government gives licences for fishing. As the river is vast, it is difficult to trace or keep track of fishermen along the entire course. However, the KFD has set up anti-poaching camps all along the river, ensuring round-the-clock patrolling,” said an officer from the KFD.
 
 The river is home to several species of fish, particularly the Mahseer. Marsh crocodiles are also found in large numbers here.