Warped priority is an expensive government tradition and is hard to break even in an era of austerity. The state forest department is a prime example. On the one hand officials go around collecting donations from corporates to provide bare necessities — camouflage uniforms, solar power lights and jeeps — for its men in the field, while on the other it spends extravagant sums on providing perks for its dignitaries. 
   Some anti-poaching camps (APCs) in tiger reserves in the state don’t even have a proper supply of drinking water, yet the forest department has spent a staggering Rs 20 lakh on refurbishing the official chambers of the State Board for Wildlife vice-chairman and legendary cricketer, Anil Kumble in VV Towers. The irony is that Kumble hardly, if ever, uses the chamber and is, perhaps, unaware of the funds splurged by the department on interiors, furniture and fittings. 
   Arul Raj, an RTI activist, stumbled on the department’s double standards when he filed an RTI application on the issue. “The forest department knocks on every door with a begging bowl in hand,” Raj said. “A mobile phone company has sponsored 2,000 metres of camouflage uniform cloth, while a Mumbai wildlife trust has donated rapid response jeeps to forest staff. They have even sought help to run these vehicles due to a funds crunch, and yet they waste money on renovating chambers of a top official.”
   Kumble was appointed vice-chairman of the state wildlife board in October 2009. Information obtained through RTI, copies of which are with Bangalore Mirror, show that Rs 19.94 lakh has been spent on renovating his chambers on the eighth floor of VV Towers. The expenditure includes CFL fittings worth Rs 99,910, AC electrification to the tune of Rs 2.27 lakh and furniture costing Rs 3 lakh. The rest has been spent on interior work — sprucing up the conference hall, wood-panelling the walls of the anteroom and the corridor leading to the chamber and installing LCD television sets. Apart from this, the department has also bought a Mahindra Scorpio worth Rs 10.58 lakh for the use of the vice-chairman’s office. In stark contrast, the state forest department has spent a mere Rs 42,462 on educating people on preventing fires in forest in 2011-2012. 
   “It’s a shame that the department goes on a spending spree while their staff are suffering without even basic amenities,” Sharan Kumar, a wildlife activist said. “So far, wildlife trusts active in Bandipur and Nagarhole have donated four jeeps to each of the two tiger reserves. A Mahindra Bolero jeep and reverse osmosis units for drinking water were also donated to the department. There are more than 40 APCs in Bandipur and more than 30 in Nagarhole tiger reserves. Even today drinking water is a luxury for staff at some APCs. The guards don’t have proper bags, shoes and other equipment which is essential for their stay inside the forest. Frontline staff are in dire need of help, and yet money is spent on making a chamber in the city cosy. It is time government began using public funds properly.”
   When asked for his comment, G S Prabhu, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), who took charge on July 1, said, “I have just taken over and I will look into the issue. We know how to set priorities and I am aware that the entire forest department including the top brass are dependent on frontline staff to execute policies. Their priorities come first and our comfort comes last.”