By Hemant Kumar CG

The Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre in Horamavu is kept busy releasing birds caught in kite strings

Kite flying is a hobby and there’s fierce competition on the streets and skies between hobbyists. But the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC), a wildlife rescue and rehabilitation centre situated in Horamavu, sees it in a different light.

ARRC is often called to rescue birds caught in kite strings or Chinese maanja threads, which are coated with powdered glass to make them sharp enough to cut other kite strings. But birds and other small animals become collateral damage when they get entangled in kite strings hanging from trees, leading to grievous injuries and sometimes death.

Jayanti, a member of ARRC says, “We try rescuing birds and animals in distress. Just to give you a scale of how dangerous these kite strings are - in 2020, we rescued over 4,089 animals out of which 1,063 animals were rescued from kite strings or maanja. These strings apparently settle down in trees causing a potential threat to the birds that fly into them. No one actually intends to cause harm to these animals but it happens.”

Some birds also get stuck at heights above 60 feet and this poses a problem not just for the birds but for the rescuers as well. “We are trying our best to reduce this problem, as only some birds that are found get rescued, whereas others get killed and go unnoticed. We’re trying to discourage people from using maanja,” said Jayanti.

This includes creating awareness among school children and telling people not to use Chinese maanja. “We also try to organize clean up drives, to remove kite strings hanging on trees. We get a hydraulic vehicle which can reach up to a height of 40 feet, providing safety to the person doing the rescue as well. But no matter how much we clean, it looks like we’ve just cleaned about 1/10th of the kite strings,” she ends.

The best solution seems to be to stop the usage of Chinese maanja.

If you see a bird or an animal in distress, call the ARRC helpline 094496 42222.

Are you an East Bengaluru resident? We’d like to hear from you. email: anupama.bijur@timesgroup.com