Wildlife activists raise concerns prompting investigation into safari operations, construction projects, and tourism activities allegedly violating conservation guidelines

Higher officials in the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) have ordered an inquiry regarding alleged illegal structures and various unauthorised tourism activities inside Kali Tiger Reserve. In a letter written to the Deputy Conservator of Forest of the reserve, the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (APCCF) of KFD has sought a report on the issues. This is after BM carried out a news report highlighting concerns raised by wildlife activists and conservationists about some construction and infrastructure development activities in the core areas of Kali. They had alleged that the construction was happening without approval from the authorities concerned.

The department had also received a written complaint from a city-based conservationist about the issue. Based on the complaint and news report that was published on February 5, APPCF has directed Kali Tiger Reserve authorities to investigate matters such as safari being conducted in the Castle Rock area, construction of an orchidarium inside the reserve by felling trees, canopy walk being held in castle rock area, boat safari in kali river backwaters, demolition of nature interpretation centre and construction of table tennis counter inside the reserve, tourists to Blue Waterfall in Anshi and alleged unauthorised trekking routes in Castle Rock. Nilesh Shinde, DCF, Kali Tiger Reserve, confirmed the news and told BM that an investigation on all points raised by APCCF is underway.

“The letter has sought reports on multiple aspects and thus the investigation is taking time. We have received ten queries from APCCF. The illegality of these structures and activities can be ascertained only after due investigation,” said Shinde.

Time and again, conservationists have alleged that many activities inside the reserve are being conducted without due approval. As per Project Tiger Guideline 2012, no new tourism infrastructure development activities should be taken up in and around tiger reserves without due approvals. In case any such activity is desired, it has to be mentioned in the tiger conservation plan to be approved by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA).

“The safari and canopy walk in the Castle Rock area are not mentioned in the tiger conservation plan. Similarly, an orchidarium has been constructed inside the reserve by felling trees without approval from the authority concerned. Boat safari is being conducted in Kali River backwaters even though it is not a tourism zone. All these activities have also led to many resorts within a one-kilometre radius outside the reserve, impacting wildlife and the pristine ecosystem in various ways,” said a wildlife conservationist on condition of anonymity.

They also allege that after the issue of tourism activities at Blue Waterfall in Anshi was highlighted through news reports leading to suo moto by the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the authorities have now labelled it as a protection camp.


  Another structure spotted in Kali Tiger Reserve coreWhen BM reached out to KTR field director Nilesh Shinde, he said, “It is a protection camp that will help in anti-poaching activities and effective management of wildlife. The camp being constructed will help in various other management aspects as well.”

Earlier this year, the principal bench of NGT had initiated a suo moto case regarding the construction of a structure in the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve. After NGT’s action, the State of Karnataka clarified in front of the tribunal that the alleged construction has nothing to do with tourism but is a protection camp created by the Forest Department to prevent poaching and illegal felling of trees in the core area.