Officials find superstition is a big reason people cage animals illegally

A rose-ringed parakeet, kept as a pet, was confiscated with the support of the forest department from a house at Falnir in Mangaluru recently. In another incident, the forest department staff had visited a flat in Karangalpady on a tip-off that a squirrel had been caged. Even before the forest department could lay their hands on the squirrel, the cage was opened and it fled. 

Tauseef Ahmed, rescue in-charge at the Animal Care Trust and Founder, Homeless Animals Rescue Team (HART), told BM, “At times, it is really difficult to convince people that certain animals/ birds are not meant to be caged and they are not priced procession to be flaunted before guests. When we had gone to rescue the squirrel it was so difficult to convince the lady. She wanted to speak only to a senior officer. She held an important position in a social service organization. Finally, after 90 minutes of discussion, we told her to just hand over the squirrel so that we could leave. The moment she opened the cage, the squirrel vanished into the bushes”.

People fancy caging squirrels because they believe that touching them brings good luck. Another strange, superstitious belief is burying a live sand boa snake at the time of laying the foundation for new house/building. Few communities believe that by doing so, it brings them prosperity. Then, there are owl and kites for black magic. At the rescue centres, the team receives several injured owls and kites. 

Tauseef said, “The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, protects only native Indian birds like munias, parakeets, peacocks, weaverbirds, koel, mynahs, and owls, which despite the ban are available for sale across the country. It is learnt that to catch wild parrots, the hunters take two of them as bait and puncture their eyes. These blind and wounded birds are then left on a sheet, where they cry out for help. Soon hundreds of birds will come for help. As soon as they descend, the hunters will throw a sheet over them and capture them. Hunters also use natural gums to trap them. According to an estimate, for every 10 birds smuggled, only one will survive.”

“Another challenge is rehabilitation of such birds. People have a fascination for parakeets assuming that they speak, not realising that they repeat only what we say. Parakeets and mynahs are great mimic artists. These birds become used to staying in a cage and eating food that people offer, which includes rotten fruits. Keeping caged parrots is common in rural areas, especially in estates. Awareness is needed and punishment for such offences should be more severe and not restricted to issuing legal notices only. There is also a provision of slapping a case and booking a person for three years imprisonment and imposing a fine upto Rs 25,000,” he said.