Ganesh Hegde, a fourth year mechanical engineering student of BMS College of Engineering in the city, could not believe his eyes when he went to visit one of his favourite websites nationalgeographic.com on the morning of March 21.    It had been barely 10 days since he had submitted photographs taken by him and one of them had been posted as part of the Daily Dozen collection.   “I was surprised. I hope it gets published in the magazine as well. It is a huge honour for me and definitely a big boost to my passion,” said the 21-year-old.   Inspired by nature Ganesh hails from Karwar and it was the green mountains and the blue seas of the Western Ghats that inspired him to capture the natural beauty of his surroundings. “I won a camera in my childhood in a competition. I was always fascinated by cameras. I like wildlife and nature photography but as a student, I could not afford the costly equipment needed for wildlife photography. I also like capturing the emotions of people. A photograph can speak a lot about feelings and emotions,” said Ganesh.   Ganesh was part of the final 500 whose works were selected for showcasing as part of the Nat Geo Moments Awards organised by National Geographic. Ganesh happens to be a self-taught photographer and feels the more you click, the better you get.   “So far, I haven’t worked under any professional photographer, but I wish one day I can work with my of idols and learn from them. I like the works of Tim Laman, Hari Menon and Steve Winter,” he said.   His wish list  Photography, for Ganesh, is the right combination of art and science. He feels that when a person is good with art, he deserves better equipment to create better art.    “For beginners, either Canon or Nikon entry level cameras like D3100, 1100D, 600D , D5200 are good. They are priced moderately. Currently, I use a Nikon D3000 body, 18-55mm kit lens and Tamron 70-300mm zoom lens. I wish to buy Canon 5D Mark 4 in the future and also a telephoto lens. The two are on the top of my wish list,”  added Ganesh.   Ganesh has already bagged placement in Mercedes Benz’s (India) research and development division and is now eagerly waiting to know if his photographs are going to make it to the print edition of the magazine. “They do publish photographs from amateur categories. I am glad my photograph made it to the website. It’s a great honour for an upcoming photographer. Even though professionally I will continue to work as a mechanical engineer, I will pursue photography simultaneously,” he said.