Moreover, there is a self-imposed ban on dubbed films. But with the government opening doors of tax exemption for remake films, film-makers are finding it easy to dub some scenes from the original films instead of shooting them afresh.

Proving that films are an industry rather than an extension of a language’s cultural sphere, Kannada film-makers are taking to dubbing.
 
Though they have not started dubbing entire films, those remaking films from other languages are dubbing some shots and in some cases entire scenes from the original.

The latest case in point is Raavana, directed by Yogesh Hunasur. The film is a remake of the Tamil film Kadhal Kondain. Some scenes from the Tamil film have been voice dubbed, even though dubbed films are not entitled for subsidy and tax exemption. The film has obtained 100 per cent tax exemption since even remake films in Kannada need not pay any entertainment tax. Recently, Om Prakash Rao’s Yodha, and Anu also had a few dubbed scenes from their original Telugu films.

CUT COSTS

The entire flashback episode in Raavana, where the protagonist’s troubled childhood is narrated, has been dubbed from Kadhal Kondain. The film-makers have no doubt saved several lakh of rupees in the process. 

Since the early 1960s, when dubbing was rampant, the self-imposed ban on dubbing by the Kannada film industry has worked with some stray exceptions. Om Prakash, who is known for making films with “borrowed” scenes from various films, makes no bones about the fact. Recently, he also admitted that some of the shots in the film Yodha were taken directly from a Telugu film.

STOCK SHOTS

Rules allow usage of stock shots like those of war and wildlife in films which cannot be recreated. Using this loophole, film-makers who use dubbed scenes from original films give an undertaking that stock shots have been used in their films. The Information Department, unable or unwilling to check the reality, certifies these films for tax exemption, leading to loss of revenue for the government.

FILM CITY FALSEHOOD

At a time when even the audience can easily recognise in which particular film city a film or a part of it is shot, the Information Department is also guilty of exempting films shot in Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad. 

Remakes fuel demand for originals

Rentals of original films in other languages peak when their remakes in Kannada are released. After the release of Raavana last week, the Tamil original Kadhal Kondain has seen its demand rising even though the film was first released in 2003. “It happens all the time. Since remake Kannada films make it a point to announce the original from which they are copied, people just pick up the original language films. Most remake films are from Tamil and Telugu, and  are a few years old. Right now, Kadhal Kondain is in great demand,” says Govindraj, who runs a video rental outlet in Vijayanagar.