By Reya Mehrotra

Environmentalists ‘surprised’ at report which says Karnataka has lost nearly 10,000 hectares of forests over past three years

Adamning report released by Global Forest Watch, which compiles data based on satellite images from NASA, has left environmentalists and the Karnataka Forest Department scratching their heads. The report claims that Karnataka has lost 9,907 hectares of forest land in the last three years (2016-2018). It says maximum damage has been caused in the Westerns Ghats, Udupi and South Karnataka. 

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Punati Sridhar says, “I am surprised by this report. I have asked the Information Communication Technology Centre (ICT) wing to verify it as there is no scope for so much area to be lost from the forest cover in the state. If so, the reflected areas might be those being harvested. Possibilities of encroachments can also not be ruled out.” 

Sharath Babu, nature and wildlife enthusiast seconds him, “After the AT Ramaswamy Committee report in 2007, the forest department has infact been checking on encroachments and clearing them out at several places. In Turahalli Forest too, efforts have been made to clear encroachments. More specifications and reasons for the disappearance of this huge forest area are needed.”

The report also says that from 2001 to 2017, a total of 19,670.2 hectares of forest area has been lost from areas like North and South Karnataka, Coorg and Udupi. Reckless clearing of forests for projects is one major reason, believe environmentalists.


The loss of forest land has been the major reason and not loss of green cover–Nithin Herale, environmentalist 
AN Yellappa Reddy, retired IFS and environmentalist says, “Development at the cost of deforestation is the biggest culprit for the loss of forest cover in Karnataka. Forests have been fragmented. The government is keen to build roads, do mining in forest area and for that indiscriminate clearing of forest areas take place. Water shortage in the state, climate change is all result of deforestation in Karnataka. Only big projects are being promoted and the government is not valuing the forests.”

Nithin Herale, environmentalist from Shimoga says, “The major reason was that the forest land was easily given away for various projects or to farmers during the last five years, especially in Shimoga without any harsh conditions. The loss of forest land has been the major reason and not loss of green cover. If a tree is cut, the forest department or environmentalists plant more trees to compensate for it but when the forest land is given away, that is loss of forest area.”

Joseph Hoover, Bengaluru-based environmentalist says, “The forest department officials are under constant pressure from locals when it comes to encroachment. Areas like Shivamogga, Belagavi, Chikkamagaluru are the most vulnerable to loss of green cover due to felling of trees and encroachment.”