Agra: Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau started his week-long visit to India on February 1 with a tour of the iconic Taj Mahal , which he had first seen 35 years ago. 

Trudeau was accompanied by wife and three kids during the tour of white marble mausoleum on the banks of Ganga river. "I was about Xav's age when I first visited the Taj Mahal almost 35 years ago... and it's amazing to be back with him & the family on Day 1 of our trip to India," he tweeted. 

The Canadian first family was visibly thrilled during the visit and posed for a picture seated on the iconic bench with the monument in the backdrop. 

 Trudeau has arrived in India for a week-long visit, during which he would hold talks with his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi on wide-ranging issues, including defence and counter-terror cooperation. He is scheduled to visit Akshardham temple in Gujarat and the Golden Temple in Amritsar.

SGPC president Gobind Singh Longowal said the religious body will accord a warm welcome to Canadian PM during his visit to the Golden Temple in Amritsar. He also demanded that there should be no imposition of Goods and Services Tax (GST) on 'langar' served in Gurudwaras. Longowal who was at Fatehgarh Sahib to attend the annual convocation of SGPC run Baba Banda Singh Bahadur Engineering College, said the SGPC had made elaborate arrangements for Trudeau's visit. 

The Punjab government is going to celebrate the 550th anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev but the government had not invited the SGPC so far to join the function, he said. Guru Nanak Dev is the Guru of humanity and if an invitation comes, the SGPC will definitely participate, he said. 

Asked about state Congress president Sunil Jakhar's statement about GST on 'langar', Longowal said SGPC members were going to meet the Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley. Langars should be freed from GST, he said. He said SGPC always served langar for people and even in affected areas during any tragedy of humanity. 

 	 	 	I was about Xav's age when I first visited the Taj Mahal almost 35 years ago... and it's amazing to be back with hi… https://t.co/owBDk5g0rY— Justin Trudeau (@JustinTrudeau) 1518966573000    
Trudeau on Sunday paid a visit to rescued elephants at a care centre run by animal welfare organisation Wildlife SOS in Uttar Pradesh's Mathura and said that India's wildlife needs protection.

Appreciating the cause against animal cruelty at the Wildlife SOS Elephant Conservation and Care Centre here, Trudeau said such initiatives need to be supported to protect wildlife in India.

"What an incredible place, with wonderful people doing great things for elephants and for India. The efforts of Wildlife SOS must be supported as we need to protect elephants and all wildlife in India," said Trudeau, who is on a week-long visit to India.

The care centre houses 21 elephants, all subjected to extreme cruelty and finally unchained after years of efforts and legal battle by the organisation.

The 46-year-old Prime Minister -- accompanied by his wife Sophie Gregoire Trudeau and children Hadrien, Ella-Grace Margaret and Xavier James Trudeau -- also fed the elephants and interacted with Wildlife SOS founders, veterinarians and care givers.

"It is a great honour to have the Canadian Prime Minister sparing his valuable family time to see our efforts to protect elephants in collaboration with Forest Department," said Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder and CEO Wildlife SOS.

Wildlife SOS runs a bear rescue centre in Agra and an elephant rescue centre in Mathura to provide critical medical treatment and lifetime care to the rescued elephants.

 	 	 	.@WildlifeSOS is doing important work rescuing captive Asian elephants across India, and giving them a new chance a… https://t.co/PCfW6JvPwA— Justin Trudeau (@JustinTrudeau) 1518971817000