A rescue effort on Tuesday has come as a shocker to wildlife sleuths. Unlike a post-rescue release, the case has forced them to look for an accused who will be charged for cruelty to animals. Leaving no stones unturned, the wildlife enthusiasts are trying out various methods including circulating handbills with the description of a bird that was mangled, to households in the rescue area.
 
 The case 
 
 The case relates to the brutal torture meted out to a black kite in a suspected case of black magic. All its claws and beak have been cut. Shocked at the sight of the bird, city wildlife sleuths, after confirming it to be not a case of Chinese Manja – the most common cause in any bird injury and rescue, have launched a search for suspects behind the brutal torture.
 
 The black kite was rescued from Hyper City Mall in Kundalahalli gate near Marathahalli and has now been shifted to the BBMP forest cell’s rescue and rehabilitation centre. Two volunteers of the BBMP forest cell, Zeeshan and Tirumalesh, who on an average rescue five birds everyday, were in for a shock after this rescue.
 
 “We got a call from one of the employees from Hyper City at around 1 pm. I thought it was a rescue call. However, I was shocked after I saw the bird. It was badly tortured. The beak was broken, all its claws were cut and its leg fractured. It was not a normal rescue case,” Zeeshan Ali told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 If not rescued, the bird would have died of ant bites and other attacks, they said. The city wildlife team suspects this to be a case of black magic surrounding a superstitious belief – experimenting on a bird by inflicting wounds on it to harm opponents.
 
 In such cases, the wild animals and birds are sold for a huge price. Wild animals in the city such as slender loris and owls too are used in similar superstitious beliefs, wildlife sleuths said.
 
 Unlike the routine kite rescue, where the birds are found with damaged wings, here the claws and beak showed it was a deliberate act of torture. Sleuths have launched a hunt for the perpetrators.