By Reya Mehrotra

Warn that loud noise and light harmful for flora and fauna; caution against pollutants

Ahead of Diwali, activists warn that firecrackers can cause great damage to the flora and fauna of the lakes. Even lighting diyas in lakes during Diwali, which makes for a spectacular sight, can prove to be fatal for the aquatic life, they say. In keeping with the NGT orders on activities permitted near lakes, activists have drawn up a list of dos and don’ts for Bengaluerans. Activists urge that loud noise is the biggest menace.

Jayanthi Kallam, co-founder and executive director at Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre, says, “Urban wildlife suffers the most during festivals. We wish to create awareness in areas near lakes to reduce firecrackers, large bonfires and loud activities. 

Diwali should be more about knowledge, hope and light and positive engagement that would support the development of the lake and the varied flora and fauna in it.”

 Bellandur worried over rapidly drying lakebedAccording to a study conducted by Dr TV Ramachandra from Indian Institute of Science, Bellandur Lake is supposed to be 14 feet deep.  
All nocturnal species, whether near lakes or otherwise, are vulnerable at this time of the year. Arun Menon, social and animal activist says that all bat species including Pipistrelle bat (insectivore), Mouse tailed bats (insectivore), Short-nosed fruit bat (frugivore), Flying fox (frugivore), owl species like barn owl, spotted owlet, scops owl, brown hawk-owl as well as migrant birds are impacted by the sound of fire crackers. He says, “All nocturnal species will be affected due to unnatural light or loud sounds after dusk. Most of these hunt for food at night and they rely on hearing and sight to locate their food. The confusion and disorientation from the extra light, air pollution and loud sounds can make a wild animal vulnerable. Even small birds like tailor bird, bulbuls, prinias and munias will get disturbed if the sounds are too loud.” 

Activists agree that lakes are a great place for community events but when efforts are being made to revive the lakes, it must also be ensured that community events don’t harm the lakes. If the festivals are to be celebrated, they must be celebrated before 7 pm and preferably, without loud music or crackers. Jayanthi says, “Do not dispose any trash that includes plastic, cigarette wrappers, glass bottles or discarded food in and around lakes. If possible, organise a small team that will clean trash from the area.”

THINK OF THE ANIMALS

Animal rights activists have cautioned that injured animals or birds should not be fed or attempted first aid on. It is better instead to call a helpline for expert guidance. Pet lovers can explore kennels and farms located outside the city to protect their pets from the noise and pollution. The strays are worst hit, rued a vet from CUPA, pointing out that the street dogs have no place to seek shelter in.

 To celebrate an eco-friendly Diwali

 Avoid crackers in public places and around lakes Use natural oil lamps, clay diyas or LED lights Use natural rangoli colours like turmeric, dry orange peel powder and rice flour Do not dirty lakes with plastic waste Use biodegradable decorations Do not play loud music near open spaces or lakes Is Pattandur-Agrahara Lake being encroached by a private group?But even before they could enter the lake area, they ran into an illegal wall. Literally.
​