By Amit Kumar & Reya Mehrotra

Picking up a lesson or two from the forest fire tragedy — which killed at least nine — in Theni district of Tamil Nadu, the Karnataka Forest Department has banned trekking expeditions in all its forest areas with immediate effect until monsoon sets in. In a circular on Monday, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) to all field directors of Tiger Reserves (National Parks) and wildlife sanctuaries and various forest circles, KFD officers have been directed not to give permission to trekking expeditions. 

Karnataka too has been witnessing forest fires — luckily no tragedies — and this year so far, such incidents were reported in Nandi Hills, Turahalli, Kodagu (Maldare and Dubare forest in Kushalnagar), near Charmadi ghat and Chikkamagaluru.

In fact, a group of travellers in the city said they had a narrow escape in Nandi Hills, a favourite haunt for trekkers from the city, recently. As summer is slowly setting in, organisers are asking trekkers to be cautious and stay away forests. 

Recounting the experience, Sartak Roy, who works with a medical device startup in the city, said, “I have witnessed how fast these fire spreads and my advice will be to avoid forests during this time of the year.” 

Sartak, along with his friends, went to watch the sunrise at Nandi Hills on March 7. Having reached there at 5 am, they started scaling a hill nearby after the sunrise. “After consulting locals, we came down from the hills and went towards Angatta Village taking a detour from Karahalli Cross. At 10:40 am, we reached the place, and we were planning to climb the hill. However, a villager alerted us that smoke is billowing from the place we parked our bikes and we shouldn’t try the trek now.”

Panicked, they all rushed to the spot and found that the fire is fast spreading. “We could see smoke emanating from the rear wheel of one of our bikes. We quickly left the spot and by the time, we reached the road down, there was smoke all over. We later came to know that there was a full-fledged forest fire in the area which is quite scary,” said Sartak. 

Trek groups have been urging travellers not to head to grasslands, especially during summer. “Monsoon and post-monsoon are the best time for trekking. If one decides to go for summer treks, one should be thoroughly prepared and well equipped,” an expert said. Rajesh R, a trek organiser said, “Rumours are floating that the trek was illegal, but it was not so. It is an open forest. Forest officials sell tickets for Rs 200. Villagers too go up the hill several times a day. We ourselves conduct 4-5 treks to Kurangani every year. Our last trek there was during the New Year.” Prasanna Bandradall , a trek leader at Bangalore Mountaineering Club, says, “One must avoid grasslands. Shola grasslands in Kudremukh, Karnataka, are very susceptible to forest fires and are closed in summers. They open only in monsoons.”