Three weeks in a Himalayan forest have changed Amit Sadh’s perspective on life; actor wants to plan a bike trip around the world instead of chasing stardom

Amit Sadh turned 37 yesterday and this birthday was very different from the usual. “I am either trekking, hiking or riding with people who are not from the industry, but this year, it was just another day for me,” sighs the actor, who spent the lockdown in the Himalayas, and only recently returned to the city. “I was in Mukteshwar, where I had been going camping for two months since I was five, with a couple of friends. A few more friends were to join us there for a trekking trip, but before they could leave their homes, lockdown was enforced.”

But Amit had his own adventures. “For three weeks, we were in a forest, with no electricity, network or another human for about five km. We lived in a tent and had to walk half a kilometre to get food,” he recounts, adding that he was trekking almost 10 km a day, while also basking in the glory of nature with his uncle who taught him all about plants and birds. “I saw a sight of bird bathing and watched the sun rise and set every day.”

He was able to embark on the return journey only after the Uttarakhand government came to his aid and after all the necessary check-ups, declared he was fit to travel back to Mumbai. The return car-journey was an eye-opener. “I had driven 28 hours straight while going there, but I was coming back amidst social isolation and that was upsetting because I am used to stopping at roadside dhabas and mingling with people. But this time, they were shut or deserted and people were afraid to interact, especially with strangers, like you’d kill them. The first two hours of travel were the hardest,” he reminisces, adding that in sharp contrast, wildlife roamed freely. “It felt like humans were caged and the animals were free.”

His friends made the journey easier for Amit. One of them arranged for a hotel stay in Ahmedabad, while some others ensured that he was well fed throughout. But the sight of thousands of migrant labourers on the road in Ahmedabad, some literally sitting in each other’s lap, shook him up. “There were some buses, so I presumed they were going home, but that sight haunted me,” he admits.

These three months have changed his perspective on life. “Before this, everything I did was about films only, be it diet, training or relationships. Even watching a movie was a technical process as I was desperate to establish myself as an actor. Some good also came out of it, but now, that ambition is gone. I am not running away from my career and I am still as hardworking.

Fundamentally I am still the same, just calmer,” the actor points out, saying ironically, he is the most certain in these uncertain times. “If you ask me what I want to do right now, I’d say, go to Goa, open a cafe, serve coffee and live a normal life. Hopefully, I will also open a café in Mumbai in the next six months. I don’t want to be a star and want to focus on small things, like maybe write or do a podcast with friends.”

Once normalcy returns, Amit plans to take a biking trip with 10-15 people, across countries, for two months. “Also, I am planning an elaborate bike ride from Alaska to Austria and from the top of the world, Arctic, to the bottom continent, Australia, for which I’ll be on the road for two years. That’s the masterplan which might take a year or two to materialise,” he shares.

But what about films? “Right now, I have no work to do, but I’m not stressed out. I am an actor, not a factory chasing targets. If I get a good script and character, I’ll do it. But right now, Goa plan is the only thing on my mind,” he signs off.