Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP) had absolutely no intention of imposing any development or conservation priorities on the people from above. It had observed that we must stop excluding people from decision-making and abandon the currently prevalent pattern of "development by exclusion" coupled with "conservation by exclusion". It had gone on to call for the elaboration of a model of conservation and development compatible with each other to replace the prevailing 'develop recklessly - conserve thoughtlessly' pattern with one of 'develop sustainably - conserve thoughtfully.' 

Intense rains, floods, landslides; huge financial losses, manifold human tragedies. In 2018 many thought that this was a calamity, which strikes just once in a century, that we will get back to normality soon. So, when in 2019 people of Kerala once again encountered the same shocking train of intense rains, people began to realise that it is unwise to continue business as usual, and we must think afresh of the options before us.

The root cause of global warming is the wasteful resource and energy-guzzling lifestyle that is spreading all over the earth. True, the model for such a lifestyle originated in the USA, which even today must accept the lion's share of the blame for global warming. 

Deliberate waste 

Consider the case of the 163 MW Athirappilly hydro-electric project on the 144-km long, already heavily dammed, Chalakudy river, one of the key case studies included in the report of the WGEEP, sometimes known as Gadgil Commission. A careful assessment of the project by the River Research Centre brings out several technical flaws - there is not enough water to generate the power as claimed, power generation will adversely affect the irrigation now available from the river. 

Ecologically sensitive zones 

"To demarcate areas within the Western Ghats region, which need to be notified as ecologically sensitive and to recommend for notification of such areas as ecologically sensitive zones under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986." In Maharashtra, the Mahabaleshwar-Panchagani region was constituted as an ESZ without any consultations with local communities in 2002. Naturally, people feel that ESZ is a regime imposed from outside and that it is a regime focused on rigid bureaucratic controls that are subverted by corrupt officials to harass and extort. WGEEP received written petitions complaining that a farmer is now obliged to pay a bribe of Rs 20,000 to get permission to dig a bore well on his farm. Mahabaleshwar-Panchagani region has large populations of Scheduled Tribes and traditional forest dwellers. It is necessary to consider following things for conservation of forest, and development of the village - watershed development programme, village tourism and human-wildlife conflict. 

Suppression and perversion 

In all these years nobody has pointed to any factual inaccuracies or flaws in the logic in the WGEEP report. Nor has anybody pointed to any violations of our constitutional provisions or acts. So, what were the grounds for rejecting our report? All that could be said without distorting what was in the report was that it was impractical. What then, is practical? 

Guardians of nature 

As a seasoned bureaucrat once told me, what we need is not more teeth but more honest jaws. So, what is needed is not more laws or more stringent laws, but proper implementation of the many existing, though currently sabotaged, constitutional and legal provisions to protect the environment and engage people in the development processes that are a result of sensitivity to their needs in our well-entrenched democracy. 

Moving ahead through forest rights 

The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Right over the Forests) Act of 2006 (TFRA), whose implementation was initiated on January 1, 2008, presents a major opportunity and a great challenge, not only for conservation, but also for sustainable use and regeneration of the country's forest, as well as domesticated biodiversity. 

Water resources 

The disasters of 2018 and 2019 have much to do with water, the most vital of resources for all of life. WGEEP had pointed out in 2011 that the current project-oriented, demand-supply-based ad hoc approach to water resource planning and management leaves much to be desired and that the time is ripe for a paradigm shift in the approach to river basin-level management of water resources. 

Way ahead 

The catastrophes that Kerala, God's own country, has faced in two successive years, pose before us serious challenges. One can only hope that these challenges are turned into opportunities to make a shift on a permanent basis in the current paradigm of imposing both development and conservation from above and translate on ground what our democratic constitution demands - conservation and development should go hand in hand, benefits of development should percolate to all segments of society, local communities should guide the course of development and conservation must not imply excluding people. 

This is an excerpt from Gadgil's Karma Award Lecture, Kottakkal, Kerala, to be delivered on September 4.