Afficianados appreciate the sublime power of rock ‘n roll. Now so do our forest officials, it seems.  In the last couple of years Maharashtra has been grappling with the problem of elephants of Dandeli forest reserve in Karnataka straying into Sindhudurg and destroying cultivation. “The pachyderm population there has doubled from 2000 in 2004 to 4000 now and lack of sufficient food in Karnataka is  forcing them to look elsewhere,” says Narendra Zurmure, deputy conservator of forests (Sindhudurg). 

It is part of Zurmure’s job to ensure that these straying elephants do not progress into Maharashtra. Often he and his men use fire-crackers, but it’s not always effective. Two weeks ago during one such operation, Zurmure accidentally pressed the play button on the CD in his vehicle. “The volume was turned on very high and in the quiet, the rock music began blaring. The herd of elephants which was about 100 metres away started to get uneasy. I pushed the volume further and to my surprise, I found the herd turning back and actually running,” Zurmure said.

Over the next four days using similar music Zurmure pushed the herd which had encroached upto Malvan back south by nearly 40 kilometers. “I informed the wildlife institute of India about the experiment. They said elephants always fear something unusual,” the IFS official said, adding that elephants do not get bemused by such tricks for long.

Zurmure’s boss, Conservator of Forests (Kolhapur Range), S K Kole said, “Elephants are peace loving animals and when there is too much noise, they tend to run away. In case of the experiment in Sindhudurg, we used the same technique to push them back south.”

Said Kale, “Elephants have actually strayed in search of a conducive habitat. But since they trouble locals, we are compelled to move them.”

“Elephants are intelligent animals. They only fear things that appear larger and stronger than them,” said a forest official. When the `rock music’ effect started to fade after a few days, Zurmure had to use fireballs that were larger than the elephants to intimidate them. The elephants are now close to Dandeli forest reserve and will be pushed inside the santuary’s limits, eventually.