Experts stress on need to evaluate forest reserves’ carrying capacity and to have SOP to handle human, wildlife conflict situations

Even as state Environment Minister Ishwar B Khandre, in a meeting held on Tuesday, expressed concern over increasing incidents of human-wildlife conflict, wildlife conservationists and experts say that an ecological assessment of forest reserves to evaluate the carrying capacity of these landscapes is of prime importance. They also highlight the lack of a standard operating procedure (SOP) for Elephant Task Force personnel for handling human-wildlife conflict situations.

According to Avinash Krishnan, a wildlife conservationist and director, science and conservation at A Rocha India, the carrying capacity of reserves is a pertinent issue that has been overlooked so far. There is a dearth of empirical study that can anecdotally establish that the reserves have reached their carrying capacity and thus the spillover effect has led to recent conflict and death cases.

“We do not have a systematic and scientific assessment of the carrying capacity of our reserves. There are some studies done in Africa for a host of species that enunciate this requirement. We should look at range carrying capacity and connected habitat assessment to ascertain if we are experiencing a spillover effect. Research studies so far are mostly based on behaviour and conflict. The elephant population has surged and thus we need to transform our approach and create a knowledge base imperative to understand the current situation,” said Krishnan.
 
Researchers also underline the need for an SOP as ETF personnel as chasing elephants back into the forest is not an easy task and involves risk. Citing two recent cases of human-elephant conflicts leading to the death of a sharpshooter and a forest watcher, experts say some level of negligence led to both accidents.
 
Sharpshooter Venkatesh was trampled by a tusker in Hassan last week and a forest watcher Girish was killed in an elephant attack in Madikeri on Tuesday. Girish was part of the Rapid Response Team (RRT) assigned to drive elephants away from a coffee estate.

“The Forest Department must have an SOP for the process. In both recent deaths, the personnel were on foot, trying to manage the situation. We cannot eliminate conflict cases as they have been happening for hundreds of years. However, measures such as barricading the forest boundary and managing the situation more systematically will surely bring down the number of lives lost,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher at Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Experts also caution that while several casualties might indicate a surge in the number of death cases, these incidents are accidental and there is no robust way of implying that the numbers are going up.

“We do not have enough data on spatial and temporal scales to infer that these numbers are increasing concerning the elephant population. A high number of human casualties or conflict incidents can not necessarily be correlated with conflict level.
 
Human-wildlife conflict is a causal factor and we need to understand the reasons behind this,” said a city-based conservationist.

Invasive species
Animals venturing out of forest reserves, according to the experts, might not just be the carrying capacity issue; degrading habitats due to the rapid growth of invasive species such as Lantana and Senna Spectabilis in wildlife habitats might also impact forage and prey base populations, forcing wildlife to venture out of the areas designated to them.

“Today, invasive species like Lantana and Senna spectabilis occupy nearly 40% of the understorey habitat of reserve areas that sustain the foraging needs of elephants and support the source population of carnivores, including the big cats. While forage and water availability can be constraints at certain places due to below-average rainfall this year, we need to look at invasive species spread too. If not addressed, it will compound the push factor severely impacting how animals use their space,” added Krishnan.

Rail barricades beneficial
While rail barricades are more effective when compared with other types of barriers, barrier suitability varies on a case-to-case and site-to-site basis.

 “Rail barricades are required in certain areas where no other mechanisms are possible. Care should be taken so that these barriers do not end up deflecting animal movement. These management aspects should be based on scientific evaluation and assessment.
 
This hard barricade can prove to be beneficial. For instance, the northwestern part of Bannerghatta National Park has now been barricaded and the number of human-elephant incidents has gone down,” said Krishnan.