Animal rescue centres advocate for coexistence amidst public misconceptions and fear; seek public awareness to protect urban wildlife habitats

Some city-based animal rescue centres have highlighted that there is an increasing number of calls by citizens to remove birds’ nests on their balconies and window sills. They say they receive calls to relocate or remove nests of animals like barn owls, kites, bats, and squirrels, especially during nesting seasons. Currently, the breeding season for Black Kites, coinciding with summer, is in full swing in Bengaluru. These raptors typically build nests on tree branches, towers, cliff ledges, or buildings in close proximity to people.

“We are receiving calls urging relocation of bird nests this season too. So far, we’ve received over six requests for relocation. Reasons range from superstitions about owls being harbingers of misfortune to hygiene concerns over owls and bats in living quarters, disturbance caused by the eerie screeches of barn owls at night, and fear of these animals attacking people,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC).

Experts say in a city like Bengaluru where humans and urban wildlife share the same space, interaction between the two is inevitable. However, public perceptions sometimes teeter on the edge of fear, misconceptions, and a lack of understanding about our wild neighbours.

However, the good news is that the rescue centres have successfully assisted most people in sharing their space for a few months so these birds can raise their chicks. Experts say young wildlife thrive best in the wild with their parents unless they are sick or injured.

“We do get requests to remove bird nests, mostly of Barn owls. They are associated with bad luck and are considered a nuisance since they make peculiar sounds. However, in almost all cases so far, we have been able to explain the role of these birds in the ecosystem and have convinced the callers to let them be. Most people are compassionate and understanding, willing to make compromises for a few months,” said Dr (Colonel) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, People for Animals (PFA).

Experts say citizens must resist the urge to intervene with nests. Instead, reach out to rescue centres for advice.

Reasons range from superstitions about owls being harbingers of misfortune to hygiene concerns over owls and bats in living quarters– Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre
“Last year alone, we attended over 100 cases and successfully reunited and renested displaced wildlife with their families. Recently, a concerned citizen from Domlur alerted us about two Black Kite hatchlings that had been ‘birdnapped’ from their nests by an uninformed construction worker intending to raise them as pets.
 
We were able to quickly intervene and successfully renest the two hatchlings back in their nest. Our team educated both the construction worker and the public about the implications of relocating chicks,” added Venkatesh.