By Reya Mehrotra

By the end of this year, Karnataka might have 50 new trekking routes added to its list. This year, at least five new trekking routes have been regularised and re-introduced by the Karnataka Ecotourism Development Board and added to the existing seven, which are Skandagiri, Makalidurga, Avalabetta, Bidarakette, Devarayanadurga, Saavandurga and Siddarabetta. The newly introduced trails include Ettina Bhuja, Ballalarayana Durga, Bandaje Falls, Ranijari and Merthikhan gudda in Chikkamagaluru.

The Ecotourism Board found that at least 43 trekking routes were being operated by agencies in the city illegally. Since they were not regulated, this posed a risk for trekkers. 

BR Ramesh, General Manager (Forests) KEDB, says, “Tour operators have been taking trekkers to locations not authorised by us, which exposes them to a number of risks. We found that they had been taking more than 50 people at a time which can be dangerous, dirtying the areas with plastic waste, staying during the night in the forest areas which disturb the nocturnal animals and other illegal activities were being carried out. We are now in the process of regularising popular trekking trails. 

After regularisation, trekkers will be able to trek safely. We will also restrict the number of people to 50 each day on each of these trekking routes to prevent any mishap. As trekking is an unregulated activity in the state, we plan to make it regulated in Karnataka.”

Regularising each route is a detailed process. Ramesh explains, “We need trained manpower, drinking water facilities, infrastructure like rest rooms, dustbins at the base camps and this requires funds. Some of our newly introduced eco trails have already been fetching us funds. We still don’t have enough funds to make our trek routes at par with those found in European countries, with incubation centres, maps and good sanitation. The cost of trekking per person is Rs 250 and that for wildlife sanctuaries is Rs 500.”

The KEDB generated revenue of Rs 40-50 lakh with the first seven eco trails last year. He believes that the new routes would lessen the burden on popular trek routes.
 Regularisation of new routes also means job creation for the local youth. Ten locals from each trek location are being trained by the KEDB in association with Forest Department as nature guides. Dev Balaji, trek guide trainer with the forest department says, “Each guide earns up to Rs 1,500 per day. There are around 60 trained guides by the forest department now for the trek routes.” 

The trek guides are also being trained in disaster management and for rescue operations.