By Chandan Gowda

How do we imagine a model that does not displace people from their homes?

The Directive Principles of State Policy, which form part of the Constitution of India, do not surface much in public discussions. The infrequent invocation of these Principles, which appear between the parts on the Fundamental Rights and the Fundamental Duties in the Constitution, is mostly due to their legal non-enforceability. 

The risk of indifference, as the Constituent Assembly debates demonstrate, was already known to the makers of the Indian Constitution, but they felt they were absolutely necessary to include. 

Introducing the section on the Directive Principles (DPs), Article 37 states, “The provisions contained in this part shall not be enforced by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws).”

The DPs then ought to matter deeply for governance: as ethical policy orientations; as parameters of evaluative criteria; as guides to policy making. (Not all of the DPs though are equally compelling. For instance: the ones on the need for the introduction of uniform civil code and the one on need for “preserving and improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle,” which were done to placate certain lobbies at the time of drafting the Constitution.) 

Barring the DP such as the one that asks that the Dalit and tribal communities be secured against exploitation and injustice or the one that asks that the state administration be decentralised through the creation of village panchayats, the DPs which show profound moral concern about the kind of country that India needs to become have nearly vanished from the policy imagination. 

Three DPs should illustrate the discussion easily. 

1. Article 39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing (a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood; (b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good; (c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment; (d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women. 

Report after recent report has shown that this DP has seen a quiet death. The data in these reports is stupefying. The poor people in the country in 2015, according to the Rangarajan Committee, make up nearly a third of all Indians. Of them, 26.05 crore lived in villages earning Rs. 27 or less per day and 10.25 crore lived in urban areas with a daily income of Rs. 42 or less. The much discussed Oxfam Report on Inequality in India reminds us that 73 percent of the wealth generated in India last year went to the richest 1 percent of Indians, while the bottom half of the class ladder in the country saw a 1 percent increase in their wealth. The stark facts should not only show that the benefits of economic growth are not evenly spread, but allow the model of growth itself to be questioned. 

Crores of Indians who led contented lives without being heavy consumers are now offered the promise of greater consumption within conditions of lopsided growth. How do we imagine an economic model that does not displace people from their homes and that allows them to secure their livelihoods in economically viable ways? This ought to count among the key policy challenges for creating economic democracy in India. 

 2. Article 48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country.

Introduced as an amendment to the Constitution in 1976, the second DP accords great moral priority to ecological concerns. Murmurs of climate change concern are heard at times in political discussions in the country, but the concern towards the environment is yet to become policy priority across the board. In fact, recent facts attest to a reverse trend. For instance, the number of “development projects” sanctioned inside wildlife protected areas without the necessary environmental impact assessments, according to a recent IndiaSpend report, stood at 519 for the period between 2014 and 2018, which was double the figure seen over the preceding four year period. Will incorporating ecological sensitivities into governance take policy precedence? 

3. Article 51. The State shall endeavour to (a) promote international peace and security; (b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations; (c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with one another; and (d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.

The political idealism of the Constitution makers and the responsibilities they saw for India in the international community become amply clear here. Sixty eight years later, trade partnerships and strategic military self-defence, that is, the issues of business and security, overwhelm contemporary discussions of India’s relations with other countries. How can India contribute to the creation of global peace in the new century? How do we envision international alliances for non-violence? 

The Directive Principles extend moral scope for enlivening Indian democracy. We owe them constant attention.