A big fat Indian wedding was nicely punctured by wildlife sleuths recently. The bridegroom had come astride an elephant to the wedding venue, and the uncle of the groom has been booked under the Indian Wildlife Act. The case has now taken a twist as the mutt which ‘loaned’ the jumbo does not have an ownership certificate, making it a case of theft of a protected animal. Jumbo transport lands bridegroom in trouble   Forest sleuths have found that neither the mutt, Sadguru Basavaraj Deshi Kendra in Airani of Haveri district, nor the mahout has the ownership certificate of the elephant. However, the mutt claims it procured the elephant from Bihar and has applied afresh for an ownership certificate.   “Initially, it was thought that the elephant was used without a valid transport permit. But the forest officials who went to the mutt couldn’t find an ownership certificate. It appears to be a case of theft as the animal was kept illegally at the mutt all these years,” a forest department source told BM.    The elephant, 13-year-old Rani, was taken into custody on May 21 after forest sleuths raided the wedding at the city’s Palace Grounds. The elephant was used to carry the bridegroom from his house in Sadashivanagar to the wedding venue – a blatant violation of the Wildlife Act as well as Central and state government orders prohibiting the use of elephants without permission from the forest authorities or their use for commercial purposes.    It was kept at the Hebbal range forest office for over four days while the sleuths examined the relevant documents. In the absence of an ownership certificate, the authorities at Bannerghatta National Park were wary of accepting it, but have since taken it in their care.    “It is no doubt a case of illegal possession. When we thought of fining the mutt for violating the Wildlife Act norms by sending it to a wedding, we sought the ownership certificate. But they didn’t have one, making it a case of illegal possession of an animal since 2007. A case was booked accordingly. However, now they have come again and are showing some papers about procuring it from Bihar. We will examine their claim and decide if they should be considered for an ownership certificate,” Govindraju V, Range Forest Officer, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror.   However the mahout, Syed Hafeez, who has been with Rani for the last six years, insists that the mutt owns the elephant. “We didn’t have an ownership certificate. We had applied for one earlier and couldn’t get. Now we are starting the process afresh,” Hafeez, who is with the elephant at Bannerghatta, told BM.