BBMP takes over the lake from Bidaralli Gram Panchayat, charts a rejuvenation plan

At last, Rampura Lake is set to become a destination worth visiting, The Lake, that’s spread over 180 acres of land, was recently taken over by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) from the Bidaralli Panchayat. The civic body has also prepared a development plan for the lake at an estimated cost of Rs 30 crore.

For many years, the Rampura Lake was being choked with sewage from neighbouring areas and wastewater from a dyeing unit. Bangalore Mirror had reported about how the dyeing unit was contributing to polluting the lake.

Residents of the locality have complained of the stench from the lake, which has made the air unbreathable and spiked the mosquito population. But this was not always the case, residents recall. According to them, more than a decade ago, Rampura Lake was a home for many migratory birds, but the pollution had affected the ecology of the area.

Untitled Carousel Lake-cleaning or throwing muck from here to there?These are some of the observations made in the report titled “Citizen’s Agenda for Bellandur and Varthur Catchment”, prepared by Dr Yellappa Reddy, Nirmala Gowda and Dr Nidhi Paliwal of Bangalore Environment Trust. 

“I welcome the rejuvenation of Rampura Lake but there will be no use if the authorities fail to ensure native trees for the migratory birds. Development of the lake should not be confined to making pathways and other amenities but must take steps to ensure biodiversity,’’ said Satheesh Poojary, a wildlife photographer and conservationist.

  Development of the lake should not be confined to making pathways and other amenities. Steps must also be taken to ensure biodiversity–Satheesh Poojary, wildlife photographer and conservationist
Emphasising on the need to take up the rejuvenation of Rampura Lake as early as possible, Ashok Kumar C, a resident, said that it has become difficult for people to visit the lake due to the bad odour emanating from stagnated sewage in the lake.

“The stink here can render one breathless. The BBMP engineers should take up the clean-up and rejuvenation work at the earliest,’’ said Kumar.

Subhadra C, a resident of Kalkere, said the authorities should focus on maintenance of the lake in the long term. “It is good that the BBMP has decided to rejuvenate the lake but the important thing is that it has to appoint home guards to prevent and penalise those dumping garbage into the lake. The BBMP engineers should also to plant native saplings on the lake bund to attract migratory birds,’’ suggests Subhadra.

BBMP (Lakes) assistant executive engineer Shivalingappa Savukar said the developmental work at the lake is expected to be completed in 12 months. “Our priority is to divert the sewage flowing into the lake. The lake bund will be developed for the benefit of people who visit the lake in the morning and evening for a walk. As part of the rejuvenation of the lake, the silt that was accumulated over all these years will be removed as soon as possible,’’ said Savukar.