The five tiger reserves in Karnataka — Bandipur, Nagarhole, Bhadra, Anshi-Dandeli and BRT — are up against a new threat which could make human poachers and forest fires seem mild by comparison. Canine distemper virus (CDV), an aggressive and fatal disease which affected around 15 per cent of the Siberian tiger population a decade ago, is fast spreading in Indonesia and could sneak into the sub-continent any time. The National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA), through the Forest Intelligence Bureau, has sent a directive to the state forest department to put all tiger reserves on high alert, especially in Bandipur and Nagarhole which have the highest density of the big cats in the country.   Report all dog and cat deaths Veterinary doctors, villagers and other stakeholders in the vicinity of the national parks have been alerted to prevent the outbreak of the deadly virus. Officials from the virology unit of the veterinary department, along with forest officials, have been patrolling villages surrounding the national parks and constantly monitoring dogs which act as carriers of CDV, an airborne virus. “We have asked locals to report deaths of dogs and domestic cats. In case of any death, our experts will test the viscera and skin of the deceased animal for CDV,” H C Kantharaju, conservator of forests and director of Project Tiger, Bandipur, told Bangalore Mirror.   “Wild animals straying out of the forest prey upon dogs or cats, they will also be infected and take it back to the reserve. Further, if an infected dog dies inside the forest, mammals feeding on the carcass could get infected,” said Sanjay Gubbi, a wildlife biologist and conservationist.   Kantharaju noted, “Tigers are solitary animals. Chances of them being infected directly is low. However, they are prone to getting infected through other means. Leopards prey on dogs in villages near national parks and are likely to get infected sooner than tigers. But tigers in zoos or safaris, where dogs can gain access, are more vulnerable.”   Officials clueless about symptoms Even though forest officials are aware of the fast-spreading CDV, none of them is familiar with the symptoms of the disease.    “It is very difficult to ascertain whether an animal is infected with CDV merely by looking at it. The only conclusive method is to test either the viscera or skin of the dead animal in a laboratory. Hence, we have alerted the villagers to report deaths of domestic cats and dogs in their limits,” Kantharaju said.    However, biologists and conservationists who have been tracking the spread of the virus globally have made interesting observations about the symptoms.    “Generally, the infected animal will become totally disoriented as the virus affects its nervous and respiratory systems. They normally shed their shy nature and become fearless. Such animals might frequently stray out of forests. However, they lose their aggressiveness with the growth of the virus in their body. Even if they venture out of the forests, they do not cause any harm to anybody. Usually tigers and leopards shy away from humans. But once infected, they exhibit no fear although they do not display any aggression. The only way to contain the spread of the virus is to vaccinate both domesticated and stray dogs, especially around wildlife areas,” Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 First seen in tigers in US zoo
 Canine distemper virus (CDV) is an aggressive and fatal disease. Dogs act as carriers of CDV. According to wildlife conservationists, scientists first learnt that the airborne virus can spread to the feline population when it affected tigers at a zoo in California back in 1980. Later, the virus infected the lion population of Serengeti National Park on the African continent through dogs reared by Masai tribals. It proved deadly, wiping out a third of the lion population there.
 
 After a period of dormancy, the virus resurfaced in 2003-04 in Russia infecting 15 per cent of the 400-strong Siberian tiger population. This year, the virus has struck yet again, infecting tigers in Indonesia, especially Sumatra, which is relatively close to the Indian sub-continent. Many are worried since unlike Siberian tigers that are spread across a vast geographical area, tigers in the sub-continent are more or less restricted to a few locations and could be severely affected should the virus make it to India.