It is the colour of algal bloom that thrives in pollution caused by chemical fertilisers from farms and industrial effluents
 
 The Tungabhadra River has turned green. Experts say this is due to algal bloom — a rapid growth algae or cyanobacteria in water, often resulting in a coloured scum that collects on the surface.
 
 Samad Kottur, wildlife activist and researcher, said, this happens due to pollution of the river. Farmers in the upstream use chemical fertilisers extensively which gets washed away during rains and collects in the river. In addition, industries also release effluents that are not treated that results in eutrophication or algal bloom, he said. Cyanobacteria
 
 multiply soon after accumulation especially after cloudy weather, followed by sunshine. Though it is short-lived, it takes away all the dissolved oxygen from the water, and makes use of nutrients in the water and grows rapidly. Even when they start decaying, they use oxygen during the process.
 
 He said, “We have observed that long-term consumption of the water leads to liver disease and if people swim in the affected water, they are likely to develop skin rashes. It is advisable to avoid drinking this water for the next 10-15 days, and cattle should also be kept away. We have been observing this phenomenon for long, but in the last four-five years it has been happening often. While it was generally reported in November-December, this year it was spotted early. Awareness on this is being generated.”
 
 However, D Ranga Reddy Secretary Tungabhadra Board said this was not harmful. He said it happens because of the first rains and a lot of fertilisers getting washed off from the fields in to the reservoir. The algae are formed in the one feet of water when it is subjected to heat. For instance, on Thursday, the water level was an approximate 80 feet, and the greenish colour is recorded on the top one-and -a-half feet. “We have examined the water long back this will stay for a month maximum. It is no way affecting the drinking water as the drinking water outlets are way below,” he said.