By Bhavna Harchandrai

You may well have taken your first steps towards a healthier lifestyle through the lockdown. Now, you just have to stick to it

It’s been such a taxing year that most of us would rather not reflect on it: 2020 is a year one wants to forget. But if you look at it through a different lens, you may just find that it yielded some pearls of wisdom. Through every hardship, battle and trial, there are lessons learned and if there’s one thing this year highlighted, it’s the need to take care of your health. Here are some lessons the year drove home, which you’d do well to stick to well after the pandemic passes. 
 
 Eat to be fit 
The buzzword during the pandemic was ‘immunity’. People on extreme diets, keto and semi-starvation regimes, and those who skip meals, must have recognised that they had made themselves vulnerable by depriving themselves of essential nutrients. Cutting out carbohydrates and consuming excess protein increases toxicity in the body. Simple and complex carbohydrates, such as fruits, whole grains, millets and cereals contain natural sugars that release energy in a way that sustains. Their soothing alkaline nature, helps maintain a healthy pH balance, and is crucial to prevent illnesses. When you eliminate this food group completely, your body doesn’t absorb essential proteins and it puts a load on the digestive system. 

 You can get too much of a good thing 
Covid-19 emphasised the need to exercise in moderation. Putting your body through extreme and strenuous workouts increases the level of cortisol, which is known as the stress hormone. Cortisol raises inflammation in our bodies and is detrimental to the digestive system; hence, it brings down immunity. Move over HIIT, CrossFit, Insanity workouts, long distance running, lifting excessive weights. High-Lo, moderate intensity workouts, 30-minute jogs, aerobics, tai-chi, yoga are the recommended forms of exercise which improve circulation, mood and give a good boost to your health. 

 Housework keeps you healthy 
We learnt to self-sustain; we had to, with no domestic helpers around through the initial months of the lockdown. Most of us found ourselves doing household chores and running errands we’d usually leave to our domestic staff. Making the bed, doing the dishes, cooking, dusting, cleaning and buying groceries kept us active all day. It kept the heart rate and metabolic rate at a happy high, kept our minds occupied and ensured we burnt off extra calories. Our tendency to over exercise in the gym and sit back for the rest of the day was replaced with an active lifestyle — this is really how humans are meant to live. 

 Less honking and more walking 
During this time, we used technology to our advantage. Workshops, classes, schools, work, courses, groceries and shopping… everything moved to online formats. As a result, non-essential commuting, traffic woes and air pollution reduced substantially. We walked 
to buy supplies, meet friends, appreciate the outdoors and enjoyed cleaner environment. Cycling became a popular activity too. These are things we should stick to going ahead. 

 Home-cooked meals 
Restaurants were shut while grocery shops and supermarkets remained open. We bought fresh produce and enjoyed home-cooked meals. The widespread habit of eating takeaways regularly or dining out frequently was disrupted. Restaurant food is laden with excess oil, salt, sugar, preservatives and MSG, and is often not fresh. Most of us started experimenting with cooking and dabbled with a variety of cuisines in our own kitchens. The period saw the rise of small businesses of suppling regional fare and showcased your neighbourhood talent. Hold on to this memory: Eating home-cooked food made us feel light energetic and healthy. 

 Early to bed
The closure of pubs and bars shaped healthier sleeping habits, forcing us to turn in early and to cut down on the consumption of alcohol, smoking etc. We became attuned to sleep in sync with our circadian rhythm. We woke up fresh and ready to take on the day as opposed to tired, sleep deprived and nursing a hangover. Your amount and quality of sleep has a huge impact on not just your energy level, but also your mental health, mood, and what you end up eating (when you’re drained, you tend to reach for junk foods and sweets). 

 Tackle stress better 
The start of the lockdown brought about fear and uncertainty. It forced us to look inwards, appreciate simple living, be content, balance work and other interests and find our inner peace. Many of us used the time to explore a hobby, learn a new skill, dabble in art, and polish up on 
our cooking skills which proved therapeutic. Some of us began chanting and followed guided meditation conducted by groups such as the Pranic Healing Foundation, Yoga Institute and Pura Resa. We learnt to destress and find calm within ourselves. 

 Value loved ones
More than ever, this time should have demonstrated that what matters most are the people around us: our loved ones, whether they’re family or friends. People drew closer and many of us forged close bonds with neighbours we never even knew before the lockdown. We chose to stay in touch with and meet only those people who we genuinely felt close to. 

 Get outdoors 
When the lockdown restrictions were relaxed, we started traveling to beach towns, hill stations, wildlife resorts and islands: we had had enough of cities. Staying put at home glued to our gadgets made us crave the outdoors. Ultimately, this is one of the biggest lessons: to live in balance with nature. Man, after all, is an animal, too, and if there’s one thing this year taught us, it’s to value the gift of nature. 


The writer is an internationally-certified fitness instructor