Wildlife activists and conservationists have demanded that forest dwellers and tribals who voluntarily come out of the state’s tiger reserves, national parks, sanctuaries, and forest areas be issued “Project Displaced Persons’ Certificates”.

In a proposal submitted to Karnataka Environment Minister Ishwar Khandre and Revenue Minister Krishna Byre Gowda, a conservationist has requested the move citing guidelines issued by the National Tiger Conservation Authority in 2010. The NTCA guidelines had recommended other states to follow the example of Maharashtra and issue “Project Displaced Persons’ Certificates” to rehabilitated forest dwellers and tribals. “We have submitted a detailed proposal to the Forest and Revenue Department to take action to make appropriate amendments to the relevant Act related to the rehabilitation of project displaced persons which would help in issuing “Project Displaced Persons’ Certificates” to the rehabilitated forest dwellers and tribals,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist.

At present, the government is offering monetary compensation and some land to the forest dwellers under the voluntary resettlement program from tiger reserves. In Maharashtra, the government has been providing project displaced person certificate to these forest dwellers to make it more attractive. NTCA, in the past, has also highlighted that Maharashtra’s model should be replicated in other states.

The step, as per NTCA, would not only help the eligible beneficiaries to get appropriate reservations in jobs, and education but will also bring down human pressure on forest areas, leading to better conservation and reduced human-wildlife conflict. Conservationists argue that issuance of “Project Displaced Persons’ Certificates” to rehabilitated forest dwellers and tribals will help the eligible beneficiaries to get appropriate reservation in jobs, education as well as get benefits of the government and reduce human pressure on forest areas, improve wildlife habitats. “Forest dwellers and tribals are ready to come out of the areas for their welfare and development, which would ultimately help in reducing anthropogenic pressure on forests,” added Kulkarni.

Conservationists say such measures will speed up the relocation program. “The certificate will boost the confidence of forest dwellers and thus more will be willing to relocate voluntarily. The present compensation is not very attractive. While the forest department is facing fund crunch to execute the program, this measure might help bring down the conflict cases,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.