Diverting forest land for mining, quarrying, road construction putting us at risk: Experts

In the last six years, Karnataka has diverted 1305.9 hectare of forest land for non-forestry purposes under the Forest Conservation Act. The majority of this land parcel was for projects related to the widening of existing roads and mining and quarrying.
 
Between 2016 and 2022, these two activities accounted for diversion of around 50 per cent of the total forest land conversion. While road projects led to the diversion of 313.03 hectare of forest land, mining and quarrying activities were responsible for the diversion of 287.3 hectare. In the given time period, as many as 25 road projects and 21 mining-related projects have been taken up on forest land across Karnataka.
 
The maximum amount of conversion due to mining activities was seen in 2016-17. As much as 145.04 hectare of green patch was diverted for such projects that year, followed by 101.6 hectare in 2018-19.
 
Experts say diverting forest areas at this rate will only degrade the ecology, hydrology, landforms and biodiversity of the area and is an inexcusable crime and proved that decision-makers are keen on promoting the economy at the cost of ecology.
 
“Deforestation of Swamimalai and Devagiri Gudda of Sandur taluk in the name of development of Devadhari Gudda by establishing an iron ore company is one such example. The government also got an ordinance for stone-crushing industry in Nandi Hills which form catchment for rivers such as Arkavathy, Kumudvati, Palar, Papagni, etc. In the last two decades, we have erased several fossil bearings sites from BRT to Ballari regions for quarrying, crushing industry and construction of dams, etc,” said Dr AN Yellapa Reddy, an environmentalist.

logs of timber being carried 
Researchers and conservationists say that forest patches should be diverted for no-forestry purposes only after conducting a detailed study before taking up development projects so as to align infrastructure activities with forest conservation objectives. However, decision-makers seldom consider this approach.
 
“What goes unquoted is the collateral damage due to such irresponsible action. While forest area is being sacrificed rampantly, none of the stakeholders are interested in conducting impact assessments of such projects in true spirit. While we should consider re-routing infrastructure projects to avoid large forest patches, it is everyone’s last priority,” said DV Girish, wildlife conservationist and environmentalist.

.
 
According to Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), these numbers only highlight the outcome of having environmentally illiterate policymakers and administrators. Loss of forest cover has a direct impact on livelihood of people too, apart from an adverse impact on the biodiversity and overall ecosystem.
 
“For a river to have water throughout a year, more than 60 per cent of its catchment area should have native forest cover. When a forest is fragmented, water availability becomes an issue. We have studied areas with intact forest cover and have also documented water availability throughout the year. Whereas, in fragmented forest areas, it comes down to six to eight months in a year,” said Dr Ramachandra.


. 
He further added that native undisturbed forest cover ensures diverse and abundant pollinators, which leads to greater crop yield.

While forest area is being sacrificed rampantly, none of the stakeholders are interested in conducted internal assessments­–DV Girish, environmentalist 
“We have recorded paddy crop yield to an extent of 14-16 quintal per acre with forest cover in the catchment of a river stream. On the contrary, catchment areas with lower forest cover yielded only 6 to 8 quintal per acre. Higher yield implies better livelihood of farmers,” said Dr Ramachandra.
 
Experts also say that this rate of forest fragmentation and deforestation will also manifest in the form of higher incidents of human-animal conflicts.