Glue traps are a cheap and popular way of exterminating rats and other pests, but a board carelessly thrown in a vacant site in Basaveshwaranagar ensnared five innocent victims —Indian mynas. Glue traps are regarded as the cruellest way of getting rid of pests, but the mynas, although a little worse for wear, managed to get away with their lives, thanks to quick action from wildlife sleuths.    The incident, however, has put the vendor of the trap on a sticky wicket. Wildlife sleuths say the trapping of animals protected under the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act (mynas are a schedule IV species) amounts to attempted hunting of wildlife. Moreover, a BBMP order issued in 2010 prohibits any organisation or pest-control company from handling wildlife by any method. The BBMP’s forest cell has served a show cause notice on the vendor.    “It’s unfortunate that pest control companies are putting wildlife and birds at risk using these glue traps,” said Sharath Babu, environment advisor, BBMP, said. “Five birds were caught in this one instance. We are taking legal action against those responsible.”   Glue traps are pieces of board (cardboard, plastic etc) coated with sticky adhesive, which immobilises small animals that step on it. The one found in Basaveshwaranagar — coated with banana-flavoured glue — was thrown in the vacant site after snaring a couple of rats. A myna attracted to the rats, swooped down and was trapped. A second bird came to the rescue of the first and it too got trapped. Three other birds which flew to help were similarly trapped.    Luckily for the birds, a passerby noticed them and alerted wildlife sleuths. The birds, some of them with feathers and skin peeled off, were rescued, treated and set free. The glue was removed with coconut oil. Sleuths involved in the rescue found evidence that the board was also used to trap a snake and bees, which is a violation of the Wildlife Act.    Sleuths say glue traps are commonly used in the city, but these traps also end up destroying wildlife. Squirrels too end up being victims of glue traps. While at least one snake is trapped every 10 days, at least four birds, including crows, sparrows, koel and mynas, are trapped every week. But these are only reported cases. Most animals simply die unnoticed.    “Chinese manja and glue traps play havoc with wildlife in city,” Babu said. “We are involved in at least five bird rescues injured due to manja every 10 days. Similarly, glue traps are proving deadly for birds, squirrels and snakes. Even protected species like cobras get trapped. We urge people not to use glue traps.”