With every one heading to either Goa or similar destinations that promise party time or just deciding to remain indoors because of the chilly weather, it is time to be different. The winter months can be a great time to getaway from the madding crowds and relax in a serene ambience. Lack of visitors not only propels tour operators to slash prices of packages but the longer nights, cooler weather and verdant landscape make winter travels romantic.

                                         Yelagiri Lake                  SWAYING IN THE BREEZE

Away from the salty sea breeze and dense forests, if you want to spend time by the thick coconut groves and swaying paddy fields while relishing some authentic Chettinad cuisine, then head to Yelagiri Hills in Tamil Nadu which is 160 kms from Bangalore. Hardly infested with toursts, Yelagiri offers you a pleasant stay akin to the experiences of staying in Ooty. The Punganoor Lake in the midst of the hills with boating facilities adds to the holiday mood. With several affordable hotels at a cost ranging from Rs 700 to Rs 1,800, the Yelagiri hills make your winter blissful. Some of them provide some really sumptuous fare, if you are one to appreciate good food.   

UP THE HILL

If you are looking for exotic locales close to Bangalore and accessible within a three to four  hour-drive, then Horsley Hills near Madanapalle could be an ideal destination. Located at an elevation of 1,265 metres from the sea level, Horsley Hills is about 160 kms from Bangalore and around 140 kms from the holy shrine of Tirupathi. Surrounded by Koundinya Wildlife Sanctuary, the hills are also near to Andhra’s highest waterfall, the Talakona falls. Though the area apart from an old Mallamma temple and Rishi Valley School does not have much tourist attraction, the winding roads, verdant forest, camping deep inside woods would refresh your tired soul. Besides, the Gangotri lake atop the hill and the Gaalibanda Environment Park will refresh your mind and bring you close to nature, while the Horsley Hills Museum will take you down the memory lane. You could stay at the AP Tourism's Governor's bungalow, the forest bungalows or the Chittoor Co-operative Society guesthouse. There are also a few resorts in the area.  

A LITTLE SUNSHINE

If you are trying to keep yourself away from the colder places, you can take off to the exotic destinations along the western seashore which provides enough warmth and sunshine and if you are keen on braving the chilly breeze and piercing humid air, scale the mountains to get a glimpse of vast neverending nature. For those who like warmer ambience amidst the biting cold breeze, then Devbagh in Uttara Kannada (Karwar) could be a perfect getaway. The island-beach resort which once inspired the Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore is located on an island and 500 kms from Bangalore. With its tranquil and panoramic view of Arabian Sea and thick meadows of casuarinas trees, the unspoilt ivory beach makes a perfect winter getaway. Several resorts including the State Government-run Jungle Lodges and Resorts have beach huts, log huts along the beach with a fine view of the vast sea. The nearby attractions including Sadashivgad fort, Gokarna, Dandeli and the unique underwater museum run by Indian Navy in Karwar further embellish the beauty of Devbagh besides the exotic sea food.

UPSPOILT TERRITORY

Further, the hill station circuit of coffeeland Chikmagalur comprising Mullayyanagiri, Kudremukh and Kemmannugundi is yet another destination that you could have on your winter itinerary list. Regarded as the tallest peak of Karnataka, Mullayyanagiri and its valleys were one of the few places where the coffee was first grown in India. A safari amidst the dense forests of Kudremukh wildlife sanctuary and a royal retreat at Kemmannugundi hill station would offer you the best of Western Ghats. 

The Horticulture Department's Guest House is the most popular place to stay in Kemmanagundi. You can also stay at neighbouring Chikmagalur and Shimoga, which have a choice of resorts and hotels.

LAND OF CAUVERY

However, the best of all comes with a trip to the land of river Cauvery -- Kodagu. Known to the be culturally rich and fecund beyond belief, a winter trip to Kodagu not only make you refreshed but also exposes you to the unique Kodava culture. 

Ranging from communing with the river Cauvery to spotting of various species of flora and fauna besides witnessing the vividness of the native culture, Kodagu will add charge to your cold winter. The Dubare elephant camp, Talakaveri, Pushpagiri wildlife sanctuary, Irpu falls and the parting Tadiyandamol between Karnataka and Kerala will unfold a natural world. Though considered to be a foreign culture, the Tibetan settlement at Bylakuppe over the years has nativised itself on several fronts. Homestays amidst vast coffee estates, resorts along the river Cauvery would make your stay memorable.