Karnataka government had abandoned plans for a road connecting Chikkamagaluru and Dakshina Kannada; now, a Delhi-based firm has revived the project saying the road is a lucrative option. Greens are unhappy
 
 The controversial proposal of a road connecting Byrapura (Chikkamagaluru) with Shishila (Dakshina Kannada) through pristine evergreen forests of Western Ghats is back, yet again. Facing intense backlash from green activists and local people, the state government had put the project on the back burner citing technical reasons. But now, the Centre has jumped into the fray and has proposed a new alignment along the same stretch, linking Chitradurga (Southern hinterland) with Mangaluru (Coastal area).
 
 The earlier claim that the road would provide an alternative to the traffic-filled National Highways passing through Charmadi and Shiradi ghats, has been discarded.
 Instead, the New Delhi-based firm that has proposed the new alignment says this would spur economic prosperity as it would set up a freight transportation corridor connecting the major port with the hinterland. Presenting the proposal to the Chikkamagaluru Deputy Commissioner last week, the firm, LEA Associates South Asia, held a meeting with the officials over the feasibility of the project.
 
 Sources privy to the discussion told BM, the new proposal would connect Chitradurga, a junction of two major National Highways, with Mangaluru via Holalkere-Kadur-Chikkamagaluru. The state government on its part was planning to provide an alternate road route to the existing NH via Charmadi and Shiradi citing increasing passenger traffic and inability to widen the roads owing to geographical constraints.
 
 “The existing road passing through Mudigere-Charmadi-Mangaluru cannot be widened as it abuts the reserve forest area. Further, acquisition of land for widening of the road will also be arduous task. Hence building the new road is the viable option and further helps the cargo traffic between Mangaluru Port and other parts of the hinterland,” representatives reportedly briefed the Chikkamagaluru District Administration. 
 
 Chikkamagaluru-Udupi parliamentarian Shobha Karandlaje had also petitioned Union Surface Transport minister Nitin Gadkari to take up the project and suggested a suspension bridge option over Byrapura-Holegundi to save the vast stretch of evergreen forests, which otherwise would have to be axed for the project.
 
 Congress MLC from Chikkamagaluru and former minister Motamma too batted for the project and raised the issue during the just-concluded winter session of the legislature.
 
 Replying to the issue, PWD minister Dr HC Mahadevappa said the government is still expecting a technical report from the experts as it was not happy with the alignment proposed by an earlier team.
 
 Locals have been arguing that over 30,000 trees have to be axed as the proposed project that cuts through 24 km of thick evergreen forests of Western Ghats that act as catchment for Nethravathi and its tributaries.
 
 
 
 
 
 Reacting over the fresh proposal, DV Girish, Managing Trustee, Bhadra Wildlife Conservation Trust, Chikkamagaluru, said, “The new road is not only longer compared to the existing road, but also causes irreparable damage to the fragile eco-system. While the existing road via Charmadi is just 303 km, the proposed road is 357 km in length. Other than this, there are several other roads passing via Kudremukh, Agumbe, Subramanya and Sringeri. However, the Central Government’s plan would damage the eco-system that receives more than 400-500 inches of rainfall every year.”
 
 “Out of the 52-km road between Byrapura and Shishila, about 25-30 km cut through evergreen and shola forests of the Western Ghats that have high water retention capacity and thus providing water in west flowing rivers like Nethravathi and her tributaries all through the year. The proposed new route will also cut through Balur, Miyar and Kabbinale reserve forest areas,” he said.
 
 Sources also revealed that recently when Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited Dharmasthala, a request was made to him by the local leaders to speed up the project on priority basis.