After 3 monkeys die near HAL quarters, forest officials, activists look for infection’s source

After a group of unwell monkeys started concerning residents near HAL quarters, they escalated the matter to authorities concerned so that the animals get proper treatment. People residing around the Jnana Jyothi School compound near HAL quarters have been observing that a group of around 6-8 monkeys among the over 30 monkeys in the area were not being their usual selves. “They had stopped eating over the couple of days and would sit at the same place all day-long, doing nothing. 
They all looked unwell and some of them were coughing and one of them was pregnant,” said Range Forest Officer Shivarathreswara Swamy

Seeing the plight of unwell monkeys, a few residents informed the People For Animals (PFA) volunteers who came to the spot and tried to feed the monkeys with some medicines mixed with food and water. But, the monkeys were not cooperating and only got irritated. The volunteers left after which the local residents informed the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officials.

On March 22, an adult monkey fell dead and the residents immediately informed the KFD authorities, stating they suspect the monkeys have been infected with some kind of viral disease and it looks like it is getting spread to other monkeys as well. KFD officials headed by Assistant Conservator of Forests Charan GS along with the RFO, his subordinate DRFO Rukmini and others visited the spot. After conducting observations, they sent the dead body of the monkey for postmortem at the government veterinary hospital in Domlur.

Dr Harish performed the postmortem and found that the infection was to the lungs, which looked like pneumonia. The stomach of the monkey was also swollen. However, for a confirmatory diagnosis, the organ and the blood samples of the dead monkey was sent to the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals, reports of which are awaited. Later, two other monkeys died, one of them a pregnant female. Again the KFD officials along with wildlife activists visited the spot and observed that over six monkeys among the total troop of over 30 monkeys still looked lethargic and refused to eat or come down from the tree.

Deaths of the monkeys on the second day rattled KFD officials, who sent the bodies again to postmortem and requested a veterinary doctor to visit the spot. The postmortem was again conducted by Dr Harish, who said that one monkey had died of lung infection while the pregnant one died due to complications in delivery. However, viscera from the carcasses and blood samples of the two dead monkeys have been sent to the IAHVB in Hebbal.
 
Veterinarians also suspected that the unwell monkeys could have been victims of food poisoning as they might have consumed drainage water due to the heat. They also suspect rabies or Kyasanur forest disease. “We mixed a few medicines like some broad-spectrum antibiotics and multivitamins in water and bananas that have been kept in the vicinity of the monkeys. Except for three or four monkeys that refused to come down the tree, others drank the water and had bananas,” Dr Harish told Bangalore MIrror.

The forest department officials have not deployed a forest watcher near the school to keep an eye on the monkeys. “Since the medicines were started, there has been noticeable improvement,” said Arun Prasad, an urban wildlife activist.