What happens when an avid biker/car racer/martial art enthusiast and wildlife photographer (there is also full-time job as a media professional with TOI in the mix) and a freelance writer, biker and lover of unplanned road journeys, meet as destiny would have planned?
 
 The beginning of many adventures.
 
 Kalyan Chakraborty (infamously known as ‘KC’) and I have been an amazing team — on and off the road for over a year now. He taught me to drive, drift and do the “donut”. I re-introduced the bicycle in his life. Together our love for wheels set us on many memorable road trips. 
 
 Bengaluru is a great city to bicycle, minus the unforgiving traffic, untamed drivers and unexpected (or should I say ‘expected’) surprises, on the streets.
 
 On a quiet long weekend, the streets are a joy to pedal through.
 
 February 20 (Saturday)/Jakkur: 4a.m.
 
 
 
 
 Early Saturday morning, we woke up to a very inspiring goal - ‘Victory Bike Lift Picture’ in front of The Mysore Palace (avid bikers would have mastered the few classic poses with the bike — victory lift, wheelie, hands off handle, to name a few).
 
 Our ride started at 5.30am KST (Kalyan Standard Time) which undoubtedly has a bare minimum of a 30-minute delay from Jakkur, to the sights of Nandini milk packets being off loaded from milk trucks. Powered by eggs, bananas, and tender coconut water for hydration, the ride began on our MTB-GT Avalanche Sport (27.5” tyre size) at a comfortable and enjoyable pace.
 
 Mysore can be reached via KR Market-Mysore Road-RV Engineering College-Kengeri-Mysore Road, Jigani-Kanakapura-Mysore Road, Corporation circle-Sirsi Circle-Mysore Road or Tumkur Road - Magadi Road -Mysore Road.  The aim is to intersect the Mysore road, so chose the option closest to the start point.
 
 
 Jakkur–Hebbal–NH4–NICE toll gate– 6.45am, 25km 
 
 
 It took us an hour to reach the NICE tollgate. Exercise caution at the Hebbal and NH4-Outer Ring Road intersections. Reflective gear and a great headlight (200 lumens from Decathlon) are life savers.
 
 Before many give an educated shout out that ‘NICE ROAD IS CLOSED TO BICYCLES’ (autos, tractors and bullock carts too), here is our cool twist to the tale. You can flag any friendly truck before the tollgate and hitch a ride until the start of the Mysore Road (if you want to shave a few kms off the ride and enjoy an open truck experience).
 
 The spontaneity paid off and we truly enjoyed the experience.
 
 Ramanagara–Kamat: 9km, 9.45am
 
 
 
 
 This refueling point was our much-awaited first pit stop. Akki Roti, idli, Kesari bhath and a Jalebi each – were devoured with no regret or guilt. The ride from this point on (resumed at 1030hrs) was going to be hard as we chose a very hot day for the ride.
 
 Bidadi–Ramanagara: 35km, 9.30am
 
 The streets of Bengaluru officially do not recognise cyclists as visible-viable-living beings. The traffic had begun to intensify and we had lost count of the number of times we were pushed off the lane by over speeding KSRTC and private buses.
 
 Here is where you learn an important life skill of balance and to fall against gravity. When we did get small pockets of traffic free lanes and biked with the local train passing by, we
 forgot the literal pushovers.
 
 Mysore Road: 7.30am
 
 
 
 
 We resumed our ride on the Mysore Road and made a quick halt to salute ‘The Boss’ (No references to actor Rajinikanth though the Tamilian in me wholeheartedly endorses the title). 
 
 This ritualistic salute began in 2012 when KC and his twin door Toyota racer miraculously escaped without a scratch post coming under the wheels of a trailer truck in front of this temple.
 
 Kamat–Channapatna–Maddur–Mandya: 52km, 12.30pm
 
 
 This was one non-stop stretch that tested us as we tried to maintain our average speed of 26 km per hour. The heat and the traffic did slow us down. Hydration was the key.
 
 We believed that the early morning head-start would make for a great start but the traffic beast catches up with you no matter when you pedal off. Hydration is a double-edged sword for women riders! 
 
 You just have to wait for a Coffee Day if you need a restroom break. So there was reason to my speed at the last leg of this pit stop. The dark chocolate ice cream with banana felt like elixir. Well rested, we resumed the ride at 1400hrs.
 
 Mandya–Srirangapatna–Mysuru (Mysore Palace): 59km, 4.45pm
 
 
 
 The street wore a relatively deserted look at this stretch reflecting the afternoon siesta time. This stretch saw consistent uphill and downhill at regular intervals. The last leg from Srirangapatna towards Columbia Asia signal (entrance to Mysore) is indeed a long, lonely stretch for two people on bicycles on a hot and humid day.
 
 We stopped a couple of times to refuel and there was one stretch where I did take a power nap for 10 minutes.
 
 St Philomena’s Church–Mysore Palace: 5pm
 
 
 This victory stretch through the busy, narrow and crowded lanes was the most cherished stretch of our ride. We did wait for the sun to set to capture our ‘victory bike lift’ picture much to the amusement of locals and tourists alike. 
 
 As we stood, watching the setting sun over the royal palace, there was just one thought that KC and I shared — dinner!
 
 True bravehearts can ride back the same day. The night ride is bound to be quite challenging and exhilarating. The traffic and vehicles on high beam add a huge risk to this journey. The bus terminal is a mere 5km from the Palace and one can conveniently place the bike in the luggage area and enjoy a comfortable bus ride home. There is, however, the in-city traffic that one has to face from Kengeri Satellite Bus Terminal. So we decided to rest the night and return the next day.
 
 February 21 (Sunday): 3.30pm
 
 
 
 Flat tyre! What good is a long bicycle journey if one does not experience a flat tyre! My bicycle went flat just as we approached Kengeri late afternoon on Sunday. 
 
 With a spare tyre, a puncture kit and an expert like KC, the wheels were back on the road and it was touch down at 1800hrs. As we shook hands and parted with a hug, there was just one thought on both our minds — dinner!