Bengaluru will soon have a 56-member dedicated leopard task force to address human-leopard conflict cases arising in the future. This decision was made by state forest minister Eshwar Khandre on Monday in the wake of the recent leopard sighting in a residential area in south Bengaluru.
 
The team will be headed by the Deputy Conservator of Forest, either wildlife or territorial. The task force will also include an assistant conservator of forest, one range forest officer, four deputy range forest officers, eight forest guards, and 40 watchers. According to the officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), a proposal for this will soon be sent to the government and the task force will be constituted in a month from now.
 
“The process will take a couple of weeks. It is important to put the right people on the team and recruit forest watchers with experience in human-wildlife conflict situations. Watchers are the foot soldiers and they will be equipped with up-to-date technology and gears to carry out combing operations and perform other important tasks,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Earlier this year, a leopard task force was created in Mysore circle on the lines of the Elephant taskforce. Officials from the department said although the team is well equipped to handle conflict cases, situations are different in the case of densely populated areas such as Bengaluru urban district.

“Whenever there is a requirement in adjacent districts, such as in Kodagu, Ramanagara, and Chamrajanagara, the Mysore task force is deputed to handle the situation and resolve the issues. While the members are well trained, human-animal conflict situations in densely populated areas pose unique challenges. This is the reason a dedicated task force has been created for Bengaluru,” said a senior official from KFD.

Wildlife experts have lauded this step, with a word of caution. “A dedicated leopard taskforce for Bengaluru is a step in the right direction. However, the department should exercise caution in formulating the team. The members should have field experience and background in handling conflict cases. The team should be well-equipped,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.