Only last month, a herd of wild elephants strayed into human habitation on the outskirts of the city, destroying infrastructure in an international school and killing at least one person, while injuring several others. Then there was the case of residents in the IT corridor being terrorised by what they first believed was a leopard, but was eventually found to be a species of wild cat.    Realising the importance of keeping forests and the natural habitat of wildlife intact, the state government has now more than doubled the extent of Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) by adding one more range of hills to its limits.    With the addition of the new range, the extent of BNP has shot up to 259 sq kms and is now spread across three districts — Bangalore Urban, Bangalore Rural and Ramanagar. The expansion primarily offers safe passage for wild animals, especially elephants, moving from one wildlife sanctuary to another while barring human intervention in the area.   Prior to the expansion, the BNP expanse totalled 102 sq km area across two districts. The government has now added the Kodihalli range, spanning 157 sq km in Ramnagar division, to BNP. The current extent of BNP now stands at 259 sq km. According to sources in the forest department, the official handing over of the additional range was completed last week.   Acknowledging the addition of new range, T V Karikalan, deputy conservator of forests (DCF), Bannerghatta National Park, told Bangalore Mirror, “The decision to add Kodihalli range to BNP was taken last year, but only now the official procedure has been completed and the park has been widened with additional forest area. Because of its geographical position, the Kodihalli stretch is crucial as it connects both Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary and BNP. It is also part of the Elephant Corridor and helps elephants move from one sanctuary to another without venturing into urban areas.”   The Kodihalli range was earlier under the control of the territorial forest division, but has now been moved to the control of the wildlife division.    “As the area is located adjacent to the Harohalli range which is currently under BNP control, it is easier for us to extend our administrative control. With the help of additional staff, we will step up vigilance and ensure that animals are provided safe passage while moving from one sanctuary to another,” Karikalan said.   STAFF CRUNCH A total of 18 watchers, working in various shifts, currently patrol the park, keeping an eye out for poaching and other illegal activities. But now that the BNP has got bigger, the authorities are worried that their resources would be stretched thin.    The state government has made no mention of recruiting extra staff. BNP authorities plan to recruit another 25 watchers on a contract basis.   Disclosing this, Karikalan said, “I have also written to the department seeking additional staff as the area is too big and difficult to be managed with current staff. Till the department responds, we will have to manage with whatever means are at our disposal. With both permanent and temporary watchers, we will set up four to five anti-poaching camps and step up vigilance. The new area is the gateway to the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary which is home to several unique flora and fauna and also shares a border with Tamil Nadu. So we have to keep strict vigil.”