By Reya Mehrotra

Locals near Turahalli forest call rescue officials, but deer dies of cardiac arrest

Locals noticed a pregnant spotted deer being chased by four feral dogs in Kodipalya at 11.30 am on Saturday and informed the forest wildlife rescue team. By the time the team got here, the deer had died of a cardiac arrest. 

It had sustained injuries on its throat and legs and collapsed due to the belly weight as it was being chased. It did due to cardiac arrest at that time, said the veterinary doctor, who conducted the post-mortem. 

Off late, wildlife enthusiasts have been demanding that the forest department take up some measure to protect spotted deer and other vulnerable species like peacocks in Turahalli forest area. 

According to locals, there have been seven attacks on spotted deer by feral dogs in the area. Joseph Hoover, a wildlife enthusiast, who visited the spot and witnessed the post-mortem, says, “It is disappointing that the forest department is taking no action on this. If they don’t, we will get the feral dogs relocated to other areas as spotted deers are always under attack. Feral dogs hunting deer is not a natural process. The deer population in Turahalli will drop if this continues.”

On May 6, BM had written about how a 5-month-old spotted deer was rescued by BBMP wildlife rescuers on Nice Road. The forest department, however, said that relocation of feral dogs will not be a wise option.

R Gokul, Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF), said, “In an open urban landscape like Bengaluru, it is humanly impossible to prevent a dog-deer interaction even if KFD or BBMP, try, unless we are able to separate these two with a high wall, which is also impractical. Such incidences are not recent occurences. Dogs being carnivores, will try to prey on herbivores like deer. When deer live in sanctuaries surviving the danger posed by tigers and leopards, they can also survive the danger posed by dogs. This is quite a natural process in an urban landscape, which should not be tampered with.”

Gokul also said that such attacks won’t hinder the deer population. He said, “Deers will reproduce till they reach the carrying capacity of the area. It will reduce only if there is human interference in the form of hunting or habitat destruction.”