A new study sheds light on the harsh and unsafe conditions forest guards in India have to work under.

Twenty-four-year-old Deepu Rana, a forest guard with the Madhya Pradesh forest department, was out on patrol on May 4 last year, in the Ghatigaon forest, west of Gwalior city, when he heard a gunshot. As he walked in the direction of the sound, he came face-toface with a poacher and his catch, a dead jungle fowl. Before he could take stock of the situation, the poacher fired at him and fled the scene. Rana was rushed to the hospital, where he died within minutes of arrival.

In a similar incident in October 2014, Satish Shendre, a forest guard with Maharashtra’s Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF), posted at the Pench Tiger Reserve, almost lost his life when he, along with two forest watchers, apprehended two armed men. As Shendre was about to catch hold of one of the poachers, the man fired at him. The location, down a steep valley, was not reachable by a vehicle. The watchers had to carry him to the nearest antipoaching camp, from where he was taken to a dispensary in the nearby town, and then to a hospital in Nagpur, where he was kept in intensive care for 15 days.

Apart from confrontations with armed poachers, fishing, timber and sand mafias, as well as illegal miners, forest guards also face risks from attacks by animals (most of which are accidental), and other medical emergencies (such as vehicle accidents, drowning and forest fires). Between 2012 to June 2020, some 287 Indian rangers lost their lives in the line of duty, according to data compiled by the International Ranger Federation. Of these, 101 (35 per cent) deaths were on account of vehicular trauma and other injuries; 97 (34 per cent) due to attacks by wildlife; and 66 (23 per cent) due to attacks by humans. Infectious diseases and non-communicable diseases contributed two per cent each, while the remaining four per cent were due to unknown causes. The defining figure from this analysis, conducted by Dr Vishal Gadre, a senior programme officer with the One Health programme at the Wildlife Conservation Trust (WCT), [i-[1] is that the majority of ranger deaths in India – 92 per cent in all – were due to trauma.

A detailed and thorough assessment of health needs of forest guards working in Protected Areas in Central India, conducted by WCT[i-[2] , has thrown new light on how the state lacks in providing formedical emergencies of rangers, including access to medical equipment and first-aid training, as well as the availability of healthcare facilities. The study is the largest of its kind, and its findings are the fruit of exhaustive field surveys conducted over three years, from 2016 to 2019, speaking to more than 1,200 forest guards from 15 tiger reserves, two wildlife sanctuaries and a national park, spread across six states.

According to the study, the average distance a forest guard has to travel to seek definitive care (to conclusively manage a medical condition) for major health emergencies (like fits and seizures, serious injuries, animal attacks, poacher assaults, major accidents, heart attacks and cardiac arrests) is over 30 km. Thirty-two per cent of the forest guards reported that they had no access to local medical facilities within commuting distance (5 km or less). These figures have compelled WCT to take the next logical step in partnership with the forest department, to map the number of health facilities around tiger reserves in central India. The exercise will help understand where health infrastructures exist and don’t, and how existing infrastructure can be supported and strengthened.

 According to the study, the average distance a forest guard has to travel to seek definitive healthcare is over 30 km
The next worrying revelation is the paucity of first-aid equipment. A startling 82 per cent of forest guards revealed that they have no access to medical first-aid in the field. While the top three items the guards have on them are mild pain killers (14.5 per cent), bandages (12.8 per cent) and antiseptics (10.9 per cent), few guards had splints (1.3 per cent), stretchers (0.9 per cent) and thermometers (3.2 per cent).

While 64 per cent of the participants had not received any first-aid training, others had received varying degrees of training, from informal to basic and advanced. Considering forest guards are prone to medical emergencies, training them in firstaid and trauma management is absolutely necessary. In an emergency, the right skill can save lives.

In case of a vehicular accident, for example, protecting the spine and binding the pelvis, while extricating the victim, can prevent worsening of the injury or death. The technique called log-rolling is just one of the many skills imparted to forest guards during the ‘Trauma Management Training’ sessions conducted by WCT. The training programmes, conducted in collaboration with forest departments, have benefited over 1,200 forest guards so far.

To live a forest guard’s life, away from family and human settlements, where one’s chief concerns are about cleaning and examining waterholes for poisoning, fighting forest fires, checking camera traps and restoring meadows with native grasses, takes a conscious choice of selfless service and devotion. And yet many young men and women are eager to take up these jobs and work for the protection of wildlife and forests. A few even apply for transfers from comfortable postings in district places to remote core zones of tiger reserves, like 24-year-old Dinesh Kendre, who gave up engineering to pursue a career as a forest guard, and requested a transfer from his posting in Buldhana district to Koktu, one of the remotest areas in the interiors of the Melghat Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra.

These men and women protect the country’s natural wealth, on which our food, water, climate and health security relies heavily on. We need to invest commitment and resources towards improving their health, safety and work conditions, not to mention making quality education accessible and affordable for their children, to secure our shared future.

The writer works with the Wildlife Conservation Trust