Animal lovers took to social media over the weekend to vent their anger against two Koramangala families’ alleged cruelty towards their pet dogs — forcing local authorities into action.
 
 Dipali Sikand, a Koramangala 3rd Block resident, posted on Facebook about the two dogs manacled under the scorching sun, spurring an outpouring of concern for the pets and censure against their owners. The petowners denied any wrongdoing. But on Monday, animal welfare authorities said they visited the houses and “counselled” the owners that even chaining pets for no reason amounted to cruelty.
 
 It all began on Saturday afternoon, when Sikand saw a boxer tied to a compound wall in blistering heat. She spoke to the security guard of the house, but he didn’t listen to her. She next tried to reach NGOs and BBMP, but in vain. Finally, she turned to Facebook and made her anger public.
 
 “It doesn’t matter if you have all the money in the world if you have no heart... this poor dog was left tied on a short leash by his very famous owners in Koramangala in the hottest sun with a jerk of a watchman who refused to hear the dogs howl telling him to shut up because sahib is sleeping inside peacefully... why have a pet if you have to leave it on the streets.# cruelty to animals,” Sikand posted.
 
 The post drew a lot of comments — ‘shameful’, ‘dreadful’, ‘not good’, ‘so sad’ said a lot of people.
 A netizen, Preeta Narain, commented: “Why do they need dogs? To guard the house? They can get security high tech these days. Such people do not deserve dogs (sic).”
 
 Sikand posted about another dog on Sunday. This time a husky. “Meet bolo a husky tied up 247 on the streets of Koramangala. Is this what we have done to ourselves. Made ourselves completely inhuman heartless... a siberian husky deserves a better place ... god give me strength to take this on . And I won’t give up no matter what now.”
 
 This post too drew a lot of comments with netizens venting out their anger over the alleged ill-treatment of the husky.
 
 With netizens expres-sing anguish, wildlife authorities said they would look into the case. When approached, the owner of the boxer, V Gupta, allegedly said they had a newborn baby and that was why they had tied their pet outside. The Reddys, owners of the husky, allegedly said it was out in the sun only that day.
 
 Meanwhile, the dogowners have denied ill-treating their pets. When BM tried to contact the owner of the boxer, Gupta, he was unavailable for comment. However, Anand GK, who works at the Reddys’ house, said: “Our dog is well taken care of. It has been with us for more than four years.”
 
 The Reddys also said they were not subjecting their husky to any cruelty. Jeevitha Reddy, daughter of Ramana Reddy, said: “We are not ill-treating our dog. If we were, the husky should have been outside 24/7. But that’s not the case. Why would we subject our pet to cruelty after getting it to our household?”
 
 Read: She found a guardian angel