In case of injuries inside forest, they have to wait till they get back to camp
 
The High Court in recent orders in a petition directed authorities to provide medical facilities for elephants in camps across Karnataka. Medicines had to be stockpiled and vets were to be appointed on duty the court had directed. The medical needs of forest staff, however, had gone unnoticed. Anti-poaching staff, guards and watchers who patrol and are camped deep in the forests do not have first-aid kits on them. So, if they suffer any injury, they had to travel several kilometers to get treated. 

Recently, on a camping visit to Bandipur, filmmaker Shruti Naidu noticed the problems of the staff first-hand. “We were on a campaign to create awareness about the man-animal conflict. The problems of the forest guards and anti-poaching staff came to light. The absence of first-aid kits was noticed. I spoke to the conservator of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve, T Balachandra and offered the kits,” Naidu said. 

There are 52 camps of guards, watchers and anti-poaching staff in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. There are about six guards, usually forest tribals in each camp. Naidu has provided 60 first-aid kits to be distributed to each of the 52 camps.

“It is just a small gesture to create awareness. I know that it is the government which has to do more. Along with creating awareness about saving wildlife and preventing man-animal conflict, we have to also focus on creating the right atmosphere for those who are putting their lives on the line to protect the forest and wildlife,” she said. 
Along with creating awareness, we have to also focus on creating the right atmosphere for everyone–Shruti Naidu, Filmmaker 
The Bandipur Tiger Reserve is spread across 872 sq km and is a hotbed of biodiversity. It is one of the six tiger reserves in Karnataka.

“The staff stationed in the camps inside do not have direct access to medical facilities and get no leaves or weekly offs. It is a 24/7 job without shifts. 

These are all issues the authorities have to address. Common people like us can raise awareness and persuade them to provide facilities,” Naidu said.