The big cat was found hiding in a culvert a few metres away from the building

Forest officials were caught napping and residents of Gandhinagar were in panic mode as a leopard slipped into the Gujarat secretariat complex in the wee hours of Monday. Employees of Sachivalaya were kept out of their offices till noon. They heaved a sigh of relief after the leopard was tranquilised and rescued post a 10-hour operation from a wooded area behind Sachivalaya.

But wildlife enthusiasts believe the leopard might have been in the vicinity for some days. They back their claim to a dead pig being found near the place where the leopard was rescued.

    Tigress Avni killed: Union Minister Maneka Gandhi lashes out at Maharashtra governmentA day after tigress Avni was shot dead in the forests of Maharashtra's Yavatmal district, Union Cabinet Minister for Women and Child Development Maneka Gandhi lashed out at the BJP-led Maharashtra government, calling the incident a "straight case of crime".   
At times, leopards are known to stash away their kill after hunting them to come back and relish later.

The male leopard about 4 years of age was first spotted on CCTV cameras by security officials. At 1.53 am, it was seen slithering below Gate number 7. Forest officials reached the spot and began combing operations around 4 am. A team of forest officials spotted the leopard in a culvert near a forest area behind the secretariat complex.

Sources said a dead pig was found at the spot from where the leopard was caught indicating that the animal had returned to the spot to eat its kill.

Wildlife enthusiast Dharmendra Trivedi said, “I saw the CCTV grab and it indicated that the leopard knew where it had to go. It’s just that it got caught this time. It may have killed early morning and found a safe passage.”

Nirav Parikh, a wildlife enthusiast and researcher based in Ahmedabad, said, “Forest officials must have intelligence — if not physical then virtual — in the digital age. They should be aware about movements of such predators. They just need to get creative with technology and human intelligence.” 

    Delhi air drastically worsens ahead of Diwali, politicians play blame game as farmers continue to burn stubbleExperts recommended avoiding outdoor activities till the air quality improved while the Centre maintained that it has already done its best to dissuade farmers from burning stubble.