Visceral samples of three tigers found dead in TN wildlife reserves made their way into the city, crossing checkposts, to be looked at by ace vet and forensic expert; reports will show if poisoning was cause of death

At a time when the entire medical fraternity and administration were busy saving lives of people affected by Covid-19, a silent group of veterinarians from Bengaluru was busy doing their bit for tiger conservation in the country. A team of wildlife experts here was busy investigating the mystery behind the deaths of three tigers in Tamil Nadu.

In April, in the middle of the Covid-19 lockdown, three tigers were found dead, two in the Annamalai Tiger Reserve in Coimbatore in Tamil Nadu, and less than a week later, one was found dead in Masinagudi Forest Range in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve in Nilgiris. Officials suspected poisoning to be the cause of deaths. 

Back in Bengaluru, veterinarian and forensic expert Dr HS Prayag and his team had earned quite a name among wildlife and tiger conservationists and among officials of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) after they managed to solve the mystery of four dead tigers found at Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary in North Goa in January. They had conducted sample tests and discovered that poisoning was the cause of the four tiger deaths.

So, in April, despite the lockdown, the dead tigers’ visceral samples made their way through secured check-posts from the high-risk state of Tamil Nadu to Karnataka for testing by Dr Prayag and team. 

In the Coimbatore case, forest officials suspect the tigers ate a wild boar that could have been poisoned. And in the Nilgiris case, the tiger had died near Maravakandi dam a week before its body was washed away in strong currents. All three tiger carcasses were found decomposed.

“Traditional methods of investigating into poisoning cases of tigers will yield positive results only if the bodies/carcasses are not decomposed,” says Dr Prayag. 

NS Murali, Inspector General of Forests (NTCA) told BM, that test results of the two tigers at Annamalai Tiger Reserve, indicate that they had indeed died of poiso­ning.” However, it remains to be seen if the poisoning was meant to kill the tigers or to kill the wild boar,” he said.

The results of the samples of the dead tiger from Mudumalai Reserve being checked at the forensic laboratory in Bengaluru, are yet to be out. Dr Prayag says in all likelihood, this tiger did not die of poisoning. Forest officials, who conducted its post-mortem, said there were no external injuries on the animal and all its organs were healthy. 

The officials suspect the animal could have died after being washed away in a strong water current. The officials also ruled out any possibility of poaching as the big cat’s claws and teeth remained intact.

The Goa case
The decomposed carcass of a tiger was first spotted on January 5 in Mhadei Sanctuary. When forest officials combed the area, they found three dead cubs. The forest officials learnt that villagers had poisoned the tiger, after it killed cattle in Bhuipal village in December.

A large part of the samples collected got exhausted in the traditional method of analysing whether the tigers had been poisoned or not. “We had only limited samples of all four tigers when it came to Bengaluru. The Goa government paid for kits imported from the US with which we tested the samples and the reports were positive for poisoning,” Dr Prayag said.