By Iffath Fathima

Rescued egret dies after drinking polluted water; locals call for STPs, rejuvenation

Last October, thousands of dead snails and fish were found floating on the banks of Madiwala lake due to pollution. That nightmare seems to be on the verge of returning. On February 6, a cattle egret was found unconscious on the lake’s bank. 

Citizen activist, Naveen S, who was passing by the lake saw the bird and checked to find it was alive still. “When I picked the bird up, it was trying to move. I put it on the ground, but the bird collapsed immediately. I realised that something was wrong with the bird, it was totally dehydrated. I knew it was definitely a victim of the polluted lake. Earlier, we had seen how thousands of fish and snails were found dead here.”


 	   Naveen found sewage inflow, figured the bird had drunk lake water   

Naveen found that sewage from a nearby storm water drain was entering the lake. He then took the bird to the Deputy Range Forest Officer, who asked him to take the egret to a veterinary clinic. “I took the bird to the Wildlife Rescue Rehab Centre in Bannerghatta Road. They asked me to leave it there for treatment. The bird died the next day,’’ said Naveen.

Speaking to BM, Dr Anand Nair of Wildlife Rescue Rehab Centre, said, “It was a clear case of water poisoning. The bird had consumed the water in the lake. It was getting suffocated. We tried treating it, but it couldn’t survive.”

   It was a clear case of water poisoning. The bird had consumed the water in the lake–Dr Anand Nair, Wildlife Rescue Rehab Centre   

The Assistant Range Forest Officer (KR Puram ) said, “We have blocked all the drains from where the sewage can enter the lake. In addition to this, a tender was passed to get a Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) built near the lake. It will take about a year for the STP to be built. Till then we have taken measures to manage the drains.”

Hisss Mohan, BBMP wildlife rescuer, has come across many such birds in the past which were dead or found in a collapsed state. “Last year, we found birds like eagles, crows and cormorants dead near Jakkur and Ulsoor lakes. Last month, I found a dead pelican bird near a lake on Bannerghatta road. These days, we even find dead turtles near the lakes.”

Residents around Madiwala Lake have been complaining of sewage and industrial waste entering the lake for a long time. Lake expert and co- founder of Friends of Lake, Ram Prasad, said, “Madiwala is one of the oldest lakes. This incident is an indication of something being wrong with the lake. Locals may use a water-testing kit to check how polluted the water is. But regardless of that, the lake should be rejuvenated. It should not only meet civil engineering standards, but also take care of environmental, ecological, limnological and hydrogeological factors.’’

 Deep and dry in VarthurThe residents of Varthur depend on borewell water, supplied by private water suppliers since the Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) authorities have failed to supply Cauvery water to all dwellings in and around Varthur.