Wildlife conservationist demands insurance for eco-tourism

A wildlife conservationist from Karnataka, in a letter written to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) RK Singh, has requested to cover eco-tourism centres maintained by the forest department by insurance policy.

“Karnataka’s eco-tourism sites offer activities like trekking, kayaking, jet skiing, birding, banana ride, bump ride, dolphin ride, safari, zip-ride, boat ride, rafting, visit to falls/elephant camps, including the proposed ropeway. These activities are run either by the Karnataka Forest Department, Jungle lodges or Karnataka Ecotourism Development Board,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, wildlife conservationist.

“However, many of the activities carry a risk for tourists like wild animal attacks, drowning and more, which may result in accidental deaths, permanent or partial disabilities,” he added.

The initiative, if implemented, is expected to boost the state’s tourist-friendly image and increase confidence among travelers in line with the Karnataka Tourism Policy 2020-26, which strives to ensure the safety of visitors at eco-tourism sites across the state.

“There have been accidents in some parts of central India involving wildlife, and tourists have become hesitant. An insurance policy will instill confidence among
 tourists and boost it in the state,” he explained.

Notably, some of the states’ forest departments have tied up with insurance companies and have an insurance policy for tourists at the eco-tourism centres maintained by the department.


 Many of the activities carry risk for tourists like wild animal attack, drowning–Giridhar Kulkarni, conservationist

It would be good if the state government or forest department can enter into an agreement with an insurance company, along the same lines as a few states such as Kerala. These states provide insurance coverage for tourists in case of accidental deaths and permanent and partial disabilities if the incident happens at eco-tourism sites, he informed.

“The Forest department could impose a condition that coverage will be only for visitors who have taken tickets to eco-tourism sites. The insurance contract may exclude losses caused by communicable diseases or pandemic,” he wrote to the PCCF along with PCCF (wildlife), additional principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) and MD of Jungle Lodges & Resorts.