Despite modest increase in forest area, forest department grapples with challenges to preserve biodiversity and ecosystem health

Between April and December 2023, Karnataka added 2,892 hectares of forest area to its existing reserve of 40,64,930 hectares. With this, the total area under forest cover has reached 40,67,822 hectares. However, this forms just 21.21 per cent of the total geographical area. Despite the recent inclusion, Karnataka’s current forest cover is much lower than it was a little over two decades ago. In 2002, the state had 43,35,645 hectares of forest area, forming 22.61 per cent of the total geographical area.

According to the National Forest Policy of India, the ideal percentage of the total geographical area under forests should be at least 33 per cent to maintain ecological stability. Experts say that given that the 33 per cent benchmark has no scientific basis, the focus should be on forest quality. Increasing forest areas with native tree species will be more useful than monoculture plantations for financial gain. Moreover, ill-advised tree-planting schemes would prove detrimental in the long term, and we should safeguard natural forests.

“While forest area must increase, natural forest cover should get priority. Any plantation activity will not lead to a high level of ecosystem restoration and services as provided by natural forests. For instance, in many areas in the Western Ghats, Acacia plantation was carried out sometime back and is accorded forest status. Similarly, many forest areas in Karnataka have Nilgiri plantations with hardly any native trees,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.
 
Experts say instead of plantation drives in the Western Ghats area, the forest department should focus on greening dry areas while securing grassland ecosystems. “Plantation drives in areas with good forest cover will not be beneficial. Apart from carrying out such drives in dry areas, the department should consider diverting funds towards extraction of Acacia and Nilgiri plantation from the Western Ghats,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a conservationist.

Forest land diversion continues
Regardless of the low forest cover, Karnataka continues to divert green patches for various non-forestry purposes. According to data from the forest department, between April and December 2023, nearly 120.6 hectares of forest area was diverted for non-forestry purposes. Out of these, while 53.67 hectares were for various mining projects, a little over 65.83 hectares were diverted for railway and 1.05 hectares for transmission lines. In 2022-23, 89.61 hectares were diverted and in 2021-22, 60.48 hectares were redirected for various projects. With this, the total forest area diverted so far is 32,062.49 hectares; nearly half the size of Bengaluru.

 “Given the ongoing climate crisis, diversion of even a single hectare of forest area for non-forestry purposes is criminal. While the government claims to have added nearly 3,000 hectares of forest area to its existing reserve, the quality of these plantations should be questioned. Moreover, any sapling takes a minimum of 20-25 years to start providing similar ecological services as a mature tree. Keeping these aspects in mind, any forest land diversion should be completely stopped at least temporarily,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
Conservationists also underline that in case of unavoidable diversions, an assessment of the carrying capacity of the forest areas should be conducted.