Music enthusiasts in Bengaluru plan their year-end trips so the wanderer in them gets to live it up too
 
 	It's that time of the year when people are set to use all their left-over leave and hit the holiday trail. 

 	With so many music fests, concerts and parties happening in and outside Bengaluru, all these music-lovers plan their travel to coincide with some of the biggest music events happening over the next two months. 

 	“Goa is the ultimate yearend party destination ­ it's a no-brainer. We are a group of six friends who plan a big road trip to Goa every year between December 25 and 30. It depends whether we stay there for the New Year, but we make sure we don't miss Sunburn,“ says Pooja B, an IT professional, who says the Bengaluru-Goa drive has much to offer for a those who like a bit of sight-seeing. 

 	“There is so much to see on the way. Last year, we took the Hubli-Karwar route and stopped by Chitradurga to see the forts and also stopped at Bhagwan Mahaveer Wildlife Sanctuary, Mollem National Park and Dudhsagar waterfalls.But this year we plan to go via Shimoga-Honnavar-Karwar as we want to go to Jog and maybe spend a night at Gokarna,“ she says. 

 	But here's another group that is also going to Goa, but to attend the Supersonic fest.“We are bored of Sunburn, and this year we want to do everything different and new in Goa. We plan to attend Supersonic; we missed the first edition of the fest last year, hence we will be there this year. And instead of going to the usual hangouts, shacks and clubs in Baga, we plan spend time in Vagator and Morjim -attend hilltop parties and dine at some amazing restaurants,“ says Raghu KS, an entrepreneur. 

 	An adventure, camp-out music fest is what tempts a lot of people. “I'm from Pune, so I know that Aamby Valley is a beautiful destination and that's why I'm headed there to attend The Enchanted Valley Carnival this year. I have my family and lots of friends there, so I think this vacation will be perfect. I will fly to Pune and spend a day with family, then head to Khandala-Lonavala with my friends for a night before camping at EVC,“ says Varuni G, a student. 

 	And looks like adventure music fests are the flavour of the season. It's not just EVC, Storm, Magnetic Fields and the Windsong fest are themed similarly. 

 	“Year-end vacation is like cousin-time -four of us, no matter where we are, ensure that we catch up for the New Year every year. And this year we want to attend Chasing Storm which is happening at Coorg. It's going to be an allnight camp out music fest with campfires, performances, marshmallows -I'm quite ex cited to celebrate New Year so differently,“ says Gunjan Shah, a banker, who says their trip won't end with just this.“The next day we will drive down for a short trip to Kerala before coming back to Bangalore,“ she adds. 

 	Some will work-hard-playhard as they combine an official trip with leisure. “I will be headed to Hyderabad at the end of this month for an official meeting and the Windsong fest is happening at the same time. So, once I finish work, I'll head to the Windsong and camp for a day,“ says Avinash YS, a graphic designer. 

 	But one newly-wed couple planning a trip to Rajasthan to attend a different sort of music fest. “My husband and I both love music and Rajasthan is a place that I have wanted to visit for the longest time. So we have decided to go to Magnetic Fields that will be held at Alsisar Mahal. It sounds so exotic,“ says Swati Kishore, an HR professional in an IT company.