The Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MOEF&CC), in association with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII), has identified nine elephant corridors in Karnataka. Out of the identified corridors, one stands impaired and requires immediate restoration to facilitate the movement of these majestic creatures, while ground data reveals the increased intensity of use in three other corridors.

The Ministry has also recommended that seven out of the nine corridors should be notified by the state forest department so that they are legally protected under an appropriate law to prevent encroachment and development activities, which can be detrimental to animal movement. For the remaining two corridors, the Ministry has suggested eviction of encroached areas and habitat improvements, including removing invasive alien species, creating waterholes, and establishing fodder plots.

These nine corridors include Kaniyanpura-Moyar (in Karnataka), Beguru-Brammangiri (interstate Karnataka and Kerala), Edayahalli-Doddasampige (in Karnataka), Edayahallil-Guttiyalattur (interstate Tamil Nadu-Karnataka), Chamarajanagar-Talamalai at Punjur (interstate Karnataka and Tamil Nadu), Chamarajanagar-Talamalai at Muddahalli (interstate Tamil Nadu and Karnataka), Karadikkal-Madeshwara (in Karnataka), Tali-Bilikkan (interstate Tamil Nadu and Karnataka), Bilikkal-Javalagiri (interstate Tamil Nadu and Karnataka).

According to wildlife conservationists, many important elephant corridors in the state are under serious threat due to illegal encroachment and violations of eco-sensitive zone rules. One such corridor is Kaniyanpura-Moyar, part of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve buffer zone and also an Eco-Sensitive Zone (ESZ).

Many farmlands that were previously owned by villagers have been puchased by affluent individuals–Conservationist
“Many loopholes of ESZ rule have been explored in this corridor area. There are seven to eight villages in this corridor and many farmlands earlier owned by the villagers; many farmlands that were previously owned by villagers have been purchased by affluent individuals, leading to the construction of permanent structures.
 
Due to human-animal conflict issues, farmers from these villages were ready to sell their lands to the Karnataka Forest Department. However, many of these patches now belong to the rich and influential. Projects are being taken up without due approval from the state monitoring committee and no action is being taken by officials concerned,” said a conservationist.