There are only 2 skilled veterinarians to handle all the man-animal conflicts in the state

The Karnataka Forest Department is left with only two skilled wildlife veterinarians, who as a part of two teams, are having to handle numerous cases of man-animal conflicts throughout the state that are on the rise.

Earlier, five posts of wildlife veterinarians were functional among the sanctioned eight posts in the Forest Department. It should be noted that the sanctioned eight posts are from the 12 proposed posts accepted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, which is considering wildlife conservation as a priority.

These five posts were filled in with veterinarians deputed from the Animal Husbandry Department. Once a vet completes five years in deputation, they are called back to their parent department. On June 9, based on an order from the Animal Husbandry Department, three vets were called back to their parent department, leaving only two to handle the human-wildlife conflicts in the entire state.

“Conservation is now going from bad to worse as there are several cases of emergencies/distress calls on a daily basis that are we are unable to attend to due to a crunch of experienced and skilled vets,” says S Prayag, chief wildlife veterinarian and forensic expert.

Three days ago, an elephant was found stuck underneath an iron fence on the fringes of Bandipur. And the nearest vet available was stationed in Mysuru. “If it were an emergency, how could the vet have reached the spot?” asks Dr Prayag.

The elephant was rescued unscathed after the fence was dismantled. This had to be done with a forest guard, his helper and a few villagers, as there was no quick response team, he added.

There were also multiple cases of elephants straying into human habitats in Hassan recently. Two elephants were electrocuted at a farm near Thalavady in Tamil Nadu bordering Karnataka near Chamarajanagar in February. Many elephants fall into pits and sustain injuries and if expert medical help does not reach in time, the loss is irreparable, said another wildlife expert. Other problems include wildlife like deer getting chased by dogs and killed, and every day at least two leopards stray into human habitats on the fringes of Karnataka’s forests.

“It is mandated by the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, National Tiger Conservation Authority and the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) CC Project Elephant, and its guidelines state a qualified wildlife veterinarian specialised in anesthesia have to handle human-wildlife conflict,” Prayag added.

Bengaluru has a few experienced hands who had imparted training to at least 15 new wildlife veterinarians appointed in a small state like Chattisgarh on wildlife conservation, but ironically Karnataka itself is reeling under shortage of wildlife vets.

Why on deputation?

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests PCCF and MD (Karnataka state forest development corporation) Sanjay Mohan told BM that a permanent cadre has its own disadvantages. “If we consider permanent posting with promotions and other remuneration, getting approval from the government is a cumbersome process, when compared to young vets who are interested in coming for deputation. Only their parent departments have to permit them to work with us,” Mohan added.

Mohan also said the Forest Department has written a requisition letter to the government addressing it to the Additional Chief Secretary asking for vets on deputation from Animal Husbandry. “It would be good to have a permanent cadre - our own teams in the Forest Department -- to handle the cases of human-wildlife conflicts,” Mohan admitted.