The fading Ghats are proving to be a double-edged sword for the gaurs. Here’s how
 
 
 While elephant and tiger poaching cases are already plaguing the natural habitats, Chikkamagaluru district witnessed killing of an gaur. Koppa division forest officials arrested two people and are on the lookout for two others in connection with a gaur poaching case.
 
 The officials traced them after they recovered remains of the gaur, which were secretly buried by the accused. The arrested have been identified as Balakrishna and Shaji.
 Pointing out the gravity of the situation, locals alleged that at least 10 gaurs were killed by the accused. However, forest officials denied these allegations. Assistant
 Conservator of Forests Borayya said, “We will investigate the case and see if the allegations are true. As of now, the remains of just one gaur has been recovered.”
 Unfortunately, this is not an isolated case of gaurs dying following human-animal conflict.
 
 In fact, such cases are on the rise and most of the cases take place when the gaur are forced to crawl into human fields to escape the fading Western Ghats.
 
 Making the most of the situation, poachers plan traps so that they can cater to the rapidly increasing gaur meat market. According to an estimate, one gaur can fetch up to Rs 2 lakh to the trader. From each gaur, about 800-1000 KG meat is obtained and is sold at the rate of 300 per kg. It is alleged that the meat is sold in select outlets.
 
 
 Expert-talk
 
 Environmentalists have observed a drastic fall in the number of gaurs, especially in Charmadi, Shiradi and Kudremukh area of Western Ghats. “Since they are not getting sufficient food in the forests, they are moving into the fields,” said Dinesh Holla, Convener, Sahyadri Sanchaya.Explaining the reason for the drastic fall in gaur population, Holla added, “During a recent visit to Kamalshile near Kollur, we were told that there are at least 42 gaurs in the village do not seem to go back to the forests. Hence, it is evident that they don’t find the forest environment suitable. This has increased the demand for the gaur meat. But the killing of gaur at this rate will make them disappear from the map.”
 
 
 About the animal
 
 gaur are found on hills and grassy fields. They are largely confined to evergreen, semi-evergreen and moist deciduous forests. The weight of an adult male is between 600 kg to 1500 kg. and the weight of an adult female is between 400 kg to 1000 kg. The length of the horns is between 60 and 110 cm. They are social animals and live in small groups.
 
 They reach maturity between 2 to 3.5 years. Breeding takes place year-round but occurs mainly between December and June. They are found in the Western Ghats, in particular, Nagarhole, Bandipur and Mudhumalai.
 
 Other cases
 
 Earlier during the year, a youth suffered injuries after the bike he was riding on hit a gaur at Bengamale near Ivarnadu of Sullia taluk in Dakshina Kannada district.
 The incident took place when he was travelling from Ivarnadu to Sullia and gaur suddenly crossed the road and hit the bike near a forest area in Bengamale.
 After hitting the gaur the bike landed straight into a drain. 
 
 The injured was immediately rushed to a hospital in Sullia by passersby after which he was shifted to a hospital in Mangaluru for further treatment.
 
 In the year 2012, runway inspectors at the Mangalore International Airport spotted a gaur at the base strip of the valley during a routine inspection. 
 
 Though the incident initially put the airport authorities on alert, it did not affect flight operations.
 
 Last year in a major haul of illegal wildlife products, Bengaluru urban forest officials seized two pairs of spotted deer (Chital or the Axis axis) antlers and a pair of gaur horns with the skull from a house in BTM layout.