As experts reveal we should do more to help the planet in our outdoor spaces, find out how it’s done

When it comes to being more eco-friendly, what are the first things that spring to mind? Perhaps it’s the car you drive, the food you eat, or the plastic waste you produce.

But experts reveal we’re missing a trick. One of the easiest ways to go green is in your garden.

“The trend for manicured gardens, with large patio areas and fake grass in place of the real thing, can mean our outdoor spaces aren’t as ‘green’ as we may think,” says horticulturalist Anne Britt (annebrittdesign.com). “But a few simple tweaks can change all that.”

Interest in all things eco is high, so if you want to get greener in your own garden, our experts reveal how it’s done.

Turn off the tap
Consider how and when you water your garden, says Rebecca Bevan, senior consultant at the National Trust.
“We should all have a water butt because rainwater is better for plants,” she says. “It’s also best not to waste tap water.”

Grey matters
Rebecca advises us to make use of “grey water” - washing up or bath water.
“It’s great for watering plants, especially if you use the mildest detergents possible.”

Woodchip wonders
Avoid planting hanging baskets as they need a lot of water, says garden designer Emma Reuvers (wildedgegardendesign.co.uk). And clever wood chip placement can cut your water consumption.
“You can set borders with a thick layer of woodchip mulch, rather than bark, which helps keep water in the soil. The mulch also feeds the soil as it breaks down.”

Know your soil
By sticking to the right plants for your type of soil, nature will help, with less need for watering or chemicals.
Emma says: “The biggest factor is whether soil is heavy clay and holds lots of moisture, or whether it’s sandy and free-draining. You can usually tell this just by handling it. Many plants really need the moisture to stay healthy while others might only survive the winter if the soil is dry.”

Welcome weeds
You may be constantly yanking out weeds, but Emma urges us to let them linger.
“Weeds provide food and habitat for wildlife,” she says. “And if you’ve got grasses or plants with structural seed heads, leave them standing. They add interest and birds collect the fluff for nesting.”

Wean off weedkiller
“Insecticides don’t just kill the insects you are trying to control but affect many others,” says Rebecca. “Try to tolerate a little damage from aphids and caterpillars - these will be food for birds and other creatures - or net vegetable crops to keep pests away.
“If some plants are badly affected each year, swap them with something more resilient, rather than waging war with poisons.”

Home for insects
With bees and bugs forming the basis of the food chain, a bug-friendly space is beneficial. It can also be rewarding to watch nature in action.
Help insects out by leaving a few untidy corners of the garden with nettles, piles of stones, a log or bamboo canes.
“Be aware any space could be a habitat and tread a bit more lightly,” says Emma. “Hide stacks of prunings from bushes behind other shrubs.
“You can’t see them, but they create a habitat.”

Clean green
Regular jet washing can cause drainage issues and threaten plant life, as well as disturbing wildlife habitats. “Brushing occasionally with a stiff broom is better for the environment,” says Rebecca. “Moss and vegetation between paving stones can be attractive and provide hiding places for insects.”

Grow your own
Why not try cultivating some herbs and veg? “The easiest way to start is with perennial herbs,” says Rebecca.
“Rosemary, sage, thyme, mint and oregano are all good options. They look great and you can use them for cooking, saving on plastics from the supermarket.
“Choose garden plants you can use in salads too, such as granny’s bonnet and nasturtiums.” 
—Daily Mirror