Number of applications seeking registration of exotic animals in state indicates people hesitant

The Union environment ministry came up with the Living Animal Species (Reporting and Registration) Rules, 2024, on February 28. Under the rule, those owning or trading exotic pets such as macaws and softshell turtles are supposed to register them with the state wildlife department.

The notification issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) said that registrations of these wild animals in captivity should happen within six months from the date of commencement of the rule.

But so far, the Wildlife Division of Karnataka Forest Department has received just over 50 applications across the state.

“We have received only 51 applications seeking registration of exotic animals in Karnataka. While people are still applying, the six-month deadline will be over in August and after that possession of such species will become illegal. The department thereafter will be forced to take action as per the Wildlife Protection Act,” said a senior KFD official from the Wildlife Department.

As per the new rule, every person who is in possession of any exotic animal species should report the details and make an application for registration electronically to the authorized officer within six months from the date of commencement of these rules and thereafter within thirty days of possession of such animal species.
 
Notably, exotic animal species are protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and listed in Schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act 2022.

The registration has to be done through PARIVESH 2.0 portal. The notification by MoEF&CC also stated that any transfer of possession and birth of offspring of these animals also need to be registered. In case of the birth of offspring of such animal species, registration should happen within seven days of such birth. Experts say while the rule mandating voluntary registration of these animals seeks better implementation of CITES, just 50 applications by exotic wild animal keepers in three months goes on to show that many are hesitant about this disclosure.

“We lacked any rules and regulations around keeping and breeding of exotic animal species that are endangered. However, the Covid-19 pandemic made us realise the importance of regularising the possession and breeding of exotic species. While the rule, if followed, will protect endangered exotic animals in captivity, just 51 applications are like a drop in a bucket. The department probably should look at better dissemination of the notification to ensure it reaches far and wide,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.