This cartoonist hopes to highlight the ills plaguing wildlife and nature through his works — caricatures and cartoons of animals and birds
 	
 	
 	 		I prefer doing this to looking inside rotten mouths,” says a laughing Rohan Chakravarty, a dentist by training and now an animation designer-cartoonist-nature and wildlife conservationist. ‘This’ is a wide range of cartoons on nature conservation and wildlife that he draws and posts on his website Green Humour (www.greenhumour.com). 	

 	 		Passionate about wildlife and its conservation, Chakravarty says art is his way of speaking for his winged and four-legged friends. “Give me wildlife any day,” he comments as opposed to making caricatures of human beings. “They give far better results.” 	

 	 		The results can be seen in his first solo show, Wildlife the Toonie Way, at the Indian Cartoon Gallery which has 70 caricatures on display. Apart from his talent in drawing, it appears that Chakravarty’s USP is his humour. Viewers chuckle silently seeing some of his works. How many would associate Crested Hawk-Eagle with Che (Guevara)? In his hands the reference seems a ‘face palm’ moment when a stern-looking hawk peers from the paper complete with the cap associated with the revolutionary leader. 	

 	 		There are several works that illuminate causes and issues with his trademark wit. Would anyone have known about the pangolin or the scaly anteater? In one cartoon, Chakravarty encapsulates the plight of this animal. A tiger has curled up like a ball besides an elephant and rhinoceros who are also struggling to do the same as they mimic the balled up pangolin. The tiger asks, “But Sir, are you sure this defense mechanism will work against poachers?” It makes the viewer think of what the pangolin does in times of danger and how the poachers pick them up and boil the animals alive in order to remove its scales. The scales are used for supposedly medicinal benefits — elephants, rhinos and tigers are also poached for similar reasons. 	

 	 		Chakravarty says his tryst with drawings has been an old one. As a school kid his textbooks and notebooks were filled with caricatures and drawings. “I have been drawing pretty much my entire life,” he says. The cause came later. It was during what he calls his “first serious safari” in 2007 at Nagzira Tiger Sanctuary in Maharashtra. He happened to be lucky enough to see a tigress bathing in a waterhole. The bathing beauty made such an impact that the moment he completed his dentistry course in 2010, which he confessed was the doing of peer pressure and the pull of the rat race called PMT (Pre-Medical Test), he decided to go full-time into drawing and illustration. Towards that goal, the first step taken was his blog. 	

 	 		And his works got noticed. When the Universal Press Syndicate selected to put up his works weekly twice on their website (Gocomics.com), Chakravarty’s decision of being a full-time artist was validated. 	

 	 		As an artist and wildlife enthusiast, Chakravarty has been in dogged pursuit of his subjects. He speaks of the Great Hornbill, a bird found in the Western Ghats and the North east. His works on this hornbill have been widely noticed and the issues that plague the bird have been vastly highlighted. “They are hunted for their beaks,” Chakravarty says in disgust. And he has travelled several times to the Western Ghats in their search. No luck as yet. “It is unfortunate,” he says, “that I have not had a single sighting. I even went to the Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary in Arunachal Pradesh but couldn’t see them. I heard their distinctive call but due to the foliage cover never saw them.” It is a regret he hopes to right in future. Then there is the Ward’s Trogon found in the north east, looking bold and sassy in his work. “They are listed as vulnerable because of habitat loss,” he informs. 	

 	 		He proceeds to narrate another story of his attempt to sight the Greater Adjutant Stork, a bird on the endangered list, found only in a massive dump at the outskirts of Guwahati. Armed with a rough sketch done on the flight, Chakravarty asked a bemused taxi driver to take him straight from the airport to the dump area. There were, according to his calculations, about 150 birds. “They are very rare and very ugly birds,” he notes. 	

 	 		For the city’s birders he suggests Nandi Hills to see the sprightly Puff-throated Babbler. “They are secretive by nature but easily sighted around Nandi Hills,” informs the artist who has made the 	 		city his base since the past couple of years. 	

 	 		There is a pause in the conversation but not before he speaks of his two big inspirations, this time the two-legged humans – Genndy Tartakovsky, creator of Dexter’s Laboratory and Gary Larson, creator of The Far Side comic strips. “One is an animator and the other a cartoonist but these two have inspired me tremendously.” And, he informs well-meaningly, he is not an animator as people are wont to conclude. “I design animations,” he says. But his foray into the world of cartooning has been happily serendipitous. 	

 	

 	 		Wildlife the Toonie Way, Indian Cartoon Gallery, till Sept 27th, 10am to 6pm