WORTH THE WAIF
 
 Models audition for the upcoming fashion week in Mumbai at a midtown hotel
 
 
 
 
 
 Another son rise
 
 YOUR diarist bumped into the dapper Faisal Patel at a wedding the other evening. The 36-year-old son of Sonia Gandhi’s all-powerful political advisor Ahmed Patel is set to take the plunge into active electoral politics in 2019. Though the Doon school and Harvard-educated social entrepreneur is still grieving for his wife Zainab Nedou, who died from a heart ailment earlier this year, he’s been trying to rebuild his life. A deeply private person, Faisal is known to be a good orator, and helping his cause is the outstanding work he’s been doing with the HMP hospital, in south Gujarat, where over three lakh people have been treated for free, or at a subsidised fee so far. Those with an inside track on these things say his grassroots work make him a prime candidate for the Bharuch Lok Sabha seat in 2019. Watch this space for more.
 
 
 Working weekend
 
 WHILE several bureaucrats, who were in Nagpur for the ongoing winter session of the state legislature, returned to Mumbai for the weekend, chief secretary Swadheen Kshatriya headed to Melghat, which has seen several deaths caused by malnutrition. Kshatriya and his wife Anjana visited many hamlets, including Harisal, the country’s ‘first digital village’, and engaged with the locals. Kshatriya, a wildlife enthusiast, also went tiger-spotting but we hear the king of the jungle refused to grant him an audience.
 
 
 At Bikaner, In Delhi
 
 BIKANER House in Lutyens’ Delhi, once a bus depot, from where buses to Rajasthan would depart, was always the country cousin of the far more elegant Jaipur House in the same vicinity. But thanks to the aesthetic ambitions of its keeper Vasundhara Raje Scindia, who commissioned architect Abha Narain Lambah to restore the eight-acre space, Bikaner House is now a haute spot in the Capital. Last weekend, author and historian William Dalrymple hosted an event to celebrate the launch of his book on the Kohinoor. This weekend will see the famed restaurateur (and film producer) Rohit Khattar launch a new restaurant at Bikaner House. While the evening has been red-circled by the Capital’s society bees, we hear some guests from Mumbai are also flying down for the opening.
 
 
  Eat your art out
 
 THE Kochi Muziris Biennale has been studded with chic luncheons and glitzy dinners, but among the most impressive was this immersive lunch hosted by Delhi-based product designer Gunjan Gupta and Emma O’Kelly, editor-at-large at Wallpaper magazine. While the show Kissa Kursi Ka was curated by the renowned Yoichi Nakamuta, the lunch was held at an antique shop in Jew Town, overlooking the backwaters. It was attended by, among others, Feroze Gujral, Desmond Lozaro, Gaurav Bhatia, Subodh Gupta and Devaunshi Mehta.
 
 
  Tailpiece
 
 A major storm seems to be brewing at the home of this industrialist’s family. The scion of this family recently married his sweetheart in a wedding to top all weddings. But during the festivities, a nasty issue concerning payments to be made toward wedding costs cropped up between the two sets of parents. We hear the molehill has now turned into a mountain, and that the mother-in-law and daughter-in-law don’t speak to each other. Moreover, the bride’s parents have refused to step into their daughter’s new home because of their battle with her in-laws.