Daroji, a wildlife short film for children, is touring the world and winning hearts everywhere. Recently, the film, shot in and around the famous Daroji Sloth Bear Sanctuary in Ballari, won the second best film award at the 34th annual Animal Behaviour Society Film Festival in Toronto.
 
 Made by software professionals, Rana Belur and Sugandhi Gadadhar, the 15-minute film was screened at the Karnataka Bird Festival in Hampi in January this year. The couple has been working closely working with the forest department, making short films and spreading awareness on environment and wildlife.
 
 Sugandhi Gadadhar told Bangalore Mirror, “Daroji, a 15-minute short film in English and Kannada for children, introduces them to wildlife. It is specifically for those from in and around Daroji Sloth Bear Sanctuary. Bindu, a female Indian Sloth Bear, tells the story of different families, including her own and shares a friendly note with her audience, suggesting that man and animal can co-exist in harmony.” The film was sponsored by the Karnataka Forest Department and JSW.
 
 The then DFO Takhat Singh Ranawat ideated the film as part of Karnataka Forest Department’s activities for children called Chinnara Vana Darshana. Vijay Mohan Raj, CCF Chikamagaluru, helped with the story. “We got a lot of support from locals working for environment, especially Arun SK and Pompaiah Malemath, and forest department staff of Daroji Sloth Bear Sanctuary. The film is being screened at the New Nature Interpretation Centre near Daroji for both children and tourists who visit the sanctuary. Locals, who volunteered to create awareness on nature and wildlife, are also screening this in the schools,” she said.
 
 The film has been officially selected for screening at international film festivals, including the 33rd Annual Kid Film Festival in Texas, fourth Annual Animal Film Festival in California, Third Annual Wild and Green Short Film Festival in the US, International Children’s Film Festival (ICFF) in Lucknow and Guro International Kids Film Festival in Seoul.