It was long since we had gone fishing and I was plain desperate. It was still Wednesday and I felt like “Born to fish and forced to work”. At 4 am,I woke up to a very windy and rainy Saturday. Two SMSes popped up saying good morning, we were all up and about. I picked up my teammates and we zoomed to Mysore Road. As the Rajarajeshwari Dental College caught our sight, we felt we had arrived. A right turn and we felt we had left the city way behind. We were going angling to Minchinbele water reservoir.

Angling our way!
For us angling is not endless hours in contemplation of nature while waiting for the fish to bite. It includes trekking, carrying our angling (fishing) tackle for camping, usually a long distance walk, carrying camping material including utensils for cooking, a stove, food and whole lot of stuff. Hope one must have got the idea that we are talking about fishing in remote places where we picnic the whole day and usually camp at night, partying with our day’s catch.

En route to Minchinbele, the last place to shop was near the big banyan tree. It was 7 am and we stuffed ourselves with piping hot “tatte” idlys, coffee and packed some chitranna to go. The road ahead has been newly re-laid but only up to the Byalalu village where ISRO has recently established remote sensing antenna (DNS) for its Chandrayaan mission. This nondescript village is suddenly becoming abuzz with activity. But to our dismay, a tea stall is yet to come up here. The huge ISRO antennas made us feel we were not too far behind NASA! The road ahead, up to the reservoir, which is further 5 kilometers away, is good for “offroading”, surely not for our poor little car.

Unwelcome hitches
These days, Minchinbele is being frequented by many couples looking for that “extra” bit of closeness. It also draws collegians on motorcycles, who are usually drunk, shouting, playing loud music and littering after breaking the beer bottles in high spirits. All this spells hell for anglers who enjoy the silence as much as the fish.

Fish are basically shy creatures. Attracting them involves a lot of stillness. The opposite bank is quiet with lush forest just behind. This setting offers an occasional chance of spotting of wild animals and a sure opportunity to watch rare birds. Any wildlife enthusiast can easily identify the many calls - including the peacock.

Most importantly, there is no one bug you with questions like, how a fishing rod works or is that a “bandook”. We have our secret route to reach the other side of the bank, which is inaccessible by road. We reached there after a 3-kilometer trek and settled down under our umbrellas as it was drizzling on and off. After fixing the tackle, ground baiting (attractants are mixed with mud, made into ball and thrown in water inviting fish with its smell) the water and first cast, for two hours nothing happened.

Fish-on!
Cast after another cast and then suddenly one of us shouted “Fishon” meaning engagement with fish and indeed landed a lovely 5 kg rohu. It came out with a little “fight” as anglers call for its resistance. Now the onus was on the other two of us as everybody wants to catch something. My line was constantly nibbling. I took the hint - someone is playing with my bait - but nothing happened.

We kept at it. Reloading the hook with bait and casting again. It was 3 pm and we were frustrated; I strikingly pulled my line this time when it nibbled. To every one’s surprise it was a poor little tilapia merely 300-400 gm.

It rained heavily in between and looked heavenly. The chitranna and gatti chutney called and we answered. Only one person on the team had nothing. An hour and half passed by. It was getting dark and we started to pack-up as we decided against camping at night because of bad weather. While we were busy packing and picking all our litter, the last man on the team cast his last line.

Price catch!
Five minutes later, I noticed nibbling on his rod. Drawing his attention, I jokingly said, “You also got one.” I expected it was another small kid. But not for nothing was he the most experienced of us all! He sensed something and gave the line a good pull. The reel screamed the music. It was a big boy. Giving a tough fight, it kept Owen busy for next twenty minutes and finally came out in a landing net. A beautiful rohu of 10-12 kg. It was the catch of the day!

A long unending smile spread on my mate’s face as he repeated his mantra - Never lose hope as “hope floats”. I understood why he is called “saar” by the angling fraternity. While returning, we stopped at big banyan tree again. It was 7:30 pm. Every visitor was on his way home. Deserted, it looked like a typical Indian village bazaar. Wallowing in nostalgia, we ate hot bhajjis and planned our Sunday brunch, with the rohus and tilapia.
 
Prakash Tibrewal is enthusiastic about wildlife and contributes to the conservation of the Mahseer through Wildlife Association of South India.