Graphic novels can be political; a tool of subversion. In India, the genre is maturing and moving on from me-too superheroes and mythological fantasy

Mocked and treated cruelly for not conforming to a particular gender, a transwoman lets her long, ‘offending’ hair loose, and it engulfs her aggressors, employers, and finally, the city. This is Anirban Ghosh’s Swamped. In Sruti Menon’s Kabul Calling, a girl whose father works in Kabul grapples with questions and impressions of Afghanistan, before her hitherto inexpressive father comes home and they rediscover a bond of affection. If there’s one thing Longform: Volume 1, An Anthology of Graphic Narratives (HarperCollins) accomplishes, it is to show that graphic novels in India have finally come of age. Overwrought mythological fantasy narratives are making way for explorations of personal stories, political statements and even abstract storytelling. 

And luckily for us, a good deal of this talent is coming from Bengaluru, as Ghosh and Menon demonstrate. 

The obvious influence, says Bharat Murthy, co-founder of Indie Comix Fest, which took place at Rangoli Metro Art Centre earlier this month, is that of schools such as Srishti Institute of Art, Design and Technology, and Karnataka Chitrakala Parishat, both of which encourage a spirit of visual storytelling. “People have started taking comics seriously as an art form, and are even experimenting with the medium,” he says, citing how the narratives that artists were showing at the festival were experimental, and even tending towards abstraction, such as the works of Madhav Nair and Amitabh Kumar. They are not afraid to tell stories of their lives such as a comic about what the cat does all day when the owner is out, (Anpu Varkey), “evoking a certain middle class, urban life”. Meanwhile, the city is also throwing up collectives such as BlueJackal, which released an eight-page comic that was an adaptation of literary shorts. 

Story time

The exploration of themes bodes well for an industry that has often struggled to find an audience. Simply put, graphic novels are expensive, and many readers don’t see the value in spending so much on what they see as picture books with “glorified action sequences”, as visual artist and comics creator George Mathen (he prefers to be called Appupen), says. In recent years though – and as publication of this anthology demonstrates – that is changing. At the Indie Comix Fest, for instance, many creators’ works were sold out, while customers were curious and interested. 

Appupen says the scene is improving, but stops short of celebrating. “It’s definitely better than it was,” he says, citing how there are more creators making graphic novels, helped along by digital platforms. The good news is that students at art schools think comics are important in discourse, and people are understanding that there’s a lot of material out there beyond the mainstream. At the Indie Comix Fest, for instance, Appupen says people were checking out the indie graphic novels on display and saying ‘Oh, it’s not like Comic Con’. 

Pinaki De, one of the four editors of Longform (the others are Sarbajit Sen, Debkumar Mitra and Sekhar Mukherjee), agrees. Longform itself was put together under the very premise that there was a significant amount of talent in the country that deserved a platform. The content, he says, has “matured”. “All the stories are very contemporary. We see works related to urbanity, situations at work, daily encounters, travel narratives and some historical narrative too. A lot of these creators are in their late 20s and 30s and have a different way of looking at the world, which reflects in the work today.” There is a realisation that graphic narratives can be accessible and tackle problems in your backyard, such as the salinity of lakes, that Nikhil Chaudhary’s Saline Intrusions looks at. And while all these may be recent developments in a still-nascent industry (in India), Sen points to it as an evolution of the scene, the way it has happened in the west. “From the election trail in the US to the Arab Spring, graphic novels helped galvanise the graphic novel scene, and the graphic novels in turn, allow creators to say things they otherwise cannot. Similarly, Appupen’s new book, The Snake And The Lotus, is set in a post-apocalyptic cityscape, while Malik Sajad’s Munnu: A Boy From Kashmir discusses the conflict in Kashmir. Efforts such as these, and those of creators such as Sharad Sharma, who goes to tribal areas and asks people to draw out their problems, are emphasising that 
comics can be an act of resistance, and can be subversive and protest matters,” he explains. 




   comic 2   


More than mythology

All of which is encouraging for creators too. Menon, who’s Kabul Calling is an evocative story of her relationship with her father, told through his stint in Kabul and people’s perception of it, says she has grown up on Indian mythology, but has since imbibed many more influences, which come through in her work today. “Personally – and I think anyone who has ever been a comic/ graphic novel fan will agree – I was never as interested in superheroes, as I was in the story itself. And creators are focusing on that now, with careful panelling and unique and organic storytelling,” says the 29-year-old.

For Appupen, the early beginnings of the Indian graphic novel scene, with its glut of superheroes and fantasy, was important in that it drew people to the genre. “The superhero boom created India – made graphic novels friendlier and interesting for a whole lot of people. People such as city-based illustrator Madhav Nair (known as Dead the Duck) are exploring newer themes, as while women are 
addressing their particular issues. Garima Gupta and Kaveri Gopalakrishnan, for example,” he says. 

Like them, city-based Ghosh (30), uses his art to express himself on matters of class, social and gender justice, sexuality, human rights and law – issues he feels strongly about. Swamped, then, takes off from a real-life incident of a non-conforming-gender person being fired from her job in Kolkata because she refused to cut her hair. “I wanted to discuss the politics of gender, sexuality and class around hair, and at the end, give it graphic justice instead of poetic justice,” Ghosh explains. Graphic novels, he believes, open up avenues for independent creators and allow them to experiment with form and content. He cites authors such as Amruta Patil, who are talking about the politics around the body, body shaming, menstruation and more, which transcend the barriers of language and social construct. 

Sreejita Biswas (Solo), whose work Dreams of the Dead (a Viking lore-inspired poem as a comic, created with Priyanka Tampi) features in Longform, reels off a number of encouraging works, from Jazyl Homavazir’s webcomic Beast Legend, which “does a great job of being different and exploring a fantasy realm” to Rohan Chakravarty’s cartoons about wildlife that are “informative and fun”. She adds: “In print, there are examples such as Gaysi’s Queer Anthology, a first-of-its-kind in India, and Captain Bijli’s anthology DOGS!. Then there is Jai Undurti’s Robots of Dharma, which explored sci-fi; Meta Desi’s collaboration with European creators for Love Me Like a Psycho Robot.” She also believes that recent times are seeing “better mythological adaptations”, which are no longer “direct edits and translations of the text or forced modernisations”, such as Vyasa, the first part of a Mahabharata adaption and Ravanayan, an adaptation of the Ramayan where Ravana was the protagonist. 

Like Appupen, however, who is still circumspect about the commercial viability of these offerings, Biswas sounds a note of caution. “A lot of the content is still repetitive, the styles and formats are similar and there is hardly any intent to experiment, but there is full intent to be relatable.” 

Which is why ideas such as that of Ghosh – about “a narrative that comes alive at the intersection of technology and quest to find love”, are encouraging. It’s inspired by Bengaluru, which “is the epicentre of technological possibilities”. He adds: “Being a user experience designer, I’m very excited to work on a personal piece that celebrates this mix – how apps and digital interaction can redefine the concept of love.” And maybe graphic novels too.