Court quashes FIR filed by state forest department over culling of black kites
 
 Spelling relief for union minister Maneka Gandhi-led People For Animals, Bangalore, the High Court has quashed an FIR against the NGO in connection with culling of black kites. The NGO landed in hot waters two years ago when the forest department not only registered an FIR, but also conducted an inquiry and filed a chargesheet against PFA following charges that 20 kites had been culled at its shelter, between January 20 and February 2, 2013.
 
 Maneka denied any wrongdoing and maintained the birds were put to sleep in a legally permissible manner as they suffered from serious ailments. She had rubbished the complaint as false and revengeful. However, the forest department had filed a case against PFA trustees Alpana Bharatia, Namrata Duggar, Arushi Poddar, Gauri Maini Hira and then PFA manager Kishan.
 
 The forest department had taken a stand that black kites (Milvus Migrans) belonged to schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act and had gone ahead with the case, filing a complaint on October 30, 2013 with the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bangalore rural district.
 
 Responding to the issue, Maneka had told Bangalore Mirror then that kites did not fall under schedule I. Taking potshots at the forest department, she had maintained that nobody set up a hospital (animal shelter) to harm animals. However, the forest department, which conducted an investigation, filed a chargesheet on July 2, 2014. The inquiry report had observed that those under the scanner -- the trustees -- had violated section 11 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and were liable for punishment.
 
 PFA held on to its defence that the birds that were put to sleep had severe wounds and injuries resulting in crushed bones, torn chests, gangrene, septic wounds, severe sepsis and nerve injuries. They had also taken defence under a letter from then joint director of Ministry of Environment and Forests, Chaitanya Murthy, stating black kites were not listed in schedule I.
 
 Forest officials rallied back with the argument that PFA’s act violated the Wildlife Protection Act, which specifies that a person intending to kill or cull wild animals/birds has to obtain permission from the state’s chief wildlife warden, but that was not done in this case.
 
 While the case was on in lower court, PFA had moved HC seeking quashing of the FIR. The court quashed the FIR on Tuesday. “We are yet to get a copy of the HC order. We had lodged an FIR, inquired into it and also filed a chargesheet. We will decide once we get the court orders,” M Nagraj, range forest officer of Kaggalipura range, the investigating officer in the case, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 Read: Maneka’s NGO culled kites: Forest officer