Volunteers express joy in joining NGO and Engineering College to enhance greenery and to promote community engagement

Residents of Shikaripalya and neighbouring areas, along with students from BMS Engineering College and volunteers from the Adamya Chetana Foundation, planted over 50 saplings at Shikaripalya Lake on Sunday to enhance greenery. Volunteers and students departed satisfied, while nearby residents enjoyed a meaningful Sunday outing.

According to Kumaraswamy S, a volunteer of the Adamya Chetana Foundation, the residents approached them to organise a programme to plant saplings around Shikaripalya Lake. “Our team has visited the lake and inspected the spot for planting saplings. The team reported on the viability of planting saplings at the lake. We engaged a few labourers to dig pits for planting saplings,’’ he said.

Tejaswini Ananth Kumar, Chairman of Adamya Chetana Foundation was present during the planting of saplings. “Forty-eight students from BMS Engineering College and faculty, residents and volunteers participated in planting saplings such as honge, neem, jamoon, cotton and flowering plants. The programme began at 9.30 am and concluded by noon. We have assigned a few residents to water the saplings. They have agreed to look after the saplings,’’ he said, adding that it is Adamya Chetana Foundation’s 442nd Green Sunday dedicated to planting saplings.

Mani Ranjan, a resident, said “some saplings were planted when the lake was rejuvenated but there was none for watering those saplings. Government should fence the lake to prevent the cattle from damaging the saplings.’’

Animesh Jha, a resident, has said he was happy to participate. “We have enjoyed a lot today in helping our mother nature as a one team. A step ahead to preserve and protect our planet and we connected with many surrounding area apartment members. Also, this planting of saplings has a bigger impact on our day-to-day life and it will give us a better future to survive in many ways including providing oxygen, improving air quality, climate amelioration, conserving water, preserving soil, and supporting wildlife,’’ he said.