Unless you are a hardcore forest-freak, the name Mutthodi wouldn’t even remotely register. Literally cut off from the rest of the world, this tiny hamlet inside the Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary is, however, distinct in one respect: It is the smallest polling station in Karnataka with just 12 voters! 

Located 30 kms away from Chikmagalur town and plonked in the middle of the forest, Mutthodi will vote on April 30 when the Udupi-Chikmagalur constituency will go to polls in the second phase. Though a jungle out there and a life is without electricity, nothing will prevent this group of 12 villagers from ensuring that their voices are not lost in the wilderness in this time’s election.

Bangalore Mirror travelled through the forest tracts of the sanctuary to meet residents of Mutthodi who this time around have a polling both right in their village. Some improvement! While some of the people here knew that they were only 12 voters this time, 27-year-old Sarita was oblivious to the fact. “ Oh really? I did not know that. That’s great,” she said. Ramegowda, who is an attender at the forest department, said: “Last year, it was 22 of us and this time we are 12. The others moved out.” 

POLITICALLY AWARE
Their lack of contact with the outside world has not dimmed their political knowledge. They do know their leaders well and this is surprising as no big-time leader except Indira Gandhi has ever visited them. But there is a radio in every house and that is their lifeline. And it seems, the women listen to it more than the men. When we asked one of the residents, Venkatesh Sanashetty, to name the leaders of two major parties, his wife immediately piped in with, “L K Advani is for the BJP and Sonia Gandhi is for the Congress.” They have never seen these leaders on television though and Venkatesh recalls that back when Indira Gandhi visited the hamlet and spoke to all of them, there were many more people in the village. But around five years ago, people started moving out.

ANGRY BUT POSITIVE
All the villagers work in the forest department and earn an average of Rs 3,000 per month. Though the villagers face only a few problems, even those have never been attended to by anybody. Says 49-year-old Shyam Kumar Naik, “We have been requesting that our jobs be made permanent for many years now, but nobody has taken us seriously.” He and fellow villagers had also protested in front of the Vidhana Soudha once, but nothing happened. 

Adds Venkatesh, “Sometimes I feel angry that nobody bothers to visit the village. We have neither schools nor hospitals and since we are only 12 of us now, they have not bothered to come.” But his and the others’ determination to vote is heartwarming. “No matter what, we will vote as it is our right and we want to exercise it.” Food for thought for those young urban voters who are so indifferent about voting!

So with only 12 people for a polling station and all of them saying that they will cast their vote in the morning, will the district administration close the booth after all votes are cast? “No” said Narayanswamy, Deputy Commissioner of Chikmagalur, “There will be three polling officers as usual and a guard. The officers will stay there till 5 pm as there are other polling stations en route and they will bring back everything at one time.” Then, why a polling station just for these 12 people? “ The next polling station is more than three kilometres away and we have decided that the maximum distance between two polling booths should be two kilometres,” he replied. JUST ONE VOTER
In Gujarat, there is a polling station just for one voter. This is located in Junagadh district in Gir forest, home to the Asiatic lion. There will also be one polling station for two voters in Chhattisgarh, and three stations in Arunachal Pradesh will have three electors each. The Election Commission had announced that this time there will be polling stations for less than 300 people.