Chargesheet filed in the case against NGO run by Maneka Gandhi
 
 Forest sleuths have chargesheeted trustees of the Bangalore wing of People For Animals, chaired by activist and union minister Maneka Gandhi, for euthanising 20 black kites, listed in schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 

 	The forest sleuths had registered a case in October 2013 (Bangalore Mirror had carried a report on November 8, 2013 - ‘Maneka’s NGO culled kites: Forest officer’.) After a detailed probe, the inquiry report was filed on July 2, 2014 before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bangalore rural, indicting five for violating provisions of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.  Maneka’s NGO culled kites: Forest officer 

 	The five under the scanner are Alpana Bharatia, founder trustee PFA, Namrata Dugar, trustee, PFA, Arushi Poddar, trustee, PFA, Gauri Maini Hira, trustee, PFA, and Kishan, general manager, PFA. All the five run the Bangalore PFA, with a rescue and rehab shelter. 

 	The inquiry report says: “People for Animals Sy.No.67, next to BGS Global hospital, Uttarahalli – Kengei Road, Bangalore 560060 have clearly violated Section 11 of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and hence it is punishable under Section 51 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.” 

 	The case 

 	The case dates back to 2013. Twenty kites that suffered from severe ailments like wounds, resulting in crushing of bones, torn chests, gangrene, septic wounds, severe sepsis and nerve injuries were put to sleep between January 20 and February 02, 2013. 

 	Even as the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, clearly specifies that a person intending to kill or cull wild animals/birds, has to obtain prior permission from the state's Chief Wildlife Warden, who is also the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), it was not done in this case, sources said. Following which, a case was registered and an inquiry was carried out. 

 PFA trustees produced documents in their defence taking a stand that Black Kite (Milvus Migrans) was not schedule I listed wildlife. These include one from Chaitanya Murti (joint director), ministry of environment and forests. Manekai too took a similar stand when the FIR was lodged in 2013. 

 	“We have submitted a report and documents clearly establishing that the birds put to sleep without following norms are listed in schedule I. t. We will have to wait and watch the honourable court's stand,” a senior forest official told Bangalore Mirror.