The fight is Over the Hedge

In 1995, Geetha Nirody and her family were amongst the first residents of Shanthi Layout in Mallasandra ward. The family engaged a gardener around 20 years ago and with his help nurtured a dense green space around their home. Little did she know that her green haven would prove to be a thorn in somebody’s flesh.

On November 14, 2020, Nirody received an unexpected e-mail. The contents of the email, says Nirody, seemed intimidatory. And mail was from no less a person than the Dasarahalli MLA himself.

“Due to the extra growth of plants and trees towards the main road (access road to Aymataji temple and Shanthi Layout), nearly half the road has been blocked which is obstructing traffic movement and the general public. We have received complaints from around 200 people to clear the obstructions. As you are aware, my main priority is to solve public issues. If you are comfortable in creating trouble for the general public and for temple devotees then go ahead with your proceedings. In the coming days, the public might stage protests on this issue. Thanks and Regards,’’ said MLA R Manjunath, in his email.

The 65-year-old says she is shocked by the tone of the mail. Neither the MLA nor anyone in the locality had ever approached her about this. She points out that people in her neighbourhood appreciated the plants in her plot.

Subhiksha Venkatesh R, a wildlife researcher, had certified the plants and trees as a home for a wide range of birds, insects and reptiles. The report of June 23, 2020, stated that creepers of bougainvillea and heart-leaved moonseed have grown over 7 feet in height and have formed a dense foliage around the walls. “This serves as an ideal habitat for a number of passerine species like the common tailorbird, munias (lonchuras), bulbuls, etc. A number of insect species, particularly butterflies were spotted within a span of 30 minutes,” said Venkatesh in the certificate.

Nirody insists the plants do not encroach upon the road, nor do they block access to the temple as mentioned in the letter. She reached out to the MLA to enquire about the complaints, which he claimed were not in writing, but what he had heard from the residents. And yet, Nirody says she is open to pruning the hedges scientifically. However, she is sure to oppose the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) sending its workers to her home with cutting machines and earth-movers.
Arun Prasad, wildlife activist from Wilson Garden, is alarmed by the threatening note in the MLA’s email. He said the greenery and the urban wildlife habitat of the places surrounding the Shettyhalli Lake must be preserved to maintain a healthy ecological balance.

“The habitats of the scheduled species protected under the Wildlife Protection Act should not be destroyed under any circumstances. The Urban Wildlife Report too stresses on the need to protect the greenery. Cutting the greenery near Shettihalli Lake will also adversely affect the migratory birds visiting the lake for nesting,’’ said Arun Prasad.

Bangalore Mirror made several attempts to get a response from MLA Manjunath, but he remained unavailable for comments.