Those who have private properties adjacent to forest areas better be prepared to give it up as the forest department intends to strictly implement its rules. In two instances, private site owners were unable to transport construction materials to their plots as the area is surrounded by forest land where transportation is banned.
 
 The high court suggested that the government rather takeover these private properties than let the private owners be short-changed.In one case, Colonel Krishna Dutt Shelly and his family had purchased a plot in Bommasandra village in 2009. In 2002, when they were constructing a house there, forest guards stopped vehicles transporting construction materials as passage of vehicles in forest area was not permitted. The layout was surrounded by forest area. Their case was against the Assistant Conservator of Forest, Kanakapura.
 
 In the second case, Om Shanthidhamaveda Gurukula and Anandhadhama Retreats filed a petition against the Assistant Conservator of Forest, Chamrajanagar. They had purchased agricultural land and converted it for residential, commercial and tourism purpose in 1992. In 2000, the revenue department had allotted further land for the trust. A part of the land it possessed was turned into a residential layout. In the meantime, the Karnataka government declared the area as Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary.
 
 The HC in its common order in the two cases said that the contention of the land owners that, since they have got the land converted for commercial purposes, the forest department should not interfere cannot be accepted. “This contention cannot be accepted when it is clear that the flora and fauna is to be protected since the area is declared a wildlife sanctuary,” the HC said.
 
 NO ABSOLUTE RIGHT
 
 The HC has said in the judgement that those who have purchased land enclosed by forest land cannot claim rights that is available to land owners elsewhere. The judgement said, “The petitioners cannot contend absolute and unfettered right as if they have purchased the lands in a regular revenue or a residential layout.”