Speeding trucks, buses and cars posed a serious threat to wildlife in and around Bandipur and Nagarahole National Park down south. But in a strange case, speeding trains have turned out to be villains for wildlife in the extreme North-West part of the state along the Western Ghats in and around Dandeli and Bhimgad wildlife sanctuaries.
 
 Even as activists and conservationists are vehemently opposing Kerala’s moves to throw open roads for night traffic, a couple of days ago, a speeding train mowed down an adult male gaur in Khanapur taluk of Belagavi district. Sources in the forest department told BM that the gaur was aged about 10.
 
 “The Indian gaur was mowed down by a train on Dharawad-Alnavar-Londa-Khanapur-Belagavi route near Londa. The death of the adult gaur was the fourth such incident in the last few years and the third such incident since the last year, on the same stretch. During February 2014, a gaur was crushed under a speeding train at the same spot, while another gaur was hit by a train in December 2014 close to Dharwad,” explained Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife activist working in the area. Similarly, in yet another case, a gaur was found dead in a collision between a speeding motorbike close to the area a few months ago!
 
 The forests of Dandeli and Bhimgad have the highest density of Indian gaurs after Nagarahole and Bandipur forests in Karnataka. But the deaths of gaurs due to trains have raised serious concerns over the safety of wildlife on the stretch as the entire area is part of the Sharavati-Dandeli-Khanapur tiger landscape as well. While the forest department has been consistently pursuing the issue with railway officials, the railways is yet to implement various mitigation measures.
 
 A senior forest officer from Belagavi range said, “Our recommendations include installation of signboards at places to alert loco-pilots, removal of thick vegetation along the tracks and creating awareness among catering staff not to throw food waste along the track as it would attract gaurs and other wildlife." Gaurs are classified under Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife Act of 1972 and are considered to be an important prey for tigers, leopards and dholes.