Renovation works have been taken up on specific themes to help visitors understand animals better
 
 While putting an end to the various infrastructural woes on its premises, Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens in Mysuru has become the first zoo in the state to go modern. Adopting various guidelines of Central Zoo Authority (CZA) of India, the Mysuru zoo has not only revamped its facilities but also switched over to several eco-friendly initiatives that will help the zoo earn the tag ‘Green Zoo’ in the near future.
 Adhering to the master plan approved by both the Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) and CZA, more than 15 new infrastructure works in different parts of the 157-acre zoo campus have put the zoo on the list of elite zoos of India. The new features, according to BP Ravi, executive director of Mysuru Zoo, will be inaugurated on Wednesday ahead of a promising festive season.
 	  	Giving details of the new work, Ravi told Bangalore Mirror that works were taken up on specific themes that will aid visitors in understanding animals better.
 	  	“Keeping in mind various themes, we have designed enclosures and tanks. Under the theme of Mega Carnivore, all major carnivores have been accommodated. There are five major carnivores in India and our zoo has three of them (lion, tiger and leopard). Their enclosures have been arranged according to the ecosystem and interiors designed similar to actual conditions in the wild. This will help people understand the role of these animals in the ecosystem and food-chain, and their lifestyle and behavioural attributes,” said Ravi.
 	  	Rainy days have always triggered tense moments on the zoo premises with water flooding from nearby tanks. Adding to these woes, several reptiles and amphibians sneaked out of the zoo with the flowing water. The authorities have now put a full-stop to such happenings and ensured several checks to store overflowing water.
 	  	“A new lake has been built on the premises to collect excess water that otherwise would have drained into the corporation drain. The 120 ML capacity tank helps percolate water and thereby increases the water level in and around the zoo area. The capacity of the reptile tank has also been increased to accommodate more water in case of flooding. Due to these activities, incidents of reptiles and amphibians straying out will be prevented,” Ravi explained.
 	  	With a requirement of 5 lakh litres of water per day, the zoo earlier relied on water supplied from KRS (Krishnaraja Sagar) by the Mysuru City Corporation (MCC). Except for one minor connection, the zoo has now done away with that water connection.
 	  	“Situated as it is in the centre of a highly urbanised locality, the zoo should serve as a model to others in conservation for others to emulate. Accordingly, several percolation pits have been made inside the zoo to help rainwater permeate. A canal system all around the zoo, fountains and artificial waterfalls keep the area cool and green due to constant flow of water. Increase in green cover is not only a blessing for wildlife but also refreshes visitors. There are three waterfalls and nine canals in the premises. Besides rainwater, we will use water from a traditional well inside the zoo that had remained unused for long. Because of the greenery inside the zoo, there is a difference of three degree Celsius in temperature between outside and inside the zoo,” added Ravi.
 	  	Zoo authorities have also overcome another challenge; that of disposing of animal carcasses. “Earlier, we used to bury the dead animals. But following orders by CZA and the Union government that all schedule I and II animals be burnt, we used to burn them with firewood resulting in pollution within the zoo and adjoining areas. We now have an electric crematorium with a capacity of 200 kg for this task. Dead animals are scientifically cremated without causing too much pollution,” another zoo official said.