NCTA advisory asks wildlife wardens to ensure tourist carrying capacity is followed

From now on, there should be a distance of at least half-a-kilometre between two safari vehicles when they are ferrying people in a tiger reserve. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has shot off an advisory to all the chief wildlife wardens to strictly follow the rule. As of now, there is a huge rush of safari vehicles in reserves, which is in violation of all the norms. 

In an advisory issued by Dr Anup K Nayak (Additional DGF-Project tiger and member secretary (NTCA-dated Feb 12, 2020), he said the tourist carrying capacity in respect of a tiger reserve is calculated as the maximum number of tourist vehicles permitted per day. The carrying capacity is determined on the presumption that the gap between two consecutive vehicles is maintained at a minimum distance of 500 metres. “However, it is often observed that the tourist vehicles inside the tiger reserve do not maintain the minimum distance with other vehicles and often resulting in crowding around animals sighted during the trip, which is detriment of wildlife and hence defeating the very purpose for which the carrying capacity is fixed. Therefore, chief wildlife wardens have been advised to implement the mentioned guidelines in letter and spirit and ensure that the tourist vehicles maintain a minimum distance of 500 metres from each other at any point of time and do not crowd around wild animals,” the advisory said.

 	  The NCTA order specifying the distance  

Sandesh R, a wildlife enthusiast, welcomed this move. “There is a craze among tourists to spot tigers in the wild but they do not realise how much harm they are doing to the big cat. Often when a safari vehicle spots a tiger, messages are immediately sent to the other safari vehicles in the area. So, soon a number of safari vehicles try to close in on the tiger. This is disturbing to the big cat. Many tourists also make sounds, either out of excitement or anxiety, which is also harmful,” he said. Nandeesh S, another wildlife enthusiast, said, “The NTCA advisory is in the right direction. Whenever an animal is spotted, a minor traffic jam builds up in the area with many vehicles closing in. The very purpose of the safari vehicles is to ensure that the vehicles are far from each other. I feel that half-a-kilometre distance is a right amount to be maintained.”

The task at hand
Now, the big question is as to how will the rule be enforced. Experts say forest officials should keep a log and ensure that a safari vehicle is allowed only a certain time after the previous vehicle has left. But, keeping the half-a-kilometre distance can still be a challenge. It is suggested that GPS must be installed for all safari vehicles. Currently, the Bandipur Tiger Reserve safari vehicles have GPS and they can be gradually extended to other safari vehicles. An official said, “With GPS, one can monitor the exact vehicle movement and this will help us communicate with the other vehicles to maintain the safe distance between vehicles. However, the process of installing GPS in all the safari vehicles may take some time.”