Wildlife rescuer falls to death after bee attack. The deceased has been identified as Venkatesh John, a resident of Gottigere and a coconut vendor on Bannerghatta Road

A 54-year-old wildlife rescue volunteer attached to the BBMP Forest Cell fell to his death after he was stung by a swarm of bees He was atop of a tree at an IAS officer’s house, trying to remove the large bee-hive, behind the Golf Course in High Grounds, Central Bengaluru last week.

The deceased has been identified as Venkatesh John, a resident of Gottigere and a coconut vendor on Bannerghatta Road. He had enrolled with the BBMP’s Forest Cell as a volunteer for rescuing wildlife too, his colleague Rohit, another wildlife rescuer from JP Nagar told Bangalore Mirror.

According to John’s family and a close friend, Assistant Conservator of Forests (ACF) Govindaraju had informed him (John) about a beehive that needed to be removed at a bureaucrat’s house behind the Golf Course. On March 6, he went to remove it.
 
According to sources, John was allegedly “lured” by the chief of BBMP Forest Cell, one Prasanna Kumar who promised John a monthly salary in the presence of ACF Govindaraj soon after honeycomb removal assignment was done.

However, ACF Govindraj told Bangalore Mirror that he was neither aware of any such beehive assignment nor did he know that John had gone to remove it.

Another source with the BBMP’s Forest Cell said that the beehive was at a good height and it was risky to access it without a harness or a protective gear from bee stings. But John scaled up the tree in the evening without any protective gear and a swarm of bees stung him.

Unable to bear with the pain, he fell to the ground. He was soon rushed to a nearby private hospital, where he was declared dead. John’s friend Rohit who reached the hospital was told by the doctors that he had suffered multiple bee stings, and sustained multiple fractures from the fall which led to his death.
 
The hospital raised a medico-legal case (MLC) and the High Grounds police personnel visited the hospital and took statements from the eyewitnesses.

The cops have taken up a case of unnatural death and are investigating further.

A relative of John alleged that they were asked not to escalate the matter as officials from BBMP visited the spot and promised a government job for one of John’s family members.
 
“Ideally, since its a case of accidental death, the cops are supposed to register a case of accidental death due to negligence under IPC section 304-A and book the accused who failed to offer him safety harnesses, protective gear or other precautions, but here the cops have taken up a case of unnatural death,” said a former senior wildlife warden.