Ramakrishna Yarlapati          An Asian Brown Flycatcher keeps a quiet watch with its big eyes, sitting atop a tree branch. In another corner of this green expanse, a shock of yellow flits about through the leaves in the form of the Golden Oriole. A myriad variety of birds come calling, especially when the fruit trees are in bloom. Straight out of some verdant forest ? Not exactly. This place might seem far removed from the concrete urban structures in the city, but in actuality, the green oasis is in the thick of IT land. And as the world outside zips past the cloud of automobile exhaust and blaring sounds of traffic, this is all drowned out by the foliage of trees inside the SAP Labs campus in Whitefield. It is this environment that inspired Ramakrishna Yarlapati and Roshan K Kadaramandalagi, both photography and nature enthusiasts, to explore their surroundings and track their feathered friends on the campus. Roshan is a project manager in the On-Premise Suite of the company while Ramakrishna or Ramki, as he is referred to by friends, recently left SAP after a 16-year stint to set up his own firm.
 
 ""We decided to do an informal survey of the birds in the campus and were surprised to find more than 50 species. This prompted us to do a proper census and we worked over a period of more than a year observing these birds and taking photographs,"" says Ramki, whose interest in wildlife has taken him to wildlife sanctuaries around the world. The result was the book Experience the Wonders of Nature. The duo would start early morning, especially in the weekends since that’s the time that there are fewer employees and more chance of sighting the birds. ""Efforts have been made to retain the natural ecosystem as much as possible in the premises. So many of the old trees that have existed on that property were kept while building the SAP campus. This helped the urban wildlife here and that is why you see a whole lot of insects, moths, garden lizards and the like, which in turn bring in the birds,” he adds.
 
                                   Roshan KK          The SAP Labs campus is on a 23-acre land in the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Zone in Whitefield, of which only 40 per cent is used for buildings and the rest is taken up by open land. 
 
 Both local and migratory birds are frequent visitors to the area and since the two photographers did the survey over two winters, they managed to capture many of the visitors.
 
 ""The experience itself brought new learning about the ecology and environment. We had many interesting encounters and captured many of these scenes — like the Munias nesting near the bike parking area, the wide variety of warblers which had to be differentiated based on their calls, the tiny Tickles flowerpecker that would come for the poppy seeds and so on. Capturing the Eurasian Golden Oriole was a challenging task because we wanted to shoot both the male and female. These are not always on the campus because they are migratory birds. We waited for long and finally managed to get them when they came to the fig trees when in bloom. Ramki succeeded in photographing them,” says Roshan.  
 He adds that alongside the book being published, efforts are also on by the SAP Labs management to make the place more welcome to urban wildlife. “We are consulting an ecologist, and efforts are on to make the space more friendly to these winged creatures.” 
 
 After all, who doesn't want to work in an environment that is not just soothing to your senses but helps in promoting sustainability. “The main idea behind the census and the book was to make employees more sensitive to the wonders of Nature and to bring awareness about preserving the environment. I think we have succeeded in that endeavour. We noticed that there was an increased interest among the others on the campus to spot the birds and generally enjoy the urban wildlife. Also, in the weekends, you will notice young people coming to the campus early morning with their cameras to shoot the birds!” says Ramki.  
 
 
 Winged guests
 Some of the birds that flutter and sing amidst bytes and codes at the SAP Labs campus —
 Ashy Prinia: 13 cm warblers that are earthy brown with white tipped tail.
 Asian Koel : A popular Indian bird that flies straight and quick from tree to tree
 Asian Brown Flycatcher
 Black Drongo
 Black-headed Munia
 Black Kite
 Blyth's Reed Warbler
 Brahminy Starling
 Cattle Egret
 Common Myna
 Common Swallow
 Eurasian Golden Oriole
 Greater Coucal 
 Indian Cormorant
 Indian Silverbill
 Indian Pitta
 Indian Robin
 Jungle Myna
 Laughing Dove
 Oriental Magpie Robin
 
 
 Eco-friendly geeks
 SAP Labs and its employees are eco-warriors of sorts. The campus is made as  eco-friendly as possible. There are 4,500 employees on the campus and the 400 kgs of food waste generated in the cafeteria, juice counters, pantry etc is converted into organic manure at the Organic Waste Management unit inside the campus. Energy consumption is reduced by replacing end-user desktops with more energy-efficient laptops. Glass roofs in the office buildings provide ample natural light during working hours. Many energy saving gadgets have been installed for high energy consumable equipments like chillers, lower rating AC units & also replaced low energy efficient light fittings with high energy lights like T5 and LED Rain harvested & Sewage treated water is used for irrigation of office plantations. Paper cups have been replaced with ceramic mugs. Employees are also encouraged to do car-pooling and use public transport and have electric cars. Those with electric cars are given preferred parking and free charging points.