By Prakash VL

Work on subway in parking space is almost over; it will be thrown open soon

Tourists who were facing problems visiting Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, popularly known as ‘Mysuru Zoo’, can soon enter the zoo via a subway from the parking space. The subway is ready and very soon it will be opened to the public.
 
The subway will exhibit pictures of animals and birds and create interest among the tourists. Vehicles travelling to Chamundi hills and T Narsipur move in front of the zoo. This was creating traffic congestion in front of the zoo and even hindrance to tourists. The ticket counter was shifted to inside the zoo. But still, the tourists found it difficult to cross the road. So, the subway is built from the parking place to the Zoo. The work for the subway started on January 17, 2020, with the approval of the Zoo Authority at a cost of Rs.1.75 crore. Due to the covid-19 lockdown, progress on the work was hampered.


.

The subway is 24 metre long, 4.9 metre in width, and 10 feet in height. There are separate entry and exit points from the parking space.

Once subway work is completed, there will be LED screens exhibiting the messages about the importance of protecting wildlife. The subway will also be having ads for private companies, businesses, and hotels to help the zoo generate revenue.

We approached Darshan to become a brand ambassador of the zoo, he open-heartedly accepted the offer–LR Mahadevaswamy, Zoo Authority of Karnataka president 

Darshan is brand ambassador
Darshan is known for his love for animals. His farmhouse is filled with different animals and he owns horses too. Darshan had adopted a tiger, an elephant, and two anacondas earlier in Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, Mysuru, and requested the public to adopt animals. He was the brand ambassador for the forest department and agricultural departments too. Zoo Authority of Karnataka President LR Mahadevaswamy told Bangalore Mirror, “Darshan always supports the development of the zoo by adopting the animals. He is very fond of the animals. We approached him to become a brand ambassador, he open-heartedly accepted the offer.”

Started in 1892, Myusu Zoo is among the oldest zoos in the country and it currently houses conservation breeding of endangered species, housing exotic animals from around the globe and recreation of natural habitat for captive animals. During the initial years, the zoo was spread across 10.9 acres area and then in In 1907, an additional 6.22 acres was included. The was named after the founder Chamarajendra Wadiyar.