RMML says conservation reserve tag would prevent any future developmental projects
 
 
 The state government is in a fix whether to declare Kappatagudda in Gadag district as a conservation reserve or allow mining in the area. While allegations have been levelled against Baldota Group for exerting pressure on the government over continuing mining in the reserve area, not much has been heard from the group which is at the centre of the raging controversy.
 
 Now breaking their silence over the issue, Ramgad Minerals and Mining Limited (RMML), the flagship company of the Baldota Group, has come out in public with their side of the story.
 
 Clarifying that mining in Kappatagudda dates back to early 2001, RMML said that it obtained mining lease in 2008, and most of its gold exploration areas are at the periphery of the reserve forest and hardly account for 5 per cent of the total reserve forest area.
 
 
 Mining is century old
 
 According to spokespersons of RMML, Kappatagudda’s tryst with gold mining dated back to British era. “British operated a gold mine in the region more than a century ago. Post-independence, the area has seen intermittent mining by HGML and BGML,” the spokesperson said. Interestingly, RMML had applied for reconnaissance permit over an extent of 1,233 sq km in Gadag district for gold and associated minerals back in 2001 and accordingly the permit was granted to explore the area.
 
 “Subsequently, the company has made significant investment on exploration of gold and other minerals. Based on the outcome, we had applied for 12 prospecting licenses and one mining lease under rule 9 and 22 of MCR 1960 in 2004 much before the expiry of reconnaissance permit. Out of the 12 prospecting licenses two were withdrawn as they found to be unfeasible economically. Among the remaining 10, two were granted in 2009 and eight further mining leases were applied for in 2012 before the expiry of granted prospecting licenses,” the spokesperson said.
 
 
 Licenses pending before Forest dept
 
 Obtaining a mining license over an area of 39.70 hectares on 9 May 2008 after a prior approval from the ministry of mines, government of India, an application was submitted to the forest department for forest clearance. “A forest clearance application was submitted to the forest department in 2008 and most of the gold exploration areas are on the periphery of the reserve forest and hardly account for 5 per cent of the total reserve forest area. As on date, RMML holds the preferential rights over 8 PLs and 8 MLs under section 10 A (2) (b) of MMDR Amended Act 2015. They are in process with mines and geology and the forest department,” company sources explained.
 
 
 Impact of Conservation Reserve tag
 
 Revealing that the hill range has lot of road network, the company claimed that once declared as conservation reserve the roads cannot be used at night. “Forest dwellers who are farming in the region earning livelihood will mercilessly be evacuated. Commercial farming, electrification and shops will not be allowed to function if the area is declared a Conservation Reserve,” the company in its e-mail claimed. The company officials have lamented that Gadag, home to several institutions lacks any industry and thus depriving educated youngsters from getting lucrative jobs to earn their livelihood.
 
 RMML stated that Kappatagudda is neither adjacent to a national park nor does it share boundary with any sanctuary. “According to the Section 36 A of Wildlife Protection Act, a conservation reserve has to be located adjacent to national parks and sanctuaries or those areas which link one protected area with another,” the spokesperson revealed.
 
 Acknowledging the area as a hub of medicinal plants, RMML said they needed to be preserved.
 
 
 Why RMML opposed to conservation tag?
 
 Most of its gold exploration areas are at the periphery of the reserve forest and hardly account for 5 per cent of the total reserve forest area
 
 Company highlighted the perils of declaring the region as conservation reserve as it would seal off the area from any future developmental projects and thereby affect hundreds of villagers around the hill range
 
 Revealing that the hill range has lot of road network, the company claimed that once declared as conservation reserve the roads cannot be used at night
 
 Listing out its reasons for opposing the Conservation reserve tag, RMML stated that Kapptagudda is neither adjacent to a national park nor does it share boundary with any sanctuary