By Garima Prasher

Around 10 vultures from northern Haryana are set to make Bannerghatta National Park their address later this year as part of a breeding project 

The wildlife division of the Karnataka Forest Department is counting days now. Sometime this year, the department’s Vulture Breeding Centre at Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) is expecting to get around 10 vultures from Pinjore Vulture Conservation Breeding Centre in northern Haryana.
 
A first of its kind, the project is crucial. A successful introduction and breeding of this endangered bird will ensure the restoration of the raptor’s dwindling population in the city and state.
 
The department says birds will be brought by air as travel by road will be time-consuming and stressful for them.
 
“Time is the biggest concern if we transfer the birds to BNP from Pinjor, by road. The process will take at least two to three days. Transfer by road happens by putting birds in boxes. However, once inside the boxes, birds will not be able to stretch their wings. They might refuse to take food and water.
 
“The best way is to fly them with the help of a private airline. There are direct flights available from Chandigarh to Bengaluru,” said Prabhakar Priyadarshi, deputy conservator of forests, BNP.
 
The department is going all out to make this relocation successful. “There are many critical nuances involved in the process. We are dealing with a sensitive creature that is considered to be endangered. We will begin with the translocation of a small number of birds so that we can closely assess how they are adjusting to the conditions at BNP.
 
“We will scale up the number only after the successful survival of the first set of birds,” said Vijaykumar Gogi, principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.
 
According to the officials, it will be a mix of 70 per cent babies and 30 per cent adult vultures. The young ones will be between one-to three-years-old. Authorities say that they decided to get a mixed population so that the breeding program could take off sooner.
 
“Vultures enter reproductive age at four and thus, we have decided to include adults in our breeding program. If we get all young ones, the process will take time.,” said a Forest Department official.

 We hope the birds start laying eggs from the first breeding season itself– Prabhakar Priyadarshi, BNP
 
Breeding wild birds in captivity, according to the experts, is a tedious task. They say while birds’ eggs fail to hatch even in the natural environment, incidents of failure can be much higher in the case of endangered species in captivity. Moreover, the eggs of captive birds are more likely to be infertile than those of wild birds.
 
“The birds need to be stress-free and familiar with their surroundings to lay eggs. The breeding season begins in September and they lay eggs around December. We are hoping that the birds being brought from Pinjor will start laying eggs from the first breeding season itself,” said Priyadarshi.
 
As per the standard procedure, the principal chief conservator of forest in Karnataka will soon be sending an official letter to the principal chief conservator of forest in Haryana.
 
Once both the officials agree to the relocation, a letter will be sent to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to obtain the final permission for the process.
 
“Once the permission is obtained, we will also be sending an expert team to Pinjor to assess the health of the vultures. Once we have all the permissions and clearances, it should not take more than two to three months to get the bird at the sanctuary,” informed Priyadarshi.