Long before I visited the Warm Heart of Africa, I had heard talk of a tiny African country rumoured to be home to some of the friendliest people on earth: a small slither of land-locked Africa boasting an idyllic climate, tropical beaches and wildlife safaris. With Malawi lying over a thousand miles from the nearest ocean, its claim to being a tropical paradise sounded dubious to say the least, so I packed my bags and headed off to discover whether magical Malawi warranted all the hype.
   Tired and a shade irritable after the long flight, I was dreading the inevitable airport bureaucracy at Malawi’s Lilongwe International Airport, but was visibly relieved when I noticed a smiling gentleman sporting a board bearing my name. “Mr Steve, you are most welcome to Malawi. My name is Zac and I’ll be your driver. I’m so happy you chose to visit my country. Come now; follow me.”
   The ultra-friendly chauffeur was also well-connected, and he marched us straight up to an empty VIP immigration counter, ensuring that we bypassed the usual interminable airport frustrations. 
   I had opted for a two-week itinerary with a week on safari in the uncrowded parks of Malawi, followed by seven days of relaxation on the fabled shores of idyllic Lake Malawi. I was anticipating a treat. 
   Newly opened Mkulumadzi Lodge in the recently resurrected Majete Wildlife Reserve and the gorgeous Mvuu Safari Lodge deep inside Liwonde National Park were the destinations of choice, exposing us to close up sightings of a jaw-dropping array of African animals. For a country not normally associated with safaris, Malawi treated us to an unforgettable wildlife experience. While hippos trumpeted in the Shire River, crocodiles basked on sun-soaked riverbanks and, at the water’s edge, a seemingly endless procession of antelopes, elephants, buffaloes and rhinos slaked their thirst in full picture-clicking view.
   But, after an active week of early morning game drives, boat cruises and walking safaris, I felt we had earned the right to kick back and unwind on Lake Malawi. Malawi’s most well-known tourist attraction is a staggering 365 miles long, 52 miles wide and around a mile deep, which has promulgated its Calendar Lake nickname. In times gone by, legendary Scottish explorer David Livingstone dubbed it the ‘lake of stars’, and exclusive Pumulani Beach Lodge advertises itself as ‘the brightest star on the lake’. I would be hard-pressed to disagree. Pumulani exudes luxury, charm and friendly five-star service, making its 10 modern villas the premier tourist accommodations on the entire lake.
   A stay at Pumulani can be as relaxed or as active as you wish. For those seeking adventure, there is waterskiing, tubing, kayaking, snorkelling and fishing on the menu. However, after all the early morning safari exertions of the preceding week, I opted to laze on the lodge’s private beach. With lake views to die for, crystal-clear water and a well-stocked bar just metres away, Pumulani — which means ‘rest well’ in the local Chichewa language — provided an ideal setting to recuperate. After four days, it took some effort to tear myself away from this piece of paradise and catch my flight to Likoma Island. This isle has gained a deserved reputation for being home to some of the friendliest communities in all of Malawi — no mean achievement in a country famous for beaming smiles and easy-going people. Recently upgraded Kaya Mawa Lodge, with its prime location on a shady boulder-strewn peninsula wedged between two sandy beaches, consists of 10 double rooms and two four-person family houses. Kaya Mawa, meaning ‘maybe tomorrow’, was a true island paradise, affording me yet another opportunity to leave my worries until ‘maybe tomorrow’.
   Dynamite is said to come in small packages, and Malawi, smaller in size than Tamil Nadu, is exactly that: a tiny country boasting a surprisingly diverse array of attractions. From the moment we touched down until I finally tore myself away from the ‘lake of stars’, I was treated to legendary hospitality. Go for it.
      Getting there and around  South African Airways offers the most convenient service from Mumbai via Johannesburg and on to Lilongwe or Blantyre. Kenya Airways is another option with connections through Nairobi. Swift Air and Ulendo Airlink are good from intra-Malawi travel. It’s also suited to road transfers on account of its small size and well-maintained network of paved roads. 
   When to go  Malawi has three distinct seas ons. The hot season (October to December) exposes visitors to temperatures of up to 45ºC. Avoid. The rainy season follows from December until March and temperatures remain hot, although from April onwards they fall towards a more respectable 20ºC as Malawi moves into its cool dry season (May - September). 
   Where to stay  Pumulani is an exclusive beach lodge on the shores of Lake Malawi. It houses 10 villas fitted with modern amenities, and is your best bet. Kaya Mawa is a luxury boutique lodge on Likoma Island in the middle of Lake Malawi. 
   What to buy  Native arts and local crafts make great mementos from your African holiday experience. All major tourist routes support a gaggle of street vendors selling attractive curios to visitors; the dark ebony woodcarvings are especially popular. 
   What to do  Apart from a wildlife safari, take a dhow sailing trip on the turquoise waters of Lake Malawi and sip on cocktails while watching the quintessential African sunset. 
   Remember  Indian nationals require a visa to visit Malawi which needs to be acquired in advance. The US dollar is the most readily convertible foreign currency. Malaria is prevalent throughout the country; consult your doctor for prophylactics before leaving. The sun is strong, so carry a hat, sunglasses and sun block.