Death of slender loris due to electrocution reignites debate on safe canopy space

A grey slender loris that died due to electrocution on the Jnana Bharati campus on Sunday has fuelled the debate on safe canopy space for the primate that has been enlisted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as an endangered species.
 
According to the experts, this was the first loris ever sighted on the Bangalore University campus and since there is a population of lorises thriving on the campus, the authorities must look at making isolated green patches continuous and clearing the forest area of electric lines.
 
“The biodiversity park and tree canopy have improved on the campus as per multiple studies carried out by our department. It is unfortunate that the first ever slender loris sighted has been found under such circumstances. However, the authority should make sure that the electric lines in forest areas are either shifted or insulated so such incidents do not occur in the future,” said Dr BC Nagaraja, professor, and head, Department of Environment Science, Bangalore University.
 
Currently, there are no studies done on the slender loris population thriving on the BU campus. Experts say since it is an endangered primate, it is high time that a study is conducted to get an inventory.
 
“A team from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) visited the campus four years ago to map this primate. The team went around the forest area on campus for a few nights looking for lorises, but they could not find any. This incident however establishes that there are slender lorises on the campus and their population must be looked at keeping in mind their shrinking habitat,” added Dr Nagaraja.


Authorities should ensure electric lines are shifted or insulated– Dr BC Nagaraja, Bangalore University 
While pruning branches and installing canopy bridges are some other solutions proposed by wildlife conservationists to ensure the safety of this primate, some highlight unrestricted public access to the campus, posing threat not only to the lorises but other wildlife too.
 
“The university has to regulate walkers’ and outsiders’ movements on its campus, especially in forests are biodiversity-rich areas. Campus authorities can think of installing canopy bridges on the lines of a similar initiative taken in the Western ghats area to facilitate the movement of lion-tailed macaques. However, the campus should not be open to the public as it disturbs wildlife,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.