Project 365 is an ambitious attempt at photo-archiving the ancient temple town of Tiruvannamalai. The year-long project will have photographers looking at all aspects of the historic town
 
 	Abul Kalam Azad is not the ex-President of India. But that’s the first association you make when you hear his name. “It is just a letter,” he says with a laugh, referring to the missing “d” which would make it an “Abdul”. He was actually named after India’s first Education Minister Maulana Abdul Kalam, but due to a spelling mistake, his name remained Abul. Spelling mistake or not, his name carries its own weight as an acclaimed photographer, with several photoseries to his name including the immensely popular Divine Façade (1990-1995), for which he travelled the length and breadth of North India. Currently, as the co-founder of the Ekalokam Trust for Photography (EtP), he is gearing up for Project 365, a year-long Herculean attempt at photo-archiving the temple town of Tiruvannamalai, whose history dates back to the ninth century and beyond. 

 	Temple town 	No stranger to attention, as the capital of the Hoysala kings, Tiruvannamalai served its rulers well. Sri Ramanna Maharshi is believed to have lived here for about 50 years and his ashram, located on Arunachala Hill, is still widely visited by the devotees. But above all, it is known for the Arunachala Temple where Lord Shiva is worshipped in the form of fire. Located about 150 km from Chennai, Tiruvannamalai sees throngs of devotees flock to the temple (around 750 AD) which happens to be the biggest in South India that is dedicated to Shiva. Apart from the temple which is at the foothill of Annamalai Hill, the town is known for Siddhi medicine and yoga centres as well. 

 	But Tiruvannamalai shot into the world’s attention in the late 1940s when legendary photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson took iconic shots of Sri Ramanna Maharshi as well as portraits of ordinary people living in and around the temple town. From the sadhu who lived on the slopes of the sacred mountain of Arunachala to the funeral of the Maharshi, the town was associated with spirituality. Photographers such as PRS Mani, Eliot Elisofon, G Govind Welling and others have created several bodies of photography works. 

 	Documenting history 	Twenty five contributing photographers will take a multi-faceted approach to a town which was hitherto known only as a spiritual centre. There will be documentation in the form of photographs and notes on topics such as urbanisation, living spaces, mystical life of shepherds, Shaiva tradition, Jainism, Sufism, gender in Tamil culture, ethnic lifestyle, life of 10 working women, wildlife, temples and shrines, caves and herbs, contemplating saints and wandering sadhus, life of children, ancient poems and contemporary lifestyle, ancient and contemporary fashion. Fifteen special contributors such as Ram Rahman, Dinesh Khanna, Aditya Arya, Waswo X. Waswo, Thierry Cardon and others will produce their own body of works apart from mentoring the emerging photographers. 

 	Abul, who was born and brought up in Kochi, says Project 365 is his spiritual offering to a town that has much to give. A photojournalist who did his higher studies on photography in Europe and worked there as well, he decided to return to India in the 90s and set up his own studio, Mayalokam, in Kochi. He recalls his own serendipitous encounter with Tiruvannamalai. In the mid 90s, when he was in Bangalore on work, he was to travel to Pondicherry by an overnight bus. At 3 am when the bus halted, a bleary-eyed Abul got down and took a room in a small hotel. Unable to sleep, he decided to go to the beach at 5 am but all he could see were the hills. Too shy to ask someone for directions to the beach, he walked till he saw the board of Sri Ramanna Maharshi’s ashram. That is when the proverbial coin dropped. He had mistakenly gotten off at Tiruvannamalai. “I had known of Ramanna Maharshi through my guru and that is when I knew where I was,” he recalls. Abul fell in love with the ancient town and visited it repeatedly before settling down there in 2010. 

 	Bangalore contribution 	PeeVee aka Perumal Venkatesan, one of the five city photographers chosen for the project, will be photographing the known and unknown ancient caves which have been used by several masters, sidhas and spiritual seekers. “My interest also extends to the bio mass and rare herbs found around the caves,” he says. “The ancient Sidha tradition mentions several herbs found only in Tiruvannamalai. It is believed that Arunachala hill is 33 million years old and this highly fertile, mineralised land allows rare herbs to grow in different seasons.” 

 	Photographer Selvaprakash Laxmanan will be studying and photographing the contemporary practice of Jainism. The mystical life of shepherds living on Arunachala hill will be documented by Vinay DV and Jiby Charles will look at the wildlife that exists on the Arunachala hill which was once covered in forests where tigers roamed. Today, after years of wood-cutting and man-made fires, only few pockets of stunted trees remain. 

 	What it means 	Project 365 is a dream come true for Abul who says that this year-long public funded photographic project will give a 360 degree view, “a photo perambulation” of the hill and life then and now in the ancient town of Tiruvannamalai. Set to begin on the Independence Day (August 15), through Project 365, EtP plans to document the Tamilakam territory of the ancient tri-Sangam that is now in parts of modern Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. In the following five years, the tri-Sanga ports of Kondungallur, Muziris, Tindis and the entire Cauvery delta’s lifestyle will also be documented. At the end of archiving Tiruvannamalai, there will be travelling exhibitions in Bangalore, Mumbai, New Delhi, Madurai and of course, Tiruvannamalai. 

 	It alarms Abul that photography has increasingly become a way to shoot pictures and post them online. “The main concept of photography was to make prints,” he laments of the dying tradition when photo reels were chemically processed to create photographs. To that end, EtP has requested all photographers to try and use traditional cameras as far as possible. And through its Facebook page, EtP has requested for donation of such cameras. “While we wish to have the chemically processed prints, other contributions are also more than welcome,” says Abul.