Purple.My introduction to wildlife began somewhere during my adolescence when I found a second-hand copy of Nine Man-Eaters and one Rogue (1954) by Kenneth Anderson. Big cats with glowing eyes stalked my dreams as I hunted down the Man-Eater of Jowlagiri and the Spotted Devil of Gumlapur in a local library. Already a big time Jim Corbett fan, I now devoured every word Anderson wrote. The legendary hunter’s tales were far removed from the sedate Cantonment of my childhood where I could only brandish a catapult threateningly at raiding monkeys in my garden.
 
 When I finally tracked him down, the trail led to my own backyard. Kenneth Anderson (1910-1974) had lived in Whitefield, was a Bangalorean and an Anglo-Indian of Scottish descent whose family had settled in India for over six generations. His father, Douglas Stuart Anderson, a military man, sent his son to Bishop Cotton’s Boys’ School and St Joseph’s College in urban Bangalore, taught him how to shoot at age seven and inculcated in him a love for the outdoors. And though Kenneth Anderson worked at the British Aircraft Factory (later HAL), he was essentially a big game hunter and a reputed man-animal conflict specialist who authored eight books and many stories about his adventures. Some of these were translated by the prominent Kannada writer KP Poornachandra Tejaswi as Kadina Kathegalu. Photos showed him with his dog Nipper, a gun, pipe and hat set at a jaunty angle on his head.
 	  	His books took me through many jungles closer to home including Devarayanadurga (State Reserve Forest). They introduced me to the Killer of Jalahalli, a brazen leopard from Magadi who stole a goat (and several other village animals) belonging to the local Daffedar (Sergeant). Anderson says Jalahalli in 1938 was an ‘unimportant hamlet, perhaps boasting 150 houses, some of which were made of brick and others of thatch.’ Around it were dense thickets. Everyone who was anyone in the area joined the hunt. Hughey Plunkett who lived nearby lost his arm. He died of shock and gangrene at Bowring Hospital a few days later. Local villagers Kalaiah and Papaiah too were mauled by the big cat. Lloydsworth, a shikari who worked at the Tobacco Factory, Beck, another hunter and thirty police personnel in an armoured van from Bangalore also joined the fray. Finally, Anderson, his plucky wife and his friend Eric Newcombe brought the leopard’s shenanigans to an end.
 	  	The multi-lingual Anderson holds his own place in vintage shikar literature. His writing is humorous and compassionate with a deep respect for his four-legged adversaries, often attributing the displacement of wildlife and consequent changes in animal behaviour to man’s interference with nature. He was a dramatic raconteur and a keen observer whose books also reflected a close relationship with the people of the forest and indigenous practices. He helped me realise that children need direct interactions with nature if they are to love and protect it as adults.
 Anderson’s book The Black Panther of Shivanapalli (1959) was dedicated to “all those who love the still wild places of this earth…the rolling hills, the open skies… peace, stillness and solitude.” He himself lies in solitude (in pic) under the trees in the peaceful cemetery on Hosur Road. His second son, Don Anderson (80), passed away last week, taking with him to the happy hunting ground stories of his famous father and their adventures together in another time and place. RIP.
 	
 	 		The writer is a cultural documentarian and blogs at aturquoisecloud.wordpress.com