Implementation of higher penalties of up to Rs 75,000 will be key, they say

Animal activists in the city are upbeat about the Centre’s proposal to amend the 60-year-old Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. There is a plan to raise the fine amount from Rs 50 to Rs 75,000 or three times the cost of the animal with a jail term of up to five years.
 
Rajya Sabha MP Rajeev Chandrasekhar said, “As recent events of cruelty have shown, the current laws are not a deterrent to those who inflict cruelty on animals. Since the existing law isn’t working, I feel it is time for the law to be strengthened and amended.”
 
Animal activists say that this will turn out to be an important law. This draft is very critical and relevant and extremely focused on what is needed today, they say. Citizen activist Priya Chetty Rajagopal said: “There have been extreme cases of cruelty in Bengaluru where two people had deliberately run over a dog and we had all the evidence including CCTV footage and postmortem reports. Yet, the accused got station bail. Hence, a tough law against animal cruelty gives out a strong message that cruelty will not be tolerated.
 
“However, I feel that the real trick will be in its implementation. We have to be careful on what constitutes as cruelty and who will execute it and what will be the role of the police. The current draft says that the fine amount can be either Rs 75,000 or three times to the value of the animal. The question is; how will you value a street dog? So, I feel that the fine should be whichever amount is higher; Rs 75,000 or three times the cost of the animal.”
 We have to be careful on what constitutes as cruelty and who will execute it and what will the role of the police be–Priya Chetty Rajagopal, activist 
Rajesh Kumar M, a wildlife rescuer from the city said that currently, most of the cases filed by animal activists are taken very lightly due to the Rs 50 fine. “The culprits get away easily. We have seen numerous instances of cruelty like a dog being thrown from a balcony, poisoning the pups, knocking off dogs from their vehicles, tying up dogs in sacks, abandoning pets on roads and birds dying of nylon thread etc. However, the bigger question is the implementation. If it does get implemented however, it will provide justice to the voiceless creatures.”