It is official now: The number of tigers in Karnataka’s forests is down to 290! The startling revelation made in the National Tiger Conservation Authority’s (NTCA’s) latest “Status Report of Tigers, Co-predators and Prey in India”, debunks the Karnataka government’s claim that the state’s tiger population stands at a healthy 350-395. It was the Wild Animals of Karnataka census report for 1997-98 that had pegged the number of tigers at 395, but successive governments have blindly quoted the number at any and every discussion pertaining to the big cats.

WHERE’S THE CAT-CH 
The recent NCTA study, which has been done using scientific methods, pegs the number of tigers at 290. Coming in the backdrop of the Sariska fiasco, this statistic has got reactions from bureaucrats, conservationists and wildlife enthusiasts. Questions are being raised on possible reasons for the disappearance of over 100 tigers from the state in the past 10 years. 

Though the report has brought to light the glaring difference in the tiger numbers compared to previous census reports, the study has gladdened both the state forest department and wildlife experts. As they claim, it has been done rather scientifically, using the photo-trapping technique. 

A LIMIT –ED, SCIENTIFIC STUDY 
The state of Karnataka, with a standing forest of about 21 per cent in its total geographical area, has about 24,182 sq km of forest marked for tiger conservation - Phase one and two. The tigers, currently however occupy an area of 18,715 sq km and their average population is 290. The report divides the population into lower limit and upper limit estimates. Karnataka’s lower limit is 241 tigers and the upper limit 339. 

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Sanjay Gubbi of the Wildlife Conservation Society, says, “The division of numbers into lower and upper limit is very scientific. It is impossible to estimate the actual numbers of animals owing to their migration from one area to another. So, the number is always calculated as the average between two different figures obtained at various levels of census. The latest method of photo-trapping also lends an element of accuracy in estimating the number of species.”

Acknowledging the difference between earlier reports and the current one, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Indu Bhushan Srivatsav says: “The earlier numbers were merely based on the pug-marks of the species and there was no scientific proof to establish the existence of the animal. While the latest number might suggest a large difference from the earlier census, the tiger population in the state is healthy keeping in mind the national average. Conservation of wildcats has been taken up with utmost priority by the department and various measures adopted hereto are yielding results.”

POACHER ALERT!
While the report acknowledges that the ‘tiger numbers in Karnataka are doing well in terms of population size, extent, and connectivity in relation to the tiger population in other parts of the country’, it also alerts the state forest department of increased poaching activity of both tigers and their prey.

WHERE TIGERS ROAM 
Nagarhole-Madumalai-Wayanad-Bandipur 192 tigers (152 to 232)

Kudremukh-Bhadra 58 Tigers ( 52 to 65)

Sharavathi Valley-Dandeli-Khanapur 33 Tigers (31 to 34)

DENSITY OF ANIMALS 
Animals Occupancy Area
Tiger 18,715 sq km
Leopard 20,506 sq km
Sloth Bear 20,749 sq km
Dhole 15,862 sq km
Chital 42,349 sq km
Sambar 43,412 sq km
Wild Boar 21,999 sq km