Karnataka Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre held a meeting on Monday with the Energy Minister of Karnataka and officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) to discuss the increasing number of human-elephant conflict cases in the state. He also announced that looking at the fatalities of kumki elephants and KFD staff during wild elephant capture operations, suitable training for all personnel of the Elephant Task Force will be provided.

“All members of the Elephant Task Force should get proper training before they participate in any such operations. Nodal officers in nine high-conflict districts have already been appointed and they have been instructed to stay in the assigned district for at least two days per week to deal with conflict situations. Currently, railway barricades are the best solution we have to prevent wild elephants from reaching farmlands. Rs 100 crore has already been allocated for this purpose and the barricades are being put up in high-conflict areas. We are looking at securing more funds for the project,” said Khandre.

Since April, a total of 43 people have died in human-wildlife conflict in Karnataka. Out of these, 30 deaths were due to elephant attacks. While 10 deaths due to elephant attacks were recorded from Chamarajanagar, seven deaths were reported from Kodagu, three from Ramanagara, two each from Bengaluru and Mysuru, two each from Hassan Circle, and one from Shivamogga. Other than that, two deaths due to wild boar, one due to a crocodile attack, two deaths due to bear attacks, three due to leopard attacks, four deaths due to tiger attacks, and one death due to monkey bite were also registered since April.

“The number of elephants in the state has increased and food availability inside the forest has gone down. While water holes are being created inside the forest areas, we need to work harder towards this,” said the Minister.

Arjuna, the sixty-four-year-old Dasara fame elephant who died on Monday in a fight with a wild elephant during an elephant capture operation by KFD near Yeslur in Sakaleshpur was cremated on Tuesday with state honours. The Minister also announced the construction of a memorial in Arjuna’s memory.