The herd comprising many females and a solitary male was busy grazing. I could not resist the temptation of inching towards the herd. They raised their heads once and then continued grazing. I took out my equipment, loaded it, aimed at the solitary male, locked the target and then. Click! Click! Click! I shot the Blackbuck. Well, I shot the beautiful creature with my camera.

Back to the desk: I had never heard of this place before or rather, I was unaware of this place on the outskirts of Bangalore, where blackbucks thrive. I was surprised to know learn about Jayamangali Blackbuck Conservation Reserve near Tumkur also known as Maidenahalli Blackbuck Reserve named after the village where it is located. This reserve is located 23 kms to the north east of Madhugiri town and about 20 kms to the west of Hindupur town. It’s a 798-acre patch of grassland with the largest population of Blackbucks (Antilope cervicapra) in Karnataka, apart from the Ranibennur Blackbuck Sanctuary (another surprise). Laudable here are the efforts of the Tumkur based Wildlife Aware Nature Club who have worked hard in getting a protected area status for the reserve.

After having decided to visit this place, the next big task was to find the route. Initially, this was not easy but our task was made simpler by www, in particular the tumkurameen.googlepages.com.

So with everything in place and directions in hand,  we left Bangalore by 6am and reached the reserve area by 8 am with the help of our listed directions as well as guidance from the villagers. The roads were in good condition with bad patches here and there but there is a catch. If you are overconfident and speed on these good roads, you will end up missing the deviation. So, don’t be in a hurry!

We were lucky enough to spot the deviation and then we asked a local villager for directions. He was only too happy to tell us, “Etlaage hogi balakke (go to the right)”. 

As we approached the gate of the reserve, we were a little surprised at not seeing any guards! We went inside and then...hardly a few meters ahead was a male blackbuck happily grazing. He gave us a queer look and upon deciding that we were not dangerous, continued to graze.

SHY ANIMALS
Blackbucks are very shy animals. They usually run away at the very sight of humans. But, they cannot seem to identify humans sitting inside a car. As we were aware of this fact, we didn’t step out of the car.

In a span of 15-20 minutes, we had sighted around four male blackbucks in addition to sighting a large herd of 
female blackbucks. We stalked them very slowly and stealthily, so as not to disturb them but at the same time we kept jostling inside the car in order to get some good snaps. The roads inside the reserve are mud roads and what with stones popping all over, one needs to be careful whilst driving small cars. 

Somewhere, to our right, we sensed something happening and we instinctively stepped out of the car and entered the grasslands. There were blackbucks, who upon sighting us moved deeper inside. We stealthily followed them camouflaging ourselves in between the shrubs until we reached a rocky plateau at a considerable height from where the valley could be seen in all its splendour. Suddenly, we saw a huge herd of blackbucks running like crazy. We realised that they were being chased by 2-3 small predators. Well, the predators turned out to be just dogs! However, we were shocked to see the dogs chasing the herd but at the same time we got to see some acrobatic and scintillating jumps from the blackbucks. But our reflexes were not fast enough to capture those amazing movements on camera. 

We got back and went ahead on the defined path till we reached the end point where an electric fence was put up for demarcation. We turned around, came back and stopped for a while at the watchtower and spent some time gazing at the grasslands. 

We then took another route which ran deep inside the reserve. We just kept going uphill and downhill. We managed to sight a solitary male from close quarters and ... my, my! He was so beautiful, what with his dark rich colour and tweaked horns. 

We continued on this path and went on and on and finally landed on a tarred road leading to a village! We stopped at Madhugiri and after a light lunch, headed back to Bangalore. So, our destined meeting with blackbucks came to an end and left us convinced and happy that in spite of such rapid urbanisation, there is space for wildlife to co-exist. 
 Tips for the trip
Distance: About 3 hours from Bangalore
Route: Nelamangala-Kyatasandra tollgate-Sira bypass road- Koratagere-Madhugiri-Puruvara village- Giregoudanahalli-Maidenahalli reserve.  One kilometre after Giregoudanahalli, a country road turns right. This  will take you to the reserve gate.
Food: Carry food and water. Otherwise, Madhugiri is the nearest place 
Camping: Possible with prior permission from the forest department
Caution: Don’t litter the clean place; leave no traces of your visit The author works in an MNC and enjoys such ‘hunts’ on weekends