Abandoned macaques are found most between Feb and April in Bengaluru, says veterinarian

Wildlife rescuer Anand Gowda from the People for Animals Wildlife, Bengaluru, had rescued a newborn macaque which was found at Kembathalli Main Road. It is now under observation at the People for Animals Wildlife Hospital.

Dr Karthik M told BM that generally between February and April we get a lot of ‘orphan’ macaques and it is quite common to get neonates that are one day old or three to five days old. 

“In this case, on February 24, informers told us that the mother was seen till about 12.00pm. They waited till about 4.00pm, but the mother never returned. That was when they called us. 

Whenever we go for a rescue — whichever animal it may be, we wait for the parents to return and re-unite the young one with the parent. Among macaques, it is very rare and uncommon to leave neonates. We suspect that the mother probably died or something would have gone wrong with her that she was forced to leave her baby behind. The young one seems to be fine now and is being fed every two hours,” he said.

Once he grows, the little one will spend time with the other juveniles and would later be released into the wild. 

Generally, the mother goes around with the neonate, but either because of a fight among macaques or fall from a height, or an accident, the mother may have died. “In some cases we have no clue about the parent— like the recent rescue. Since maximum cases of abandoned macaques are found in the months of Feb- April, we suspect that the birth rate could be high during this season. We do get cases even after April. On an average every year, People for Animals Wildlife gets about 8-9 juvenile cases, of which at least 3-4 cases are of macaques that are 1-5 days old,” he said.

Speaking about the challenges of treating young macaques, Dr Karthik said, dealing with injuries is a big challenge. “Sometimes, they suffer head injuries even if their fall is along with the mother. Two years ago, we had a case where the young one was rescued after he had fallen along with his mother from a tree. The young one did not have his eye sight for quite some time. We were doubtful, if he would get his sight back, but he recovered.”