Time’s up for wild boars in Karnataka. The government’s new order allows people to hunt and kill wild boars that enter agricultural fields, anywhere in the state.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What was initially intended for just Ramanagara district has now been extended to the entire state on the insistence of politicians and farmers’ groups. The latest permit, however, has raked up a controversy at a time when the government is already on the defensive over its celebration of Tipu Jayanti.
 
 
 Wildlife activists and conservationists are up in arms against the decision, saying the move would only set a bad precedence and legalise killing of wild animals.
 
 
 Today, the government has allowed killing of wild boars because they are marauding into agricultural fields. Tomorrow, blackbucks, tigers and leopards will raid into human habitats. So will the government initiate similar steps then too, activists are asking. They’re also mulling moving the High Court against the decision.
 
 
 Confirming that the order to kill wild boars has been extended to the entire state, Ramanatha Rai, minister for environment, forests and ecology, said: “The order is applicable wherever the problem of wild boars are reported. The Kerala government had recently issued a similar order. Not just one or two districts but across the state. We have not outright issued an order but enforced certain conditions and allowed killing of boars that enter fields. There is a provision in the law itself and we have merely invoked that clause. Obviously, the decision has been taken following frequent requests by farmers and leaders about intense damage caused to standing crops.”
 
 
 OTHER ANIMALS
 
 
 The government order has left wildlife activists and conservationists worried. In fact, several members of the state wildlife board itself have revolted against the decision of the government. “Already people have been hunting wild boars illegally. The order would only legalise such practices. In Chamarajanagar district alone there are more than 4,000 illegal guns. In Kodagu too their numbers swell to several thousands. The department is already reeling under severe shortage of frontline staff like watchers and guards. The government says that it has laid out conditions. But who will monitor that people actually kill according to those conditions on the field? If somebody hunts the boar in forest and gets it into his field for disclosing to the KFD, how you will prove that they have hunted it on their field,” asked Joseph Hoover, a member of the State Wildlife Board.
 
 
 Another member said: “We are only worried that the order would set a bad precedence and enable the state to kill other species. Today, already there have been complaints about blackbucks destroying crops, leopards and sloth bears. Will the government Issue orders to kill those animals in the coming days? Just because the centre has agreed to kill wild boars, it does not mean that state should do the same. Instead, the officials in consultation with the forest department should have adopted holistic approach and scientific mitigation measures to put an end to the problem.”
 
 
 However, ACS Vijay Bhaskar clarified: “We cannot comment on such situation at this stage. But at this juncture or till date there is no proposal to kill any other animal but the boar.”
 
 
 Activists have also alleged that it took several decades for the government to ensure the salubrious population of wild boars in state forests since 1970s. But with the
 order to hunt them, the conservation efforts would go vain in less. “Within no time, it will go out of control and we may lose those species,” an activist exclaimed.
 
 
 FIRST IN STATE
 
 
 Though man-animal conflict is prevalent in Karnataka, an order to kill troublesome animals on a large scale is said to be a first of its kind in the state’s history.
 
 
 TM Vijay Bhaskar, additional chief secretary, environment, forests and ecology, said: “It is true that this is for the first time that such an order allowing people to kill animals has been issued. We have been clear in the order that farmers can hunt only those boars that get into their fields. They cannot chase them into forest and hunt. Further, they cannot hunt those boars that have conceived.”
 
 
 
 ANGER OVER ORDER
 
 
 Sahyadri Sanchaya has raised objections to the state government’s decision of cull wild boars. Dinesh Holla said this is not only shocking, but disastrous.
 
 
 “In the name of development, the government is already destroying the Western Ghats. Let the government first prevent forest land from being converted into agricultural land. Let them (government) curb encroachments. Where will the animals go? The population of wild boars has already seen a drastic fall. The first target is wild boar because of its high meat value. We hope the government will review its decision,” he said.
 
 
 Wild boar meat costs around Rs 200-300 per kg.
 
 
 It is learnt that Bengaluru Rural MP DK Suresh was upset that these animals were causing extensive damage to crops and had reportedly written to the state government.
 The forest department has stated that farmers can kill the boar using licensed guns, but cannot consume the meat. The carcass has to be buried or burnt as per guidelines, and videography of the method of disposal has to be furnished to the forest official.
 
 
 
 CONDITIONS APPLY
 
 
 n Hunting is allowed only in agricultural fields with licensed guns
 
 
 n Pregnant or nursing boars must not be shot or killed
 
 
 n An injured wild boar or its carcass must be handed over to the KFD within 24 hours
 
 
 n A post-mortem has to be conducted in the presence of KFD
 
 
 n Meat of the killed boar should not be used for consumption or for any other purpose
 
 
 n Carcass has to be burnt or buried in a 3-ft-deep pit