With lobbying for postings at the forest checkposts on the Karnataka border becoming a nuisance, the state government issued an order on Tuesday, that prevents personnel from continuing in checkposts, forest mobile squads, forest vigilance squads and saw-mills duty for more than two months. In its latest order, the state government has directed Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) at every circle to withdraw the sanctioned posts and reassign them based on merit. The order is likely to cleanse the corruption-ridden checkposts, particularly at various vantage points along the inter-state borders.
 
 	Upset over increased political intervention in transfer and posting of personnel to various checkposts, the forest, environment and ecology minister, Ramanatha Rai has ordered to bring in changes in the posting of personnel. The new order by the minister not only empowers the jurisdictional CCFs to appoint staffers to checkposts, but also ensures change of guard at all checkposts once in two months to prevent rampant corruption. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, sources close to the minister said, “The political intervention and pressure from different levels of political setup was indeed a surprise to the minister.
 	
 	The trend was not in the good interest of administration. Checkposts are crucial to control illegal smuggling and trafficking of wildlife. There were complaints that a lot of corruption was prevailing over at these checkposts. Hence, the minister, in consultation with the senior officers, chose to bring about total change in appointment of staff to checkposts.” According to the order issued on Tuesday, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, CCF rank officials have been entrusted with the responsibility of appointing staffers. 
 	  	“If there are any sanctioned posts at checkposts, the jurisdictional circle CCFs have to withdraw them and based on the total strength of the personnel in their circles, a new roster of personnel to man the checkposts should be made. The personnel must be assigned to man the checkposts on compulsory two-month basis. No personnel must be given more than one term in a calendar year,” the order said. 
 	  	Expressing happiness over the latest order, a wildlife activist from Bengaluru said, “Using political clout, many forest personnel had succeeded in getting permanent postings to man the checkposts, mobile and vigilance squads and saw mills. Though not all are corrupt, many were indulging in rampant corruption by colluding with poachers, smugglers and other anti-social elements. The fresh order not only restricts each person for a period of just two months in two years, but also prevents corruption as staffers are changed frequently.”