Five target species included elephants, and gaur, sambar, chital and wild pig outside tiger reserves in Karnataka 
 
 A new scientific study by the Wildlife Conserva-tion Society India Program has assessed seasonal distribution patterns of five wild herbivores in human-use areas adjoining tiger reserves in the State.
 The findings will help conservation managers better plan protection of these species as well as prevention of conflicts, outside the tiger reserves.
 With less than 5 per cent of India’s area designated as protected areas, many wildlife species overlap with people sharing habitats, space and resources.
 
 Outside the legal bounds of the PAs, these animals are vulnerable to poachers and are prone to conflicts with people. “Securing wild species will require understanding their movement and distribution beyond man-made boundaries and plan conservation measures accordingly,” said Dr. Krithi K. Karanth, Associate Conservation Scientist, WCS in her study.
 
 
 	On the trail
 	  	The five target species included elephants, and gaur, sambar, chital and wild pig which form the principal prey for tigers in this landscape. The study surveyed around 7500 sq km area, adjoining Dandeli-Anshi, Bhadra, Biligiri Rangaswamy Tem-ple, Bandipur and Nagarahole Tiger Reserves. To examine the patterns of their occurrence, structured interviews were conducted with 3860 local households in 1565 villages located within 10 km radius of the TRs. The study further determined how environmental and landscape factors such as forest cover, water availability, elevation, distance from the TR and human population densities influenced this distribution, over space and across seasons. Using the data collected, the study produced predictive maps of occupancy of all five species around the five TRs, during the dry and 	wet seasons.
 	
 	
 	 		Previous study 
 		 	 		A parallel study by Karanth and others in 2013, found that 64 per cent of households reported experiencing crop loss to wildife and losses were similar across the five TRs.