You arrived with a lemon and raw chilli for a promotional event of one of your films recently. What are you scared of?
 No, I did not bring them. I arrived a bit late and someone started teasing that I was doing a lot of films and should avoid the evil eye. One of them went to the hotel kitchen and brought a lemon and chilli and handed it to me. I was holding it. It was just fun.
   You seem to have signed a huge number of films.  I am currently working in five films. In reality, many actors are working on multiple films at a time and this is not a big deal. At the moment, the films I am working on are Jai Bajaranga Bali, Coffee With My Wife, Case No 18/9 and Prachanda. Nan Life Alli is wrapped up.    What about films in Tamil and Telugu?  Right after Lifeu Ishtene, two of my Tamil films, Vaada Poda Nanbargal and Muppozhudhum Un Karpanaigal were released. Coffee With My Wife is a bi-lingual in Kannada and Telugu. Last year, there were many offers in Tamil. But I was doing five Kannada films back to back and could not take up any film in other languages. Some of the Tamil films offered were similar roles to what I had done in the two films earlier and I had to let them go.    However in Kannada, two of your big films; Drama and Yaare Koogadali, had you in what is called the second heroine role’.  It doesn’t really matter. I was paired opposite Yogi in Yaare Koogadali and that was good enough. In Drama, I played a deaf and dumb girl. It was so challenging and it was the first time I had the opportunity of doing such a different role. I loved both the characters and films. I do not really know why it should be called the second heroine or any other name.   What were the challenges in Tamil and Telugu?  I can now speak Tamil and Telugu. For the Telugu version of Coffee With My Wife, I have dubbed for my character. It is a romantic comedy that deals with what happens between a couple. When I began acting, I had a tough time with Kannada as I had stopped studying it in high school.    You had a film before Lifeu Ishtene?  I was doing my MSc when I did a role in Parichaya. It was a small role and for the next 18 months, nobody even noticed it. I even worked on a film called Mareyalare with Chetan, but the film was shelved.    How did you get into the film industry?  I was in a dance group called the Shadows. I did a few print ads. The director of Parichaya saw my portfolio photos and cast me. It was by fluke that I became an actress. I had no clue whatsoever about acting. But being a dancer helped. After Parichaya, I completed my MSc before acting in Lifeu Ishtene. I did some short films and Pawan directed one of those. After that he cast me in Lifeu Ishtene.   But then why did Kannada become a problem for you?  In high school, like many others, I chose Sanskrit because you can write the exam in English and score more marks. I was not good at Kannada even before that. I was very poor in Kannada spellings. I wrote tuppu tuppu for tappu in my answer sheet. I still have that answer sheet with me. Before doing films, I could hardly read Kannada. During the shooting of my first film, I did not know the difference between nirmapaka (producer) and nirdeshaka (director). During a live TV show, I had a horrible time and everyone made fun of me. I had to take the help of my mother in reading Kannada reports about the film. Slowly, I have begun to learn more than what I learnt in school.   Do you get free time at all in between shooting?  I still do. I go trekking with my friends. The trail between Bandipur and Ooty is my favourite as you can see a lot of wildlife. I am still a dancer and love to read Sidney Sheldon.