Meet the men and women who are doing their part to help conserve the city’s bird population

Compared to the bird counts I did at Lalbagh in the late ’70s and early ’80s, I estimate the populations of land birds would have dropped by about 95%. Water bird populations, when compared to the group counts of the early ’90s, have dropped by about 80%,” says MB Krishna, ecologist and birdwatcher. 

This dire truth, even as World Sparrow Day came and went on March 20, with no real improvement in numbers of the little bird. Still, there are those who care about the plight of birds and do their part to keep numbers up.

Like Edwin Joseph and his wife Sarah. Every year, the couple, in their late 60s, distributes boondi laddoos at Gospel Street, where they stay. This, to celebrate World Sparrow Day. 

In the compound of their 2BHK home, they have built a small zoo with apple cartons, wooden partitions, hay, pots, feeder jars and plates to hold water, to provide shelter to more than 100 sparrows of their neighbourhood. They have also hammered a more than 20X4-foot ‘dining plank’ of aluminum to serve food to their winged buddies – millets at 6.30am, khara mixture at 9am, cooked rice at 11 am, snacks at 1 pm, and millets and khara mixture at 4.30 pm. Idli, dose, chapatti, and biryani – all veg, is also part of the rotating menu. 

There’s more. “We have covered some trees in our garden with dry coconut branches. We water these branches every evening. This gives them a cool place to rest. I also keep an eye out for cats and pigeon hawks who come to kill them and chase them away,” shares Joseph, a former athelete, who now coaches school students and children with special needs, and is fondly called Bengaluru’s Sparrow Man’.

Haven for birds

If the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) campus is famous for being a green oasis that hosts Sparrows, Common Mynas, Jungle Mynas, Rock Pigeons, Spotted Doves, Asian Koels, Red-Whiskered Bulbuls, Greater Coucals and Magpie-robins, and migratory birds of the north, Shubha Bhat, wife of professor Navakanta at IISc, has a small part to play in it.

Her 900 sq-ft employee quarter is a menagerie of fruiting trees, flowering shrubs, and creepers on three sides, and has become a pitstop for resident birds as well as migratory speces such as Kashmir Flycatcher, Tickell’s Thrush and Ultramarine Flycatcher, who fly in during the winters. Bhat, who grew up in the Western Ghats, began small, placing an earthen pot with water in her garden 12 years ago to invite birds and animals. But to no avail. “It took three months to get even a dog to visit me,” she recalls. But things started looking up after that. “Crows came in, as did neighbourhood birds such as Mynas, Koels and Pigeons.”

She then added three cement birdbaths, a hanging earthen pot, halves of dried coconut shells, bamboo twigs with small branches for the birds to perch on, fish, aquatic plants, flowers, and fountains to her lawn. All this has resulted in a riot of birds, whose chirps and quirks the 43-year-old homemaker enjoys from her home. 

Shubha and a few students and staffers of IISc have started hanging bird nests at nooks of the campus to invite these avians, acting under the mentorship of bird expert JN Prasad, who has also carried out the same initiative at the Puttenahalli Lake. 

Clockwise: A Bull-capped Rock Thrush and an Oriental White-eye at the employee quarter in IISc; Puttenahalli Lake; a Forest Wagtail; Shubha Bhat in her garden, sparrows have a drink and the Sparrow Man of Bengaluru Edwin Joseph 

Creating bird hotspots

“Till date, 102 species of the birds have been spotted at the lake,” Usha Rajagopalan, chairperson of Puttenahalli Lake Improvement Trust (PLIT) says. In a weekly census that they have been doing since 2016, they have seen ups and downs in the numbers, and one reason is commercial fishing, which keeps the birds away. 

They have been taking specific steps to attract birds to the lake. Such as the introduction of bird perches and two nesting boxes and water bowls each. In addition, plans are afoot to create bird hotspots.

The PLIT is creating patches of vegetation on the lake and making an enclosure by planting shrubs around the slope. Their efforts are paying off: Rajagopalan says they have spotted Bronze-winged Jacanas at the Lake after three-four years, as well as the Pied Kingfisher. 

Take big steps

Krishna believes large-scale changes are the need of the hour, if we want to be hospitable to birds. Lakes, he says, must have a gradual and not a steep slope to the shoreline, as this would encourage birds which wade into the shallows, such as Sandpipers, Egrets, Herons and Stints. 

Lake islands should be vegetated, and the vegetation should have a variety of forms from floating plants such as Water Hyacinth and Duckweed, to submerged plants such as Hydrilla and Elodia. “Anchored floating plants such as Water Lilies and Lotus, are used by birds like Jacanas which walk on them. Emergent plants, the reeds and sedges are an all-time favourite, harbouring many birds, from migratory Warblers to Rails and Bitterns,” he says. The “fancy for ‘blue’ lake waters” also needs to be abandoned. “Reeds and hyacinths must be allowed to populate lakes because they bring down pollution level. Commercial fishing must be discouraged.”

On land, ways to bring back birds would be to have more rustic gardens and urban forests with multi-layered vegetation. “We need more trees on the roadside, especially on footpaths. There is a common misconception that roadside trees serve no use for wildlife in urban areas. Nothing could be farther from the truth.” Krishna explains how in Bengaluru, birds such as Night Herons used to build their nests and raise their young on large trees, even roadside ones. 

…And small ones too

“It’s all a matter of giving sparrows some water, millets, love and care. It takes just 15 minutes,” Joseph says. Prepare a little, especially if you want to attract a lot of sparrows to your home. He suggests spotting the nearest market area first. “Then start dropping millets 50 metres away from the market towards your home. With every passing day, bring the millet trail closer to your home and in some days, sparrows will make your home their home,” he says. 

Shubha suggests observing bird behaviour. “After the rains one day, I saw a Tailor Bird bathing under the droplets of water hanging by the leaves of my banana plant. So I started watering all my plants from the top daily. Soon, small birds started visiting.” Later, she started showering her mulberry tree with water in the morning so that Orioles, Starlings, and Barbetts could enjoy their ‘dew bath’. 

Krishna too believes individuals can play their part. Birds will come where there is greenery; so as much as possible, grow plants in your yards and balconies, he suggests, as he has done in his home in Basavanagudi. “If you have too little space, grow a creeper or climber and let it hang down from a balcony or allow it to grow up on a net or mesh. Leave grains, cooked food and water out for birds such as sparrows. If you’re worried about pigeons entering your home as a result, know that they are cliff resting birds, and will not come where there is foliage,” he says.