By: Mayuri Phadnis
 
 Dangerous chytrid fungus, known to eliminate frogs, has widespread presence
 
 	In 1993, scientists found the presence of chytrid fungus on dead/dying frogs in Queensland, Australia.
 	  	The fungus, caused by Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, an aquatic fungal pathogen, has been known to be responsible for the extinctionof certain amphibian species in the US and Australia.
 	  	Acouple of years ago, a bunch of researchers had found traces of this killer fungus in the Western Ghats. In a shocking and potentially disastrous revelation, the same team has discovered that the presence of the fungus is quite widespread in the Ghats. In fact, they claim that the chytrid was proven to be a potential threat to the amphibian population, some of which is rareand endemic.
 	  	The fungus results in a disease (Chytridiomycosis), which causes the frog’s skin to become rigid, ultimately choking its respiratory system to kill the creature. Its spread — pegged at 2.4 per cent prevalence in the region — has been attributed to human activity and changing environment.
 	  	Dr Neelesh Dahanukar, a research scientist at IISER, Pune, who is part of the research team, said during the first study, the team had taken samples from three different species in the northern parts of the state. “This time, we undertook studies at 36 locations and can confirm the infection’s widespread presence in the Western Ghats. We took the samples non-invasively i.e using swabs,” he said. 	
 	Dahanukar added that the prevalence is more wherever the diversity is higher. “Places like south Karnataka and Kerala border, which are home to many unique species, have high prevalence of the fungus. The spreading of the infection can prove to be a threat to their population,” Dahanukar added. Another issue of concern is that the fungus was also seen on endangered species like Nyctibatrachus humayuni, which has a fragmented and limited presence in the northern section of the Ghats.
 	  	Dr Sanjay Molur from Laboratory of Systematic Conservation Planning of the Zoo Outreach Organisation in Coimbatore, who is also a part of the team, said researchers are now working to gather more information.
 	  	“Considering the fact that the disease has a negative impact, we will begin\ to monitor frogs’ population. It has led to extinction in some countries. We cannot make any conservation efforts before finding out how the fungus is affecting the local amphibian population,” he said.
 	  	Amit Sayyed, a researcher from the Wildlife Protection and Research Society in Satara, confirmed that the infection was spreading quite rapidly.
 	  	“The condition is seen on both rare and commonly found species. If this goes unchecked, it might threaten the existence of amphibians in the Ghats.”