Crude explosives were placed by poachers, for wild boars whose meat is in great demand
 
 
 Meat bombs have been traditionally used by farmers to ward off crop raiders like wild boars, but in the hands of poachers they have become a major ecological threat as they are using it to kill wild boars, which they sell as exotic meat in villages and even cities like Bengaluru.
 
 
 The crude explosives, usually prepared by mixing items like ragi, meat and gunpowder, are also a danger to wild animals, recent victims of which were two sloth bears in the Bannerghatta-Kanakapura-Sathanur forest range, one of which died after biting into the explosive and the other is battling for life.
 
 
 “We got two distress calls from Sathanur and Kanakapura range about two injured bears. One of the bears was already dead when we reached it while the other was in an extremely critical condition with half of its face blown away,” said Dr Arun A Shah, centre head, Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre.
 
 
 Doctors at the centre said that the injured bear has slim chances of survival as its face has been reduced to a mangled mass of flesh and tissue due to the impact of the explosion.
 
 
 “The bear’s s face and eyes have been severely damaged in the blast. We have given it medical aid and shifted it to the rescue centre at Bannerghatta where it is still undergoing treatment,” Dr Shah said.
 
 
 Dr Shah also added that last week his team came across another bear with near fatal injuries after it had bitten into a meat bomb. In an attempt to protect wildlife in the region, forest officials and conservationists are now trying to educate the villagers along these forest fringes to desist from using meat bombs.
 
 
 “We are now trying to make villagers aware that it is illegal to indulge in such activities,” Dr Shah said.
 
 
 Quite often, glass shrapnel and nails are also mixed in the explosive to ensure the death of the animal. The strategy is to place the meat bomb at an ideal spot in the forest, where the scent of the meat lures the animal to eat it. Once the animal bites into the bomb, it explodes, either maiming or killing the animal. Earlier, the bombs were kept adjacent to agricultural fields that are frequently raided by wild boars.
 
 
 But now there has been a rampant increase in its usage with an increase in demand for wild boar meat. A kilogram of the meat can fetch anywhere between Rs 100 to Rs 150 and even more if it is being sold to a customer in the city.
 
 
 “Meat bombs have killed many animals in the area; we have rescued many victims of such explosion. Bear is listed as a Schedule 1 animal in the Indian Wildlife Protection Act and killing it is an offence. Now people who are targeting wild boar are killing other animals,” Sharath Babu R, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban said.