From a middle-class family to the world of glamour, how has the journey been?
 I never wanted to be an actress, ever. But I guess this was what was destined for me and so I am here. I did my Bachelors in Journalism and wanted to take up a cinematography course and that’s when Nandini Reddy (Director, Ala Modalaindi) met me and convinced me to act in her film. The journey, so far, has definitely been endearing. 
 
 
 From girl next door to current sensation... describe your feelings. Do you love the attention? 
 The film industry is a sensational profession to be in. I can’t comment on how I’m feeling. I enjoy acting though I didn’t want to be here. I am planning to do meaningful films in the future as well. 
 The first time your family and friends saw you on screen, what was the reaction? Who is your biggest critic?
 A lot of my friends and family don’t see films. It’s not that they are against it, they just don’t watch them. But since I’m into it, they invariably end up watching. I’m my biggest critic. When I get back watching myself on screen, I think I probably could have done it differently. 
 You have sung two songs in Ala Modalaindi. You amazed us with your versatility. So is it Nithya, the singer or Nithya, the actor?
 It is just something I’m born with. I love to sing, I never took any classes and I don’t believe it can be taught. Nandini knew I loved singing and she recommended Kalyani Mallik, the music director, to hear me out. One of the days I sang while he was around and he asked me to come to the studio. That’s how I happened to sing. If I had a chance, I would have been a singer than an actress. 
 Would you rather be in an offbeat movie or a masala pot-boiler?
 Definitely off-beat! I will not do a masala pot-boiler. There are others who are crafted for it, I’ll stick to what I can do. I feel it’s important that the audience gets something out of my films. 
 The difference between men and women directors... [She has acted with many women directors]
 It’s a coincidence that I happened to work with three women directors, with Nandini for Ala Modalaindi, with Anjali Menon in Happy Journey (one of the stories in Kerala Café) and Anjana for Veppam. I rate my films with them among the top films in my career. But for me, a director is a director, be it a woman or a man. 
 Finally if not movies, where would you have been?
 I would have been in a forest working in a wildlife reserve taking care of orangutans (giggles). Yes! I would have been with animals around.