Nagpur: Wildlife experts, veterinarians and wildlife buffs have termed the idea of neutering tigers to stop procreation and preventing man-animal conflict by the state government outlandish and hare-brained. They also questioned the proposal to translocate 50 tigers from Chandrapur district.

“It is usually not justified scientifically to translocate wild tigers to new locations whatever be the reason. Only if there is a sufficiently large site with abundant prey, some wild tigers that have already acquired hunting skills can be relocated to repopulate such an area. There has been only one successful large project of this nature in Panna, where there was abundant wild prey, villages had been relocated, and tigers had been poached out earlier. All other cases of translocation have failed including the one in Sariska to meet the intention of repopulating a new habitat with tigers,” said K Ullas Karanth, director, Centre for Wildlife Studies (CWS).

Karanth said translocations of tigers into new areas with low prey density, many livestock, and human presence has caused many tragedies not only in Maharashtra but also in other states such as Karnataka. “If it is true that dozens of tigers will be translocated in Maharashtra, it would extremely unwise and will lead to a tragedy both for local people and tigers involved. I would strongly advise against it,” the expert said.

Karanth added, “If the goal is to control tiger populations, we must recognize that as the real problem. ‘Surplus’ tigers, which cannot be kept in zoos for many different reasons, should be euthanized humanely by professional doctors either in the field or after capture.”

Secondly, production of ‘surplus’ tigers in wild populations can be brought down by stopping the present excessive, artificial, ‘habitat management’ which is artificially inflating prey densities and as a result increasing tiger densities and production of surplus animals that have no place to go.

“These are complex ecological problems which should be seriously examined by scientists with necessary knowledge. We have too many ‘experts’ who are causing this problem without learning anything from the past,” said Karanth.

“Such a proposal smacks of ignorance and reveals those who make proposals do not understand tigers. Neutering wild tigers will be against all international guidelines and would trigger a Supreme Court intervention. Translocating 50 tigers is the worst and most hare-brained scheme I’ve ever heard. Such proposals are meant for garbage can,” remarked conservationist and wildlife author Valmik Thapar.

Seething reactions have been coming across India to TOI on the issue. Anish Andheria, president, Wildlife Conservation Trust (WCT), said, neutering had been tried in domestic dogs and other animals with limited or no success. “There may be 200 tigers in Chandrapur, but this population is ‘open’. There is nothing like ‘excess’ tigers in a landscape as none of our parks are fenced - through natural processes, young tigers will be pushed out by adult animals, keeping the overall tiger population in check,” he said.

Andheria said tiger population in Chandrapur district had gone up because of better protection. Poaching too has been controlled. Unlike human population in cities, tiger population will not keep growing for forever. “What is needed is a conservation strategy unique to areas outside national parks and sanctuaries,” he added.

“We should not use the same methods we are using to manage wildlife inside our parks. Outside the reserve, communities have to be involved. Habitat management has to change. Most importantly, prompt emergency response teams, composed of forest personnel and some members from the community have to be constituted,” the wildlife expert said.

Andheria added also widespread and repeated awareness programmes to communicate ways of coexistence with wildlife have to happen in every village and school. If you want wildlife to roam free in human-dominated landscapes, systemic changes should be tried instead of shortcuts such as translocation and neutering. Both these methods have serious limitations and will only transfer the problem or at best give temporary relief. “What we need is a sustainable and permanent solution,” he said.

Conservationist Prafulla Bhamburkar said, “Neither neutering nor translocation are solutions. If tiger numbers are increasing, natural dispersal is the only solution. Whole landscape is an important unit to maintain natural flow of tigers and carrying capacity is entirely decided by land use pattern. Maintaining ecological balance and securing corridors hold key over artificial management. The forest department should prepare a landscape level conservation plan for Vidarbha where state’s 96% tiger population is based.”

Noted veterinary surgeon Dr Shirish Upadhye, though supportive of the idea, sounded a note of caution. “Selection of these males needs to be scientific and unhurried. In areas where viable mating pairs exist, it would be unwise to neuter the males. Instead, an effort should be made to translocate these pairs so as to maximise birthing potential.”

“Population to be vasectomised should be based on genetic studies to ensure we retain maximum genetic diversity in the numbers we choose to leave intact,” he added.