By Reya Mehrotra
 
 Subhadra Cherukuri, working with Ernst & Young, has been rescuing snakes and educating people on the importance of these reptiles
 
 Dressed in a camouflage print T-shirt and knee-high boots, she makes her way to the jungle with a snake on the hook. Meet Subhadra Cherukuri, one of the very few woman snake rescuers, from Bengaluru.
 
 From childhood, she has had a fascination for reptiles and had a will to rescue them. “I started actively rescuing snakes around seven years ago. Initially, I watched and assisted my husband, who is also a professional snake rescuer. After I had gained enough knowledge, I began rescues on my own. The journey involved a lot of learning, honing my skill of tracking and bagging snakes safely, without harming the animal or myself. I also learned to handle the crowds tactfully while doing my job as people panic and create chaos,” she told BM.
 
 She said she was interested in reptiles and wildlife even before marriage, but her parents’ concern prevented her from getting into rescue. “So I had to wait till I got married and take the full time role,” she said.
 
 February to September is the official snake season when the most number of snakes are spotted in residential areas, she said. Though they are seen in all of North Bengaluru, Yelahanka to Old Madras Road are the most affected areas, she said. She describes a typical day. “When I get a call, I first ask for the location and if the snake is out in the open. If it is in the open, I ask the informant to leave it alone as it will go away by itself. Else, if it is close enough for me to get to the area within 10-15 minutes, I go there. I ask the informant to keep an eye on the snake, ensure that all exits are barred, and that a crowd does not gather. Once I reach the location, I use a hook to bag the snake, after which I survey the area and hive the informant and residents tips on how to keep the area free of rats so as not to attract snakes.”
 
 She then releases the snake in natural surroundings or close to where it was found. Subhadra, who is also a project manager with Ernst and Young, believes that there are preconceived notions of how certain jobs are meant for men and the others for women, especially in India. Snake rescuing, for instance, has always been a man’s job in small towns and villages. “It does not take any extra-physical ability to do so, it is just about perception. Until two decades ago, a woman on a bike was “too modern”. I believe a woman can do anything that a man can. It is just that they allow themselves to be bogged down by stereotyping.”
 
 She said sometimes people who call her for rescue tell her to call a man. “I end up explaining to them that I have been rescuing for quite some time and that I need to concentrate and do my job before the snake gets away.”
 
 Cherukuri said she also has to deal with superstitions. “Sometimes being the only woman amidst a crowd of people ready to kill the snake, even if it is not venomous, can be challenging. Also, dealing with snake charmers who de-fang snakes and make them dance to earn a living,” she said. She said snakes play an important role in the ecosystem, and sometimes rescuing a life is the only way one can give back to the nature. Though not denying the fact that hyper urbanization has caused many snake species to become endangered, she believes that people are gradually becoming aware of the need to save them. “Many lakes have become landfills in Bengaluru, which has had a huge impact on snakes in the city ,” she said. Subhadra is a private volunteer rescuer and does her job only out of passion. “The government and forest departments do not have any rescue cells. Snake rescuing in Bengaluru is mostly done by private rescuers,” she said.