An insensitively abandoned fishing net in Jakkur Lake almost killed a spot-billed pelican with the entire length of its gular pouch – the extensible throat sac used for short-term storage of food – slit open. The bird was rescued from its trappings on June 10 but was in a critical condition. Almost a month-and-a-half later this beautiful bird was released back hale-and-hearty into the lake to join another pelican thanks to the relentless care and treatment given to it after three meticulously performed surgeries by the doctors from the city wildlife team.
 
 The incident – however heartening in the end to have ensured that the pelican not only lived but was able to fly back to its mates – has raised an alarm over the mindlessly abandoned fishing nets by the locals who use the water body to catch fish for sale. The fishing nets are suddenly being seen as death traps for these unsuspecting migratory birds for whom water bodies like Jakkur Lake are few natural habitats remaining here for them.
 
 The bird was found hopelessly entangled in the abandoned fishing nets on June 10. It had been so badly injured that about 50 per cent of the badly slit gular pouch had to be removed. The doctors were successful in removing all the dead tissues in the pouch although they tried their best in retaining at least the basic integrity of the pouch’s complex structure to enable the bird to carry its food in it to go on living.
 
 After the surgeries, the recuperation was found to be extremely slow but the bird fought to regain its strength after each surgery and made a complete recovery at the end of the period.
 
 Before being released back to its watery habitat, the bird was tested for its ability to catch and retain fish weighing about 200 grams each, the wildlife team members told Bangalore Mirror. Only upon observing its success was a decision taken to release it to freedom.
 
 “The tear occurred in the bird’s struggle to break free of the net. But even if the bird had managed to escape it would have died a slow, painful death as with the torn pouch it could not have been able to hold fish in it. It would have starved to death apart from the pain. The pelican was treated at the rehabilitation and underwent undergone three surgeries totalling about thirty hours,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden told Bangalore Mirror. “The bird was released back in Jakkur Lake and it was very heartening to see that it immediately joined and interacted with the other pelicans in the area.”
 
 On the importance of releasing rescued and recuperated bird in its area of origin, renowned expert Saleem Hamid said, “An important aspect of the rehabilitation process is to release the animal/bird in the right habitat and, wherever possible, release it in the same area from where the bird was found. Birds develop a sense for feeding locations and the potential safety of those locations; a bird released in a new area will have a steep learning curve to figure it all out in a day or two.”
 
 PUBLIC IGNORANCE RAISING ALARM
 
 The incident has raised an alarms on the serious issue of fishing nets being abandoned which pose a grave danger to the lives of waterborne birds which are also after the fish.
 
 Jakkur Lake alone has at least 69 species of birds around the habitat, which include ones like coots, white-breasted water-hens, purple moore hens, cormorants, and kingfishers; and insensitive littering or abandoning fishing nets prove deadly to these birds, experts said.
 
 “Abandoned fishing nets pose a serious threat to water birds and the consequence of human indifference to littering could be lethal to wildlife. People visiting lake bodies and around should be sensitive towards the lake’s ecosystem, of which these birds are an important and integral part. Non-application of mind could be deadly to a few birds remaining in city. 
 
 Read: Probe pelican death: AWBI