Following the bird flu scare that originated in Hesarghatta, chicken consumption in Bangalore has halved – from a high of 4 lakh kg per day to 2 lakh kg per day. And yet, retailers refuse to budge when it comes to prices even though wholesale prices have crashed.
   In April 2011, the price of live chicken breached the Rs 100-mark for the first time in Bangalore and prices have hovered around that figure since. However, with over 60 villages around Hesarghatta quarantined after bird flu killed turkeys last week, wholesale prices have come down from Rs 70 per kg to Rs 48 per kg. However, retailers in Bangalore continue to charge Rs 90 per kg for live birds. Cleaned and ready-to-cook chicken continue to sell for around Rs 120 per kg.
   Dr B L Chidananda, associate professor, department of animal sciences, University of Agricultural Sciences, says the correction is being artificially held up by retailers. He said, “Wholesale prices have already come down. In fact, producers are losing on every bird. The cost of production is Rs 60 and the wholesale price has come down to Rs 48. As a result, farmers are losing at least Rs 10 on a bird. It is a business secret that retailers will not tell consumers very soon. That is why retail prices continue to be high despite drop in demand.”
   Since the last outbreak of bird flu three years ago, the consumption of chicken has gone up drastically in Bangalore. From 1 lakh birds per day (1.8 to 2 lakh kg), it is now 2 lakh birds per day (4 lakh kg).
   Chidananda calls this the “paradox of bird flu.” He said, ""Because of media reports, consumption has come down in the last one week. However, after the last bird flu scare, consumption peaked after the initial drop.” In 2008, chicken was retailing at Rs 50 a kg. The price crashed to Rs 25 due to the bird flu scare. But since then, increasing demand has taken the price to Rs 100 per kg.   Fresh stock to be cheaper Retailers are likely to cut prices from Monday. A wholesaler, not wishing to be named, said, “Retailers hoped that people would pay existing rates during the weekend. They did not expect the demand to fall so sharply. The fresh stock that will be supplied from Monday will be cheaper and retailers will have no option but to reflect the market reality in prices.“ 
   Though consumers are shying away, it is only people who handle infected birds who can be affected. Chidananda said, “All viruses die at 72 degrees Celsius. Indian cooking, either boiling or deep frying, and the use of spices, means that eating chicken is not risky. Butduring an outbreak, people are naturally afraid.”
   Meanwhile, poultry in 60 villages around Hesarghatta are being culled as a precautionary measure.
 
 
 MIGRATORY GEESE TO BLAME?
 Thousands of turkeys have died due to bird flu at the Central Poultry Development Organisation in Hesarghatta. Wildlife experts had recently spotted a bar-headed goose, which migrates to Bangalore from Afghanistan, in the area. The bird was found to be a carrier of bird flu during the 2005 outbreak in several countries. However, the BBMP is yet to test the blood samples of these birds.