Ministers can no longer use elephants at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) as their personal property, to be sent where they will. The Central Zoo Authority has nipped this alarming trend in the bud and has warned BBP officials against sending elephants to exhibitions and other functions. Home minister made jumbo arrangement for son&rsquo;s college
 
   The order by the top authority governing zoos across the country comes in the wake of Bangalore Mirror reports highlighting the misuse by ministers (Home minister made jumbo arrangement for sons college on Nov 26, 2011 and Forest minister okays jumbo for temple fest on Dec 23, 2011).
   The reports brought to light the practice of okaying the use of BBP elephants at private functions without following the required norms. City-based wildlife enthusiasts discovered that the permission came from forest minister C P Yogeshwar’s office.
   Wildlife activists had objected to this practice. They quoted rules that said zoo elephants could only be used for state functions like Dasara and not private ones. The authorities flouted other norms as well by not getting the animal’s fitness certificate and permission to transport the animal.
 
 They did not get permission from the local deputy conservator of forest, the principal chief conservator of forests and the Karnataka Zoo Authority either.
     CZA’s rap “You are hereby directed to stop sending zoo elephants with immediate effect for the exhibition and performance or any other purpose from Bannerghatta Biological Park, Bangalore, and comply with the directives issued by the authority,” the CZA order said.
   If the authorities continue to violate the rules, CZA can initiate departmental inquiry and disciplinary action against them.
   BBP authorities are taking no chances and have issued an order to immediately implement the directive.
   “We have around 14 elephants inside and no elephant will be let for wrongful use henceforth,” R Raju, BBP executive director, told Bangalore Mirror. “I have issued an office order in this regard. I hope it will not be violated in future.”
     Forest minister Welcomes it Reacting to the order, forest minister Yogeshwar said, “We had  already decided to stop and the central government’s direction only helped our decision. We welcome it and have stopped giving permission for the use of BBP elephants.”
   For wildlife activists, it’s a victory. “We welcome the order,” said Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore urban. “Now that the  CZA has stepped in, we hope the practice stops.”