Environmentalist has written to the Forest Dept asking that a field director be appointed to Bandipur Tiger Reserve before fire season

With summer approaching, the threat of forest fires looms large. Now, green activists have written to the Forest Department to take adequate measures by deploying personnel so that precious forest land can be saved.
 
In a letter to the department, environmentalist and former Wildlife Board member Joseph Hoover writes, “The Bandipur Tiger Reserve is in need of an experienced, efficient and honest field director at this critical point in time. The scenario right now is very bleak, more so with the fire season around the corner. The ground level staff, especially forest watchers are demoralised. Bandipur Tiger Reserve has a history of major, devastating fires over the last seven years. We have lost a forest landscape in excess of 6,500 hectares. More than 4,000 hectares of Karnataka’s best tiger reserve was lost to fire due to the lackadaisical approach of a former field director. Given the fact that Bandipur Tiger Reserve has suffered due to inept and corrupt field directors, we humbly request you to post a good officer with sound man-management ability to this critical tiger habitat.”

Hoover said the Reserve was home to more than 150 tigers. Bandipur had suffered three major fires since 2013 with the worst in 2019 scorching more than 4,000 hectares of the tiger habitat. “Government probes have attributed these devastating fires to inept, callous administration. Karnataka’s best tiger reserve again finds itself in trouble as the state government hasn’t appointed a field director. Besides, there is no assistant conservator of forest in Bandipur since December 2021. There has been no range forest officer since August 2021. The Forest Department had recommended the names of experienced, sincere officers. But the government has not deemed it appropriate to accept the department’s choice. The fire season is already around the corner. Bandipur, which has lost more than 6,500 hectares over the last few years, cannot sustain another inferno. It is frustrating that forest, environment, and biodiversity are the least of the government’s priorities...” he added.
Many studies have shown that the wild lands including forest areas are increasingly facing difficult fire weather conditions.

 We didn’t start the fire, it was always burningAccording to experts, selection of inappropriate species for large-scale afforestation and monoculture plantation are some other reasons, indirectly leading to forest fires.

THINGS WE LOST IN THE FIRE

According to the India Forest report, globally about 98 million hectares of forest were affected by fire in 2015, which comprise 3 per cent of the forest area. This was mainly in the tropical domain, where about four per cent of the total forest area was burnt. The Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has also reported an estimated 260,000 to 600,000 premature deaths of human/wildlife annually, due to exposure to smoke from landscape fires (including forest fires). The report also finds that annual carbon emissions from forest fires range between 2.5 billion and 4.0 billion tons of CO2. Persistent hotter and drier weather due to climate change and other human factors such as land conversion for agriculture and poor forest management are the main drivers behind the increase of forest fire. “In India, severe fires occur in many forest types particularly dry deciduous forest, while evergreen, semi-evergreen and montane temperate forests are comparatively less prone. More than 36 per cent of the country’s forest cover has been estimated to be prone to frequent forest fires,” the report stated.