Veterinarians perform surgery on the broken shell of an exotic pet turtle
 
 
 Eight-year-old turtle Enu was enjoying the sun last week when he fell off from the first floor balcony of his home in Marathalli and broke his shell (rib cage) in two. A fractured and profusely bleeding Enu was rushed to Bangalore Pet Hospital, where the vets, whose curriculum revolves around pet dogs and cats, faced the challenge of treating the exotic animal. 

 	In a two-hour long operation, the vets, accompanied by a dentist, performed this complicated surgery using anesthesia, and fixed the broken shell using wire and sealed it with dental cement. 

 	For Dr H D Lohith, a vet at Bangalore Pet Hospital, handling the one foot long red eared slider was a professional challenge. The surgery was complicated as the shell was broken into two and could not be stitched up. 

 	“This was the first time I was working on an exotic turtle. We assessed the turtle and wanted him to stabilise for two days as he was in pain and not eating. A shell for turtle is like the rib cage for humans. The problem with turtle is they have to be in water to eat and do their job but with a fracture like this, if he entered water, it would have seeped into his organs and caused multiple complications,’’ explains Dr Lohith. 

 	Dr Lohith was accompanied during surgery by his dentist friend Dr Suman Reddy. 

 	First they anesthesised the animal and fixed the fractures using stainless streel wire; The stitching was covered with a three-layered sealing-- first with medical tissue adhesive, followed by dental cement and finally with epoxy. 

 	``The idea was to allow him to get into water as early as possible. So I had to fix the wound properly so that it can heal as shell healing takes a long time,’’ Dr Lohith added. 

 	Dental cement was used to cover the operated area as it was found to be the best adhesive that will not affect the healing process when the animal gets into water. 

 	Enu is back home and has taken happily to water much to relief of his parent guardian Archana, who never expected her pet to be back to being normal after the near-fatal fall.
 	
 	
 	PATIENT PROFILE
 	
 	
 	 		* Enu is a red-eared slider, a semi-aquatic turtle belonging to the family Emydidae which is a subspecies of the pond slider.
 		 	 		*It is included in the list of the world’s 100 most invasive species but don’t fall under Indian Wildlife Protection Act.
 		
 		*It is one of the most popular pet turtle.
 		 	 		*Red-eared slider gets the name from the small red dash around its ears. The slider part of their name comes from their ability to slide off rocks and gets into the water quickly.