Tapping into the tourism potential of its famous waterfalls, the state government seems to be emulating the facilities at the world famous Niagara Falls.
 
 Close on the lines of the famous cantilever bridge across the Niagara gorge that provides spectacular views of the falls and river, the Jog Management Authority has submitted a proposal to build cantilever viewing gallery at the famous Jog falls facilitating a clear and picturesque view of the falls.
 
 The steel structure with a lightweight canopy will come up on the right side of the falls according to the plan submitted to the government. However, the only obstacle in the project’s way is that the forest on which the gallery will come up is located within the limits of Sharavathi Wildlife Sanctuary in Uttara Kannada. A proposal to divert about 0.405 hectares of forest land for the project has been submitted to the forest department, according to sources in the state government.
 
 According to the proposal submitted to the KFD for approval of the diversion of forest land, the JMA has revealed that about 10 lakh tourists visit the Jog — the second highest waterfall in India. “Viewers gallery is an ambitious project and will add to the beauty of the falls and attract more tourists. It will facilitate a proper view of the falls from the gorge. However, the only obstacle is the availability of land as part of the land required falls within the jurisdiction of Sharavathi Wildlife division. We have applied to the forest department seeking approval for diversion of forest land for the project,” tourism minister Priyank Kharge said.
 
 Sources in the Jog Management Authority (JMA) that maintains and supervises tourism and infrastructure development activities at the falls say the latest cantilever gallery will come up on the right side of falls just a few meters below the Jog IB close to Raja falls.
 
 “Currently, there is a viewing spot on the left side of the falls near KSTDC hotel. The new gallery is going to be exactly opposite the current one on an area of 40x20 mtrs,” a senior official of the JMA explained. According to a justification made by Shivamogga Deputy Commissioner VP Ikkeri, who is also the CEO of JMA, before the KFD: “The gallery is to create diversified platforms and also allow tourists to view the natural scenic beauty from different angles. More than any other purpose, it will ease out the congestion of visitors at the existing view point.”
 
 While the existing viewpoint is on the ground, the upcoming gallery will be of a cantilever type and likely to cost between Rs.8-10 crore.