In a move towards wildlife conservation, the Karnataka Ecotourism Development Board (KEDB) has come forward with its Certified Volunteer Training Programme (VTP). Nature enthusiasts and aspiring conservationists have a golden opportunity to participate in the first programme of 2024, set to take place at the Bandipur Tiger Reserve from January 5 to 9.

The programme was launched in 2013, to equip volunteers with the skills needed to support the Karnataka Forest Department in diverse conservation activities. These include tiger estimation, bird surveys, elephant estimation, nature awareness in schools, and other pivotal programmes. With a successful track record of training over 500 volunteers, the programme temporarily ceased after 2015 but is now making a comeback due to popular demand.

This year, the programmes have been conducted at various wildlife hubs, including the Kulgi Nature Camp in Dandeli and the Bandipur Tiger Reserve, and soon the first programme for the next year will begin.

Rahul Aradhya, Chief Trainer and Naturalist at KEDB, said, “The 5-day immersive training programme aims to sensitise participants to biodiversity and conservation efforts. Attendees can expect a diverse curriculum, featuring talks, discussions, and practical sessions on a wide range of subjects, from communication skills to Indian wildlife laws. The programme includes engaging topics such as mammal behaviour, wilderness first aid, bird ecology, storytelling, conservation issues, and more.”

The participants will have the opportunity to explore the wilderness through walks, safaris, and field visits.
 
Aradhya further pointed out that, so far, they have received 2,000 applications for the programme. There are around 30 slots available for every training programme, and 18 have already been booked.

“The programme is like a sensitisation and awareness workshop. There will be walks and safaris, and there will be a lot of information given to them about the forest. Once they complete the training, their contact details and email addresses will be taken, which will be sent to the KFD officials of all the districts. As and when required, the officials can reach out to them about volunteering. They will also be given a certification towards the end of training,” explained Aradhya.
 
One can expect a lot from the programme that will include plant and tree life, mammal behaviour, communication skills, bird ecology, reptiles and amphibians, the Indian Wildlife Act, butterflies and moths, conservation issues, techniques, and various other topics, along with multiple walks, safaris, and field visits.
 
The Bandipur Tiger Reserve, with its rich biodiversity, provides an ideal backdrop for this transformative training programme, promising an enriching experience for all those involved.