Children in J P Nagar turn Samaritans for a wounded kite as they nurse it back to health for over a month
 
 	December 1 was like any other Sunday for Vaishnavi (9 years), Sahana (10), Shikar (5) and Rishima (8), four children who reside in Nandi Gardens, an apartment complex in JP Nagar 9th Phase, until they noticed an unusual sight. 

 The four were playing in the apartment complex premises when they noticed a large bird sitting on the ground. The bird appeared to be in some pain and attempted to flap its wings, while desperately trying to fly. But it couldn’t get off the ground. The children went up to the bird and found that one of its wings was injured. The bird, a black kite, flapped its one good wing and attempted to hobble away, but it didn’t get very far. It was too weak and in obvious pain. 

 The children immediately decided to help the injured kite. The kite is a species that is largely overlooked since they sit unnoticed high up on terraces and water tanks. Residents of the complex, however, say this one would certainly have died if it hadn’t been noticed by the children. 

 	“It was touching and inspiring the way the kids took the lead to save the bird,” said Anand Yadwad, a resident of the apartment complex and an employee of a city-based IT firm. “For over a month the four, who were joined by other children of the complex, looked after the bird, nursing it back to health. Within a month, the bird was back to its normal self. It was released by  	residents in the apartment complex on Friday. ” 

 	When they found the injured kite, the children first turned to Suresh Krishna, a resident of the complex who runs a finance company. Krishna immediately called the civic agency’s rescue team, but couldn’t get through to anyone. “It was a Sunday and my efforts drew a blank,” Krishna said. “But the children were determined to help the kite. They began feeding it water. The bird was scared and restless, but the kids ensured it didn’t get away to be gobbled up by a stray dog or attacked by a cat.” 

 	Learning of the kids’ attempt to save the bird, elders in the apartment complex began to rally around. “With no sign of rescuers, we decided to look for someone else,” Krishna said. “We found a doctor in our own complex – Dr Roopa Satish. She told us to put the bird in a box so that it is not attacked by cats.” 

 	Dr Roopa, a vet with the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, Bannerghatta Road, then took over the rehabilitation process. She administered first aid and kept the bird on a diet of fluids. “Its wings had got entangled in string and it was twisted,” said Dr Roopa. “Luckily there was no cut. The wings were straightened first and then we put the bird on painkillers for a couple of days. We also brought the incident to the notice of the forest authorities.” 

 	For over a month, the children kept a watch over the bird, nursing it back to health and ensuring  	Dr Roopa’s every instruction was meticulously followed. Dr Roopa admits that the bird’s chances of survival would have been nil had it not been for the children. 

 	“Once the kite began flying well, we again took permission from the authorities, which is mandatory, and released it. The kite was doing perfectly well. It was a very successful release," said Dr Roopa. 

 	The children are thrilled that they were able to not just save the kite, but also restore it back to health. “I am glad that we were able to save the kite,” said Apeksha A Yadwad, another child who resides in the complex and who had joined the original four in nursing the kite. “We are fortunate that we got to see it from so close. You don’t get to see a kite from so close. I think one of my best memories will be the image of the kite flying away fit and healthy.” 

 	Krishna, however, summed it up nicely when he said, “I think the kids taught us all a valuable lesson —to be kind to birds and animals.”