Ira Dubey is the First Lady of Indian Cinema in a play, produced and directed by her mother with Joy Sengupta as Devika’s husband Himanshu Rai; opens in Mumbai on September 7

On September 7, Lillete Dubey will bring in her birthday with a new stage production, Devika Rani: Goddess of the Silver Screen. The actress is directing daughter Ira Dubey who plays the First Lady of Indian Cinema with Joy Sengupta as her debonair filmmaker-husband Himanshu Rai. The play opens at the Tata Theatre in Mumbai, after an inaugural performance in Pune on August 31.

Though Lillete has done many plays based on world literature, the primary aim of her theatre company has been to give a platform to original Indian writing, be it Vijay Tendulkar, Mahesh Dattani or more recently Twinkle Khanna whose short story, Salaam, Noni Apa, from her book, The Legend of Lakshmi Prasad, was adapted by her for the stage. Having already experimented with a play on Gauhar, the singer from Kolkata who popularised Hindustani classical music, Lillete was not in the mood for another biopic. But then, she ran into an old college friend, Kishwar Desai, who was also on the jury of the Montreal English Theatre Awards (META) and confided that along with a book on the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre, she was also writing on the cinema of Devika Rani and Himanshu Rai based on five years of research and several unpublished letters. Instantly excited, Lillete asked her if she’d also like to write it as a play and Kishwar was quick to agree.

“It’s not an already made script which guarantees a safe and successful run. After seven-eight drafts, we’ve finally decided what we want to tell. While we will start with and touch on films with women-centric topics, like Achhut Kannya, the play is not a filmography for the archives. It’s a personal story of a woman who was the grand-niece of Rabindranath Tagore, who’d been educated in London, and who broke the glass ceiling 80 years ago to enter a profession which did not draw women from respectable families then,” she points out. Lillete adds that the winner of the Padma Shri and Dadasaheb Phalke award, did not only act in movies, with her husband she set up and ran India’s first listed studio, Bombay Talkies, which introduced legends like Ashok Kumar and Dilip Kumar. “It’s a fascinating story which unfolds against the backdrop of the Second World War with the studio employing many Germans.”

And will the journey also touch on the big ‘scandal’ of the ’30s, when Devika Rani eloped with co-star Najm-ul-Hassan during the filming of Jeevan Naiya which landed lab assistant Kumudlal Ganguly, rechristened Ashok Kumar, his break as an actor? “Oh yes, and also the reason she returned home, one of them being adultery which was a punishable offence then and she could have been jailed,” she says.

Quiz her on her choice of Ira to play the titular role and Lillete reasons her daughter is a talented actress who speaks flawless English and can be both feisty and vulnerable—demure bride and dragon lady—on stage.

For Ira a biopic is always exciting, particularly one that goes back in time. “In Devika’s case, we know what she looked like and have seen her films so there’s a lot of research involved in getting the way she walked, spoke and dressed right. At the same time, one doesn’t want to make a caricature of a real person. The challenge is to capture her spirit so people believe that this is Devika Rani,” she maintains.

Her director mother points out that Ira is slim, petite and can carry a tune well and for that instant, will convince you it’s Devika Rani sitting on the branch with Ashok Kumar and crooning, “Main Ban Ki Chidiya”. “She’s the right age given the role spans from 18 to 36,” adds Lillete, informing that the play ends with the actress-filmmaker’s retirement from showbiz to marry Russian painter Svetoslav Roerich and move to Himachal where she made documentaries on wildlife, before settling down in Bangalore, where she died at the age of 85, a Garbo-like figure.

Talented Joy, for her, is also apt for his part. “He has the right look to play Himanshu, who was 16 years older than his wife, and shares a great working relationship with Ira. We also have him speaking Bangla in a few scenes,” she smiles, revealing that Kishwar has written the play with almost 50 characters with each actor playing at least three different characters. Pia Benegal is doing the costumes.

A working birthday is not everyone’s cup of cheers, but after three years, it’s become a norm for her. “It means there’s time yet before I have to start thinking of hanging up my boots or should that be sandals,” laughs Lillete, equally kicked about her real-life role of a grandmother to daughter Neha’s 10-month twins. “For the first time in my life I am experiencing pure love. These babies are mine only to spoil and indulge,” she signs off with a smile.