The forest department, which is struggling to handle the man-animal conflict in some remote parts of the state, is now faced with a new problem — the increasing number of unauthorised and self-proclaimed wildlife rescuers who are literally extorting money from the public at every chance they get. The miscreants are suspected to be involved in illegal trade of wildlife products like animal hide and snake venom.  
 The office of the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF), which has found that these fake wildlife rescuers reach the people in need by listing their numbers with Just Dial, has asked the helpline to direct the people who make distress calls only to the 33 persons recommended by the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike.  
 The department took the initiative after it received several complaints that such people even demand between Rs 1,000 and Rs 2,000 to rescue just one snake. “We have received complaints about exorbitant amounts being charged by some unauthorised wildlife rescuers while the BBMP’s volunteers do the service free of cost,” said B K Singh, PCCF (wildlife).  
 “When people refuse to pay such unjustifiable amounts, they even put the snakes back on the premises. So I have written a letter to Just Dial to give contact numbers of only persons recommended by the BBMP,” said Singh. 
 A source in the BMP said instead of handing over the rescued animals to the zoo authorities, the clandestine rescuers misuse them to make money by selling venom and skin.  
 “There is a rampant misuse of the helpline and the callers are being harassed with exorbitant charges. The more serious matter is that the wildlife is being misused to sell products like snake venom. There is no accountability for such rescues,” confirmed Sharath Babu R, a honorary wildlife warden. 
   “We had written letters to the forest department, alerting it about the increase in the number of unauthorised wildlife rescuers. It is a welcome move that the PCCF has now asked Just Dial to direct distress calls to only authorised persons,” he said.