Peregrine falcon with fracture was lying at a spot in Rajarajeshwari Nagar for three days

The peregrine falcon, historically known as the duck hawk, belongs to the family Falconidae. Its notable features are a blue-grey back, barred white underparts, and a black head. One such falcon was recently found in Rajarajeshwari Nagar, injured with a fracture. The sighting was reported by a passer-by and the bird was subsequently rescued by the People for Animal (PfA) Wildlife hospital.

This was the first incident where the team rescued a falcon, and with the right medical intervention, the bird has now gotten a new lease of life and can fly again.
 
The peregrine is considered to be the fastest bird in the world with its speed of flight reaching over 320km/hour.
 
The bird was spotted lying on the ground and was unable to fly. It was reportedly lying in pain at the same spot for three days, after which a passer-by reported the same to the PfA Wildlife rescue team. Photos of the falcon were sent by the individual to the PfA team. The bird had a drooping wing and was immediately rescued and brought to the hospital.
 
Dr Madhav HV, Senior Veterinarian, PfA, said, “After initial assessment, a fracture was suspected. The bird was allowed to rest and stabilise over a course of two days, and on the third day, an X-ray examination confirmed that the metacarpus of the right wing was fractured. Intramedullary pinning was carried out soon after.”

The intramedullary pin is a long surgical pin that is inserted into the medullary cavity of the bone. It is threaded through the fracture site that helps to keep the bone aligned and limits movement of the fracture edges for smooth regrowth.
 
Dr Madhav said, “The pin was left in place for a month, during which, regular physiotherapy and laser therapy was performed on the bird. It was treated with painkillers and antibiotics as is the post operative protocol. Once the X-ray showed a stable callus formation, the pin was removed and the bird was allowed to rest.”

Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, Chief veterinarian, PFA Wildlife Hospital, said, “The rehabilitation process involved stimulating flight and movement of the muscles surrounding the operative area to regain strength and prevent atrophy. The bird is now able to fly and has been moved to a bigger enclosure where it can practice flying for about four days. After this, it will be released into the wild.”

The bird was rescued on December 21 and the intramedullary pin was removed after two weeks. It was then rehabilitated to another enclosure to practice flying. The bird was unable to fly then, which is why it was observed for a few more days before it could be released.

 After initial assessment, a fracture was suspected. The bird was allowed to rest over a course of two days. On the third day, an X-ray exam confirmed it ­–Dr Madhav HV, PfA 
Dr Nawaz said, “Collisions with transparent glasses of windows on high rise buildings are one of the many causes of injury in birds such as the falcons. A similar probable history is being pondered in this case as well. However, there is no substantial information to confirm the cause of the injury.”

Peregrines are said to be the only birds which are found in larger geographic areas. They hunt pigeons and other medium sized birds. They can also bunt insects or other small mammals.