Killing of 2 cows by the tiger near Khanapur triggers panic
 
 

 	Refusing to take chances with the acts of the alleged ‘man-eater’ tiger that was recently released into Bheemghad Wildlife Sanctuary near Khanapur in Belagavi, the forest department has reportedly written to the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state seeking permission to recapture the tiger. 

 	The tiger, which had left people in a panic after killing two persons in coffee estates in the Bababudangiri Hill range of Chikkamagalur, was captured at Padavarahalli. 

 	Subsequently, the tiger was radio-collared as per the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) guidelines before being let into the wild. Even though there were plans to keep the tiger in captivity at Bannerghatta Biological Park initially, the department officials based on experts’ opinion had decided to release it into Anshi Tiger Reserve. But due to protracted protest by villagers in the area, it was released into Bheemghad Sanctuary. 

 	After being released into the wild, the tiger began attacking livestock in the surrounding villages of Bheemgadh. “In less than nine days, the tiger killed two cows near Gavali village,” explained a senior forest official from Belagavi. 

 	When Bangalore Mirror contacted Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), there was no written permission sought by the Belagavi officials. 

 	“I had directed our officials to monitor the behaviour of the tiger in supervision with experts. Based on their report, I will take a call. If they say that it has to be captured, then I will permit them to capture it and we will then think of a possible alternative,” he said. 

 	Supporting the sentiments of some people, Belagavi Rural MLA Aravind Patil too protested against the forest department’s move. The forest officials are trying to convince villagers that there is no threat from the tiger to human beings as there is no evidence of any such attack ever since it was released it into the wild, a source said.