By:Harsha Bhat
 
 150 artistes turn seven heritage temples in the city into a rousing rostrum for rasikas
 
 Historic temples in the city will reverberate with music and dance for the next six weekends as part of the annual Bangalore temple festival, Gudiya Sambhrama, organised by Heritage, a not-for-profit organisation. This year's festival will focus on the sacred mountain ranges. 

 The temple festival will be celebrated in two parts — Gudiya Sambhrama and Earth Mother. While the former will go on till March 2nd with over 150 artistes participating, the latter will be held in October and will witness the participation of 25 naturalists, environmentalists, filmmakers, wildlife photographers, scholars and conservationists for an expo on of Indian mountain ranges. 

 	Vijayalakshmi Vijayakumar, secretary of Heritage, says that sacred spaces (temples), performing arts and nature are the lifeline of the cultural heritage of a nation, “but they are rarely celebrated”. Gudiya Sambrhrama, she says, was created to create awareness about “India's rich history and its deep connection to both its cultural and natural heritage. With this purpose in mind, some of us old-timers decided to organise an annual festival that showcases and strengthens the pillars of our heritage.” 

 Gudiya Sambhrama will host a range of performances like vedic chanting, veena and sitar recitals, puppetry, carnatic and Hindustani classical music, Bharatanatyam, kuchipudi, kathakali, mohiniyattam and other dance presentations at seven temples (Nandi Teertha Devasthana, Malleshwaram, Sidhi Vinayaka Devasthana, HSR Layout, Prasanna Ganapathy Devasthana, Koramangala, Venkateshwara Varagiri Devasthana, Banashankari, Sridevi Bhoodevi Devesthana, Domlur, Karanji Anjaneya Devasthana, Basavanagudi and Guddadada Ramanjaneya Devasthana, Hanumanthnagar). Some of the artistes who will be performing at the festival are dancer/actor Rukmini Vijayakumar, dancing couple Nirupama and Rajendra of Abhinava Dance Company, sisters Ranjana and Gayathri (who have been a steady presence in the carnatic classical music scene for over two decades), veena artiste Rajesh Vaidya, sitar player Purbayan Chatterjee (renowned for his fusion of Indian classical music with contemporary world music genres) and other luminaries from the field of dance, music, arts and culture. 

 	Lovers of classical arts, get  	ready for some scintillating  	performances in the backdrop of age-old temples in the city. 

 

 	Gudiyasambrama, 6 pm onwards, Jan 25 - March 2. For event details log on to 

 	gudiyasambrama.org or call 09731207477