NTCA writes to forest dept seeking details on construction inside Kali reserve

Based on a recent report published by Bangalore Mirror on illegal construction and infrastructure development in the core area of Kali Tiger reserve, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has now written to the Karnataka Forest Department asking for a factual report on the issue.

Addressed to the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state government, the letter has cited yet another representation made by wildlife activists through the news report on alleged illegal construction activities in the core areas of the reserve.

“… another representation vide email dated 22.03.2023 has been received by this authority wherein wildlife activists have raised the issue of illegal construction and infrastructure development in the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve. In this regard, I am directed to request you to furnish a factual report to this authority at the earliest…” read the letter by the assistant inspector general of forest, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.

On multiple occasions, the activists have alleged that various illegal construction activities have been taken up inside the reserve area without due approval. Orchidarium, jungle safari, and canopy walks were some of the illicit activities highlighted.

Locals say that the demand to conduct a thorough inquiry on financial assistance under CSR for the construction of the Orchidarium in the core area has been raised in the past, but the authorities have ignored this so far.


Locals have also demanded a probe about the role of Tiger Conservation Foundation of the Tiger Project as its funds were used for construction­–Wildlife activist
“Locals have also demanded a probe about the role of Tiger Conservation Foundation of the Tiger Project since the funds of the foundation have been also used for the construction of an Orchidarium which violates Tiger Conservation Foundation Guidelines, 2007 because the funds were used to take up the construction in the core area of the Tiger Reserve which violates Project Tiger’s 2012 Guidelines,” said a wildlife activist in the region.

Many allege the construction of an Orchidarium is in defiance of the decision by the Centre as well as the Karnataka government’s order dated October 23, 2002, which puts conditions for salvaging dead and fallen timber as per the approved management plans of the wildlife areas.

The Sunday Read: Core issueActivists say the recently inaugurated orchidarium in a nursery area located in the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve thus violates the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and the Supreme Court’s order. All construction activities in the core areas of tiger reserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and national parks are banned as per a Supreme Court order.

Wildlife activists say there should be a probe conducted on the lines of the Corbett Tiger Project area where senior forest officials have been named for committing irregularities under a safari project by felling thousands of trees and allowing constructions.