For the last three years, sometime in August, Kalyan Varma packs his travel kit (two Nikon cameras, a 400mm zoom lens, a 10mm wide angle lens and a tripod), boards a six-hour flight from Bangalore to Kenya. He then hops on to another plane and 30-minutes later reaches the Maasai Mara National Reserve, to witness the world's oldest and greatest show on earth: migration of 1.5 million wildebeest, 350,000 gazelle, 200,000 zebra and 12,000 eland across the Grumeti River, which is as “wide as MG Road. It is a striking spectacle of chaos,” says Varma, a professional wildlife photographer from Bangalore. 
 Visualise this: Wildebeests moving in clusters the size of a small town, across expansive grasslands. Each mammal weighing 180-270 kgs, which can run at 60 km/hr. Their marching hooves hoist, from the ground, reddish brown clouds. Deafening sounds pack the air. Keeping them company are God's first linear design -the zebra. The four-legged mass reaches the edge of the river; performing a million-year-old ritual. 
 The wildebeest is fearful of three things: water, creatures in the water and predators hiding in the grasslands. 
 On the edge of the river they face their fears: a crocodile infested Grumeti River and carnivores on the other side of it. The wildebeests hesitate, sometimes for hours, before crossing the river. “Once after a six-hour build up they abandon their crossing only to return the next day,” recalls Varma. The brave ones that step into the river become a fine meal for the crocodiles; the rest scramble across and some get hunted and killed by the waiting lions or tigers.   
 THE INITIATION When Varma witnessed the spectacle for the first time, he went wild shooting pictures; an impossible task for a Mara debutant. “There's so much action going on that you don't know where to look,” says Varma.  He soon gave up, put down his camera and immersed himself in the ancient custom unfolding before him. He’s wisened up since. Now he sets one camera, on a tripod, in shooting mode and the other he uses to capture the frenzy. “I’m yet to capture the complete chaos in its entirety,” says Varma, “the sound, smell, scale, distress, stampede and then you have all the different animals at one place... phew!”  The migration happens over a span of one-and-a-half months in batches of 20,000-plus wildebeests.  
 In 2009, when Varma stepped out of the plane for the first time, he kissed the grounds of Maasai Mara. “I was overwhelmed,” he says. “As you land, you see thousands of zebras, cheetahs, lions...it’s exhilarating! Everything, the land, animals and the spaces in between, are in shades of brown and yellow, covered by a canopy of brilliant blue sky; all the way to the horizon and beyond.”  On that day, Varma shot 14,000 pictures. As a wildlife photographer, Varma, has crisscrossed India photographing animals. “In India you have to make numerous trips to spot a Tiger,” he says. 
 “Whereas Maasai Mara is like a buffet of animals -the spread is varied and breathtaking.” 
 Varma stays for 2-5 weeks in Maasai Mara and shoots an ‘indecent’ amount of pictures. 40,000 images on his first trip; 20,000 on the second and 16,000 on his trip in 2011. “But I got only 16 good photos the first time, 20 the second time and the last trip yielded 4 good shots,” he says. No, the numbers are not a reflection of Varma's skill. He wants his pictures to be memorable, “not just good”.  He’s not keen to zoom in so you can see the iris of a cheetah or the wrinkles on a Rhino’s neck (though he does “those kinds” too), instead he “steps back” to capture the essence and timelessness of the place. The animals are a part of it.  “I want my pictures to say something about the legend that is Maasai Mara,” he says. “If we had visited Mara 10000 years ago, it would’ve been the same as what it is now. I want my photos to tell ‘that’ story.” 
 Three visits and thousands of photographs have resulted in a series called Mara in Monotones consisting of 25 breathtaking photos. Maasai 
 Mara has been a time capsule for Varma. “The infiniteness of the place makes me think of where we come from and where we are going. It makes me appreciate life.” Varma wants people to get the perpetuity of what he sees every year -without any distractions. That's why Varma presents his Maasai Mara in monotones.