As forest dept says probe report submitted to govt, conservationists say details should be released in public domain

City-based wildlife conservationists and activists have raised concerns about the delay in the expert committee’s report on the causes of the state’s star elephant Arjuna’s death. Arjuna, who carried the golden howdah in Mysore Dasara for eight years, died on December 4 last year during an elephant capture operation by the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

A couple of days later, the state government ordered a probe into the allegedly botched rescue operation that led to the end of the 64-year-old elephant. A high-level committee comprising senior officials from KFD and conservationists was constituted to probe the death.

“It has been more than 40 days since the government formulated the committee and the probe began. However, there is no clarity on the report yet. The department has not released any information regarding this in the public domain,” said a wildlife conservationist.

According to senior officials of KFD, the report has been submitted to the state government.

“The committee has completed the probe and a detailed report on the outcome has been submitted to the government. It was submitted a week ago and it is the government’s prerogative to decide when the report should be made public,” said a senior KFD official.

However, conservationists say the report should have been made public as the probe was ordered after the public outcry.

“The department should have shared the report in the public domain. The inquiry was ordered on public demand and the report should be made available publically too. There is a lack of transparency on the part of the department in every aspect leading to rise in suspicion,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust. 

Petition against KFD’s operation
Various NGOs have demanded the Karnataka government immediately stop the capture of wild elephants under ‘Operation Jumbo’, and put in place a comprehensive plan of action to mitigate human-elephant conflict.

This representation has also come in the wake of KFD restarting the operation as a purported solution to the human-elephant conflict in the Hassan-Kodagu region.

This petition by the Centre for Research on Animal Rights (CRAR) and the Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organisations (FIAPO) says that as per protocols, wild elephants are supposed to be released back into the forest after radio collaring. However, the Forest Department has been keeping elephants in captivity and sending them to camps. They allege the department recently captured a young elephant which was not a potential threat to humans.

They say the entire exercise is completely unscientific and appears to be a knee-jerk reaction to appease politicians and people rather than a solution to conflict issues.

“Numerous scientific studies have demonstrated that capture and relocation do not work as a strategy. Elephants always return to their home range. Capture of elephants from the wild is an egregious exercise of the power embedded in section 11 of the Wildlife Protection Amendment Act, which is leading to the death of innocent wild elephants that are Schedule I species and must be stopped at once,” says Alok Hisarwala, lawyer-activist and founder, CRAR.

Experts say the use of capture as a solution to human-elephant conflict is unscientific, ineffective, and has led to the deaths of many wild elephants in the state. In 2023 alone, three elephants died during capture. They allege the botched captures go unquestioned.

“The use of capture is more a sensationalist smokescreen to appease the general public, and in effect, does not ensure peaceful coexistence. Commercial encroachments over forest lands, especially elephant corridors, are the main drivers of human-elephant conflict. Elephant reserves must be recognised as legally protected areas, like Tiger Reserves. Even 10 years after the 2013 High Court order, the government has failed to declare notified forest areas within elephant corridors as reserve forests under section 17 of the Karnataka Forest Act,” says Bharati Ramachandran, CEO, of FIAPO.