Reserve some laughs

As The bFlat Bar is on its way to shutting down, it’s celebrating the last few days with lots of music and laughter. And so today, it is hosting fearless and controversial but loved comic Kunal Kamra and his new comedy special – Fresher Thoughts in the house. His issues with uncles, journalists, politicians and life will make you both laugh and think hard.

 WHERE: No 776, 100 Feet Road, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 9pm, September 30
 ENTRY: `999, bookmyshow.com and at the venue
 CALL: 9108974398

Attend an open mic

Beat your Monday blues with some good laughs. Wondering how? Come over to this cafe, sit back 
and relax with some good food and drink, and a hilarious open mic comedy show, curated by Bangalore Comedy Club. This edition will feature Ahmed Shariff, Suhas Navratna, Neha Bobde, Navin Kumar and Arun Kiran.

 WHERE: Beer Cafe, Koramangala
 WHEN: 8pm, September 30
 ENTRY: `150, insider.in or at the venue
 CALL: 8929188568

 The epic show

Keeping up with the tradition, JV Vidyapeetha has set up festive dolls in their school premises. The Dasara Bombe Habba will display scenes from the Ramayana, Mahabharatha, Bhagavatha, Mysore Dasara procession, villages, wildlife and so on.

 WHERE: 6th cross, RK Layout, Padmanabhanagar
 WHEN: 10am-4pm, till October 4
 ENTRY: Free
 CALL: 26391509

 Take an art break

Catch the last day of Allurations, an exhibition of paintings on the joys and beauties of nature. Treat your senses to a spectacle of visual marvels, meant to stir the highest sensibilities in you. Whether you are a corporate official or an art connoisseur looking for contemporary paintings to decorate your space, this show has something for everyone.

 WHERE: Magnitude Gallery, 3rd Block, Jayanagar
 WHEN: 10am-8pm, September 30
 CALL: 9900117201

 Dance showcase

Shrishti Center of Performing Arts & Institute of Dance Therapy has turned 50 and so it is marking the occasion with a dance festival, helmed by classical and folk dancer-choreographer AV Satyanarayana. The event will involve an award ceremony, a recital of Baja Govindam by the Shristi Center, and Bharatanattyam dance performance.

 WHERE: Ravindra Kalakshera, beside Town Hall, JC Road, Sampangi Rama Nagar
 WHEN: 6pm onwards, September 30

 Wardrobe edit

The Crafts Council of Karnataka is keeping the culture of sarees alive with its flagship exhibition called Vastrabharana. The good news is, it is back and this time the focus is to showcase varieties of handcrafted cholis, bespoke kanjaris, by using handloom yardage 
fine-tuned with subtle detailing. Also, choose from Uppada and Paithani sarees, natural dyed weaves, linen Ikat and Gadwals and more.

 WHERE: Chitrakala Parishat, Kumara Krupa Road
 WHEN: 11am-7.30pm, till October 2
 CALL: 9845030838

Pop to rock

Soul Circle is a two-member band based out of Bengaluru, which prides itself in playing all genres of music – pop, rock, blues, country, and others. So here’s something for everyone to look forward to. They have also toured in Greece, Czech Republic, Dubai, Abu Dhabi and across India since their inception in 2016.

 WHERE: Hotel Radha Regent, near Fire Station, Electronic City
 WHEN: 7pm, September 30 CALL: 67276969 

Music meetup

Do you make music? Do you want to be a musician? Whatever be your reason, stop by MyMusic Community. Simply put, it’s a jamming meetup where musicians get together and play and improvise. But on some days, they also host workshops and open mic performances.

 WHERE: MyBo Tree, KHB Colony, 5th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 7.30pm-9.30pm, on Mondays
 CALL: 9986763466

Flea market

Chittara, an exhibition of art, craft and handlooms, is back and it’s hosting a variety of products such as home decor, handlooms, handicrafts, clothing, wooden toys, jewellery, bed linen, mats, brass, etc. And if you haven’t checked it out yet, here’s your chance through the week.

 WHERE: Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath, Kumarakrupa Road WHEN: 11am-7pm, till October 6 
 CALL: 22261816