By: Vishakha Chanchani
 
 It‘s interesting, what a diversity of birds we still have. From modest and chirpy warm sparrows to spectacularly dramatic peacocks. Native to India, peacocks are familiar sights in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Varanasi; you might spot them in regions of Madhya Pradesh or U.P; they happily inhabit many sectors like Dwarka in New Delhi, where they dwell amicably amidst human populations in housing colonies.  How many of us know about the tiny peacock population in Bangalore? A patch of forest called Byalkere adjoining Hesarghata Lake is a sanctuary for peacocks, besides other wildlife. In quieter parts of Kengeri (rapidly disappearing), one might be lucky to encounter that rare flash of blue. We, residents of this place, occasionally hear them call. Years ago, I was surprised by a peacock party flying towards a water body nearby. And last week, one gave darshan strutting across our granite wall, to delve into shrubs, delighting me with a fleeting glimpse of iridescent plumage bathed by sunlight, before vanishing into the adjacent piece of land. 
 	  	It felt like a real special appearance.
 Peacocks are shy and alert. These crested creatures fascinate with their dance to rain, with their fan of feathers. They occupy a romantic place in Indian literature, poetry and song. Feathers are kept for good luck, maybe to act as reminders of their magnificence. Feathers of the male become ornament. Hindu gods and saints often display peacock plumes. They‘ve been part of human wardrobe since time immemorial. Morpankh becomes head gear, costume; now peacock earrings are in vogue. A range of peacock feather articles are sold worldwide by whole sale dealers. It’s vyapaar, lucrative business. You might come across local vendors in our own bazaars, perhaps in Shivajinagar, or Malleswaram, selling feathered fans or ornaments. 
 	  	Peacocks, since ancient times, have been hunted by people for their meat. In Dodballapur, native tribes may still hunt them as part of yearly rituals. Today, the populations are depleting; use of pesticides, electrocution, loss of scrubland, water sources, poaching for meat and feathers being major causes. The meat is considered to have medicinal value. 
 	  	The Government of India has declared a ban on the poaching of peacocks for meat or feathers. Yet, the trade continues. Earlier, we collected feathers the peacocks shed, for their sheer finery; some turned into articles for sale. But now the proliferation of peacock plumes in the market, suggest another story. It seems obvious that the feather trade invites and involves much slaughter of this bird. 
 	  	When we think of peacock feathers, we might typically recall the lavishly marked tail. But the male peafowl’s varied feathers luxuriously layer its entire body, to confound the bird watcher, scientist, or artist. A peacock changes hues with every elegant move of its body, as light catches it in different ways. Now purple, now blue; glinting green, gold, or brown. 
 	  	When peacocks molt feathers, you can witness an amazing range; if you happen to find one, pick it up like a gift only to marvel at nature’s manifestations. But the world over, when trade turns uniform and focuses on excessive production, they only become thoughtless cruel practices. 
 	  	Today, should we purchase peacock feathers to support some human craving, or learn to say no and rather appreciate and enjoy the plumes on the bird itself? Difficult choice, Nagarvasi?
 	  	Take care, till then.