It was a nice and bright weekend as Varun and I decided to travel to Mysore from Bangalore on a bike. I made myself ready for a two-day long bike ride as Varun doesn’t know how to ride one. We started around 5 am on Saturday and after a half-hour drive, reached Mysore Road. The road is fantastic and riding here is a pleasure. We reached Ramanagaram at around 6.30 am and we stopped nearby for tea at a quaint little cottage.

After half an hour, we found a coffee shop on the highway and had cappuccino and cookies there. Then it was a non-stop drive till we reached Srirangapatna at 8 am. Srirangapatna (also spelt Srirangapattana and anglicised to Seringapatam during the British Raj) is a town in Mandya district and is of great religious, cultural and historic importance.

We first visited the famed Juma Masjid and then moved on to the place where Tipu Sultan had died.

A LESSON IN HISTORY

The trip was a lesson in history for us — we came to know that Sultan Fateh Ali Tipu, also known as the Tiger of Mysore (Born: Nov 20, 1750, Devanahalli - Died: May 4, 1799, Srirangapatna), was the first son of Haidar Ali by his second wife, Fatima or Fakhr-un-nissa. He was the de facto ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore from the time of his father’s death in 1782 until his own demise in 1799. The mission was to liberate his land from the yoke of the colonials. His short but stormy rule is significant because of his view that the only life worth living was that of freedom. He was defeated in the Third Anglo-Mysore War and in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War by the combined forces of the East India Company, the Nizam of Hyderabad, the Mahratta Confederacy, and to a lesser extent, Travancore. From here, we went to the Ranganatha Swamy Temple which houses Lord Vishnu in the sleeping posture on the Great Snake Anantha and is one of the biggest temples in the state. It was built in the 9th century by the Vijayanagar rulers.
We also peeked at Tipu Sultan’s Palace, which is now in ruins.

Colonel Bailey’s Dungeon, named after Colonel Bailey who died here in 1782, was used to imprison many other British officers during Tipu’s rule, including Captain Baird and Rulay, Colonel Brithwhite Sampson, Frazer and Lindsay. This dungeon lies north of Ranganatha Swamy temple. The oblong bastion referred to as Sultan Bateri conceals the vaulted dungeon measuring 30.5 mts x 12.2 mts. The prisoners were apparently chained to stone slabs.

The Obelisk marks the place where Tipu Sultan breathed his last when he was trying to stop a British soldier from pulling his legendary sword from its sheath.

We also explored the Dariya Daulat Bagh, built in 1784. This palace made of teakwood is set amidst groomed lawns and flower beds and was the summer palace of Tipu Sultan. We moved on to the Dodda Gosai Ghat that lies on the banks of the Cauvery and is a preferred place for shooting song and dance sequences of regional films. From there we went to the Nimishamba Devi temple. This temple gives a picturesque view of the Cauvery.

We also visited the Gumbaz built by Tipu Sultan as a tribute to his illustrious father, Hyder Ali. It is built on a stone plinth, with polished black granite pillars that run along the corridor around the inner chamber. The Gumbaz is situated at the eastern extreme of Srirangapatna and enshrines the cenotaphs of Hyder Ali, his wife Fakr-Un-Nisa and Tipu Sultan. The inner chamber is painted with tiger stripes that were associated with Tipu.

A DATE WITH BIRDS

It was time for us to go to Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary, which is the abode of migratory birds from Siberia, Australia and North America.The Sanctuary was established in 1940 due to the efforts of India’s noted ornithologist Dr Salim Ali. This unique bird sanctuary is set on the banks of the River Cauvery and has a group of six islets. This bird sanctuary is perfect for those who like to go on short wildlife tours and bird watching tours.

To watch the birds, we had to take a boat ride. It was fun and I also took some nice shots. We found a couple of crocodiles basking in the sun.

Then, we moved to Brindavan gardens. It lies adjoining the Krishnarajasagara dam which is built across the river Cauvery. The work on laying this garden was started in 1927 and completed in 1932. Spread over 150 acres, the Brindavan gardens are a major tourist attraction and have been a backdrop for songs in many Indian films. Special attractions include the Dancing Fountains. The Krishnarajasagara dam, designed by Sir M Visvesvaraya is India’s first irrigation dam and marvel of civil engineering in pre-Independence India. The dam is over three kms long and is constructed at the junction of three rivers - Cauvery, Hemavati and Lakshmanathirtha. The view from top of the dam was amazing.After that we had dinner in the hotel we had checked into and decided to go to Mysore in the morning.

UP THE HILL 

Day 2: I got up at 6.30 am and got ready for Mysore. Just near the hotel people were playing nice folk music and I took a video recording. First we went to Chamundi Hills, which according to legend is the place where the Goddess Chamundeshwari killed the demon king Mahishasura. The temple is huge and very beautiful. The temple has a very beautiful idol of the goddess wearing a garland of skulls. While going down we found a board, which read “Nandi 2 kms”. 

So I turned my bike and we went to that place. We found a large monolithic statue of Nandi, the Bull. Nandi is the vahana (vehicle) of Lord Shiva. Just near the Nandi there was an ancient cave Shiva temple. We also took a peek at the Lalitha Mahal Palace, which has now been converted into a hotel. It is a splendid Italianate palazzo, double columned and domed - set in sprawling terraced and landscaped gardens. It was built by the erstwhile Maharaja of Mysore to host his important guests.

Then, we went to Karanji Lake, which is owned by the Mysore Zoo Authority and surrounded by a nature park consisting of a butterfly park and a walk-through aviary. We found many birds like guinea fowl, jungle fowl, peacocks and geese. But, the unique bird was the white peacock, which I was seeing for the first time. Then something something happened which every nature lover dreams of. Wow, a peacock spread his wings and started dancing. It was really a treat to watch.

A visit to the magnificent St Philomena’s Church was a must and we were impressed with its architecture. Some of the 
scenes from the Amitabh Bachchan starrer Amar Akbar Anthony were shot in this church.

We couldn’t have missed the Mysore Zoo. Located on the outskirts of Mysore, the zoo is home to a wide range of animal species. The official name for the zoo is Shri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens, though it is known commonly by its shortened name. This is the only zoo in India to have a gorilla. 

We also saw a tapir, gaur, the emu, an ostrich-like bird native to Australia, white deer, water monitor lizard and many other exotic animals. I was a bit tired so we decided to skip the Railway Museum and Mysore palace. After driving for two days I was a bit tired so we thought of going back to Bangalore and seeing these places some other time.
Maneesh is a consultant based in Bangalore who loves to bike and blog.