The demand for monkey catchers has gone up, with the &lsquo;experts&rsquo; demanding Rs 800 per monkey          
The harried residents, numbering over 300, of Trinity Habitat, Trinity Blossom, Trinity Orchard and Trinity Point on Hennur main road at Geddalahalli (ward 25) have done the rounds of both BBMP and the forest department. 

While the forest department put them on to a group of monkey-catchers, it was Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike’s reply that took the cake. ‘Happy hunting ground’
The apartment cluster has around 500 coconut trees, several chikku trees and other fruit-bearing trees, and is a happy hunting ground for the simians. According to the residents, the local catchers’ rate per monkey was Rs 300 two years ago and has now gone up to Rs 800.

 “We do not mind spending money. But what is the guarantee that they will not come back?” some residents said.

One resident, Rani Dominic, said, “We were told that catching monkeys and snakes is a free service of the forest department. When we approached the department, they gave us the contact number of a group which demanded Rs 800 for every monkey caught! When we approached the BBMP forest cell, we were asked to send an e-mail. We were flabbergasted at their reply — forget any assurance of help, it was more like an primer on the habits of primates, along with dos and don’t like ‘shut your doors and stay inside’.”

Said another resident, “Only we know what we have been undergoing for the last two and a half years. Our house tiles, balcony covers, solar water heaters and water pipes have been damaged on several occasions by the monkeys.”

Arul Raj, a financial consultant with a software firm and a resident of the complex, said, “We have tried to shoo them off with catapults, but they are not a bit scared. They come as early as 6:30 am and can be seen till 10 am. They are back at around 4.30 pm and keep trying to enter flats till around 7 pm. Milk packets disappear and newspapers are strewn all around. Worse, they climb the coconut trees and drop coconuts on the parked vehicles, damaging them.” 

Kavitha Ranjith, a resident, said, “You never know when they will attack. To play safe, we had to cut the palm trees around our flat. Our kitchen garden has been totally destroyed. There are around 50 of them and when they fight among themselves, it is a frightening sight. They are known to carry the rabies virus, and it is scary to think of what would happen if they bit our children.”

When she was contacted, Vanashree Vipin Singh, deputy conservator of forests, Bangalore Urban district, said, “Ending the menace is a long-drawn process. As I took charge of the division only 15 days ago, I was not aware of the problem. I have directed the jurisdictional RFO to visit the spot and take the necessary measures to end the menace.” 

Elaborating, she said, “The first thing to do is to discourage people from feeding them. Later we could use crackers to shoo them away. Capturing is the last resort and requires the permission of the chief wildlife warden, as monkeys come under the Wildlife Act. However, even if they are caught and released in the forest, they will return to human habitats as they have got used to them.”