Efforts to conserve wildlife have too often been impeded by global greed and short-term interests. Poor enforcement of wildlife laws has fuelled a robust trade in animals and animal parts. On the other hand, in some cases at least, it is this trade that has kept critically endangered species from going the way of the dodo. A case in point is the tamarin primates, and Sandalwood superstar Darshan has joined the select ranks of its saviours.   The new addition to Darshan’s family is named Gaja, after his hit film of the same name. Gaja, a cotton-top tamarin, is a male, only about a month old and was acquired by the actor for Rs 5 lakh as a pet for his son, Vineesh. Gaja is one of only about 6,000 cotton-top tamarins remaining in the world, and no, he was not illegally acquired. The transaction does not violate Indian wildlife laws. On the contrary, with the number of pet tamarins far outnumbering those in the wild, Darshan could well be saving the species.   “I do not keep illegal animals,” Darshan told Bangalore Mirror. “This is an exotic pet I bought from a friend who breeds them. It is for my son who is thrilled with it. Bangalore's weather is suitable for cotton-top tamarins. It is one of the few foreign animals that can be kept as pets. Incidentally, it is illegal to keep Indian wildlife as pets. So you will find peacocks being kept as pets in foreign countries, but it is illegal in India.”   Darshan admitted that tamarins are not just costly buys but also expensive to maintain. “A pair of such tamarins would cost between Rs 8 and Rs 10 lakh,” Darshan said. “Gaja is being fed baby food, boiled egg whites and fruits .”   In India, cotton-top tamarins are found in the Mysore zoo, where they are kept for conservation purposes, while a few dozen are reared as pets in household. The animals are indigenous to a small portion in northwest Columbia.   Sanjay Gubbi, a member of the State Wildlife Board, said, “The cotton-top tamarin is not a popular pet in India. It is an exotic species and very rare. There is a quota system in place across the world for such species and only a limited number of animals can be exported out of the country of origin. However, one must take extreme caution while handling such animals. Many of them could be completely harmless, but there are concerns when exotic pets like snakes, emus and others escape into the wild. They have the potential to spread new and devastating diseases among indigenous species.”   Gubbi revealed that the ‘quota system’ for wildlife species includes hunting them, but also cautioned against importing wild animals. “Any animal imported is kept in quarantine for some time to check if it is carrying a disease or virus. In India, the enforcement is lax. It is not just animals, but even imported wood has to undergo checks. They may carry small snakes, amphibians or other small animals that could spoil the ecosystem here.”