New species scorpion discovered species
 
 Meet Liocheles schalleri. It is a new scorpion species that researcher Zeeshan Mirza noticed in the jungles of Tripura and has described in the journal Zootaxa on Monday.
 
 Zeeshan told BM that he has dedicated it to his favourite conservationist. “This new species is dedicated to conservationist George Schaller, whom I admire. I was fortunate to have met him in 2012 at the Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary,” he said. George Schaller is a German-born American mammalogist, biologist, conservationist, and author.
 
 Twenty-nine-year-old Zeeshan, who is associated with the National Centre For Biological Sciences, Bengaluru, has previously described over 30 new species to science, including spiders, scorpions, lizards and snakes.
 
 “Scorpions are an interesting and ancient lineage of arachnids and are infamous for their medical importance,” he writes. During the course of a biodiversity exploration of Tripura in northeast India, he collected specimens of a hormurid scorpion that were later identified to be species on the genus Liocheles. The specimens differed from known species of the genus in several aspects following available keys and available data in the literature.
 
 The new species, Liocheles schalleri occurs in the Indo-Burma biodiversity hotspot, a region that has been poorly explored for its arachnid diversity. Four specimens of this species were collected from slit-like deep burrows on mud escarpments in Trishna Wildlife Sanctuary, Tripura.
 
 Scorpions of the genus Liocheles are commonly known as dwarf or wood scorpions and are relatively rare to find. Though dwarf scorpions appear to be widespread across India, they are patchily distributed which Zeeshan thinks might be attributed to lack of sampling.
 
 Most records from the country of this genus were incorrectly identified as L. nigripes, which is likely to be restricted to the Satpura and Vindhya hills in central India. Other records from across the country likely represent the new species L. schalleri represents yet another undescribed species or putative synonyms of L. australasiae. Records of L. nigripes from Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Kerala as well as record from Indonesia and Malaysia are considered incorrect identifications. This hints to the fact that there could be more new species of dwarf scorpions for which Zeeshan says work is under way.
 
 About two years ago, Zeeshan launched an app called ‘Indian Scorpions eGuide’. This is probably the first of its kind in India, for use by the common man, rather than experts in an attempt to popularise scorpions among naturalists and enthusiasts.