Bengaluru Butterfly Club (BBC) spots over 1 lakh plus individuals

The large number of butterflies spotted in Bengaluru, experts said, is an indication that despite rapid urbanisation the city has remained rich in butterfly diversity. At the Doresanipalya forest campus, the Bengaluru Butterfly Club (BBC) spotted over 1 lakh plus individual butterflies.

The BBC, is a group comprising like-minded nature lovers whose vision is to spread the message of butterfly conservation in Karnataka. The club was formed with the coming together of four butterfly watchers – Ashok Sengupta, Haneesh KM, Nitin Ravikantachari and Rohit Girotra in January 2011. All were new to the world of butterflies; the original idea was to exchange information, share knowledge and go out on butterfly watching walks in and around Bengaluru.

BBC completed 10 years of counting butterflies in Bengaluru and till date have counted over 1,11,000 butterflies during the past 10 years at the Doresanipalya forest campus, with an addition of 16 new species to the Bengaluru butterfly list.

With over 1 lakh plus butterflies found, the city as well as Karnataka are indeed doing well in terms of biodiversity, stated the BBC members. “Karnataka is doing very well in terms of butterfly diversity. The Karnataka forest department has done an excellent job in terms of butterfly conservation. Under the leadership of Sanjay Mohan, principal chief conservator of forests, Karnataka forest department (KFD), awareness drives were undertaken about the importance of butterflies through events like Butterfly Festivals. The department planted larval host plants and nectar plants which helped in improving butterfly populations; in addition, butterfly parks were set up in various parts of Karnataka which played a key part in improving populations. The Karnataka forest department conducted population surveys in Dandeli, Kodagu and Bannerghatta to study butterflies,” said Rohit Girotra, member of the butterfly club.

The BBC has also conducted over 300 plus butterfly walks for the public and assisted the Karnataka forest department in conducting the annual butterfly festival. So far, KFD has conducted five butterfly festivals.


     Oriental Common Lascar and Anomalous Nawab

“Climate change and especially its biological impact, including northward movement of species, contribute to decline in populations. This impact is revealed while studying butterflies. People have been counting butterflies for more than 47 years starting from England and other European countries, and now in India. As the butterflies were counted without fail every year, the numbers showed what the butterfly population was like. It is also important to count butterflies in a specific habitat. For example, in Doresanipalya, with the counting, it became evident that KFD has been increasing the numbers of native species. We can also understand how best to handle developments and balance it with conservation,” Dr Krushnamegh Kunte, associate professor, National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS) told BM.

It is said Bengaluru has 179 species of butterflies; three most commonly seen species are Common Grass Yellow, Common Emigrant and Common Four-ring.

The rediscovery of the Lilac Silverline at Hessaraghatta Lake by Nitin Ravikantachari was an important milestone for the BBC. The Lilac Silverline, which was thought to be extinct, was rediscovered. The sighting proved a breeding population of this rare species still exists, which is important because this species is legally protected in India under Schedule II of the Wildlife (Protection) Act.

The butterfly club, meanwhile, stressed how important it is for more citizens and nature lovers to come forward and get involved in butterfly counting so as to keep a tab on the numbers which would in turn help protect the environment.