Even those projects that had permission for construction before the Environment Ministry order will not be allowed
 
 A recent High Court ruling has put an end to any ambiguity in terms of who can construct resorts in a 10-km radius of the Kabini backwaters: nobody. The ruling came after Kabini Holiday Homes Pvt Ltd challenged a former deputy commissioner’s order, stopping it from constructing its resort near the backwaters.
 
 Based on a Supreme Court order from 2006, the Ministry of Environment had directed in November 2014 that no resorts (or any construction) can come up in a 10-km radius of a protected area, including national parks and wildlife habitats.
 
 Interestingly, the authorities are not sparing even those who obtained permission from the state government before the Environment Ministry’s order came about. The Karnataka High Court said that even though permission was granted earlier, new rules that prohibit construction held good.
 
 Several individuals and firms that had taken permission before the order had come out were caught off-guard. Sources say that those with plans of starting a resort around the backwaters run into scores. They had obtained permission and purchased lands from local villagers. The HC’s latest ruling, therefore, will set a precedent for all such ‘projects in progress’.
 
 In the case of Kabini Holiday Homes, the local deputy commissioner had stopped the firm from putting up a resort near the Kabini backwaters though the state had given it permission earlier to acquire land for the project. This was challenged by the firm in the HC, which rejected the petition. 
 
 Kabini Holiday Homes, represented by its director MP Cherian and one Sowmya Narayanan, had approached the HC with a petition. They claimed that the state government had permitted them to acquire various extent of land to put up an eco-resort near the backwaters. However, the deputy commissioner had issued an order and stopped the construction citing that the area came under the Nagarahole Tiger Protection Forest and was adjacent to the Kabini reservoir.
 
 The firm’s advocate contended that the state and its organ Karnataka Udyog Mitra had granted approval for the project and they “cannot now turn around, restraining them from putting up the project”. The government advocate argued that there was a change in policy and new enactments have come into force. There are directions of the Supreme Court as well and, therefore, the DC’s orders stopping the work were valid.
 
 Rejecting the firm’s case, Justice Ravi Malimath said: “Even though there are various permissions granted by the various authorities, the same may have been valid at that point of time. Due to the subsequent change of law, as well as the directions issued by the Supreme Court in a cantena of decisions, the impugned order has been passed by the Deputy Commissioner. Therefore, continuation of any project within the forest area etc,. having been specifically prohibited, the Deputy Commissioner was therefore justified in passing the impugned order.”