In addition to the bird flu that has led to the closure of Mysuru Zoo, four tigers have died in a week in the state. Now, an 18-month-old tiger, which was rescued from Ponnampet in Virajpet taluk within the Nagarahole forest reserve to Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre in Kurghali, died on Friday.
 
 
 
 The tiger was rescued from a snare recently
 
 Kamala Karikalan, executive director, Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens (Mysuru Zoo) said: “The post mortem report states that the tiger had sustained multiple injuries. It had swelling while being brought to the rehabilitation centre. The cavity in its leg had a deep infection. It was also observed that it had lung infection, which caused respiratory problems. Looking at this general information, the tiger was probably unhealthy and suffering. However, we have collected samples and are sending it to Bengaluru.
 
 The tiger was rescued from a snare that was laid to capture wild boar near Ponnampet in Virajpet taluk. According to the veterinarian, the tiger had consumed meat in the morning and was doing well. But it was found dead later.
 
 It had injuries on its front paw, inflicted while it tried to escape from the snare.
 
 Apart from Friday’s death, three tigers from Nagarahole National Park and Muliyuru ranges have died over the last few days.
 
 On Tuesday, a decomposed carcass of a tigress was found near Kamalethodu village, under DB Kuppe range in Nagarahole National Park.
 
 The veterinary doctors had stated that the tigress was around 11 years old with one of its teeth broken. In another incident on the same day, a nine-year-old tigress and a mother of two cubs, died allegedly due to an overdose of tranquilisers at a village of HD Kote taluk on the outskirts of Nagarahole forest.
 
 A week ago, a seven-year-old tiger, which was rescued from Bandipur, died while being moved to Bannerghatta National Park. According to the information available, the tiger had sustained a fracture on its front right limb, besides bearing external injuries.
 
 
 MAN ATTACKED
 
 A villager who was attacked by a tiger on Tuesday was brought to KR Hospital in Mysuru on Friday early morning for treatment. He was identified as Kariya (55), a resident of Balele village, in Virajpet. He had sustained minor injuries and scratches.