The fourth edition of Echoes of Earth, Bengaluru's very own eco-friendly music festival, wrapped up on a high note over the weekend. Hosted in the outskirts, amidst the lush and cool greens, it brought music, arts, culture, food & drinks and environment activism together to great effect. Bangalore Mirror was the media partner for the fest. 

Spread over two days and across four stages, it hosted over 30 Indian and international artists – ranging from Squarepusher, Acid Pauli, Garden City Movement, Natasha Diggs, and Maksim to Prabh Deep, Lifafa and Jitter. But if there was one stage that drew crowds like bees to a honeypot, it was easily The Big Tree stage, which was literally set up under the shade of a sprawling banyan tree and its prop roots, complete with beddings and cushions to flop on. This stage, say the organisers, was completely powered with solar energy. Second, it hosted intimate and experimental gigs by Daniel Waples, The Soul, Tamish & Nilanjanna, Prematron and Thaalvattam. The third and undeniably the biggest reason for its popularity was: The canopy was cast with a net of light bulbs, which turned it into a yellow-tinted, photo booth as well as a cosy nook just to lie down and unwind. 

And when the crowd wasn't hovering around these corners, they were seen milling in and out of the flea market selling sustainable products, trying appetising food and drinks at the stalls or swinging in hammocks tied between the trees, with what moonlight shining on them. 

They also checked out the many installations set up to sensitise them about endangered species of the world, plus the special Nat Geo Zone. Upcycled from discarded plastic bottles, headphones, cloth, paper, auto parts, metal sheet, gunny bags and coir, these were sculptures of Hangul, a Kashmiri stag, vulture, gorilla, and humpback Mahseer. To celebrate the increase in number of the tiger population as a result of the wildlife conservation efforts, they had also crafted a tiger from corrugated sheets.

With its carnival-like vibes, Echoes of Earth managed to attract almost 16,000 youngsters, parents with tiny kids, and furry pets, die-hard music lovers and poi enthusiasts. At the fest, we also caught glimpse of a new hobby in town. It's called Dapo. An Israeli art form, it involves juggling a star-shaped, thick fabric all around the body.