While the city reels under a severe water crisis, urban forest patches are not untouched either. After a few reports of wildlife venturing out of Turahalli Forest Reserve in search of water, the Karnataka forest department (KFD) has swung into action.

The department has decided to manage waterholes inside the forest area to ensure water availability for wildlife.

“The main forest area has a lake that is filled to the brim. Water scarcity is in nearly a 100-acre patch of Turahalli, which is separated from the main forest. We have put some concrete rings inside this patch and are ensuring they are filled so animals do not venture out of the forest,” said N Ravindra Kumar, deputy conservator of forests (Bengaluru Urban), KFD.

KFD officials told BM that waterholes will be created and managed until the city receives some rainfall.

“We have put concrete rings inside the forest area and filled them with water from the tankers. Waterholes serve as the only source of drinking water for wild animals and birds and thus cannot be ignored. We will continue to manage these waterholes up until we receive some rain,” said Ravindran.

There have been reports of spotted deer and some birds venturing out of this forest patch in search of water.

According to Joseph Hoover, former State Board of Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust, this particular patch of the reserve has gone completely dry and there is no water in BM Kaval Agara forest too.

“We have received reports of some animals getting out and moving in the night towards a nearby waterbody to quench their thirst. We are working in association with the forest department and will ensure animals do not come out of the forest area,” said Hoover, who’s also the founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
The instances of animals wandering near human habitation in search of water were confirmed by a city-based animal rescue and rehabilitation centre as well.

 We will continue to manage these waterholes up until we receive some rain— N Ravindra Kumar, deputy conservator of forests (Bengaluru Urban), KFD 
According to Dr (Colonel) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian of People for Animals (PFA), wild animals coming out of the Turahalli area can be dangerous as they can get hit by vehicles or attacked by feral dogs.

“We have visited the area a couple of times this summer season and have found spotted deer in forest fringes. Not just the water holes, but the fodder has dried up too. We have thus launched an initiative called ‘Operation Quench Thirst’, under which, we are filling waterholes and making fodder available as well. We have placed eight concrete rings inside the forest area to store water. Under the initiative, two to three tankers are being sent inside the forest every day,” said Dr (Colonel) Shariff.