A film on Machli, arguably India’s most famous tiger, tells her incredible story by humanising her
 
 There’s a story in every sinew of a tiger’s body; a tale in every step she takes that changes with her intent – whether she’s hunting for prey or feeding her cubs. For well-known wildlife filmmaker S Nallamuthu, stories of big cats lie in between these observations, and not in the round-the-clock cycle of hunting, mating, feeding, rest and play, that many documentaries showcase. Meet Machli, The World’s Most Famous Tiger – a 44-minute-film that follows his nine-year-journey of following the famed, eponymous tiger of Ranthambore National Park – hopes to tell one such saga. The film, produced by Natural History Unit India will be shown on Nat Geo Wild on February 26 at 8pm.
 
 It’s a special film, because it’s a tribute to a tiger that continues to have cult status, even after her death. Machli has many wins to her credit – she produced a gene pool of 50 tigers that helped populate Ranthambore National Park and Sariska Tiger Reserve; she lived to the extraordinary age of 20 years, the longest a tiger has lived in the wild; she defeated her mother to become queen of the fort and lake territory of Ranthambore; she battled a 14-foot crocodile; she fought a huge male tiger to protect her cubs. These are incredible stories of survival and regeneration in the wild, and Nalla, as Nallamuthu is known, has striven to capture them all in this film, so that the audience connects as deeply with his beloved Machli as he does.
 
 Which is probably why he is loath to call this a ‘conservation film’. “I try to make my films as cinematic and visual as possible. I want to push the boundaries and tell an emotional story that will connect with people outside the bubble of the wildlife community. It helps me reach a bigger audience,” he says. And while that may not always endear him to conservationists, it does humanise the big cats so beloved to him, which in turn, he believes, brings across his message of conservation more strongly than a documentary of a tiger’s naturalistic behaviour might. 
 
 Scenes such as the death of Machli, for instance, he says, will strike a chord with any viewer. Possibly one of the only times a tiger was filmed before and upto her natural death in the wild, it shows an aged, toothless, semi-unconscious Machli, reduced to a shadow of her majestic self and struggling to breathe, taking one last walk alongside Nalla’s jeep. “She was on her death bed, and had been in very bad shape for five days when I got the call and rushed there. No one thought she would last a day longer, but then, to everyone’s surprise, in that state, she got up and crossed my jeep, and then started struggling to breathe. I have some connection with her, I believe. It was very difficult to film the tiger I had been following for 10 years, but getting to do that was completely different experience, and I’m sure people who watch it will feel as I do,” he says.
 
 
 
 
 
 Tigers, he believes, are a lot like humans, and that’s what makes them so fascinating to watch, and film. “Cubs fight with each other, and the mother tries to separate them and resolve things. One month of a tiger’s life is equal to a year of human life. An 18 month-old tiger behaves like an 18-year-old teenager, and by 20-21 they want to separate and want their own identity,” he says. You see this in his films too – Machli’s fight for territory with her own cubs, and how she has to eventually cede and occupy a fraction of the area what she had fought for in the first place many years ago. Sometimes, a tiger’s life can be like a Hindi feature film, as he found while filming Tiger’s Revenge, when he discovered that the male tiger (Zalim) visiting the three cubs that he thought were orphaned after the death of their mother was actually their father, who was taking care of them, most unlike natural behaviour in the wild. Their body language too changes depending on the power dynamics at play; depending on whether they’re in command or need to be servile, on whether they’re interacting with their litter or defending their territory, and so on. Once, an ageing Machli, injured in a fight with her son gave him a “look”. All of this, Nalla says, can be positively dramatic, like a “Shakespearan drama”. 
 
 Along the way, he has learnt much from his beloved big cats. “I’ve learnt not to have any conflict, to avoid it and keep a distance from it. I’ve learnt to work hard and be patient from the way Machli stalks and captures her prey, and the way she brought up her cubs. I’ve about life – how when opportunity comes, there should be no second thoughts. Take the way Machli hunts – a Sambar deer is kill, whether she is pregnant or not,” he says. Emotions like that can inspire so much love for an animal, and that’s what he hopes the film eventually does for tigers and conservation in India.