Resident Welfare Association (RWA) members of a residential complex in Nagarbhavi 2nd stage are in the dock after they sent out a circular among other residents stating they were going to burst crackers to ward off pigeons from the 14-floor apartment.

The association members sent the advisory last week when an animal activist intervened and approached the RWA members, asking them not to burst crackers. The RWA president allegedly abused him verbally and asked him to step away from the matter.

Animal welfare officer at Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) KB Harish told Bangalore Mirror that he has approached the jurisdictional police and have filed a complaint against the RWA office bearer for abusing him as well as using crackers to chase away pigeons which amounts to cruelty to animals.

A resident of the same apartment, on condition of anonymity, informed Harish their RWA members have been planning to burst crackers placed between the shafts of building blocks to chase away pigeons. According to other residents of the complex, hundreds of pigeons occupy the shaft space between the floors. They build their nests, lay eggs and the entire shaft area is filled with pigeon poop, dead birds, and foul smell emanating from the shafts. “Many pigeons enter the vacant flats, build nests inside. The rooms are filled with dead and decomposed birds, broken and decomposed eggs and pigeon drops,” another resident said.

“Bursting crackers can’t be a permanent solution as the frightened bird flock will leave and a fresh set of birds will arrive,” said the resident who sought animal welfare officials’ assistance. He has often ensured injured pigeons at the residential complex get treated. He took them to a pigeon hospital in Rajajinagar, Shree Shankheshwar Parshwanath Jain Kabootar Daana Seva Samithi. Instead of bursting crackers the RWA has to come up with other novel ideas like making pigeon shelters using bricks on the terrace for them to build nests, he added.

Wildlife expert and enthusiast Sharath Babu told Bangalore Mirror that there are experts who are developing hyper bird management techniques to curb pigeon or other creature menace in buildings. Anyone looking for free or cost effective solutions to deal with the menace could contact Babu on 9880108801.