Wildlife volunteers were perplexed when they received a call alerting them to a young (joey) of a kangaroo stuck in a tree in Coles Park. Volunteers, wanting to catch a sight of the rare animal, rushed to the spot and even informed forest department sleuths. However, it wasn’t a joey that was in need of rescue, but a slender loris. A protected species under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, the slender loris is an equally rare species and is seldom found in the city. Rescuers were only ‘slightly’ disappointed with not finding a kangaroo and quickly got down to rescuing the terrified animal.  
 The size of an adult slender loris is about 10 inches, but this one bore injuries on its limbs and eyes. Wildlife volunteers believe it was brought to the city by illegal pet traders and the animal had somehow managed to escape from captivity. 
   “Slender loris’s are never found inside the city and that too in a core area like this,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban said.
 
 “They live in colonies in the forest. The only way this one could have got here is by those involved in illegal pet trade. The very presence of the animal clearly points to a flourishing illegal pet trade. The animal had sustained injuries on its body, perhaps from mishandling, improper caging, crow pecking and torture.”
   Some passerby had spotted the animal in a tree and had mistaken it for a baby kangaroo. 
   “Initially one of our members tried to pick it up,” said Mohan K, a volunteer who had rushed to rescue the animal. “As a large number of people had gathered around, the animal was restless, agitated and tended to be violent. Although they look very fragile, their limbs and claws are very strong – stronger than a human’s — and it can inflict serious injury with just one swipe of its paws. It clung to the branch and we could not dislodge it.”
   After trying for some time, the rescuers decided to take the branch along with the animal. It’s the fifth slender loris that has been rescued in the city this year. In previous years, wildlife volunteers had rescued only two or three. The rescued animal will be treated for the injuries it has suffered and will be released in the wild, experts said. 
 
 
 Ingredient in black magic 
 Slender Loris is primarily a nocturnal animal found in forests in India. Called Lilliput, the large eyes of these creatures are used by black magicians. They are also believed to bring luck, a superstition which fuels the illegal trade. Possessing this animal amounts to violation of Indian Wildlife Protection Act rules and can a person found with a slender loris can be charged with illegal possession, illegal entry into forest and attempting wildlife trade which could result in imprisonment.