A strong wave of dissent is fast brewing among Indian Forest Service (IFS) officials of the state following an attack on one of their colleagues. 

 A couple of miscreants and elected representatives from Kodagu-Mysore district had attacked a young IFS officer S Sivasankar who has been posted as deputy conservator of forests, Madikeri Wildlife Division on November 28. 

 While taking part in a meeting over the recommendations of the Dr Kasturirangan report on Western Ghats, Sivasankar, of the 2010 batch hailing from Namakkal district of Tamil Nadu, was abused by some elected representatives and subsequently assaulted by a couple of miscreants for voicing his concerns about conservation activities during the meeting. 

 	The incident, which happened in front of the Mysuru MP, MLAs of Virajpet and Madikeri and Zilla Panchayat president of Kodagu, has now come under intense criticism by various sections of the society including his own colleagues. Dr Ravi Ralph, additional principal chief conservator of forests (APCCF) and president of IFS officers’ association, in a statement said that the officer was only attending to his duty. 

 “He is a young, honest and upright officer and was attending to official duty at the time of the incident. The assault was unprovoked and appeared to be premeditative to intimidate the officer who had not permitted certain prohibited activities in the sanctuary while strictly enforcing the provisions of Wildlife Act. The association has raised concerns about the safety of IFS officers and other forest staff as such incidents have been repeatedly occurring in the Kodagu district.” 

 	The association sought intervention of the government and demanded stern and timely action against the perpetrators of such an act. A complaint has been lodged at the Madikeri Town police station by the officer and subsequently two false cases have also been registered against Sivasankar under prevention of atrocities act, according to the association. 

 	A couple of years ago, another IFS officer, Takat Singh Ranawat was assaulted by miscreants in Kanakapura limits while trying to thwart illegal transport of granite.