The tiger population in the 18 tiger reserves in the country has surged by 30 per cent to 2,226, with Karnataka leading the way with a whopping 406 tigers across five tiger reserves in state
 
 	The union government on Tuesday announced that India has a total of 2,226 tigers in 18 tiger reserves. Pipping all other states with tiger reserves for the second consecutive time, Karnataka has topped the list with a whopping 406 tigers across five tiger reserves. While the nation has witnessed an overall increase of 30 per cent since the last count in 2010, Karnataka has clocked a 35 per cent increase from its previous figure of 300 tigers. 

 	Even as the state is elated over its burgeoning population of the big cat, there seems to be a few harsh truths behind the `success story' that has been kept under wraps. For over 10-months, some of the tiger reserves in the state have not been provided with h the grants required for the maintainance of the reserve and other conservational activities. Yet, field staff, forest officials and other stake-holders have done what they could Sources in the state forest department revealed to Bangalore Mirror that some of the forest reserves have not been provided with required grants from m the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) that overlooks the `Project Tiger' activities in all country's tiger reserves. 

 	“Except for Bandipur and d Nagarahole, all other tiger reserves lack funds. Despite several requests, there is no o breakthrough in this,“ the official said. 

 	According to the list of hortreserves facing a severe shortage of funds, Dandeli and Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) BRT) Both Tiger Reserve top the list. “Both the Anshi-Dandeli Reserve in Uttara Kannada and BRT T in Chamarajanagar district have e not been given the required grants rants for over 10 months. Similarly, the Bhadra tiger reservein Chikkamagalur district has s not seen any money for over seven even months. Given the Herculean ulean retch task of protecting a vast stretch of tiger habitat and ensuring uring the health of the felines in n the absence of grants is indeed a miracle!“ the officer revealed. 

 	Centre communicated about fund crunch 

 	Acknowledging that some of the nted reserves have not been granted cipal funds, Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden of the state said, “It is true that some of the reserves have not been provided with the grants. There is no problem with Bandipur and Nagarahole as there has been a steady flow of funds. But in the case of other reserves there has been a technical problem. We have taken up the matter with the NTCA and explained to them about the severe shortage of funds. We have been asked to submit a fresh proposal and the Centre has agreed to sanction required funds on a priority basis.“ 

 	Every year, depending on the nature of conservation work as submitted by the respective state governments, the NTCA affiliated to the MoEF allo cates funds for each reserve ranging from Rs 1 crore to Rs 10 crore. Out of the total amount about 50 per cent of the grant is provided by the Centre, the other portion has to be equally shared between the Centre and the state, according to sources. Based on the availabil ity of funds, civil works for field staff, maintenance of the reserve, and conservational activities are taken up through the year. 

 	Spurt in tiger numbers, triggers panic 

 	While the increase in the tiger count has brought cheer to both the forest department and conservationists, the state government has another challenge to tackle in the form of renewed conflict between humans 'and tigers. 

 	“The state is already witnessing several incidents of tigers straying into human habitats and lifting livestock and killing people following the shrinking of tiger habitats. Now that there has been an increase in the tiger population, such conflicts will rise and we will face the wrath of the people,“ said a forest official. 

 	Commenting on the issue, noted conservationist Sanjay Gubbi of Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), said, “We need to prepare ourselves for such consequences. It is impossible to achieve a zero-conflict rate when we are witnessing a spurt in the tiger population. But what needs to be done is that the conflict rate has to be brought under tolerable limits and requires everybody to work on a war-footing.“ 

 	PCCF Luthra clarified, “The conflicts pop up not because of the spurt in population but because of the increase in population density. Currently Bandipur and Nagarahole have a density of 15 to 18 tigers per 100 sq km. Other reserves lack such a density and there is place for more tigers. The problem of conflict will be tackled in a scientific way.“ 

 	Reserve-wise details in a couple of months 

 	While Karnataka has topped the list of states with the most tigers, the individual figures for each tiger reserve are yet to be revealed and, according to officials, it would take at least couple of months to reveal all the figures. 

 	Speaking to BM from New Delhi, Vinay Luthra said, “The state is happy about the performance and credit must go to all for putting in the best of efforts.What is promising is that there have been sightings of tigers in several new areas like Cauvery Sanctuary, Male Mahadeshwara Hilll Sanctuary and Bheemghad Wildlife Sanctuary. The sampling is still in progress, particularly camera-trapping and analysis of scat DNA from several line transects. The details for individual tiger reserves will only be available after a couple of months.“ 

 	According to Union Minister Prakash Javadekar the previous estimate of tigers in 2010 stood at 1,706. “The latest findings reveal that there are 2,226 tigers.We must be proud of our legacy as there has been 30 per cent increase. This is a huge success story,“ Javadekar replied. 

 	Almost a decade ago, the tiger population in the country dipped to an all-time low of 1,411 triggering panic among conservationists and the government, forcing every state to take up stringent measures to protect tigers. A vast area of 3,78,118 sq km of forest area in 18 tiger states were surveyed with a total of 1,540 unique tiger photo captures.