Lovebirds (budgerigars), are admired by pet lovers for their bright feathers. But it’s precisely this attribute that pet traders and tribals are exploiting to dupe unsuspecting pet lovers. 
 
 Rather than take the trouble of breeding the birds, tribal gangs which supply pet stores have resorted to a cheaper, but vile trick. These gangs are snaring Indian black-headed munias and are dyeing the birds with textile dye, making a quick buck in the bargain. 
   Recently, a forest mobile squad trapped and arrested Venkatesh, who had more than 300 munias in his possession. Venkatesh belongs to the Nari Kova tribe, which specialises in trapping these birds which usually nest around agricultural fields.
   “It’s unfortunate that these birds are dyed like textiles,” said K B Manjunath, DCF, forest mobile squad, Bangalore. “We received a tip-off and trapped a trader with 300 Indian Munias. An investigation is on.” 
   To the untrained eye, the dyed birds look exactly like lovebirds. The Indian Munia is a protected species under the Indian Wildlife (protection) Act 1972 and possessing, transporting, exhibiting or being involved in its trade is a violation of the act. It carries a penalty of up to three years imprisonment.
 
 Trading in lovebirds, however, is not illegal.
   A pair of lovebirds costs anywhere upwards of Rs 200 in the open market which makes dyed munias a lucrative trade. But it comes at great costs to the birds. Experts say at least 40 per cent of the birds die during the “dyeing process” – if it could be called that. 
   “The birds are dyed in the most insensitive way,” said a wildlife expert. “Live birds are simply dipped in different dyes. The birds are coloured in patterns which means dipping different parts of the birds in different colour dyes. About 12 different colours are used.”
   Sharath Babu R, honorary wildlife warden, told Bangalore Mirror, “Out of 100 birds coloured in this fashion, at least 40 die from the chemical effects of the dye. The average lifespan of these birds is two years, but those that survive barely live to this age. They are sold to pet traders in the city as lovebirds, but by the time customers realise that they have been taken for a ride, it’s too late.”
   Manjunath said, “We appeal to people not to encourage this trade. It is also a violation of the law to buy munias. Ignorance of the law is not an excuse, so we urge pet lovers to take care.”