By: Vishakha Chanehani
 	
 	Does a voice that says we have lost touch with animals belong to the environmentalist or ecologist, the nature, or animal lover?
 	
 	 		Who would associate wildlife with the city? We rush to mountains or forests to experience nature, but not many think about wildlife, the nature around in our homes, in our cities. What constitutes `wildlife'? Not cows or goats, sheep; not the dogs or cats who depend on humans for survival, not the domesticated. Wildlife is different. 	

 	 		It could mean a band of invading monkeys, chirpy squirrels scurrying about, barbets on neighbourhood trees, kites overhead; even ravens perching nearby are in many ways, wild. Fishes or turtles in our tanks, the parakeets or budgerigars in cages, have been stolen from the wild too. And no one would argue about snakes being wild! Snakes surface from underground due to rain or excess heat, often because of loss of habitats. Not to mention butterflies, moths, dragonflies and varied insects that happily invite themselves to the nooks and corners of what we think are our homes! Do we view them as unwanted intruders? Dangerous pests, menaces? 	

 	 		To be shoved away, smuggled, caged, kept in zoos? Found in glossy alphabet books... C for camel, F for frog, M for monkey? Are we to encounter the whiff of the wild in the safety of our homes, in a Discovery channel? 	

 	 		Are animals in our lives just cute or fearsome ani mated cartoons? 	

 	 		After reading an animal story or watching an `animated' film, how many of us truly feel empathy, wake up to animal lives around us? Have we... Felt curious about creatures that reside in the plants around? Felt bad for ants when we accidently disrupt their nest? Looked at fish in aquarium and thought this may not quite be the place for them? How did they come to be here anyway? Ever thought about chicken claustrophobically strung together, to be killed, or only to lay eggs for us? 	

 	 		Cared to think about animals in a circus; the ones that feature in a film? 	

 	 		The kind of training they received to perform for us? 	

 	 		Considered why on earth plastic is being discovered from inside animal bodies, be they cows or deer? 	

 	 		Felt the loneliness of a parakeet cramped up in a cage? 	

 	 		Thought of what parts of our city were like, before we made houses there. Who were the earlier inhabitants? Where did they go? Given way to an animal on the road? Felt remorse for one that got run over? 	

 	 		Intervened when we saw a snake getting mercilessly attacked or burnt? 	

 	 		Asked how animals become meat for us? What they have to go through to get slaughtered? 	

 	 		Been made aware of the terrible experiments conducted on animals, to create cosmetics, food stuff or medicines for humans? 	

 	 		Are we aware of the indignity of the life they may be living? 	

 	 		Deep down, in the unquestioning urban lifestyles that we adopt, do we get groomed by messages that make humans always come first? 	

 	 		Does a voice that says we have lost touch with animals belong to the environmentalist or ecologist, a mountain trekker, the nature, or animal lover? 	

 	 		The truth is that the more nature suffers, the more we suffer. Being well, or `well-being' after all, cannot happen in isolation. Take care till then.