Wildlife conservation now has a brand new website with a difference. The site, www.conservationthreats.org, aims to encourage the general public to participate in wildlife conservation. The idea is to ensure that threats to wildlife are documented and made available to policy makers, the forest department and others interested in wildlife conservation.
 
 The website, designed by Prakash Matada of Wildlife Matters, has clearly categorised the various threats to wildlife in the state. These have illustrative photographs to help users post their inputs in the appropriate category. The site allows anyone who registers to upload inputs on threats like poaching, fragmentation, mining, forest fires, human-wildlife conflict and road kill in protected areas of Karnataka. For instance, people driving through highways in Bandipur or Nagarahole can look for road kill and report it on the site.
 
 It provides an option for uploading images, videos, news clippings and news links. All threats will be mapped and viewers will be able to see the spatial distribution of threats. Reports on various threats can also be generated in a tabular form. For pro-active users, the site provides the contact information of government officials of important protected areas.
 
 “We thought of having greater public participation in wildlife conservation. With more people visiting wildlife reserves, we thought to use this opportunity to involve them. The site can be used by travellers, trekkers, wildlife photographers, students, wildlife enthusiasts, media personnel and others,” said Matada. “With more and more people using the internet and digital photography, we expect the website to be popularised through social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter. We worked as a team and took a year to develop the site,” he said.
 
 Currently, the focus of the site is on protected areas in the Western Ghats. Later, the focus area could be expanded based on the response. There are plans to bring out a Kannada version of the site for the benefit of rural users. “If people who live in and around wildlife reserves use the site, it will be a big victory for public participation,” Matada said. The site allows users to download posters with wildlife messages so that they can be printed and used for conservation awareness.