By Reya Mehrotra

Monkey business is booming. Or call it gorilla warfare. At a time when the 6.1 per cent unemployment rate and job losses are monopolising conversations, monkey rescuers are in great demand. And this is one sector which is hiring.

Because Bengaluru is overrun by monkeys. And this is a fallout of the depleting tree cover. With monkeys making apartments their new homes, monkey rescuers are on speed dial of many apartment residents. And knowing how desperate people are to be rid of the monkey menace, monkey rescuers are charging anywhere between Rs 65,000 to one lakh for each monkey rescue.

Tired of being held to ransom by monkey rescuers, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) rescuers and the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) are being flooded with complaints at the exorbitant costs of a monkey rescue. To tackle the rising costs of a monkey rescue, the forest department is planning to call a meeting to fix a price for private rescuers and protect residents from extortion.
  Only authorized personnel can do it... They charge per monkey. I have recently told the Chief Conservator of Forests to look into the matter and fix ceiling rates– Principal Chief Conservator of Forests Punati Sridhar  

“We have great respect for animals but monkeys are just unbearable. The situation is so bad that we are unable to walk with anything in our hands because the monkeys swoop down on us in a group and snatch it,” said Ramya S, a home-maker and resident of Bannerghatta road.

If people out on the roads are not safe from the monkey menace, those inside their homes are not safe either. “Though we have covered the entire house with grilles, monkeys still try to sneak in whenever the doors are opened. They steal things from the house. We have been seeking BBMP help but it’s not of much use,” said Devika Kumar, a home-maker from Sarjapur road. 

Fixed rates

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) Punati Sridhar says, “The forest department takes up capturing and translocation based on local demand. Only authorized personnel can do the job. They charge per monkey. I have recently told the CCF to look into the matter and fix ceiling rates.” R Gokul, Chief Conse­rvator of Forests says, “Since we have been receiving a lot of complaints about monkey catchers charging exorbitant rates, we are planning to fix a baseline value. We cannot fix one amount because there are many variables – size of apartment, number of monkeys, location of apartment and other factors.”



  .  
Authentication is a must

Says Mahesh TR, monkey rescuer with BBMP, “As BBMP rescuers, we don’t charge any money for the rescue. BBMP only takes transportation cost. Monkeys are a highly protected species and if they are to be relocated, one has to write to the Karnataka Forest Department officials. Officials are sent to inspect the menace and if there are too many monkeys, then they’re relocated or else the residents are trained how to deal with monkeys. For relocation, KFD too only charges for transportation and not as high as these private and illegal rescuers. We recently got to know that a private rescuer, who was called to capture a monkey, shot at it and killed the monkey. A FIR was filed against him for doing so. Another private illegal rescuer who was reported to have captured 15 to 20 monkeys for commercial uses, has also been arrested.”

Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer with BBMP and founder Wild World Conservation Trust (WWCT) echoes his sentiments. “Monkeys cannot be relocated as they won’t survive in new areas that are not known to them. What we do instead is try to educate people to not engage with them and not to offer them any food.”

Chandan Kumar SM from People for Animals (PfA), says, “We have trained volunteers to rescue monkeys. We don't leave monkeys in far off forests as they can’t adapt in new locations easily. So we relocate them to the nearest green patch in the same area as they were found. We don’t charge for the rescue and relocation but accept whatever the residents give us.”


  .  

Who you gonna call?

About whom to call when you monkeys are a menace in residential areas, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Shivraj Singh said, “If it is in BBMP area, residents must contact the forest cell of BBMP and for other locations, the nearest forest officer can be contacted.”
 
KFD blames the summer, garbage issues

According to R Gokul, CCF, “The weather is quite dry these days and monkeys come out to seek water and food. Secondly, garbage strewn around attracts monkeys. Thirdly in urban cities, there are no predators of monkeys to keep their population in control which is why they grow fast in numbers. Apartments are their favourite places to reside as these have multiple hideout places. But we have not yet heard any case of serious injuries or casualties due to monkeys. 

They have been reported to drink milk from homes, and destroy flowering plants or garbage kept in the open. We usually instruct apartment residents and associations to take preventive measures like installing meshes, using firecrackers and so on. If that does not help, we give directions for the monkey to be relocated by monkey catchers under our supervision.”

According to rescuers, monkeys are found in large numbers in highly populated areas like Mallesh­waram, Vidyaranyapura, Rajajinagar, Giri­nagar, Hanuman­thanagar, Marathahalli among others.