By  Prerna Bindra
 
  Meet the men and women who are rewilding India and providing safe habitats for plants and animals, large and small
 
 Pradip Krishen is an unlikely gardener of forests. In an earlier life, he was a filmmaker, having directed – among others – the edgy Massey Sahib (1985) and In Which Annie Gives It Those Ones ( 1989), which periodically resurfaces with its illustrious star cast of Arundhati Roy as the leading lady (and script writer) and Shah Rukh Khan in a bit role.
 
 But funding for his cinematic sensibilities was thin on the ground, and Pradip was not ready to toe the Bollywood line. So in 1995 he walked out and into a void, with no idea of what to do except build a home in Pachmarhi. This small hill station town in Madhya Pradesh is surrounded by forests, and walks in the wilderness piqued his curiosity about his tree-neighbours. After a decade of intensive learning, Pradip carved out — if not defined — a new vocation for himself as an amateur botanist, an author of seminal and highly readable books such as Trees of Delhi and The Jungle Trees of Central India, and as an ‘ecological gardener’ who restored degraded, damaged landscapes.
 
 One such remarkable project is the Rao Jodha Desert Rock Park that surrounds Jodhpur’s Mehrangarh fort. The sprawling 70-hectare landscape of volcanic rocks that formed around 750 million years ago was denuded, over-grazed, and a ‘green wasteland’ overrun by an exotic Mexican tree – Prosopis juliflora, locally called baavlia, or “the mad one”, for its propensity to spread like crazy, and behave like a bully, as it reeks toxic alkaloids which edge out other vegetation. Since 2005, Pradip has been leading the effort to restore it – to return the area to what it might have been some five centuries ago when Rao Jodha founded the city of Jodhpur.
 
 The task was, and continues to be, monumental. Baavlia is a stubborn tree, and Khandwaliyas, traditional sandstone miners, were employed to chip away at the stone to root out the invasive tree deeply entrenched in the rocky landscape, and give space to other plants to grow. Krishen worked with his team to bring back native plants, creating a thriving forest with more than 300 species of plants, including 70 types of grasses in a rocky desert that receives barely 20 cms of annual rain, and relentless scorching sun. With the return of the natives, the wildlife is back – geckos, frogs, jackals, butterflies. On a walk through the park a year or two ago, I ticked off at least five raptors including peregrine falcons and vultures, a hare hopped across my path and the presence of quills indicated that porcupines had been out on a stroll too!
 
 Most of the “forest people” I have met over the years have typically begun with the simple idea of having their own little sanctuary or, more accurately, explains Pamela Malhotra, of the Save Animals Initiative (SAI) sanctuary, to “provide a safe haven for wild animals, who are increasingly under pressure from escalating deforestation.” It was with this idea that Pamela and Anil Malhotra, then recently back from the US, procured 50 odd acres of fallow land in the Western Ghats in 1991. They continued to consolidate their land, and two decades later, their 300 acres are flush with meadows, native trees, perennial streams and has become a secure retreat for animals – from elephants and tigers to the endemic Nilgiri Marten – and over 300 species of birds.
 
 Their larger purpose though is water. “This is not about a cuddly private sanctuary for two people who love animals and nature. It is about the future of humanity. Forests are watersheds, and we need water to develop, and well, to survive,” she says.
 
 She is right. The annihilation of forests cuts at the root of our survival. About 75 per cent of the world’s accessible freshwater that we use – for domestic purposes or agriculture – comes from forests. Yet, in the past three decades about 250 sq kms of forests – that’s over two Chandigarhs – have been felled annually for various projects such as highways, mines and cement factories.
 
 In this light, such initiatives of rewilding providing much needed buffers to existing forests and safe, if small, havens for wildlife, are important. It was this desire to provide a safe haven for wildlife that moved Poonam and Harshawardhan Dhanwatey to turn degraded farmland into a forest that today partially supports tigers, leopards, dholes, sloth bears, wild boar etc. In 2001, they bought seven-acres in the village Ghosri that formed a chicken neck connecting two parts of the Tadoba Tiger reserve, and was therefore a vulnerable patch for passing animals. The land was protected and grazing stopped. They planted local trees, aided in their efforts by birds, bees, bats, butterflies — pollinators all. In a few years, the land was lush with indigenous grasses, shrubs and trees, such as palash, also called ‘flame of the forest’ for its brilliant red flowers and tendu. “The tendu,” Poonam informs they owe to the sloth bear, “from whose droppings sprung the saplings!” Once the land was fairly secure, they made a waterhole – and one of the first guests was a tigress with her three young cubs, and it is in her honour that their land, and the small boutique resort they recently started to sustain their initiative, is called tigress@ghosri. If it was a concern for wildlife that motivated the Dhanwateys, the Bangalore-based IT couple Rajesh PC and Meera turned part of their productive eight-acre farm in Wayanad (Kerala) to protect the diversity of plants. The region is part of the Western Ghats, a global diversity hotspot, but has been massively converted into commercial plantations of coconut, coffee etc leading to water shortages in a region known for its lush monsoon. Their plot was dominated by silver oak, as were many such private estates and common lands. Such monocultures are a drain on soil fertility, demand intensive use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides, which ultimately reduce floral and faunal densities. Meera wanted their little parcel of land to be a ‘seed bank’, and planted over 100 species of indigenous trees, including the rare and endemic Madhuca bourdillonii.
 
 Assam’s Jadav Molai Payeng, is well, different not just from the urban crop of ‘forest people’, but also his fellow villagers. Payeng, a member of the Mishing tribe, was 16 when he dropped out of school to look after their head of 50 odd cattle. His home or changghar – a typical Mishing dwelling house on stilts – was on a sandbar along the Brahmaputra river. Frequents floods eroded the denuded islands, causing death and destruction. During one particularly vicious flood, many snakes and other small creatures were washed ashore, and lay writhing and dying on his island. Payeng was distressed, and determined that his tiny island would offer a refuge to wild animals. This was in the late 1970s, and over the next three decades, he single-handedly planted on this barren riverine island trees and grasses, especially those favoured by rhinos, elephants and ungulates. Cut to a winter evening in 2008: the first ever elephant herd walked into this thick vegetation, across from Payeng’s hut, and proceeded to destroy it. The villagers watched in horror. Their first instinct is to drive the animals away, but Payeng was overwhelmed with joy. Life had come back to this dry, barren land. This dense 550 hectares forest now offers sanctuary to rhinos when the lowlands flood, elephants stranded in human habitation, and the occasional tiger, among other animals. India’s ‘Forest Man’ is a man with a purpose. When I met him in Delhi, Payeng stated that protecting and planting forests is the key to prevent damage and erosion from frequent floods. “If we all do it, no more global warming,” he says.
 
 Payeng’s earthy wisdom is rooted in science. India’s forests serve as a carbon sink, neutralising over 11 per cent of the country’s total greenhouse gas emissions, while globally forests absorb 2.4 billion tonnes of carbon per year. But such efforts and private conservancies are few and need to be replicated to make a significant impact. Pamela believes that corporates must get involved, and the couple has initiated dialogue with businesses to buy land to restore forests as part of their corporate social responsibility plans. Meera and Rajesh are now working on creating conservation sites for native plants on community land with local partners and communities. For the Dhanwateys, a step forward has been to work with corporates to invest in private conservancies, and with the government to create a climate for such initiatives. A unique model of ‘private entrepreneurial conservation’ is Jabarkhet Nature Reserve (JNR), a resurrected wilderness abutting Mussoorie, whose hills have been ravaged by relentless and mindless development. The reserve, a partnership between the owner of the property, Vipul Jain, and conservationist Sejal Worah, has ambitious plans of making it pay for itself through individual and institutional membership, entry fees, school field trips, but without any tourism construction to keep disturbance at a minimum.
 
 After a walk in Jabarkhet, where we chanced upon the rare Khaleej pheasant and spied a shy kakkar deer, I scroll through the camera trapped images of wildlife clicked in the reserve: sambar deer, leopard cats, gorals, leopards, assorted variety of birds, and black bears, who have reappeared in these parts after a decade. “We allowed the land to recover, and so the wildlife returned,” Sejal says with a smile. They work in partnership with, and train and employ, local residents and naturalists so that there is community investment in the project.
 
 The hope is this model will demonstrate not just ecological but economic incentives for private landowners to invest in conservation, while also creating livelihoods for local communities. In the process, Sejal adds, a network of protected forest patches that can act as ‘stepping stones’ and safe havens for the wildlife of the region can be created. Pradip believes that rewilding is important to restore and heal damaged ecologies, and an opportunity to reverse the destruction of the natural world. In our struggle to save nature, such initiatives show us new ways to protect the planet, to educate and inspire. In a ravaged world, they give us hope. They have taken root; now we need to make them stronger.