Animal activists blame police, state pollution control board for negligence towards apex court order 

With not many citizens following the Supreme Court order on bursting of crackers during Deepawali, around 200 pet dogs went missing in the city.

The owners concerned are leaving no stone unturned to ensure safe return of their pets. Animal activists blamed the police and Karnataka State Pollution Control Board for being negligent towards ensuring the public follow the apex court’s order.

The Supreme Court passed the order restricting bursting of crackers between 8 pm and 10 pm across the country. There is no count on the hapless street dogs that are missing due to indiscriminate bursting of crackers with no empathy towards the strays.

“Some people have to post photos of the pet dogs that strayed from their homes due to bursting crackers. If these pets are geotagged, it would have been easier for people to trace and restore them with their owners without any hassles,’’ said chief veterinary officer (mobile & extension) of the department of animal husbandry & veterinary services Dr Prayag HS who promoted geotags for pet dogs.

Expressing concern over hundreds of missing dogs due to bursting of crackers, Arun Prasad, an animal activist, said the police failed to enforce the Supreme Court order. “No one is bothered to stop bursting crackers that are banned. People are allowed to burst green crackers at designated places. However, people continued bursting crackers as per their whims and fancies,’’ said Prasad.

Sujaya Jagadish, an SPCA member, said people in villages have taken up bursting crackers. “I have observed in my own village - Mittur, Kolar district, that monkeys, cows, birds and dogs, all exhibit fearful reactions as a result. This fear can lead to stress, anxiety, and even physical harm in many animals,’’ said Jagadish, adding that how a three-legged ageing street dog died of heart failure last year during Deepawali as the sound of fireworks petrified her.

Nevina Kamath, secretary of Action for Animal Justice said lost, injured and panicked pets are a yearly feature during Deepawali, Ganesha festival and other festivals.
 
“Uncontrolled and unregulated bursting of high decibel crackers have caused immense distress to the elderly, invalids and infants. With a burgeoning population, and rise in disposable incomes, the frequency and volume of crackers being burst has gone up exponentially. In spite of clear directives to the state governments by the Supreme Court and the National Green Tribunal, there is no implementation on ground, thanks to a lethargic police force and cynical public that actually feel cracker bursting is a tradition and a necessity for celebrations,’’ said Kamath.

She noted that despite several citizens’ groups having requested the police commissioner personally to ensure that police patrolling is done with public address systems informing about timings, dates and the permissible types of crackers, nothing happened.
 
“The police control room was flooded with complaints from irate citizens who were furious with the indiscriminate bursting of crackers, but to no avail. Likewise, the KSPCB too did not conduct sufficient campaigns before or after the festive season to ensure the message went across. Environmentally sensitive citizens and those who don’t find pleasure in loud blasts and billowing fumes are forcibly subjected to torture. Urban wildlife including avian and arboreal species are simply blasted out of their habitats,’’ she said.

She asked that if cigarette smoking is banned in public as it is a health hazard, why aren’t the cracker loving citizens told to carry out their activities in remote places where no other components of the ecosystem are affected.