Having worked in the rainforests of Amazon in Peru, naturalist, explorer, author, and award-winning wildlife filmmaker Paul Rosolie, who became famous for the ‘eaten alive by anaconda’ stunt, had a new experience in store in the forests of Western Ghats in Kerala last week: Being chased by a tusker, during his first solo expedition.
 
 
 
  Rosolie is studying how tigers and elephants are migrating and went to one of the forests in Wayanad for the study
 
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Rosolie, author of Mother of God, who was in Puttur after returning from his eight-day jungle expedition on Tuesday, said, “India holds some of the most vital wildlife habitats on earth.”
 
 Rosolie is in India to study how tigers and elephants are migrating and had been to one of the thick forests in Waynad for his study. He stayed with minimal food and slept in a canopy hammock on a tree admiring and documenting the beauty of nature, watching elephants that were very peaceful and listening to the roar of the tiger in the night during this five-day expedition in the jungle in addition to three more days on roads.
 
 He said, “What is inspiring about India is that large wildlife and people can coexist – it is a lesson we need to learn back in the US. But animals also need sanctuary areas that are free of people. On my solo visit, I was encouraged to find pristine looking areas deep in the rainforest. Places where there are no people, and no trash. The animals are happy. You can see it on the elephants’ faces – they are not stressed and angry like the ones you see near populated areas.”
 
 Elaborating on how he managed to survive after being chased by a tusker last week, Rosolie said, “I was walking on one side of the stream when I saw two female elephants with two of their young ones walking quietly. As I walked watching them from a distance, I did not realise that the male was actually standing still behind and I nearly bumped into him. The huge tusker turned around and made a loud call and charged at me. All I knew was I had to run at top speed to save myself, so I threw my large bag away, only to see him coming towards me breaking all the trees. His power was astonishing. I ran in a zigzag direction to reach a 12-foot cliff and then jumped down into the stream below. I saved myself from the elephant except for a few bruises and cuts, but lost my most precious knife as well as destroyed my video camera.”
 
 Rosolie, who launched the first ever study of anacondas in lowland rainforests, said, “The Indian jungle is far more dangerous than the Amazon where jaguars can grow to the size of a leopard and anacondas can reach 200 kilos. In India, you have true giants: elephants, tigers, bison, crocodiles and so on. It’s a new environment for me.
 
 What people don’t realise though is that these larger species are icons of an ecosystem made up of thousands of smaller creatures – and the ecosystems they create are what provide us with clean water, air, resources – not to mention beauty and adventure. It troubles me to see forest loss, because it causes strain for wild animals and causes water shortages and suffering for humans”.
 
 Rosolie hopes to revisit the jungle in March along with his wife Gowri Varanashi, a rock climber as well as wildlife photographer who hails from Adyanadka in Bantwal.
 
 
  ‘EATEN ALIVE’ SNAKE STUNT
 
 Rosolie hit the headlines after an American nature documentary special focused on an expedition by Rosolie to locate a green anaconda named “Chumana”, which he believed to be the world’s longest, in a remote location of the Amazon rainforest in Peru. The special was also purportedly to feature Rosolie being “eaten” by an anaconda, protected by a suit designed specifically for this purpose. However, nothing of the sort happened, and the show received criticism for being misleading. Rosolie stated, “The hype was misleading. They seemed to forget that this was an attempt and not a promised outcome. The point was to draw a crowd and then showcase how awesome and important the Amazon is.”