Bengaluru has multiple flyovers constructed to free up traffic, especially on the busy roads underneath. Now, for the first time, the city will get a flyover so that the movement of wild animals is unhindered.
 
The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) which is constructing the satellite ring road has hit a dead end at Bannerghatta as the road connecting Bannerghatta to Kanakapura passes through the Bannerghatta forest. If a four-lane ring road is to be constructed, the existing two-lane road has to be widened.
 
With stiff opposition from the Greens, the NHAI has now decided to construct a 6 km-long flyover above the Bannerghatta wildlife corridor. Once the flyover is constructed, the existing road will be handed over to the forest department.

“This particular corridor has been a challenging one for us as we are facing resistance for the widening plan. As we have no other alternative, we are forced to construct the highway at the existing location itself. Hence, we have decided to construct a six-kilometre-long elevated highway. We hope once the elevated highway is constructed, it would ensure that wild animals in the eco-sensitive zone can have freedom of movement as there will be no vehicular movement on the forest floor,” an NHAI official told Bangalore Mirror.

Currently, there is heavy traffic during peak hours crossing this forest zone as vehicles ply between Bannerghatta and Kanakapura road on a daily basis. Another reason for the NHAI to go for an elevated highway was it could not get required permission from the forest department for land acquisition and felling of trees.
 
“We cannot execute the satellite ring road without connecting this key stretch. So, we are going for an elevated highway,” the official added.

.
Though the greens have welcomed the move, they are urging the NHAI to exercise caution.

“It is a welcome move that a flyover is being constructed to avoid the Bannerghatta zone. This will be helpful as once the flyover comes it will end the current movement of vehicles on the existing road passing through the corridor,” Narayan Kumar, a green activist said.

According to Shiva Kumar, another activist, the construction time will be critical as construction equipment at the site can still cause a lot of harm to the sensitive zone. 
“We feel the construction of highways or elevated highways is usually delayed and this delay can cause a lot of problems. So, if such a plan is executed, then the officials should ensure that all the necessary precautions are taken and the entire project is completed in a time bound manner,” he added.

The construction time will be critical as construction equipment at the site can still cause a lot of harm to the sensitive zone— Shiva Kumar, activist
There has been demand for such underpasses in wildlife corridors — elevated stretches in dense forest areas, so that the wild animals have freedom of movement. There was a similar proposal in Bandipur as well. However, such projects come at a huge cost and it would be economically unviable to construct a long stretch of highway in a forest. The Greens have been urging the government not to construct any highways or permit new highways in forest areas and ensure that the animals have right of way in our forests.

The NHAI is executing the ring road under the Bharatmala project. The ring road will link Dobbspet (Tumakuru Road), Doddaballapur (Hindupur Road), Devanahalli (Hyderabad Road), Hosakote (Kolar Road), Hosur (Chennai Road), Anekal (Thali Road), Kanakapura (Kollegal Road), Ramanagara (Mysuru Road) and Magadi (Kunigal Road). The total length of this ring road is about 281 km (as against 116 km identified for peripheral ring road and 60 km of the existing outer ring road) in Karnataka and 45 km in Tamil Nadu.