By Nandini S

Residents of Kendriya Vihar in Yelahanka lose electricity, sleep and more on Sunday night due to heavy rainfall

The past few days have been hectic for the residents of Kendriya Vihar (KV) in Yelahanka, as the apartment complex was filled, flooded with rainwater. On Sunday morning, BBMP and the residents were hopeful that the water level would recede but it only poured more heavily in the evening, making the situation worse.
 
According to the Indian Meteorological Department, Yelahanka received “heavy rainfall” (150 mm in just a couple of hours). As a result, around five lakes in Yelahanka started overflowing. Due to the heavy inflow, Yelahanka Lake started discharging rainwater downstream. The stormwater drain here, under encroachment, could not contain the rainwater which flowed into the apartment complexes in the area, flooding them.
 
Residents of KV faced a hard time as rainwater gushed into the electrical room in the apartment complex, cutting off their electricity and plunging the apartment into darkness. Around 150 two-wheelers and 75 cars, parked in the apartment complex, were submerged in the rainwater.

KV houses 604 flats and 1,600 residents. Residents were provided milk, biscuits, candles, bread and drinking water. “The entire ground floor is submerged in rainwater. The electronic appliances and other items in these houses are damaged. We have to look for accommodation until the water level recedes. Even then we will have to vacate our homes… We cannot live on the ground floor of such buildings,” a resident of KV said.

On Monday, teams from NDRF, SDRF, civil defence, firefighters and volunteers stepped in to help the residents of the apartment complex. Eighteen NDRF teams used boats and tractors to ferry the residents in and out from the complex, it is said. A medical team, with eight doctors, was also sent to KV to provide first aid.

Gaurav Gupta, chief commissioner, BBMP, said that 130 mm rainwater was measured in Yelahanka zone, due to which the lake wall broke and water gushed into the stormwater drain and the apartments nearby.
 
The rainwater flooding KV has been diverted towards the stormwater drain now. It connects Yelahanka Lake to Jakkur Lake and can accommodate about eight feet of water.
 
BBMP has requested the government to expand the stormwater drain to 33 feet. Gupta said that it will take two to three days for the water level in the drain to recede in the absence of rainfall as at the moment there is greater inflow than outflow of water into the drain.

Something’s stinking here

The heavy rainfall on Sunday exposed the tip of the iceberg of Bengaluru’s flooding problems. Residents of various layouts in and around Vidyaranyapura faced a hard time as rainwater, mixed with sewage water, entered their homes. As they spent the night dealing with the stench, some took to social media to call for help.

A resident of Basava Samithi Layout, wrote on Facebook that the water level was rising by the minute and helpless, she had to resign her fate to prayer, hoping that the rain would stop.
 
Another resident resorted to sarcasm, and wrote on social media: There is a “musical fountain” at Srinidhi Layout referring to the dirt and stench.
 
“Looks like we are living in sh**. There are no proper procedures in place to regulate the cleaning of drains or garbage collection. Worse, there are no proper roads here and there is no electricity now. What good do we get from paying our taxes with our hard earned money” he wrote.

Another resident from Gurudarshan Layout called for immediate help and wrote, “The position is critical and water from the sewage has entered my house. I request the officials to look into this as there will be more rainfall. Please send help.”
 
The drains here are filled with rainwater, which, due to stagnation, is attracting mosquitoes.

  Rescue personnel had to evacuate several people as the water entered their homes in the city

FLOODLIGHTS

Singapura’s woes 
In Singapura, while residents were struggling to flush out the water, they were scared to see snakes appearing from the water to prey on the fish. Meanwhile, a road in Singapura Layout caved in on Sunday night. Some good Samaritans tried to help the motorists to find a way out.
 
Worried parents 
Many families in Kendriya Vihar, with kids in tow, decided to move out. Many were seen getting into boats carrying their babies and heading to safety. Some shifted to their relatives’ places while those on the lower floors shifted to friends’ homes on the upper floors.
 
Sleepless night on the road 
Many residents in MS Palya had to spend the whole night standing on roads. As the water gushed into their houses, the residents were in no position to go back.
 
No water to quench thirst
It was a thirsty day for many on Monday as there was no drinking water available in many houses. The residents said that the water had flooded the sumps. With no electricity, they could not purify the water.
 
Reptile trouble 
Many residents in Yelahanka had to step out of their houses as snakes, scorpions and crabs had started to flow inside. People started calling up the wildlife rescue team to save them.
 
A night in the car 
Many drivers had to spend the whole night in their vehicles. A few drivers said that the rainfall was so heavy that they could not enter their houses. Traffic on the busy airport road was also affected for some time due to the road getting flooded.
 
153 mm rain in Jakkur
While there was no “heavy rainfall” reported in other parts of the state (According to the Met Department), heavy rainfall was witnessed in Bengaluru with Jakkur received the highest rainfall with 153 mm

Rain for 2 more days in city
The Met department says that Bengaluru will witness rainfall for at least next two days. Officials have predicted isolated to scattered light to moderate rains are likely. IMD has also forecast widespread light to moderate rainfall in the rest of Karnataka.