By Rajmohan Sudhakar

Food, shelter and clothing (or education, sanitation and healthcare) can exist only if you have the environment to sustain these bare necessities. By environment, I mean not just our immediate settings — home, garden, park, forest and suchlike — but an open-minded collective that can respect and sustain such environments, not one that ring-fences itself as challenges unravel.
 
That we are rapidly losing such a progressive collective in this country as we speak notwithstanding, we are racing towards apocalyptic doom is all, if the current path of blatant ecological destruction is to be sustained. There is still that window for course-correction and late-epiphany amongst the political class.
 
A larger social setting that we often take for granted, for instance, is a fledgling urban milieu like Bengaluru. At the moment, more than anything, we miss the political will to take the city and citizens along in all inclusivity, taking into account the ever-changing dynamics of the climate crisis at play.

In the past couple of weeks, Bengaluru had a lesson in how the climate emergency can overwhelm urban infrastructure — a flooded airport and an overflowing lake as gallons of rainwater plummeted from the heavens in short spells, a phenomenon that is increasingly commonplace.
 
Yet, we did not see an official acknowledgement of weird weather pounding the city, except news reports brought to you by Bangalore Mirror. Nor do we have the infrastructure in place to cope with such extreme weather events. The municipal corporation must take heed and address the issue. BM had repeatedly stressed in two stories, just recently — ‘A hard rain’s gonna fall’ and ‘The catcher in the rain’ — how Bengaluru may terribly fall short in climate mitigation measures.

On the contrary, at a time when everything is being rearranged to cool the planet down and face the fallout of the climate crisis head on elsewhere, India is keen on amending laws that govern our primeval forests. In this part of the world, the Western Ghats, which we are an extended part of, is one of the oldest, if not primordial, ecosystems, where new species are discovered often.

Of course, it was the wildlife week and all that. Cop15, the biodiversity conference in Kunming, China, is virtually underway ahead of the much anticipated Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. However, back here, the Centre has given 15 days for the public to write in their feedback and suggestions on the proposed amendments to forest laws made public through a consultation paper on its website.

The existing law provides for at least a year’s imprisonment for forest offences. The new document proposes to bring it down to just 15 days, a report in Down to Earth portal said.
 
It is absurd to see this kind of leniency towards offences in a ‘conservation’ document of today. Alienating forest-dwelling communities from their homeland will only worsen the fight against climate crisis and make biodiversity conservation harder. The industrialist is as good as the forest-dweller for the current dispensation. That the forest-dweller is an ally in reclaiming a liveable future is a fact brazenly overlooked by the policymaker. “In practice, anyone can take forest land for non-forest use with due approval from the Centre and due payment of compensatory levy… even for reserve forests notified under the Indian Forest Act, 1927…” - wrote Sathyam Shrivastava in the Down To Earth portal.

Preposterous as it sounds, India abstained from a vote declaring environment as a basic human right at the United Nations just days ago. Climate action requires ecosystems-based adaptations, especially in biodiversity conservation. In warmer weather, certain species bounce back while some decline. So, cookie-cutter measures just won’t do, but a better understanding of what’s at stake will.

As the World Health Organisation announces another probe into Covid-19 origins, isn’t it perplexing, that even after almost two years, we haven’t the foggiest of ideas about where the virus came from. Surely, the onslaught on biodiversity has to be factored in.

In Europe, one in five bird species is hurtling towards extinction. That birds such as the snipe and swift which used to be commonplace, even in India, are figuring in a list of endangered birds there is alarming. What a study of this kind would throw up in India about the state of our avian species is worth an earnest inquiry.

As Joe Biden is busy setting up wind farms in the US’ east coast, here we have seen observations such as the following: ‘climate change is something the elderly complain about as they age’. Do guess who said that. India, meanwhile, slipped to the 101th position in the just-released Global Hunger Index.
 
When ecosystems are thrown out of balance in the ensuing fury of nature, an already-stressed economy and a place alongside the poorest of nations in the hunger index are terribly telling.