If the transfer of two veterinary officers working at Bannerghatta Biological Park is anything to go by, it seems the Karnataka forest department and the Animal Husbandry & Veterinary Services department have no coordination. These entities are not even inclined to know what the other is doing.
 
It resulted in a situation where there were no veterinary officers on call at Bannerghatta Biological Park as15 deer and seven leopard cubs died recently by infighting and bacterial infection.

Since the forest department does not have the provision to recruit veterinary officers to work at around 10 zoos maintained by it, veterinary officers are posted at these zoos, including Bannerghatta Biological Park, by the Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services department on deputation for five years.

Each zoo should have one to three veterinary officers based on the number of animals and size of each zoo. There were three veterinary officers, two on deputation and one on contract basis, working at the Bannerghatta Biological Park that has a safari, rescue centre, and zoo and also a butterfly park.

Dr KS Umashankar, chief veterinary officer working at Bannerghatta Biological Park, was transferred on September 25 to his parent department (Animal Husbandry & Veterinary Services) after completing five years at the park. The veterinary officer working on contract basis is said to have resigned the job to pursue higher studies. Dr Vijaya Kumar N, veterinary officer working at the Bannerghatta Biological Park was transferred on October 17 to Veterinary Hospital, Somanahalli in Bengaluru South Taluk.

Veterinary officers working at various zoos on deputation or on contract basis are not happy with the state forest department, the custodian of all zoos across the state. They demand the state forest department to recruit veterinary officers on its own to ensure efficiency, commitment, and dedication among the veterinary officers working at zoos.

“There are cadre and recruitment (C and R) rules to appoint people for C and D posts (animal keepers, mahouts and others) that were outsourced a few years ago. I do not know why the authorities concerned want veterinary officers to work either on deputation or on contract basis,’’ a veterinary officer said on the condition of anonymity.

Demanding the authorities to post or recruit veterinary officers without any delay, Arun Prasad, an animal activist, said the absence of veterinary officers at Bannerghatta Biological Park will have an adverse impact on the health of wild animals.
 
“I want the authorities to take measures to ensure animals are healthy at Bannerghatta Biological Park by appointing veterinary officers,’’ said Prasad.

Joseph Hoover, an environmental activist, said it was shocking to know that there is no veterinarian at the Bannerghatta Biological Park.

“Considering that seven leopards died due to a viral infection, the administration should be all the more cautious to ensure that mammals, birds and reptiles are in a safe ecosystem. The government should do away with the practice of deputing veterinarians from the veterinary department on an ad hoc basis. The need of the hour is to have a cadre of wildlife-specialised veterinarians in the Karnataka forest department, especially when there is an escalation in man-animal conflicts,’’ said Hoover.

 We will have veterinary officers on a regular basis soon—Eshwar Khandre, forest minister, Karnataka

When informed, Bannerghatta Biological Park executive director AV Surya Sen said he was not aware of the transfer of Dr Vijaya Kumar.
 
“We will make arrangements to have veterinary officers,’’ said Sen.

Meanwhile, state forest minister Eshwar Khandre said the process to recruit veterinary officers is on. “We will have veterinary officers on a regular basis soon,’’ the minister said.