State to celebrate Vidhana Soudha’s diamond jubilee in style
 
 Celebrating the diamond jubilee of Vidhana Soudha, the seat of power of state administration, President Ram Nath Kovind (in pic) will address the joint session of the state legislature on October 25. The special session, from dawn to dusk, will throw light on state’s evolution and its progress. However, the central theme, according to senior officials of the state legislature, will be climate change which is affecting the state for the last few years.
 
 According to an official release, the President will address both the House starting from 11:00 am to 12:30 pm. Soon after the President’s address, the session will recall the evolution and progress of the state with special reference to its history, language, culture and environment. Interestingly at 7 am Grammy-award winner Ricky Kej and his team will present a musical symphony that will focus on environmental consciousness.
 
Read Also:
Chief Minister sees no problem in retaining VTU con man as Cong it cell General secretary 

 A senior official told Bangalore Mirror that the symphony would give an insight into the rich biodiversity of Karnataka. “Musicians have toiled day and night to explain us the intricate relationship with nature. It will be a treat for the audience and it holds lot of importance when all of us are witnessing the effects of climate change,” the official said. Recently, the orchestra was held at National Institute of Advanced Studies (NIAS) as part of its RoundGlass Samsara Festival between October 2 and 8 where several young students were given a chance to present their ideas about nature. Vedansh Pandey, an 8th class student of National Public School presented a paper on Cycle of Life explaining the importance of nature, wildlife and its conservation. Spread across 60 acres, the work on Vidhana Soudha was started in 1952 and completed in 1956. Previously in 2005, the then president and scientist Dr APJ Adbdul Kalam had visited Vidhana Soudha and addressed the joint session of the state legislature marking the golden jubilee. The government plans to felicitate the family members of CMs who worked towards the construction of iconic building in the neo-Dravidian style of architecture.
 
Read Also:
ACB's dilemma to raid or not to raid it officials