Between April 2022 and March 2023, Karnataka diverted nearly 89.61 hectares of forest land for non-forestry purposes. Nearly 60% of this diversion (59.89 hectares) is for mining and quarrying projects and for ‘other’ purposes.

While 16.67 hectare has been diverted for four mining and allied projects, over 37 hectares of forest land was diverted for six projects for the construction of schools, laying of pipelines for drinking water supply to nearby villages and towns, establishment of small-scale industries, and construction of water treatment plants.

The total forest land diverted for mining and allied purposes this year is the highest compared to the annual land diversion for mining over the last four years.

To date, the Karnataka Forest Department has redirected nearly 32,000 hectares of forest land for various non-forestry purposes such as irrigation, wind power, and allied projects, mining, and allied projects, linear infrastructure projects like road and railway tracks, putting up transmission lines, hydel power, quarrying and many other activities.

A big portion of this (nearly 32%) has again been for mining and allied work. As many as 140 mining projects on forest land have been sanctioned in the state so far.

Ecologists and environmentalists say given the ongoing climate crisis, the diversion of more and more forest land will only lead to degradation of forest ecology and biodiversity.
As per the National Forest Policy of India, at least 33% of the given geographical area should be under forest cover to maintain ecological stability. Karnataka currently has about 20.19% of its total land under green cover.

“Given the current situation, even a single inch of forest land diversion should be considered criminal. While the department is selling the concept of compensatory afforestation through CAMPA, saplings can never compensate for old-growth forest areas. To reach the level of carbon sequestration and ecosystem services provided by old-growth forests, these saplings will require hundreds of years. Looking at the current extreme weather events, we do not have that time on our hands,” said a city-based conservationist.

Conservationists also highlight that the Forest (Conser­vation) Amendment Bill of 2023 is a looming threat to Karnataka’s deemed forests too. Karnataka has recently notified 3,30,186.23 hectares (8.16 lakh acres) as deemed forest and experts say the proposed bill will aid diversion of deemed forest for non-forestry purposes.

According to Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Wildlife Board, multiple cases of exploitation of forest areas owing to confusion over boundaries have been highlighted by activists in the recent past. These include no objection certificates granted by the Deputy Conservator of Forest for commercial activities, including mining in deemed forest areas that include part of revenue land.


While the department is selling the concept of compensatory afforestation through CAMPA, saplings can never compensate for old-growth forest areas– City-based conservationist

“It is important for the government to get revenue and forest department officials to come together and sort out the confusion over boundaries. If not, forest areas will continue to be exploited. These confusions crop up primarily due to the recalcitrant attitude of revenue officers. Given the threat arising from the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill of 2023 if passed, we should quickly sort out the boundary issues of deemed forest,” said Hoover.