Haul was being smuggled under maize; city turns conduit for the AP produce
 	
 	
 The forest department’s city mobile squad, in a major seizure, has taken custody of 3,893 kg of red sanders from a truck where it was being smuggled concealed under maize crop. This comes close on the heels of a recent smuggling racket of red sanders, concealed under maize, that was busted mid-sea by the Mumbai coast guard and the directorate of revenue intelligence. 

 	 		With the value of red sanders estimated to be around Rs 30,000 per kg in the international black market, the seized wood is said to be worth around Rs 11 crore. 	

 	 		The truck from Andhra Pradesh, bearing registration number ADD 3805, was seized on Thursday. With CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species) banning its international trade, Thursday’s seizure has yet again set off an alarm in wildlife circles. This has brought to the fore Bengaluru’s relevance as a transit point for smuggling of red sanders from Andhra Pradesh’s Seshachalam forests. Bengaluru is of importance to the smugglers because it is well connected to two major ports - Mumbai and Mangaluru – which are business gateways to the world. 	

 “The vehicle was intercepted based on a confirmed tip-off on contraband being smuggled through a stretch connecting Bengaluru and Andhra Pradesh at around 2.30 am. Though it was a truckload of maize, our officials, on searching it in detail, found logs of red sanders stuffed inside,” M N Vijaykumar, divisional forest officer, forest mobile squad, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	 		While the vehicle owner fled the spot, forest officials are investigating the case based on the vehicle details. The vehicle was intercepted near Hoskote. The city forest squad officials who have seized 193 pieces of the valuable wood, have registered a case under various sections including section 79 (compounding the offence), section 80 (forest produce belonging to government) of Karnataka Forest Act and section 144 (that prohibits transport and sale of forest produce). 	

 	 		With the mode of operation being the same – using maize as a cover – as in the recent Mumbai seizure, sources said state officials were probing if the smugglers had any common links. “We are probing the case from all angles. The seizure, however, has raised an alarm and investigations are on based on the details we have got,” Thimmarayappa, range forest officer attached to the squad told Mirror. 	

 	 		With similar cases reported across the city of late, this major seizure has set the forest squad thinking. “It seems Bengaluru is turning into a transit point for smuggling. A policy decision has to be taken by the Andhra Pradesh government to ensure non-pilferage of this contraband. We will get in touch with the transport department to ensure strict screening at check posts,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, told Mirror.