A diet containing organically grown foods is rich in vitamins and nutrients and will ensure a fit body and clear skin

Organic foods are clearly healthier for the planet, because they support a food system that keeps out synthetic fertilizers and pesticides. Organic farming promotes a better biodiverse ecosystem. It pays equal attention to preserving natural waterways, healthier soil, cleaner air, denser wildlife, better farm workers and a balanced climate.

Remember that eating organic food increases nutrient-content in one’s diet. For example it boosts the presence of vitamin C, iron, magnesium, and phosphorus in the body. Including these foods in your diet has a direct impact on the environment and your beauty, inside and outside. Radhika Iyer Talati, Founder of Anahata Organics, shares organic foods that one must consume regularly for a fitter, healthier, disease free life and a beautiful body.

Try organically grown fruits
There are several farms which are growing fruits that are completely organic and pesticide free. These fruits do not contain any harmful chemicals or pesticides and are beneficial for health in every way, not to mention that they also taste a lot better.
It may be interesting to note that organic farms and crops are not only sustainable but also pollinator-friendly. These practices help protect bees, pollinators and other wildlife from toxic chemicals. They help organic farmers manage their farms in a manner that fosters biodiversity and improves the availability of natural resources. And the best part according to research is that eating organic food can decrease the amount of acne that surfaces on one’s face and body. Many people suffer from acne. Eating well is the first step to clearing acne and unlocking spotless, beautiful skin.

Eat organic nuts and seeds
Despite being high in fat and calories, nuts and seeds help you lose weight. These are superfoods that are crunchy, filling and loaded with vital nutrients like magnesium and vitamin E that most of us don’t get enough of. These nuts are packed with healthy vitamins and minerals like copper, zinc, vitamin A, C and E among others that encourage a glowing, smoother looking skin.
Eating nuts and seeds as a snack or a whole meal requires almost no preparation, so it’s easy to just add them into your routine.

Snack on organically grown berries
Rated amongst the world’s most popular health foods, these tiny yet delicious and nutritious fruits are very easy to incorporate into our existing diet because they just blend into any of our regular daily food. When organically procured, these become powerhouses of immunity building nutrients that upscale your health naturally. Another thrilling fact is that consuming organically grown berries can help to reduce wrinkles, fine lines and other signs of aging.

Consume organic vegetables
Since organic vegetables are grown in a field without the use of any synthetic pesticides, they not only give us more vitamins and minerals but are also extremely beneficial for our gut and brain health. More and more small scale organisations are pushing for organically grown veggies to be sold in the market and it’s time we signed up to get some on our table.

Get in on organic grains, pulses, legumes, millets and flours
Organic grains and millets have a higher nutritional content than their conventional counterparts, as they contain much fewer additives. These grains and millets are packed with vitamins and other antioxidants and make you healthier and fitter. Not only are they high in nutrients and fiber, but regular consumption of these foods will help reduce obesity and chronic inflammation.
So, whether you wish to alter your diet or simply add these organic foods to your current dietary routine, switch to organic food now because it’s a sure shot way to live a natural and healthy life. We know that yoga and exercise play a pivotal role in staying healthy and fit, but in the long run, the food that we ingest is a significant determinant when it comes to maintaining good health.