Kaikondrahalli Lake in Sarjapur witnesses a completely community-driven effort to celebrate pristine surroundings
 
 
 	A completely community driven sprit was witnessed at Kaikondrahalli Lake in Sarjapur on Saturday during the second edition of Kere Habba, where a series of activities were conducted with great pomp, keeping the environment in mind.
 	  	Unique and hands-on events and workshops for adults and kids were organised amidst pristine surroundings, with the motto: Zero per cent waste and 100 per cent segregation.
 	  	Walking, cycling and public conveyance were the popular mode of transport. Visitors were encouraged to bring their own water bottles, with water stations available for refills. There was no plastic and no disposables used during the sunrise-to-sunset event.
 	  	Food stalls served delicious food prepared from organic/sustainably farmed produce and waste generated was segregated and managed responsibly. Several stalls at the venue sold handcrafted items.
 	  	The event also had a panel discussion on the issues affecting the local people. The panellists were mainly local people who talked on the imperative of having better infrastructure like proper roads, friendly footpaths and public transport system connectivity.
 	  	“Kaikondrahalli lake is a virtual extension of my home, my workout coach and oxygen for my soul. Can a mall with its closed walls, junk food and cheap trappings match it one bit,” asked Shilpi Sahu, local resident and active volunteer at the lake.
 	  	Around 4,500 people attended the event. Funds were raised for upkeep of the lake through donor passes which led to subsidised entry to the Play arena and Club-Mahindra holiday packages up for grabs.
 	 

 	Kaikondrahalli Lake
 	  	Kaikondrahalli Lake, spread over 48 acres, 23 guntas on Sarjapur Road, is a bio-diverse ecosystem with a flourishing flora and fauna. Around 43 species of birds, 26 species of reptiles and 2900 plants comprising at least 33 varieties have been identified during the survey carried out by Mahadevapura Parisara Samrakshane Mattu Abhivrudhi Samiti (MAPSAS) and the United Way of Bengaluru (UWBe), a volunteer-led non-profit body. Some of the bird species spotted are White-browed Wagtail, Greater Coucal, Red-wattled Lapwing, Pied Kingfisher. Exotic flora spotted include ‘Jali Mara’, ‘Nerale Hannu’, Singapore Cherry, Pink Lapacho and Wild Date Palm.
 	
 	
 	
 	The Kaikondrahalli Lake in Sarjapur saw various activities 	 		such as walking, cycling, as well as food stalls apart from several 	 		plastics-free moments 	
 	
 	 

 	Current status
 	  	Works and restoration at the lake are funded by BBMP, managed by MAPSAS trust and supported by the surrounding communities. 	The lake upkeep efforts have now entered phase 2. There are cycle paths, jogging tracks, toilets, solar power lights and an amphitheater. A must visit for runners, walkers, wildlife lovers and photography enthusiasts.