By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 Do you have a yellow spot near your house? I do, and it stinks! This is a place where men of all ages, from auto drivers to Audi owners, pull up, pull out and pee away as if it was their private loo. No polite request, warning sign or divine image can persuade them to keep away. Where does one find a solution to this problem? Well, the city of San Francisco turned to a bunch of scientists, and they did not disappoint. They came up with a hi-tech superhydrophobic paint, which was used to coat the much-abused walls of that city’s nightclub district. This material actively repelled liquids, so anyone relieving themselves on these walls was in for a shock, for the pee bounced clean off the walls and back onto their feet and clothes. 
 
 
 As you loop that visual in your brain, marvelling at the technology that paid the incontinent idiot back in his own smelly currency, let me ask you something. Do you know that you pass by live examples of this technology almost every other day, right here in Bengaluru? The next time you come across still water of any sort – a puddle, a water tank, a well or a lake – look closely at the surface. You will see many small, long-legged creatures on the water’s surface. They are called pond skaters or water striders. Have you ever wondered how they manage to walk on water?
 
 
 Pond skaters exploit the fact that water has high surface tension. They have a unique anatomical structure – a long, thin body and even longer, slimmer limbs – that helps them distribute their weight over a large surface area, while keeping most of the body above water. But that’s not enough. They need to keep every little drop of water away from their legs and bodies, as any water accumulation would weigh them down and send them very quickly to a watery grave. To achieve this, pond skaters use the same principle as pee-resistant paint, that of hydrophobicity. Every square-inch of the insect’s body is coated with millions of tiny hairs. These hairs, and the layer of air they trap between them, repel each drop of water that falls on the pond skater’s body, keeping it absolutely dry as it skims over water. The paint achieves the same effect through human-designed nanostructures – a case of science imitating nature.
 
 
 With the unique ability to walk on water, pond skaters exploit a hunting range that few other creatures can aspire for. When some hapless insect falls on the surface of water, its desperate movements produce ripples that are picked up by the skater’s sensitive front legs, which act as sensors. Using its middle legs as propulsion devices, the skater quickly reaches the struggling insect and punctures its body with its proboscis. It injects enzymes that literally dissolve the creature’s innards and prepare a gooey mash that the skater sucks up.
 
 
 What if the hunter becomes the hunted? There are a large number of predators in and around water bodies like fish, frogs and water birds that would gladly gobble up pond skaters. Luckily this insect has glands that emit a foul-smelling secretion, enough to keep most predators at bay. To ward off the more persistent ones, most skater species have wings that can be used to fly short distances to escape danger. These wings also come in handy when a pool becomes crowded. Pond skaters fly out in search of better prospects, settling down in other nearby ponds to start a new colony.
 
 
 I come back to a point that I make quite often in this column. You don’t need to travel to a faraway nature reserve to admire wildlife. Even in the city, becoming more aware of the creatures around you, you might at times see the most innocuous little beings revealing awesome secrets.