Blind macaque fosters hundreds of orphaned baby macaques voluntarily

Hundreds of orphaned baby macaques did not become parentless when Nanny, a 16-year-old completely blind macaque fostered them like her own.
 
The mothers of these baby macaques had died due to electrocution or road accidents and the People for Animals (PfA) treated them and gave shelter, a volunteer says.
 
Nanny has been fostering them voluntarily. As per the observations made by rehabilitators and curators at PfA, she knows that they are not her own babies, but identifies each of them with their smell, chief veterinarian Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff told Bangalore Mirror.

The veterinarians and rehabilitators say Nanny has been a great asset to the hospital, raising orphaned macaques as young as three-month-old.

Staff at the PFA say Nanny came to them around 12-13 years ago after she became a victim of an acid attack. “Someone threw acid on her face and she lost both her eyes. She finds ladders and swings inside her enclosure using her muscle memory. “Whenever we want to introduce a new object like ladders, hammocks, swings or a utensil inside the enclosure, we make her touch it and adopt the sense,” Shariff says. At present, Nanny is fostering around five baby macaques.

Veterinarians at PFA says when adult monkeys, especially the female ones die of electrocution or road accidents, their babies -- usually three to four in a group or in some cases even more, are left dislodged from their group. These baby monkeys are rescued by wildlife rescuers and brought to PfA where they are rehabilitated in three phases and released back into the wild.

The first phase is In-care facility, where the baby monkeys are put in kennels with incubators, heating pads, and soft toys and fed with milk and other supplements. These baby monkeys stay in the kennel for around three months where the humidity, temperature and the moisture is maintained adequately, and the rehabilitators and curators observe their growths. The kennels are also taken out in the sun frequently so that the babies get Vitamin D, a staff veterinarian said.

When these babies finish three to four months, they are then graduated to Nanny’s enclosure which is called the Primate Orphanage Care, where the baby macaques’ food habits are changed.

“Inside Nanny’s enclosure, the baby macaques are fed with fruits, vegetables and milk. It’s now when the baby monkeys will start to bond with Nanny who fosters them in turns and builds a confidence among them that they are in safe hands. “Nanny hugs the babies during cold nights and enjoys their warmth while she would be giving her warmth to them,” Dr Sharif told BM.

It is at Nanny’s enclosure the baby monkeys start forming their own comfortable groups, respecting hierarchy, with no fighting, sharing food and maintaining harmony. When the veterinarians and the curators observe a confident group, the monkeys are then shifted to the final release primate cage. At the final cage, which is situated a bit far from the hospital inside a forested space, the macaques are fed with food they would get only in forests. “The fruits are reduced and only vegetables and other items are fed to the macaques by feeders who would be clad in camoflauge dresses. “During this, the human interaction is reduced and the monkeys are left in the cage for another couple of months under the observation of rehabilitators and curators who decide their date of release,” Dr Shariff told BM.

“During the time of release, the macaques get annoyed if human beings go near them or try to feed them, which is a happy and a contented sign for us as the macaques are now ready to fend for themselves in the wild,” Dr Shariff added.

As of now, Nanny had fostered more than hundred baby macaques and they were successfully released into the wild in consultation with the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

At present, there are eight macaques at the final release primate cage which are ready for release in the near future, while five baby macaques are being fostered by Nanny and four baby macaques are in the In-care facility, the chief veterinarian said.