* Siddaramaiah hints the controversial project in the forests of Kappatagudda in Gadag will be scrapped if public is against it 
 
 * A livid chief minister lashes out at forest officials over the recent Bandipur fire where a young guard lost his life battling flames
 
 
 
 
 In a victory of sorts for the people of Kappatagudda hill range in Gadag district, the state government has hinted that the “proposed mining project in the pristine forests will not happen if public mood is against it”. At the same time, chief minister Siddaramaiah remained cautious about the legal hurdles if the project is scrapped. In all likelihood, the nod for the controversial mining project Kappatagudda will be nulled after the Budget.
 
 Heeding to public pressure from all quarters of society, especially minister for rural development and panchayat raj minister HK Patil, who is also the in-charge minister for Gadag, Siddaramaiah had convened a sudden meeting of state wildlife board despite his busy engagement ahead of Budget presentation next week. However, appearing to be convinced by the public sentiments in the district, Siddaramaiah hinted during the meeting that the hill range in central Karnataka would soon be declared as Conservation Reserve.
 
 Siddaramaiah was briefed about the controversies surrounding the project and the outcome of the public consultation meeting in the mid-week of January. At least 247 people attended the public meeting where most people raised the area’s concerns over the mining project. Of which, 221 people demanded that the hill be declared as Conservation Reserve while another 26 argued for mining in the area. As the majority and sentiment among the local people was for conservation, Siddaramaiah sought all the members’ opinion. The members too expressed that they would go by the public.
 
 A review of chronology of events related to Kappatagudda revealed that a ‘prospective mining licenses’ basically to conduct assessment of mineral deposits were issued to a private mining company. “The orders for assessment of mineral deposit which included testing of soil and digging were previously ordered during 2007-08. Neither the forest officials nor do any other bureaucrats had documents pertaining to the order,” explained a member of the Wildlife Board. Siddaramaiah was apparently livid.
 
 “What if the company that was previously issued order takes us to the court? Why cannot these details be maintained properly? I cannot even hold a meeting of the Board again tomorrow as there have been series of meeting related to Budget. I have called for this meeting to decide on the subject only because of minister HK Patil’s request. If you all agree that we must go by people’s choice, then provide me with all the reports, including mining and other developments related to Kappatagudda and I will accordingly take a decision,” the chief minister told officials at the meeting. There was further drama in store when the recent Bandipur fir e issue came up for discussion. Annoyed by the back-to-back controversies that are plaguing the KFD, Siddaramaiah reportedly vented his anger against officials over gross mismanagement of resources. “If you just sit in Bengaluru, how will you be able to see what is happening in forests? When the issue of forest fire in Bandipur and the compensation for the guard who died in the fire was placed before him, Siddaramaiah reportedly lost his cool and expressed his dissatisfaction over the working style of KFD. Though officials explained how tough it‘s tough to keep a tab on such a wide range of woods regularly, the chief minister was in no mood to liste
 
 “Officials briefed the CM that miscreants had lit fire to 4 to 5 places and it was difficult to check manually as the extent of the range is huge. Refusing to buy the argument, Siddaramaiah questioned them when and where they had visited? What were the department personnel doing when miscreants had illegally gained entry into forests and lit fire? With no answer or defence from the bureaucrats, CM went further, “If you all just sit in Bengaluru, how you all will be able to see what is happening in forests? This is perhaps the reason making them (officials at forests) relax as well. A young guard has lost his life because of this and he had to support his family. Who will answer and reply to the questions of his family members?”
 
 Later speaking to media persons, B Ramanatha Rai, forest minister said, “The government has decided to give Rs 25 lakh as compensation to the family of the martyred guard in the line of duty.” Murigeppa Tammanagol (27), a forest guard in Kalkere Range of Bandipur Tiger Reserve was suffocated to death while fighting wild fire that gutted unique flora and fauna in as many as three to four range of Bandipur.