His public service ad campaigns about the dangers of plastic -- showing the image of a dead cow inside a plastic bag and other similar images of endangered species, have made quite an impact and also won a lot of advertising awards. 

“All plastic is bad and any amount of  justifying cannot change the way it is posing a danger to the environment. It can be frustrating sometimes because it is a slow process. It is not easy to convince people that they should use cloth bags instead of plastic as it is bad for the environment. But I will keep hammering on and talk to anyone who is willing to listen,” says Vinod.     

One of the campaigns designed by him and his colleague N Ramesh on the importance of planting and growing trees, which was initially created as a social message, was later endorsed by the World Wildlife Fund and managed to bag almost all the advertising awards in India and abroad a few years ago, including the London International Advertising awards and at the Cannes International fest. His campaigns for the Bangalore-based voluntary organisation, Treesforfree, has also bagged innumerable awards, including the 'One Show Design' awards.

Through his website lessplasticmorelife.org and blog, Vinod has been keeping the drive against plastic alive. He has also designed cloth bags and given out the designs to anyone who wants to make such bags, all for free. Recently, Vinod has connected with the “Green Bag Lady” Teresa Van Hatten-Granath of Minnesota, who makes and gives out fabric bags to anyone who pledges not to use plastic. 

And when he is not doing all this, he is volunteering with NGOs and planting trees. “When I go to schools and organisations to talk about the importance of growing trees, I first show them a drawing of a car spewing exhaust, a tree and clouds to tell them that only the trees will remove the CO2 and bring rain,” says the ad professional, whose wife and 22-month-old son are as passionate about greening.

Janet Yegneswaran, founder of  Treesforfree says about Vinod: “It is encouraging to see someone so young being so driven and dedicated to the cause of the environment. He has been the force behind many tree planting initiatives and is a great support for the cause of greening and rain water harvesting.”