A farmer from Nanjanagud Taluk near Bandipur Tiger Reserve has filed a complaint before the Lokayukta against senior officials of Karnataka Forest Department alleging dereliction of duty and abuse of funds for forest barricades. The complaint has been filed against the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, the Conservator of Forest, the Chief Secretary of government of Karnataka, and the Additional Chief Secretary of Forest, Ecology and Environment Department.

“The farmers living in the region are distressed as herds of wild elephants raiding farmlands in the area have become a frequent affair. This is after crores of rupees were spent by the forest department on creating various types of forest barricades. Animals are still venturing out frequently and raiding the farmlands. This is the reason behind most of the elephant electrocution cases. However, there is no accountability on the part of forest department officials. I have requested the Lokayukta to look into the issue,” said Iqbal Ahmad, the farmer who has registered the complaint. The complainant has also raised the issue of a single contractor in the area handling solar fencing and solar tentacles projects for over a decade.
 
From elephant-proof trenches to railway barricades and from solar power tentacle fences to steel wire ropes, while the forest department has deployed many options to contain the jumbos and reduce human-elephant conflict cases, experts say not much has changed on-ground.

“While farmers still suffer, there is no accountability as senior officials are seldom available to listen to such complaints. It is high time that action is taken against corrupt officers for embezzlement of funds and mismanagement of reserves. For instance, while the department took up 1.5 km of steel rope fencing at BTR two years ago, it is yet to be completed. The barriers are not maintained at my places as EPT has crumbled and the solar tentacle has collapsed leading to high conflict cases,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
According to some conservationists, the revenue and private land falling in elephant corridors should be notified by the government under the Environment (Protection) Act. “Lands in sensitive areas have been taken up for construction activities. While installing barricades may bring down conflict cases to some extent, it cannot be a long-term solution. Elephants are intelligent animals and they will always have a way around these fences. Providing safe passage to the animals is the only way out,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a conservationist.

Task force
Meanwhile, Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre announced on Thursday that Bengaluru’s Leopard Task Force will become functional over the next two days. The Minister held a meeting with senior officials of the forest department to discuss the increasing number of human-wildlife conflict cases in the state. He also highlighted that more efforts should be made to install railway barricades, elephant containment trenches, and solar fences.