Objections to Hubballi-Ankola rail line project as it can pose danger to ecosystem

Strong objections have been raised against the Karnataka government’s ambitious Hubballi-Ankola railway line project by experts and organisations alike. They have cited adverse effects on elephants, tigers, endangered species, and the fragile ecosystem of the Western Ghats.

The objections were raised over days leading to a public consultation held in Karwar on Wednesday. The meeting was organised by a committee constituted by the National Board of Wildlife (NBWL) to study the project and its impact on the surrounding area.

The line is proposed to pass through tiger corridors and involves diversion of 594.64 hectares of forest land. If the line is approved, two lakh trees will face the axe.
 
Experts say that the endangered fauna and flora of this ecologically sensitive area cannot bear the impact of tremors and vibrations of railway track construction procedures. Introducing a railway track will cause irreversible damage and permanent habitat loss.

“The rain forests of Arabail ghat region, where the rail track is proposed, have unique, endangered, and endemic flora and fauna that depend on the distinct topography of the area. The survival of biodiversity requires an integrated forest ecosystem without any anthropogenic disturbance. The proposed rail line will pave the way for massive landslides, loss of trees, destruction of sensitive habitats of fauna, and loss of native biodiversity,” said Ravi Hegde, a basic science researcher from Bengaluru who is among many people who raised objections.

According to researchers and ecologists, the proposed line will bifurcate the forest connectivity of Uttar Kannada district and impact wildlife movement, leading to forest encroachment and poaching as well.

They say that the forests of the Hubli-Ankola railway zone are rich with 29 species of reptiles and 50 species of butterflies. The majority of mammals belong to the IUCN Red List and most of them are protected under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. According to another objection filed by the Living Earth Foundation (LEAF), an environmental monitoring, research, and advocacy organisation in Bengaluru, the proposed railway line alignment cuts across the tiger corridor in the area, and its total length inside the corridor is approximately 17.6 km.

 The proposed rail line will pave the way for massive landslides, loss of trees, destruction of sensitive ­habitats and fauna, and loss of native biodiversity–Ravi Hedge, researcher 

“Even as per NTCA, it will disrupt the habitat connectivity between Kali Tiger Reserve and Bhadra Tiger Reserve, which will have serious implications for long-term conservation of tigers in the Western Ghat landscape. It also intersects the elephant movement corridor and is likely to have serious implications on the seasonal movement of elephants in the landscape. It may become a leading cause of wildlife mortality due to train hits,” read the objection filed by Rajani Rao Santosh and Sandhya Balasubramanian, directors, LEAF.
 
Apart from the loss of habitat for large mammals, felling of nearly two lakh trees and clearing of undergrowth is likely to erode the region.

“Research spanning over the last 20 years from across the world shows that the tropical rainforest fragmentation kills the big trees in the remaining forest area. This project will leave an adverse impact on the entire forest ecosystem of the Western Ghats,” added Hegde.