Visualise–Gain Clarity
» Visualise the activities, that always enthralled you, in great detail. For example: If you like wildlife photography then visualise yourself taking pictures of wildlife
» Break it down into smaller steps in your mind. Example: If you like pottery –then visualise buying the material, setting up the wheel, mixing the clay to the right consistency etc. 
» Look at the minutest details that you can think of. Example: How the clay smells or feels when you hold it in your hands.
» Allow yourself to sift through the activity or activities and know that the activity that most excites you is ‘the’ one.
» Feel the excitement building up.
» Feel the joy flowingthrough you. 

This simple process would help propel you positively towards your chosen activity and fill you with anticipation of undertaking it. Slowly, your true passion will unravel itself, you will be able to feel it within you.
Now that you know what your passion is, what makes you feel energised and excited, what do you do with it? Get Proactive
This would be the time to start the spadework to achieve your goal and avoid last minute frustrations. » If your passion is photography, chances are that you already know a lot about the equipment and methodology. Yet, this would be a good time to upgrade and refresh the information in your mind about the equipment and the requirements. 
» Identify the camera that you need for the pictures that you will take 
» Identify the subjects that most interest you –indoor objects, outdoor scenery, portraits, children, animals.
» Identify a quiet corner where you will edit the pictures.
» Identify website, magazines or other methods to share your pictures.
» You love pottery. What are you waiting for? Start collecting ideas (sketching them out or collect pictures from magazines) that will move you towards making that vase or mask that has been a part of your dreams for so long.

Getting proactive will focus your mind on the upcoming activity and prepare you mentally to undertake the commitment to follow them through. Execution 
An encounter with your passion be it art, photography or social service can make your spirits soar and allow you to experience the beauty of life in a deeper form.  Remember to decide (a tentative time frame) when you will start indulging in ‘this’ activity. Make sure you have done the spadework before you start, to avoid frustration.

Passionate about work
Prasad Bidappa popularly known as the ‘man who makes supermodels’ is an image consultant, who also runs an advertising agency. He is a man with a ""great eye for talent"". He's groomed winners -Vidisha Pavate, Nicole Faria, Anushka Sharma, Diana Hayden, Deepika Padukone, Lara Datta, Sara Connor. According to Prasad, visualisation is important for fulfilling one's passion in life. His golden mantra to upcoming models is, ""Always choose the work that would make you get up early in the morning and head for work. Always visualise what kind of life you want and where this job will take you. Passion is a must to make things workable and enjoyable. For instance, acting is not just a job for Shah Rukh. It is his passion towards work that makes him transcend beyond boundaries.”

To start the process of delving deep you could devise a step by step plan for the same.
» Start putting your plan in action.
» Work around your timings with family and work commitments.
» Make sure you remain flexible and allow the plan to change shape here and there.
» Keep at it. If you are taking up this 
activity after many years or if it happens to be a new activity then chances are that you might not get it perfectly right the first time through. Be prepared to give yourself the time and space to get it right slowly over a period of time.
» Make sure you have realistic expectations. If you are using the potter’s wheel after many years, give yourself time to gather speed and steadiness over a period of time.
» If you are so inclined, make sure you get exposure for your passion or work. Exhibit your product(s) or display it for positive re-enforcement.

When we say we are passionate about something that does not mean that we are professionals at doing it or have mastered the best way of executing that activity. That is not what passion ‘needs’ us to do. Passion is all about doing something with your heart and all your might. It is not about being perfect at an activity. It is about loving that activity and wanting to feel the feelings that come up after you have completed that activity.  

So go out there and allow yourselves to indulge in that, which makes your heart beat faster. Assimilate & Integrate
All through your journey of discovery and achievement remember:
» This is YOUR passion, your dream.
» You deserve to follow your heart and do what makes you come alive.
» There will be times when you will feel discouraged with the results.
» It’s a normal thing to feel disheartened at times when the project is not going the way you visualised or planned it.
» When you feel disheartened, do not hesitate to take a break from the activity and reassess your project and your strategy.
» Be creative.
» If you feel the activity or project is not really what you want to do, then add on angles to it that are creative and will take the project to a successful culmination.
» Have fun in the process.
» Be optimistic.
» Have a good sense of humour.
» Meet like-minded people and make friends.
» Enjoy! 

You have to experience passion to know passion. You have to know passion to live passion. You have to live passion to live an exemplary life. (Rachna Sharma Sirtaj is a practicing Life Coach in Munich, Germany)