Forest dept’s measures such as tracking herds using radio collars, erection of barricades in conflict zones have managed to reduce human casualties of jumbo encounters

Human casualties due to the elephant attack in Karnataka have decreased over the last three years. According to official data, while 29 human deaths due to elephant conflicts were recorded in 2019-20, this number went down to 23 in 2020-21. Last year, only 17 human casualties were reported across the state.

Officials from the Karnataka Forest Department say the slight improvement in the number of human casualties is due to various efforts taken up by the department in the recent past.

“The number has slightly come down but is not a drastic reduction. We have a system to identify the herd of elephants that is crop raiders. We radio collar such herds and monitor their movements regularly not just to obstruct their path, but also to warn the villagers,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

The biggest reason for the drop, as per the officials, is the erection of barricades in the conflict-prone areas. Moreover, after the formation of the elephant task force, there has been a consistent decline in conflicts.

With more than 6,000 elephants, the number of human deaths is limited to around 20. In Chattisgarh, with around 250 elephants, the number of human deaths is around 100. Similarly, in Madhya Pradesh, with a total elephant population of 60, as many as 90 human deaths were recorded last year.

“We have plugged almost the entire outer boundary of forest areas with elephant-proof trenches and solar fencing. It is now very difficult for the elephants to find ways and venture into villages. Our priority areas have already been tackled. However, since we are dealing with intelligent animals that still figure out gaps to sneak out, we have been focusing on plugging those gaps too over the last one and a half years,” added Pushkar.

However, wildlife activists say a decrease in human casualties does not imply a drop in conflict cases. They allege a lack of vigilance on the part of the forest department when it comes to managing elephant corridors in conflict-prone areas.

While the government has identified nine elephant corridors across the state, activists allege that illegal constructions have sprung up in these areas and no action has been taken by the officials concerned.

“Just because the number of deaths is reducing does not mean the number of conflicts is going down as well. The department has been looking at temporary solutions for managing elephant-human conflict. While nine corridors were identified in 2005 based on a study, no action has been taken on ground to maintain them. Hoards of illegal constructions have come up in these areas,” said a wildlife activist on the condition of anonymity.

Experts claim since fencing forest areas in difficult terrain is not possible, the department must look at purchasing private lands and creating more corridors.

“The department must identify the bottlenecks which are already mentioned in the report prepared by a Center-level committee years ago. One of the recommendations is creating corridors by purchasing private lands. Many people owning these lands in conflict-prone areas are ready to sell, but the forest department has not been proactive,” claimed another activist.

 We radio collar such herds and monitor their movements regularly not just to obstruct their path, but also to warn the villagers–Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife)

Fund crunch?

Project Elephant comes with a particular budget scheme of the Central government and the total allocation is of Rs 7 crore. Out of which only 60% comes from the Center. However, senior officials from the state forest department informed BM that only the first installment, which is 25%, under Project Elephant has been released so far.

“We have not received the Centre’s second, third, and fourth installments yet. While there is a fund crunch when it comes to funds being released from the center, the state government has extended its support. Under the rail barricade project, we have received Rs 70 crore and under the man-animal conflict scheme, we have received Rs 91 crore so far from the state government,” said Pushkar.