The talk of security measures being enhanced in and around Jnanabharati campus in the wake of the gang-rape of a National Law School of India student appears to be simply an exercise of expelling hot air.    Only a day after reporting that students, especially women students, still feared for their safety and that streetlights were not working (Jnanabharati campus remains as spooky), it has now been found that two well-grown sandalwood trees had been chopped down, as recently as in the last seven days.    Wildlife volunteers suspect it to be the handiwork of sandalwood thieves. The incident has sent alarm bells ringing. With thieves finding a way to operate again, it won’t be long before incidents of students being mugged, assaulted and robbed — all too common on the campus prior to the rape case — surface again, sources say.    Sandalwood trees on the sprawling 1,100-acre Jnanabharati campus have been a frequent target for thieves, but smuggling activities had come to a complete halt in the four months since the gang-rape case. It now appears that it’s business as usual. Incidentally, the eight men accused in the gang-rape case are all believed to be sandalwood thieves.    Following the rape incident, security was beefed up at the four entry/ exit points at Jnanabharati campus. This included closing the main gate by 9 pm and restricting entry of private vehicles into the campus. Police patrolling was also stepped up. But this appears to be woefully inadequate. The smugglers are suspected to have entered the campus by making their way through a eucalyptus plantation behind the atomic energy department quarters in the campus. This path connects to Nayandalli.    “Just when we thought that people and the trees on campus were safe, thieves have brazenly chopped down the trees,” said S Deepak, a wildlife volunteer. “University officials and the police are doing best and there have been some changes, but clearly it is not enough. These smugglers have just found a new way to enter the campus.”   The trees were left to dry, part of the modus operandi of thieves. Once dry, they are chopped into smaller pieces and carried out of the campus by those who collect firewood.    “Balraj, the new police inspector, university officials and forest department officials have been doing their best to check the entry of strangers, but the thieves have been a step ahead,” Deepak said. “There are two points, one behind the atomic energy department quarters and the other behind the canteen leading towards the railway track, which are not guarded. Both connect to Nayandalli. Police must post sentries here.”
 
 ‘We will beef up security’
 Bangalore University officials have promised to close loopholes in security measures on the campus.
 
 “Together with the police, we have implemented several measures to check activities like sandalwood smuggling and untoward incidents on the campus to ensure the safety of students,” Dr M Narayanaswamy, professor and in-charge of security on the BU campus, told Bangalore Mirror. “The police are already carrying out patrolling activities and are also checking those who enter the campus. However, now that sandalwood trees have been cut, we will discuss the issue with the police and beef up security on the campus.”