Efforts on to control fire which is spreading to neighbouring reserves
 
 The Karnataka forest department is at its wits end to contain the forest fire across Bandipur, with the blaze showing no signs of being contained and even spreading to neighbouring Biligiri Ranga Temple Sanctuary (BRT) Tiger Reserve.
 
 Apart from optimising resources, KFD officials have appealed to the general public to support its staff members — in terms of food and essential supplies, who have been braving all odds to douse the fire, which has been aided by dried up vegetation and unforeseen wind speed over the last week.
 
 More than 500 staff has been deployed to control the fire. KFD has flown in staffers from Mysuru, Mandya and other divisions and deployed them across various ranges.
 
 
 
 
 No signs of water
 
 One of the biggest challenges has been to get adequate water. “All tanks and Moyar river have gone dry and there is no water source nearby to get water for fire brigade to douse the fire with. Every time we have to fetch water from a distance of several miles and by that time the fire would have spread to other parts due to heavy winds,” revealed a forest official who has been working in N Begur range. Another inclement factor is the wind. “Between 11 am and 5 pm, the area is witnessing heavy winds due to which the dried up vegetation is
 
 
 fast catching fire. A couple of spells of rains would bring the situation
 
 under control.” BG Hosmath, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) said
 
 
 
 Loss to increase
 
 
 With the fire turning wild with every passing day, the quantum of damage is only increasing, with 200 acres of forest burnt last week.
 
 Speaking to Mirror, T Heeralal, director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve said, “In the last two-days as much as 600 acres of forest land has been burnt. But with fire spreading fast since Thursday night, the damage may have been even more. We may have to reassess the damage once the fire is brought under control.”
 
 
 
 Appeal to the public
 
 Seeking help from public, the department has appealed to the people for help by supplying food and water for its staff in remote areas. “Providing drinking water and food like bread, butter, jam, pickles and snacks for our staff would greatly help and boost the morale of our staff. If volunteers, honorary wildlife waredens, NGOs, State Board for Wildlife members coordinate and arrange for the
 
 
 supplies, the department will be grateful to the donors,” a top official KFD official said.
 
 
 
 
 Lakhs up in smoke!
 
 The KFD had embarked on preparations to prevent fire mishap as early as December. Vast tracks of fire lines were set up to prevent ground fire from engulfing the entire forest area. Sources in the department revealed to BM that several lakhs were spent creating fire lines in different ranges where there was possibility of fire mishap. “We had done fire line for more than 1,800 kms across the tiger reserve. We had spent Rs 4,800 on every kilometre,” Heeralal revealed.