Karnataka Forest Department begins analysis across 51 divisions in state to understand effectiveness of existing structures, plug areas of conflict

To protect the jumbos and reduce human-elephant conflict in the state, the Karnataka Forest Department has taken up a mammoth task. The department has carried out an elephant barrier analysis across all the 51 divisions in the state. The idea is to analyse effectiveness of existing barriers and pinpoint areas where though territories overlap, there is no mechanism to separate elephants from humans.

“We are looking at existing barriers and places devoid of them across 51 divisions, including territorial and wildlife, to understand need to plug in the gaps,” said Saswati Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, KFD.

The analysis is also looking at existing barricades to understand maintenance requirements.

“Elephant barrier analysis was conducted for Kodagu a few years back and Chamarajnagara Circle with the help of students. The Karnataka Evaluation Authority has made some assessments too. This is the first time the department is carrying out a comprehensive analysis. We have got details and the information will be used to create a five-year plan to bring down elephant-human conflict cases,” added Mishra.

Useful exercise
Wildlife conservationists say barrier assessment is a useful exercise and will save a lot of resources for KFD apart from helping the department focus on hotspots of conflicts. They opine that a scientifically robust barrier efficacy analysis will be useful in comparing historical data and information from future assessments too.

“There are nearly 13 hard or structural barriers by KFD, but sometimes these have limitations. Assessing and analysing the efficacy of barriers and correcting these errors are important. Some site-specific factors need to be considered while conducting the analysis. For instance, in the case of Bannerghatta National Park, we considered variables in terms of breakages, inter-barrier distance, barrier extent, etc. These site-specific nuances should be considered and planned and mapped across the divisions. This will help the department understand where more efforts are required to curtail conflicts. Technical inputs from agencies and scientific groups working in those areas can be used too,” said Avinash Krishnan, a wildlife conservationist and director, science, and conservation at A Rocha India.

Experts recommend the department conduct this exercise periodically, especially at the beginning and end of every cropping season.

 There are nearly 13 structural barriers, but sometimes these have limitations. Analysing efficacy of barriers, correcting these errors are importantAvinash Krishnan, A Rocha India 
“Peak harvest season is when there is a surge in conflict cases and flux of elephants outside protected areas. Thus, assessments must be conducted both before and post-cropping season to understand the efficacy. The process should be standardised,” said a city-based conservationist.