Bareilly: In what could be termed as an once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for wildlife enthusiasts, a tigress was spotted with her five cubs at Kishanpur Wildlife Sanctuary of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve (DTR) on Saturday, just a day after the reserve was opened for the season. Siddharth Singh, who is a regular visit to the reserve, and his son Abhuday Singh, caught the tigress family in their cameras.

In a bid to ensure safety of the cubs, the forest department has closed the route passing through Kishanpur sanctuary for the next six months. Patrolling has also been intensified. Tiger-sighting in Kishanpur range is not uncommon as compared to other forest ranges of DTR and this tigress in question has been spotted by tourists earlier. As per the 2019 tiger census, UP has 173 tigers, out of which 100 are in Dudhwa reserve.

   n a bid to ensure the safety of the cubs, the forest department has closed the route passing through Kishanpur sanctuary for the next six months. Patrolling has also been intensified   In a bid to ensure the safety of the cubs, the forest department has closed the route passing through Kishanpur sanctuary for the next six months. Patrolling has also been intensified

Sharing his joy with TOI, Siddharth Singh said: “We have been following this particular tigress for the past four years. We call her Beldanda female after the forest beat where she is generally sighted. She can easily be compared with Ramthambore’s tigress ‘Machali’ because she is extremely tourist-friendly and often walks on the road meant for tourist vehicles. Even on Saturday, we shot her video while she was sitting on the road and didn’t panic despite watching us. After few moments, she called her cubs and then we came to know that she has given birth to five cubs. Otherwise, forest department had captured her picture with four cubs only.”

“The exact location of the tigress shouldn’t be disclosed as it may increase poaching risk. We have closed the route where tigress was sighted and regular monitoring would be done using camera traps. As per guidelines, tigress with cubs should be provided an isolated environment so that she could raise her cubs. Priority would be given to forest conservation over tourism and tourists won’t be allowed on this route for a while now,” Dudhwa reserve field director Sanjay Pathak told TOI.

“We cannot allow wild tigers to grow under human intervention as they would not be able to differentiate between human and animals which may lead to man-animal conflict in future,” he said. Tigress with cubs mainly remains in isolated area in order to protect her cubs from male tigers, other than father, and poachers. Normally in such cases there is a high risk to cubs either from poachers or male tigers.

“Five cubs are quite rare and definitely it is quite encouraging for us. Normally it is good to leave the tigress in isolation with her cubs to allow her to raise them under preferable situation,” state co-ordinator of WWF-India, Dr Mudit Gupta, said.

Singh, however, said: “We would request forest department to allow tourists to visit this particular forest beat and use Beldanda tigress for attracting tourists from all over the world. Tourists’ influx also keeps male tigers away from the area as they are shy in nature. This will also help in protecting cubs.”