While dept says animal cannot be released into wild, activists say the govt did not keep the animal’s or people’s safety in mind while capturing it

The Karnataka Forest Department plans to train the radio-collared wild elephant that it captured in the Bandipur Reserve Forest and send it to other states for using the pachyderm in activities such as forest patrolling. This plan has not gone down well with the animal rights activists as they feel all issues have not been looked into. Forest officials say this is the only way forward as the elephant cannot be released back to the wild as it has a history of killing about five people in Tamil Nadu. They also plan to shift the tiger that killed two people in Bandipur to a safari area in Hampi.

Sanjai Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) and chief wildlife warden, says, “There is demand from other states for captive elephants for various activities such as forest patrolling. We have earlier sent elephants to states such Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand and Maharashtra. These elephants cannot be released back to the wild as they could be a threat to people living around the forest area. We need to take care of the people first.” 

The elephant named Crowbar had attacked villagers when they tried to click a selfie with the animal in the outskirts of the Bandipur forest. The animal was captured by the forest department three days ago and is being monitored in the elephant camp in Coorg. The elephant had earlier been once captured by the Tamil Nadu Forest Department and translocated to Madhumalai National Park with radio-collar. 

Animal rights activists are asking if Tamil Nadu did not capture the animal, why is Karnataka doing so? They say the authorities haven’t taken proper action to ensure safety of both the wildlife and people. 

Arun Prasad, an animal rights activist and environmentalist, says the elephant has a defective tusk leading to some behavioural issues. “When villagers tried to chase the animal away, it attacked in self defence. Had the forest department been prompt and alert, this would not have happened. The villagers would not have entered the forest area and troubled the animal. They are now blaming the animal and have captured it,” he says adding that the forest staff do not use scientific ways to capture the animals. The elephant was lifted using a hoist and a crane which could damage the pleural membrane of lungs of the animal. They should have used a ramp. Also, the lorry they used did not have any wooden support,” he says. Sukhwinder Singh, another animal rights activist, says the forest department is not conducting any drives to create awareness among people about how to deal and co-exist with the wildlife. “Many villagers get the elderly in their families to take the cattle out on grazing into the protected areas intentionally. The wild animal then prey on the cattle and end up attacking or killing the human as well. The family then gains compensation of Rs 10 lakh and a government job. Now, they are also demanding more compensation,” she says. Sanjai Mohan adds that the forest department and NGOs are creating awareness among villagers. “We are short of trained veterinarians who are specialised in wildlife and have asked the government to provide us more doctors,” he says.