Concerned over the danger to wildlife and the soil that litter spreading in forests is posing, a group of green-lovers have taken up the mission to clean up the plastic and other waste thrown on the sides of roads passing through the Kudremukh National Park.   A treasure trove of the Western Ghats, rising from the sea-level just 100 meters on the western side to 1,892 meters at the Kudremukh peak, the forest is also home to some very rare species of mammals, amphibians, reptiles, butterflies, birds and plants. The combination of high altitude grasslands and thick Shola forests makes this place one of the best rainfall regions and attracts many nature lovers. Unfortunately, this high footfall is proving to be a bane as people who travel via the arterial roads leave behind a disastrous trail of garbage.   Rohit S Rao, managing trustee of Kudremukh Wildlife Foundation, told Bangalore Mirror that adding to the problem are roads to two major shrines — Sringeri and Horanadu — which pass through this park. On their way, visitors throw plastic bottles, poly bags, liquor bottles, beer and soft drink cans and baby diapers. All of them are non-biodegradable and harmful to both wildlife and soil.   “Observing the sorry state of affairs, the Kudremukh Wildlife Foundation has taken up a mission to clean up the mess. The forest department has also extended their co-operation to the movement. Armed with gloves and sacks, Deepika, Chinmayi, Karthik, Sowmini, Vivek, Raj Mohan — all from different walks of life — and 8-year-old Abhinav set out in two cars on February 24 on a drive to clean up the forest,"" said Rohit.   When they reached the base of the Ghats at the Forest Check Post near Mala, they got out of the comfort of their cars, rolled up their sleeves and started collecting the waste. The objective was to clean up the 62-km stretch from Mala to Samse Gate and DK border to Kerekatte.   “We had assumed that it would be an easy task as there were eight of us and we had cars. But the sheer volume of trash proved to be too much. Near Mullur gate we took about two hours to clean a stretch of about 200 metres,” said Rohit.    By noon they collected nine sacks of garbage. Vantage view points and tourists’ favourite places had much more rubbish. By the evening they filled 21 sacks with trash weighing a total of 71 kg. The team made sure that the garbage reached a proper disposal facility. By the time they wound up for the day they had finished only around 6 kms which was less than 10 per cent of their target.   ”The job is well-begun. We will return with renewed spirits to clean up the entire park probably on March 10. Once it starts to rain the plastic will seep into the forests,” said Rohit.