Three researchers from Maharashtra working in Bengaluru have described a new species of scorpion from the Western Ghats
 
 During a field study for the Indian tarantula project supported by the Rufford Foundation and Department of Science and Technology, three scientists Zeeshan A Mirza and Rajesh V Sanap from the National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bengaluru and Amod M Zambre from the Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru have described a new species of hormurid scorpion from the Western Ghats of India.
 
 	A new species of the enigmatic genus Chiromachetes Pocock was spotted in Nov 2013, but the research paper was published in Euscorpius — Occasional Publications in Scorpiology on Tuesday.
 	  	The new species, Chiromachetes sahyadriensis is named after Sahyadri Hills synonymous to the Western Ghats. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Zeeshan Mirza said, “It is certain that these scorpions are found in three districts of Maharashtra – Thane, Pune and Raigad. These scorpions are flat and are found under the rock along the stream bed. When we surveyed burrows, we found remains of scorpion exoskeleton (outer covering) and were wondering who would have eaten the scorpions. It is not uncommon for scorpions to eat their kind but here nearly all the burrows that we checked had remains of the same species, said Rajesh Sanap. When two individuals were kept together, the big scorpion ate the smaller one.
 	  	Scorpion fauna of India has largely been underexplored. The Western Ghats, a mountain range that runs parallel to the western coast of India for about 1,600 km, is a biodiversity hotspot known for endemic and range-restricted biodiversity. In the course of arachnological exploration of this range, specimens of hormurid scorpions were collected from the northern Western Ghats. Hormuridae is a highly complex group and has seen several major changes in its high-level taxonomy. Based on the presence of ventral tarsal spines and spinules, as well as on the shape of hemispermatophore, the specimens collected from Maharashtra were assigned to the genus Chiromachetes. They, however, differ from all known species of the genus Chiromachetes, added Amod Zambre.
 	  	The paper states that the species exhibits a high degree of sexual dimorphism, especially in the length and robustness of the pedipalp manus (long sting-bearing tail and a pair of pincers on long arms). Manus length/width ratio in males is 4.6 to 4.8 and 3.4 in females. Females are darker in coloration as opposed to the males, and the leg coloration in males is much lighter. Tarsal spines in males are thick and long whereas they are short and thin in females. The new species is presently known only from the type locality where it occurs under boulders along forest streams. The type locality lies close to the Tamhini Wildlife Sanctuary which supports similar habitats and it is likely that the new species is also distributed in the adjoining protected areas. The type specimens were collected within an hour with the aid of an ultra violet flashlight. Most individuals were found sitting at the entrance of small slit-like burrows under boulders with their pedipalp chelae exposed. Several of these burrows had remains of conspecific pedipalps around the entrance indicating that the species might be highly cannibalistic. This is further attested by the fact that  	specimens maintained in captivity preferentially fed on smaller individuals of the same species leaving pieces of pedipalps.
 	  	Researchers hope that dedicated surveys across their potential range would yield more undescribed species of the genus Chiromachetes as well as other hormurid scorpions from India.