Kolkata: After twelve long years, thousands of endangered Olive Ridleys were sighted for mass nesting for the second time this year in the eight km-stretch of Rushikulya Rookery in Ganjam district of Odisha.

Rushikulya is considered to be the second-most preferred nesting location of the Olive Ridley turtles after Gahirmatha beach in Odisha’s Kendrapada district. ‘Olly’ is the main mascot of Odisha for all national and international sports events. The endangered Olive Ridley sea turtles travel and arrive in lakhs every year on the Rushikulya and Gahimatha beaches of the state for their annual nesting. Nearly five lakhs endangered Olive Ridley turtles were sighted in the Rushikulya Rookery beach earlier this year for mass nesting between the third week of February and the first week of March. However, wildlife scientists said that it is indeed very rare to see them come for a second time and it has never happened in the last 12 years. 

“We call it split nesting. In 2005-06, this split nesting had happened. This year it happened again. Olive Ridleys can come to sea shore for nesting for two-three times also. But what is more unusual is that split nesting is happening during hatching time. On April 17-18, nesting happened again. Initially it was 700-800 nesting and on 18th (the second day) number is 8195,” Berhampur Divisional Forest Officer Ashis Behera told Mumbai Mirror from Berhampore in Odisha.

According to wildlife scientists and experts, the breeding time in Odisha coast is seven months long. November to January is the mating time which happens in the sea surface. The peak season for mass mating continues from mid-December to mid-January. During that period, fishermen have to be very cautious while going for fishing as the fishing nets will act as death traps for the turtles.

“It is rare second mass nesting this time. In the early '90s, second mass nesting was witnessed. It was only 3-4,000 mass nesting. The mass nesting took place in 4.5 to 5 lakhs from third week of February for the first time. Then again mass nesting started in April and it will continue for the next 12 days,” said Rabindra Sahu, Secretary, Rushikulya Sea Turtle Protection Committee. Sahu is a wildlife expert and works hand-in-hand with forest department of Odisha. 

Nesting has reduced in Gahirmatha, which was 4.8 to 5 km, due to setting up of Dhamma Port and dredging in the recent days in the area. Earlier around 7-8 lakh Olive Ridleys used to come for nesting in this beach.

“Rushikulya now is an ideal location for nesting now. Here only local fishermen go to the sea. Earlier locals used to eat and sell Olive Ridley turtle eggs but now the fishermen are cautious about the conservation of these turtles. . There are seven villages near Rushikulya and awareness campaigns have been carried out by forest officials, NGOs and other organisations,” Sahu added.

Read Also:
Olive Ridley Turtles' return nets Mumbai's Versova beach a new guardian

Ahead of the mass hatching, the Odisha Forest Department has started the process of documentation by opening a Centre at Gokhakuda. CCTVs have been installed to check human intervention during the hatching, according to Behera.

The Odisha government has decided not to allow any tourist or outsider within six to seven kilometres of this long mass nesting coast. Three special barricaded zones have been constructed for visitors. They can watch the mass hatching process from a distance. Forest guards are keeping a close watch on the Olive Ridleys nesting.

Rushikulya is a very long beach of around 52 kms, while nesting happens in seven to eight kms. 

 “The main challenge now is with regards to the safety of these eggs. The eggs will incubate for around 50-60 days on their own in the heat of the sand. The coasts will have to be fenced and security measures have to be undertaken by the Forest Department officials, self-help groups, villagers and volunteers,” Sahu said.

Centre for Ecological Sciences under Indian Institute of Science (IIS, Bangalore) also has a field station at Rushikulya rookery, in a bid to monitor Olive Ridley turtles.

Read Also:
Meet the visionaries who laid the foundation for the survival of India’s endangered species