About 800 to 900 of the herbivores inhabit BGML premises, but feral dogs are killing them off. Forest department wants government to declare premises a reserve
 
 At the sprawling premises of Bharat Gold Mines Limited (BGML), it is not unusual to spot a blackbuck, perhaps that most graceful of antelopes that inhabit the subcontinent, grazing or, on being surprised, darting away. The gold mines in Kolar district fell silent in 2001 and have remained closed since then. Nature has reclaimed parts of the premises which now teem with blackbuck. But, these blackbucks are under threat and wildlife volunteers are urging the forest department to declare about thousands of acres in the area into a reserve.
 
 Wildlife volunteers say that about 800 to 900 blackbucks have made the area their home, but they are increasingly being attacked by stray dogs. Volunteers say that until recently, less than five blackbucks were lost every month to feral dogs, but the numbers have doubled in recent times and in some months dogs kill as many as 12. The herbivore is a protected species under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act and volunteers fear that the dogs could wipe out this herd.
 
 “Stray dogs have become a menace as far as blackbucks in the area are concerned,” said M Murali Kumar, a wildlife volunteer involved in several initiatives aimed at protecting the blackbucks. “Stray dogs now camp in the wild and are hunting down and feeding on blackbucks. The blackbucks need protection.”
 
 Following the appeal, the forest department has directed staff to increase patrolling to keep dogs from attacking the antelope and are considering pushing for the area to be declared a conservation reserve. Wildlife volunteers believe that the herd of blackbucks which have made parts of BGML premises their home, moved in from forests in Dharmapuri, Krishnagiri and Rayalpad in Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The antelope now inhabit about 12,000 acres of BGML property between Bangarpet and BEML Nagar, but are mostly concentrated in Male Krishnavaram.
 
 “The area is open grassland and is a perfect habitat for them,” Murali said. “There are also plenty of spotted deer and rabbits. Besides seeking protection from the forest department, we have also been creating awareness among the public. Blackbucks are an endangered species.”
 
 Forest department top brass say they will soon submit a proposal to the government to convert the area into a reserve. “The issue is serious,” said Mune Gowda, DFO, Kolar. “Blackbucks stray close to villages in search of food and water. Dogs in these villages attack the blackbucks. Not only blackbucks, but there are thousands of spotted deer in the district. We have received numerous complaints that the deer are damaging crops as they move in herds. However, we are working on a solution. We are preparing a proposal to turn the area into a reserve. We will submit the proposal to the state government which will decide,” he added.