The apex body has cut funds ranging from 10-40 per cent for various reserves
 
 Karnataka may be touted as the home to tigers in India, but the state is currently clawing for funds to manage its five tiger reserves. The situation has resulted from the Central government drastically cutting down funds for tiger conservation for the financial year 2015-16 despite the state’s tiger reserves hosting a copious population of the big cats.
 
 The National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA), which is the nodal agency to supervise tiger Conservation in India, cut the state-bound funds for managing the reserves, leaving the state government and particularly the Karnataka forest department stumped.
 
 In its annual plan of operation (APO) sanctions for the new financial year 2015-16, the apex body has cut funds ranging from 10-40 per cent for various tiger reserves in Karnataka. This apart, the NTCA has also clamped down on recruiting any additional staff at the tiger reserves.
 
 The APO sanctions for various tiger reserves were announced a few days ago. A senior forest official told Bangalore Mirror: “It was surprising and shocking to know that funds have been drastically cut down this year as compared to the previous financial year.”
 
 However, APO sanctions for Bandipur Tiger Reserve are yet to be announced while the allocations for the other tiger Reserves are already out.
 
 BIG SETBACK TO TIGER CONSERVATION
 
 Even as state forest officials wonder about the actual reasons behind the funds reduction, many expertsfeel that the move would affect the tiger conservation programmes across Karnataka in a big way.
 
 Acknowledging the imminent setback due to shortage of funds, Ravi Ralph, principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) (Wildlife) told Bangalore Mirror that they will have to find other ways to compensate the loss.
 
 “Though this does not happen every year, it is indeed strange why Karnataka tiger reserves, despite the good conservation methods, have been provided with less funds compared to the previous years. We are not privy to their (NTCA’s) decision and are therefore unaware of the reasons behind the reduction. It would be very difficult for us to continue with our conservation work due to this sudden funds cut. Many projects have been initiated assuming that adequate funds would be due in time. They will all be in implementation stage; but now, the fund reduction is bound to hamper the programmes in a big way,” Ralph explained.
 
 Several senior forest officials have now expressed concern over the future of the tiger projects. Avani Kumar Varma, former P CCF, said, “The decision would severely hamper the conservational projects in all tiger reserves. The funds made available to NTCA are known, but the logic behind the reduced allocation of the same fund to different states by NTCA is baffling.
 
 “State government should come to the rescue by diverting funds reserved for non-forest areas like Forest Development Fund, CAMPA. The states must think on having separate funds for the management of wildlife areas rather than depending on the Centre to avoid sudden problems like these.”
 
 Another retired forest officer said while requesting anonymity: “Every tiger reserve is maintaining tiger foundations which get constant revenues through eco-development and tourism activities. In some of the reserves, the funds from the foundation have been untouched. But at a time like this, the directors of the Tiger Reserves have to make up their mind to use the money as compensatory fund. Further, the amount earmarked for other activities in the department should be spent on wildlife on priority basis and later when funds start trickling in, it should be reimbursed.”
 
 DANDELI UNLUCKIEST OF ALL 5 TIGER RESERVES
 
 Hailed as the most promising tiger reserve in India with enough space and good prey density for the tiger population to flourish, Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) has got the least of the funds as compared to the other tiger reserves. There is a reduction of 40 per cent in funds due for DATR compared to the previous years. While DATR was sanctioned `559.205 lakh in 2014-15, this year it has been sanctioned only `391.555 lakh, according to the sources.
 
 Srinivasulu, director of DATR, informed Bangalore Mirror, “We too are unaware about reasons behind the cut-down. Usually the sanctions are not park specific and depend on total funds allocated to NTCA. However, the reduction of funds will definitely affect our programmes and the onus will fall on our shoulders to compensate the loss through various other measures.”
 
 Moreover, the restrictions on recruitment too will hit operations in DATR where the NTCA has allowed recruiting only two APC Watchers contrary to five last year. In Bhadra Tiger Reserve too, permission is given only for three APC watchers as against four last year.
 
 DEPT RELENTLESS
 
 However, the Karnataka forest department, unhappy with the much reduced allocation, has decided to take up the matter with the NTCA.
 
 “The only option is that we need to take it up with the NTCA by way of correspondence. We will be writing to them seeking reasons for the reduction in funds for our tiger reserves and request the apex body to release more funds,” Ralph said.