Less than a fortnight after this paper reported the grave condition of the five elephants housed in pitiable condition at Fun Fort, an old amusement park on the outskirts of Srirangapatna near Mysur, after the circus they belonged to was de-recognised one of them, Chanchal, has succumbed. And the tragedy is made worse by the apathetic attitude of the forest department and the circus owners, who were lax in administering treatment to her. Had they done so, the tragedy could have been averted.
 
 	Chanchal, who had become recumbent once before, when she was initially brought to Fun Fort, took ill and became recumbent once again, on November 15. “We got a call on 18th, informing us she was ill. They had waited for three and a half days without taking any action,” Vasudev Murthy, Honorary Animal Welfare Officer, Animal Welfare Board of India, rues. The Animal Welfare Board of India wrote to Wildlife SOS to send elephant experts to look at her, but the experts, who were in Agra, were only able to make it on November 19.
 	  	“In the meantime, the AWBI arranged vets from close by – Dr Suranjana Ganguly, veterinarian at People For Animals, Mysuru, and Dr Anil – who were kind enough to go immediately, around 6 pm on Wednesday afternoon,” Murthy says. In a case of absolute apathy and mean-mindedness, the circus owners didn’t allow them to administer fluids/ glucose to her as she was dehydrated, or treat her in any other manner. Paropkari and Murthy allege that the Range Forest Officer (RFO) Mariswamy KM was there but didn’t intervene, while the District Forest Officer (DFO) Javed Mumtaz was unreachable and the Wildlife Warden didn’t answer his phone. “The doctors also tried to reach the vets the circus owners said they had hired, but they were not in town. At around 8 pm, the elephant passed away,” Paropkari says.
 	  	However, Mariswamy says they appointed equine specialist Dr Ramana to begin treating Chanchal on November 15 itself, but she did not respond. “We had been trying to feed her and give her water, but she was not ingesting it and would throw most of it out,” he says. Admitting that the circus owners did not cooperate when Dr Anil tried to administer glucose, he says he intervened and “insisted” that electrolytes be administered. “On 15th, Chanchal did not urinate and defacate. On 16th it was able to, and seemed to be making a recovery,” he adds. 
 	  	Dr Ganguly, veterinarian at People For Animals, Mysuru, who examined Chanchal at the behest of Murthy, says after she examined her, she found that she was dehydrated and asked for fresh water “which was not available”. When water was eventually brought in a bucket, Chanchal poured it all over herself (as Muriswamy also says) “in an attempt to cool herself”, Ganguly says. However, they were stopped from actually administering glucose by the owner, who connected them to Dr SM Khadri on the phone. “Dr Khadri told me that somebody is due to come in the next day for a blood test and said to go ahead with the IV,” she says. When she and Dr Anil tried to do so, however, the mahouts and owners did not cooperate. Eventually, they had to leave, while the RFO promised to intervene and give her the glucose. “When I reached home, I got a call that she had dies.”
 	  	Dr SM Khadri, Assistant Director, Karnataka Sheep and Wool Development Corporation, Mysore Regional Office, who checked on Chanchal after hearing about it, says she was in a bad state. “She was recumbent, had a fever and could not get up. The mahout told me that she had a fall four months ago. From my assessment it seems she had an injury to the cervical vertebrae.”
 	  	Presently, the AWBI is exploring legal alternatives to get the elephants the care they require immediately and prevent any further torture or death. Meanwhile, an elephant expert from Wildlife SOS is assessing the other elephants. But all that means nothing to Chanchal, who paid with her life. Hopefully, her remaining companions will not meet the same fate.
 	 

 	THE BACKSTORY
 	  	The case of these elephants came up earlier this month in the Karnataka High Court during the hearing of a case filed by CUPA against elephant procession, begging and performances. Justice Nagarathna directed the government counsel to take action on the matter after reading the newspaper report.
 	  	That was followed by an unofficial investigation by the Forest Department, which, as per information received by Shreya Paropkari, Cruelty Response Manager for Humane Society International India, inaccurately depicted the conditions of the elephants as well. However, those findings were rubbished by an Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) authorised investigation on November 12. A team of four – Vasudev Murthy, Honorary Animal Welfare Officer, Animal Welfare Board of India; Dr Ashish Sutar, a doctor from PETA, Dr Shantanu Kalambi from the Wildlife Trust of India and Dr Kshama, veterinary officer from the Mysore Zoo – inspected the elephants and found that their condition had worsened.
 	  	“All of them were emaciated,” Murthy says. “Waste had piled up and they were living in debris. Food was scattered in their urine and feces, and their wounds were festering.” The presence of an abscess and puncture wound on the
 	ear of one elephant points to the use of an Ankush (a metal hook used to control elephants), Paropkari adds. In addition, one of the elephants had a rectal prolapse, which means that even a small nick can cause a “fatal infection”, she adds. “The texture that protects their sole (their footpads) had eroded.” In violation of elephant care guidelines – which state that elephants can only be chained on one leg – they were being chained on two legs. In addition, the chain is supposed to be covered by a tube that cushions the blow to the elephant, which wasn’t being done. “In short, the conditions were pretty bad,” Murthy says. “We submitted a preliminary report and were in the process of communicating it to the Chief Wildlife Warden, but their procedure didn’t allow that.”