Authorities say although the land is not encroached upon, it is the increasing human dwellings that is depriving wildlife of its natural habitat; this has backfired on the residents
 
 
 	The rush for housing on the fringes of the city, a few kilometres from the Gunjurpalya forest area from where leopards and wild animals often enter human habitats, has caused miseries for the inhabitants of the Varthur road stretch where a leopard entered the Vibgyor High school premises on Sunday to spread terror among people.
 	
 	  	It has now emerged that the BBMP is in a spot over providing basic infrastructure to the residents of the locality, who in a hurry for owning houses now stand vulnerable not only to the lack basic infrastructure like street-lighting and proper roads, but also to attacks from wild animals, particularly leopards looking for prey from their dwindling habitat like the Gunjurpalya forest.
 	
 	  	Over a decade ago, before the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike expanded to be Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (Greater Bengaluru), the KR Puram panchayath had given permission to property developers to construct buildings on the stretch. The following years, with rapid urbanisation, the natural wildlife habitat was encroached upon by the new settlers in these areas.
 	
 	  	A BBMP official, who did not want to be named, told BM, “The permission to construct these residential complexes was given by the then KR Puram panchayat. It was not a forest land. But the Gunjurpalya forest is nine kilometres from Vibgyor High school. However before giving permission to construct apartments and houses in that vicinity the officials should have taken over the land from private property owners. But the builders have got the plan sanctioned by the then (BBMP) officials without a proper approach road, whereas the owners have got a stay from court.”
 	
 	  	Worse, ward 85 (Doddenakundi) corporator, Shwetha Vijayakumar pointed out that although the area where the residents live is not forest area, Varthur Lake is connected to Gunjurpalya forest. But its periphery is badly maintained with a lot of meat stalls using neighbouring areas as dumping zones. These attract carnivores from the forest, she said.
 	
 	  	This has only made it worse for the 4,000-odd residents of the locality near Vibgyor High in Kundalahalli off Varthur Road.
 	
 	  	Now, especially after realising the ease with which a leopard could enter a school premises nearby, the residents are terror-struck – especially about stepping out of their buildings after dusk.
 	
 	
 	
 	 		DEMANDS GO ABEGGING
 		
 		 	 		The residents have time and again demanded that BBMP officials fix street lights before any untoward incident takes place. For the past four years, the local population has lived in fear, which has only compounded with the leopard’s entry into the school. Even motorists try to avoid the stretch. 	 		One of the S Rainbow Apartments’ residents, Raghukumar P, a techie living next to Vibgyor the school, said there are 12 apartments in the stretch where people of all ages reside. “But only two street poles are provided – that too half a kilometre from our place. Since several years we have been demanding streetlights and good roads. It was very difficult to walk after dark, but now it is even scarier after witnessing a wild animal entering our neighbourhood.” 	 		Another resident Keyur Mistry said at least the presence of adequate street-lighting would help them “see whether there are people or wild animals around us!” Anuradha S, a resident who works on shifts in a private firm, said, “I reach home from work only around 1 am. I am especially scared after yesterday’s incident.”
 		
 		
 		 			* FOR NOW, LET RESIDENTS INSTALL LIGHTS 		 			Even I am worried about the safety of thousands of people living in the neighbourhood after the incident shook me. For now the residents should install a streetlight on their own in front of their apartment for safety 		 			— Shwetha Vijaykumar, corporator, Ward 85 (Doddenakundi)
 			
 			
 			 				* IT’S DANGEROUS TO LIVE THERE 			 				The forest land is around 200 acres. There is plantation close to the school area. As I know, the forest area has not been encroached but the natural habitat of these animals are disturbed by the increasing population 			 				— Kariappa, Chief Conservator of Forests