The seventh edition of Bisle Kappe Frog Watch records 19 species of frogs; heavy rains bring down species count

This year, the seventh edition of Bisle Frog watch was conducted. The programme is part of the citizen science initiative that encourages a common man to identify frog species.

The 22 participants from across the state stayed at the Community hall in Bisle and field work was undertaken around Bisle Samudhayabhavana and at Ashoka Vana, with the support of environmental activists Dr. Krishna Mohan and Ashoka Vardhan.

“The beauty of this year’s frog watch programme was the introduction of foldscopes by Gubbi Labs during class room sessions,” said Vineeth Kumar, Assistant Professor of Zoology, St. Aloysius College, Mangaluru. “Foldscopes are origami microscopes that have the potential to change the way we view life and micro-organisms around us. Invented a few years ago in the US, these pocket-sized tools are now making their way to remote parts of the world. Gubbi Labs has procured these foldscopes and introduced them to participants during the workshop. They are cheap, but yet to be made available in India,” said Vineeth, who is one of the organisers.

While in the previous editions the team has been recording an average of 25 species, this year, only 19 species of frogs were recorded. “Due to heavy rains, the smaller streams were not accessible; hence we missed out on stream-dwelling species. Also, students focused on one or two species at a time. 

The focus was more on how to identify a species than the number of species recorded,” said Vineeth. 

The experts were also happy that a few species that they thought were endangered were found in good numbers. According to Vineeth, species such as Tyson’s leaping frog (Indirana tysoni), Sholiga’s narrow-mouthed frog (Microhyla sholigari) and Boulenger’s tree frog (Rhacophorus lateralis) were found in good numbers. 


Team Bisle Kappe

The Bisle Kappe team that organised this year’s event includes wildlife enthusiasts Vineeth Kumar, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Zoology, St. Aloysius College, Mangaluru; Rohit S Rao, CEO, Crystal Electronics, Mangalore and Shashwat Jaiswal, Mechanical engineer working in a private company in B’luru.

The resource persons for the workshop included Dr. KV Gururaja, faculty at Srishti Institute of Art, Design and Technology, Dr. Sudhira HS, a batrachologist from Gubbi Labs, and Dr Seshadri KS, an expert in Systematics (Taxonomy), Evolutionary Biology and Ecology.



The team 

found a healthy number of Boulenger’s tree frog and learnt to use a foldscope at classroom sessions