Efforts to make Karnataka a premier tourist destination

In a bid to provide a new dimension to tourism in the state, the Karnataka government has drawn up many plans and designs to rope in small and middle-segment investors to invest in state tourism and the response is emphatic. The response from investors has been positive, driven by a recognition that the state’s vast tourism potential is ready to make big investments.
 
The government is ready to kick-start operations to provide the silver lining to the big initiative and to put Karnataka tourism on the international map.

Delighted with the response and the buzz the Dakshin Bharat Utsav, an Investors Summit has generated in the tourism circles, it is clear that the state tourism is on the high road. Chief Minister Siddaramaiah and Minister for Law, Parliamentary Affairs Legislation and Tourism, HK Patil are determined and keen to put Karnataka on the elite list of top tourist destinations in the world and the state tourism department is confident that tourism in the state will scale a new high in the years ahead.

“The introduction of this major initiative is a game-changer, followed by the Sacred Ensembles of Hoysalas, the ancient temples of Belur, Halebid and Somanathapura are making it into the UNESCO World Heritage List, it will provide a shot in the arm to the tourism sector,” said Gopal Shetty, chairman tourism committee, Federation of Karnataka Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FKCCI). Shetty revealed that the potential for tourism in the state is huge. Wildlife tourism, Medical tourism, Temple and heritage places tourism and Adventure tourism are high on the list of national and international tourists and it is needless to mention it will generate good revenues to the state.
 
“The new tourism projects and the many additional facilities including hotels and hospitals required to facilitate the tourists will create big employment opportunities and that is a big plus,” said Shetty pointing out that thousands of men and women are ready and seeking to make a career in tourism and hospitality sectors.
 
Many Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) are also willing to make investments realising that the state government is pumping in big money and is all geared up to kick-start operations on war footing and more importantly the chief minister is very supportive.
 
Most of the knowledgeable tourism explorers were of the view that Wildlife and Temple tourism, now that the temples of Belur, Halebid and Smanathapura are on the Unesco Heritage list, will attract thousands of international tourists. India is home to one of the largest Asian Elephant populations and the popular Bandipur and Nagarhole Wildlife sanctuaries are home to hundreds of Elephants and Tigers including the most sought after Blank Panther. pointed out a regular Bandipur tourist, adding that the sanctuary needs a facelift and advanced medical and veterinary facilities. The government is also planning to do in addition to the Ayurveda and Wellness clinics and programs at all tourist destinations.