By Melvin Mathew

Bengaluru-based NGO People for Animals (PfA) is artificially incubating 22 lizard eggs at their facility in an attempt to increase the slowly dying population of house lizards. According to experts incubating lizard eggs is quite rare owing to difficulties in finding these eggs.
 
Lizards that are commonly seen in Indian kitchens are slowly disappearing from urban spaces and experts attribute their slow disappearance to multiple factors like pesticide use, road-kill, disturbance in the food chain, etc.
 
The NGO received 22 eggs of Oriental Garden lizard from a person in Bommanahalli.
 
Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Sharif, chief veterinarian, PFA Wildlife Hospital said, “The population of lizards is visibly on the decline in the city. With the disappearance of lizards, the population of smaller insects like flies and mosquitoes is increasing uncontrollably. Increase in pollution, becoming victim of road-kill owing to loss of habitat, use of toxic pesticides is some of the other reasons.”
 
Using 3-6 lakh worth artificial incubators, PfA is hatching the eggs in an oxygen-, humidity-, and temperature-controlled environment. Periodically, the eggs are moved inside the incubators automatically and panels outside display the respective levels. There are small compartments inside the machines where the eggs are kept, added Shariff.
 
Using candling technique -- where a light source is placed underneath the egg -- the stage, fertility and spices of the egg before placing inside the incubator. Dr Madhav of PFA said that reptile eggs do not require high temperature to incubate. “The portion inside the egg containing air is placed on top to allow breathing for the hatched animal. The eggs will be kept in the incubator for 51-60 days. Every five days, candling is done to take report of the development,” he added.
 
Lizard eggs hatch at ideal 70 percent humidity and under 25–29-degree Celsius temperature. The breeding season for lizards is between the month of May to October and during October the NGO receives the most eggs. It takes roughly 51-60 days for the eggs to hatch.
 
According to an IISc research paper, with a loss of natural environment lizards have resorted to sleeping on urban structures that mimic their natural habitat. Researchers found that they were more likely to sleep in rough concrete blocks.