Forest sleuths were stern initially but laterturned soft once they realised he was in fact a do-gooder
 
 ​This man is no Salman Khan. But the noble act of saving an injured blackbuck and providing shelter with medical aid to it backfired on Hari Krishna, the global advisor of ICICI Bank. 

 A goshale (cowshed) for abandoned cows run by him on Kanakapura road, named Radha Govind, was raided by CID forest sleuths on Wednesday, after a tip-off that he was in possession of a blackbuck, a protected and schedule I listed animal. The officials found the blackbuck, but Hari Krishna claims innocence. 

 	Hari Krishna told Bangalore Mirror that about a year and a half ago, the blackbuck was found in a badly injured state after a bear attack at Handanakere village near Tumkur. ‘’Its left leg was broken. A farmer came running to me and told me about it. I rushed it to Hebbal for treatment immediately. As we treat abandoned and injured cows at our shelter, I decided to keep it in our shelter till the treatment was over and it became fit to go back to its habitat.’’ 

 	Hari Krishna said he had also submitted details about the blackbuck to the Tumkur DFO, stating that the animal was found in a bad state and was rushed for treatment to Bangalore, and had also received an acknowledgement. ‘’It took more than 9 months for the wounds to heal and it is being treated. Besides a broken leg, it also had viral fever and we have been treating it even now. As it had recovered only recently, I was planning to give it back to the forest department in a day or two. But before that, the officials have come and I’m confused. However, I have explained the whole episode to them and the intention, which was only saving a life and nothing beyond it,” Hari Krishna said. 

 	The Radha Govind trust, located on Kanakpura road, has been protecting cows and bulls since 1997. The goshale supplies milk to the muzrai department that is in charge of temples. 

 The CID forest cell sleuths have issued a notice to produce the documents in his defence in the case. “We raided the place and found that there was a blackbuck. Possession of blackbuck is violation of provisions of Indian Wildlife Protection Act. He (Hari Krishna) has explained the whole episode on how he found it and later rushed it to Bangalore for treatment after informing the local DFO,’’Venkat Shetty, Inspector, CID forest cell, told BM. 

 	The forest cell officials admit that Hari Krishna’s intentions appear to be good. ‘’ But the issue here is not intimating anything thereafter — either keeping it or handing it over to the forest department after the treatment and its recovery. Now, we have found it in good condition and fit. At this juncture, it amounts to violation of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, as possessing it here, which is not its habitat, amounts to unauthorised possession. We have issued a notice to him to produce the documents which he claims to be in his defence. We will act later after the inquiry,” Shetty added. 

 	If the charges are proved, a person in illegal possession of wildlife contravening the provisions of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act may face a sentence of imprisonment up to three years and a fine of up to Rs 25,000, CID forest cell sleuths told BM.