On Thursday, Randeep Hooda headed to Karnal in Haryana to kick off the 20-day schedule of his upcoming romcom, Unfair & Lovely. On a pit stop at Murthal, the actor connected with Mirror to inform that the ride to the North was unusual.

“You are suspicious of anything that is given to you and then close your eyes, hoping for the best,” he laughed, adding, “Since I am from the state, my first priority was to ensure that not too many get wind of my presence, and those who do, have been asked to meet me only after the shoot is over keeping everyone’s safety in mind.”

Romcom is a new genre for Randeep who’s hoping it will give a new direction to his career. He’s known the director, Balwinder Singh Janjua, for a long time and they’ve been discussing the project for a while.

“It took some time to take shape and now I’m excited to run with it,” he acknowledges.

Before this, he wrapped up Salman Khan’s Radhe in early October. Ask him what lessons he’s learnt on that shoot to survive in the new normal and pat comes the reply, “Just do it, don’t talk.”

He describes Prabhudheva as a “sorted director” and hopes his third collaboration with Salman, after Kick and Sultan, works as well as the other two and Radhe arrives in the theatres to give everyone, from the exhibitors to the film industry, a much-needed push.

Randeep had got tested multiple times for Covid-19 because of these shoots. Was he scared? “What’s the point of being scared, the aim of getting tested is to know and if positive, control it’s spread.

Unfortunately, if someone does test positive, there will be some scheduling hassles, but we’ll deal with that when it comes,” he says, asserting that it’s time to move forward.

The actor underwent a surgery in August and insists it didn’t impact him during the Radhe shoot. “The gravitas is still there, rest we’ll find out as we go along,” he chuckles, saying he wants to do an action film now. “I haven’t fully explored the physical action genre and quite enjoy it. I hope to get to do that in a film soon.”

After completing the shoot, Randeep plans to go to the jungle which he misses. “Hopefully, I will get some amazing landscape and wildlife clicks before I move to my next project,” he says wistfully.