Between 5,000 and 10,000 of rose-ringed parakeets inhabit about 10 to 15 trees near Orion Mall. Wildlife volunteers will begin a study and a census of the birds. They are also mulling turning the area into a tree park
 
 	Their raucous screeching has been a feature of the area for years, but strangers rarely notice them above the din of shrill horns and bustling traffic. Decked in coats of emerald green with distinct rose-red beaks, these rose-ringed parakeets add a touch of the primeval, but environmentalists are amazed that they still thrive — and in such large numbers —in what is essentially a commercial hub and despite noisy construction activity in the vicinity. 

 	Parakeets by the thousand inhabit about 10 to 15 trees around Orion Mall in Rajajinagar. Two trees — a rain tree (albizia saman) and an African tulip (spathodea campanula) — are a favourite with more than a thousand nesting, perching or roosting in each of them. The two trees are ringed by Orion Mall, the Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Limited (KSDL) factory campus and a Namma Metro line, which makes the feature a wonder. 

 	Residents say about 5,000 to 10,000 parakeets inhabit these trees, but an exact count will soon be available. Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike’s (BBMP) forest cell volunteers, wildlife volunteers and tree experts will conduct a first-of-its-kind census on the birds. The object is not just a head count, but to ascertain reasons why the birds thrive in this particular area. The aim is to ensure their habitat is not destroyed. Wildlife experts are also mulling turning the trees into a tree park after the census. Apart from the rain tree and the African tulip, these winged residents also inhabit copper pod, peepal, sandalwood and eucalyptus trees. 

 	The team of 10 volunteers, led by an ornithologist, beginning Sunday (5.30 am), will study the birds, find reasons why so many of them are attracted to this one place and will devise ways to protect their habitat. "It is a wonder, but people don't know much about it," said Sharath R Babu, advisor, BBMP environment cell. "There are thousands of parakeets in each of one of the trees in front of Orion Mall, inside a park and in one tree in the KSDL campus. About 400 to 500 parakeets are found in other trees here. We have decided to conduct a census of these birds. They are a treasure and need to be protected." 

 	The ornithologist will teach the other volunteers the basics of bird watching. Based on the results of the study, the plan to ensure the parakeets don’t go the way of the sparrow. "The survey findings will be documented,” Babu said. “The authorities concerned will be informed of the findings and steps will be taken to protect the habitat.” 

 	GREEN MAY BE REASON 

 	Tree experts, who will also join the initiative, say the lung space in the area may be the reason the parakeets thrive there. "It is a wonder that despite the huge traffic and development activity, these birds live here,” said Vijay Nishant, a tree expert. “The trees are roosting places for the parakeets. They inhabit an area which is a rough circle surrounding Orion Mall and includes the Karnataka Antibiotic and Pharmaceutical Limited campus. This is a rare green patch in the city and is probably one of the reasons why the birds thrive here.”