After garnering huge response in Kerala, Urumi, Santosh Sivan’s period film, is all set to cast its magic in other languages/states.  The first to roll out will be the Tamil version, tag-lined Pathinainthaam Nootrandin Poorvaal.  Other adaptations in Kannada, Telugu and Hindi will go on floors after the Tamil release, expected next month.  Incidentally, all the versions will have the same Malayalam name Urumi (curling sword), but with separate local taglines.  
 
 One of the most-talked-about projects, Urumi has already been rated as a landmark film in Malayalam. The movie goes back in time to recount a story that takes place after the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama set foot in Calicut way back in 1498.
 
 Says Sivan, “Strangely, Gama’s epochal landing and its aftermath have so far not found a place in the history of Indian cinema.  I have earnestly tried to deliberate on some aspects pertaining to that period.  The socio-political equations changed soon after his dramatic arrival.”
 
 Scripted by Shankar Ramakrishnan, the screenplay of Urumi has been set in the period between 1502 and 1524, focusing on the events that took place during Gama’s last visit to the country. His cruelty towards the countrymen and his unreasonable demands create a band of warriors thirsting for revenge which forms the format of Santosh Sivan’s yet another directorial venture.
 
 The film’s casting has been absolutely envious with some big names such as Prithviraj, Genelia D’Souza, Prabhu Deva, Arya, Tabu, Vidya Balan and Amol Gupte. The film has become a huge box-office hit in Kerala.
 
  “Even the Malayalam version released in Bangalore has had a great response. The collections are heartening,” says Ramakrishnan. 
 
 There is considerable hype in Tamil Nadu as Sivan is a known figure in the state, right from the days of Roja (as the cinematographer). Even Prithviraj, the producer of the film as well as the lead actor, is hugely popular in Kollywood. Needless to mention about the presence of Arya, Prabhu Deva and Genelia.
 
 Sivan, an ardent history buff (can we all afford to forget his Asoka, the Shah Rukh Khan-starrer which also had Ajith in a cameo!) has sincerely attempted to look at history from an Indian perspective as most of our history books on the subject were written from a Western point of view.
 
 Besides Sivan, two other renowned cinematographers have lent their expertise to this visual spectacle — wildlife photographer Alphonse Roy and National award-winning Anjali Shukla.
 
 It is learnt that ace filmmaker Mani Ratnam, who saw the film, showered heaps of praises on Sivan. 
 
 Sources tell us that the two of them might come together for Mani’s epic film Ponniyin Selvan. When quizzed about it, Sivan said that nothing has been finalised yet.
 
 Prithviraj, also producer of the film, is happy that the film has taken a brilliant opening. 
 
 An English version of the film, The Boy Who Wanted to Kill Vasco da Gama, is also getting ready, eyeing the 
 festival circuit. Surely, Urumi is going places!