By Reya Mehrotra

The forest department has constructed 10 ponds at Jayamangali Blackbuck Reserve and the Thimmalapura Wildlife Sanctuary, for the animals to have easy access to water

After several Bengalureans expressed displeasure at the state of blackbucks in summers at Maidenahalli, the forest department has given a face lift to Jayamangali Blackbuck Reserve and the Thimmalapura Wildlife Sanctuary in Tumkur.

Keeping in mind the rising temperatures, ten cement ponds have been created for the animals to have easy access to water in the reserves.

“Maidenahalli is one of the great places for sightings blackbucks. However, during my recent visit, I found that there was severe water scarcity. Even the villagers were complained of water shortage,” said Trilok M, a techie based out of Bengaluru. Talking to BM, Ramalinge Gowda, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Tumakuru says, “Currently, there are 2,000 blackbucks in the reserve. It is a hot summer and to ease the summer for the animals, we have created 10 ponds all and ponds for them. 

Naturally, we have received a good response, and several Blackbucks are seen using them during daytime.”

Maidenahalli is a great place for black buck sightings. However, during my recent visit, I found that there was water scarcity. Even the villagers were complained of water shortage legs ­–Trilok M, techie 

Apart from this, the department has constructed two pergolas, four tents, a rest house, two public toilets and a watch tower for youngsters to observe the blackbucks, to attract tourists. By the end of the year, the reserve will be ready for visitors to camp for a day. The department has already spend Rs 25 lakhs for the development and has further requested for a budget of Rs 50 lakhs.Gowda added, “We are expecting a good number of visitors next year. The pergolas and tents will help youngsters and researchers stay, hold group discussions on wildlife and observe them. Once complete, we will also be screening movies and documentaries based on wildlife for our visitors so that they take back something informative and useful from their stay here.”