Desilting for Hosakerahalli Lake’s rejuvenation paused for more than 10 days

After a long struggle, the residents living around Hosakerehalli Lake in Rajarajeshwari Nagar got the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) to take up the much-needed rejuvenation work of the water body, only for it to come back to square one.
 
The desilting process, a part of rejuvenation, was started a few days ago but has now reached a standstill. Locals say it has been more than ten days since the work stopped without any reasons cited by the civic body.
 
“For years, sewage from BWSSB channels was let into the lake, making life miserable for people dwelling close to the water body. After fighting various issues, we could finally get the authorities to start cleaning the lake, but now the work has stopped again,” said a resident.
 
Those living in Pushpagiri and Dwarka Layouts, close to the lake, say they are worried about the impact of the upcoming monsoon season.
 
“We had our houses inundated after a moderate spell of rain a couple of weeks ago. This was due to unfinished drain work. While the drain work is still not completed, they have stopped de-silting the lake as well. The whole area is a mess with broken sewage pipes and clogged drains. We are worried about getting flooded soon,” said a resident of Dwarka Nagar
 
Residents and lake activists also cry foul and allege that although they had requested the authorities to merely remove the weeds, as the lake was de-silted by the BDA in 2017, their plea was ignored.
 
“Pushpa Giri Nagar and Dwarka Nagar are located in valleys and with the unfinished drain work and lake de-silting process, even a moderate spell of rain will cause havoc in these areas,” said Joseph Hoover, former member, State Board for Wildlife and founder, United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
Lokayukta should intervene 
Exasperated, Hoover has now reached out to the Lokayukta office, requesting an inquiry.
 
“It is disappointing that the BBMP, under the duress of a politician, has destroyed the Hosakerehalli Lake in Bengaluru. Considering that we are in the midst of a climate crisis, wherein extreme weather events are battering us, every caution should have been taken to ensure our biodiversity, especially lakes are protected,” said Hoover in the complaint.
 
The letter written on May 28 highlights various discrepancies in the process.
 
“Though no work order was issued, and no clearance was obtained from the Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development Authority (KTCDA), a 25-foot-wide road was illegally being constructed in the middle of the encroached lake. However, only after the illegality was exposed by citizen activism, senior officials from BBMP visited the lake and agree that the road was being illegally constructed. We were told the contractor had carried out the work without the knowledge of BBMP officials.

 It is hard to believe that a project as big as Hosakerehalli was being executed without the knowledge of the BBMP,” alleges Hoover, requesting the Lokayukta to conduct an inquiry. 

Project to resume after monsoon 
According to BBMP officials, the de-silting work at Hosakerehalli will now begin only after the monsoon season. B Reddy Shankar Babu, BBMP Zonal Commissioner (Rajarajeshwari Nagar) said that no concrete work and de-silting of the laker will now be taken up due to the arrival of the rainy season.
 
He also said the de-silting work got delayed due to unnecessary interventions by locals on multiple occasions.
 
“Had we finished de-silting, well within time, the lake’s water holding capacity would have doubled and resolved the problem. However, the rainy season is here and thus neither de-silting nor construction of the retaining wall can be taken up now. We have created a team of chief engineers from various departments and zones to finalise an immediate course of action to prevent any untoward incident. We have implemented this solution on a war footing. We can safely say that SWDs in the area are temporarily fixed and the residents will not face any issues. Having said that, BWSSB’s pipelines going through the SWDs might still cause backlash into toilets of the houses in the valleys,” said Babu.