When several sick pigeons, which were released at this year’s Republic Day function at Maneckshaw Parade grounds, flopped to the ground and died in front of hundreds of spectators, our civic authorities didn’t take a serious view of the shameful episode. A couple of months down the line, they seem to have woken up to the fact that their obligations to the city include protecting its avian residents. 
 On Wednesday morning, two pariah kites were shot at and injured by persons reportedly in the employ of the HAL airport authorities. This time, BBMP was quick off the mark and within 24 hours of the incident lodged a complaint with the K R Puram range forest officer (RFO). The RFO has booked the airport’s air traffic controller, Wing Commander (retd) M P Srinivas, for attempted poaching. B M Parameshwara, conservator, BBMP, lodged the complaint and the airport official was booked late on Wednesday. 
 The RFO, Ganesh V, told Bangalore Mirror that the reported week-long shooting at birds within the perimeter of the airport will be investigated to ascertain the species and the number of birds shot down. The probe will also look into whether permission was granted by the aviation ministry to adopt such methods to scare away birds in the vicinity of the airport. Apart from the ex-IAF officer, some unnamed airport staffers and ‘shooters’ have also been booked. 
 The injured pariah kites were spotted by members of the public, who alerted activists attached to the BBMP forest cell. The volunteers found 12 mm air rifle pellets embedded in the birds’ bodies. The pariah kites — a protected species under schedule IV of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act — are currently being treated at the Bannerghata Biological Park.  
 “We were informed that the airport authorities had hired shooters at the rate of Rs 10 per bird,” said Sharath Babu R, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban. “Our volunteers who rushed to the spot were told the shooting has been going on since a week. Bangalore has over 69 species of wild birds, with the more endangered ones (hawks, shikras, sparrow hawks, falcons) coming under schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. Shooting protected birds is a serious offence,” he added. 
 The case has been booked under sections 9, 39 and 40 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, which provide for prison terms ranging from one to three years. “We were not allowed inside [the airport is a restricted area] on Wednesday. But we will take the necessary permission and begin investigations,” Ganesh said.
   Meanwhile, Wing Commander (retd) Srinivas has categorically denied the charge of poaching. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, he said, “We have 40-50 flights a day and it is necessary to keep the runway clear. There was a scaring exercise but nothing like poaching took place.”