The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), which enforced a ban on trekking across its forest areas till the onset of monsoon in the wake of the tragic forest fire incident in Theni, Tamil Nadu that killed 10 trekkers, has now revoked the ban after realising that the move would have a negative impact on eco-tourism activities which are being aggressively pursued by the state tourism department.

KFD will now allow trekking along routes approved by the eco-tourism board. The department has issued a fresh order permitting trekking in areas outside protected forests along with formation of an intelligence team to gather information on illegal trekking expeditions by private agencies.

Banking on the salubrious population of wildlife and dense jungles, the tourism department had declared the year 2017 ‘Year of the Wild’ and aggressively marketed eco-tourism activities. The sudden ban ordered by Jayaram, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), posed a threat to tourism activities keeping in mind the summer holidays. 

Hence, a day after the PCCF (Wildlife) ordered the ban, Punati Sridhar, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) issued a circular allowing trekking in forest areas other than protected forests.

Resolving the confusion, the latest circular from KFD said, “Trekking in areas other than protected forests will continue under the watchful eyes of the KFD officials. The eco-development board has already identified trekking routes in various forest areas. The PCCF (Widlife) has only banned trekking in protected areas that come under the wildlife division. Hence, it has been decided to allow trekking activities on identified routes located outside the purview of protected forests,” the order, a copy of which was accessed by BM, said.

Punati Sridhar, PCCF (HoFF), said, “We have instructed the Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCFs) to issue permission according to the carrying capacity of the route. In case such pre-identified routes are found to be filled with thick and dried grass bush, such routes can be avoided or closed till the monsoon.” 
The order also directed KFD staff to maintain a fire line on either sides of the identified trekking routes and cut tall grasses to form small heaps.


New intelligence team

In view of the increasing trekking activities, the KFD has mooted the idea of forming a new intelligence unit or strengthening the existing intelligence network. “Barring the local population, any other illegal intruder or trekker will be identified and cases will be booked against them and promoters of trekking activity. Besides, staffers at Anti-Poaching Camps (APCs) have also been directed to conduct intense patrolling in their beats to identify illegal trekking activities,” the order revealed.
Keeping track of trekking activities across Karnataka, the department has directed its staffers to keep an eye over the social media including Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp groups where information on trekking will be shared so that the KFD staff can prevent such illegal activities.