Stay away from hills during pre-monsoon showers after mid-May, say forest officials
 
 
 	One of 12 trekkers from Bengaluru-Mysuru died, while two others experienced shock, after lightning hit them as they were taking pictures of the scenic beauty of the Kumara Parvatha hills, also known as Subrahmanya or Pushpagiri Hills, on Saturday.
 	
 	  	Pushpagiri or Kumara Parvatha, at 1,712 metres, is the highest peak in Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary in the Western Ghats of Karnataka, located about 20 km from Somwarpet of Kodagu district that shares its borders with Dakshina Kananda. 	
 	
 	It may be recalled that on Sunday, Harish R, a teacher of a private school in Bengaluru, was declared dead after lightning reportedly struck him at the hills. 
 	
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Manjunath TN, RFO of the Subrahmanya range, said that during the pre-monsoon showers, the region experienced severe thunder and lightning. The district administration issues warnings, but often these are not taken seriously. “Since it is a reserve forest, we do not permit trekkers inside. Often trekkers avoid our checkpost as there are many other alternative routes. Part of the region is under the Pushpagiri Wildlife Sanctuary. These trekkers have made an entry in the Madikeri checkpost, which is on the way, and trekking is permitted. Since the region receives heavy pre-monsoon thunder showers, it is advisable to stay away from trekking, especially after mid-May,” he said.
 	
 	  	There are three routes to enter the hills --- through Madikeri, Somwarpet and Subrahmanya. Dinesh Holla, convenor, Sahyadri Sanchaya, who has been trekking for over 20 years, expressed shock over this incident. 
 	  	
 	He said, “This is probably a first-of-its-kind incident. Also, when the lightning struck, the team was not even at the peak. It is really difficult to understand how this happened. Kumara Parvatha region sees the highest number of trekkers from across the state. It is crowded round the year. Trekkers do avoid Kodachadri or Kudremukh during monsoons, but there are trekkers who go only during monsoons to Kumara Parvatha, to experience the dynamic scenic beauty. This is the longest and toughest trekking range of the state. Those who want to trek in the Himalayas are first trained in this range or Mullayyanagiri so that they get acclimatised to the tough terrain,” he said.
 	
 	  	There are also different beliefs that go behind trekking the Kumaraparvatha hill. While for many, it is trekking for passion, there are some devout persons who also go up to the peak. For them, it’s a matter of religious belief. They feel that the visit to Kukke Subrahmanya is complete only if they trek the Kumara Parvatha region.
 	
 	  	Holla recollects, “On January 25, when we had been to Kumara Parvatha, we realised that there were 786 trekkers in the region, mostly from Bengaluru as it was a long weekend.”