An influential seer has come out in open against the Mecon Report related to the Kaiga Atomic Power Station in Uttara Karnataka district. “Since the government has appointed its own agency, we are confident that the report would be one-sided. 

Since Mecon Limited is a Government of India enterprise, they could submit a report that the people from this region are not suffering from cancer,” said Gangadharendra Maha Swamiji. He called upon people to participate in the public hearing on December 15 and oppose the setting up of Units 5, 6 at Kaiga.

The seer was speaking at the Sonda Suvarnavalli Auditorium on Thursday in which persons, representing various environment organisations, participated. 

“In this part of the region, several people who are not addicted to tobacco and are young have died because of cancer. We have seen techniques adopted by Kaiga officials during an open debate held in Yellapur. The people of the region should think right and not fall prey to bribes. From the beginning, Dr Shivaram Karanth, Pejawar Swamiji have been opposing the project. 

We are not in favour of setting up Kaiga Unit 5 and 6,”the seer said. He also asked the people’s representatives to support the move. “According to scientists, the impact has also been noticed on agriculture, horticulture, forests, wildlife, natural resources and animals.It is for this reason we had an open discussion with the Kaiga officials twice. We have also made a spot visit. 

  We feel that the public meet is just an eyewash as Kaiga officilas have already published the environment report— Shri Gangadharendra Maha Swamiji  

In 2012, a convention was held at Vajralli and a demand for health survey was made. In 2017 May, a mega convention was held in Yellapura with the support of the public, experts and people’s representatives. We also wrote a letter to Prime Minister in July 2017, urging to stop the setting up of Kaiga Units 5 and 6. We feel that the public meet is just an eyewash as they have already published the environment report,” the seer alleged. The seer claimed that the environment report is filled with lies and wrong information.