A Bengaluru-based businessman-turned-birder has photo-documented 951 species of birds in just one year (2018) out of the total 1,317 species in India. Having begun the journey in 2012, Gururaj Moorching’s interest in wildlife began after a trip to Kaziranga and another trip to the Rann of Kutch where he happened to read two books titled ‘Birding on Borrowed time’ and ‘Lifelist’. 

Gururaj Moorching said, “When I had a chance meeting in April 2015 with naturalist Marmot Snetsinger in Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary, Arunachal Pradesh, I was elated. Her mother, the late Phoebe Snetsinger, was a legend in bird watching circles. She was the first person to have crossed 8,000 birds on her Life List in 1995 and watched 8,398 species of birds across the world.”

When Phoebe took up bird watching, she had a rare type of melanoma and the doctors had given her a year to live. She defied death for another 17 years since her diagnosis. I was inspired and I could especially relate to her as I faced a similar health predicament. Phoebe’s book, ‘Birding on Borrowed time’ inspired me to take up birdwatching and photographing birds with intensity and a sense of urgency. I set targets for myself and travelled the length and breadth of our diverse country to find and admire as many bird species I could in an attempt to do a ‘Photographic Big Year’ in 2018,” he said.

Ornithologist Shashank Dalvi, India’s first birder to complete one ‘Big Year’ and record 1,128 species of birds in 2015, mentored Gururaj. He helped Gururaj list out travel plans to get maximum results and devise a calendar plan, based on the seasons and locations across India.

“It is not a mean task to chase 1,317 species of birds found in India, including Andaman and Nicobar Islands. My love of travel, food and meeting new people made the journey interesting in this amazing country of huge diversity.Birding community in India is a well-knit family. I received great support from birders, guides and naturalists who were eager to share any information on bird movement and even opened their homes, kitchen and hearts to me. Rofikul Islam, a gifted naturalist from Kaziranga, stood by me throughout the year and was the inspiration behind my decision to pursue a Photographic Big Year, which was a first of its kind,” said Gururaj.

 “A deep sense of contentment comes over me at the end of this sojourn,” he said.