With row over boundary with China raging, customs department has banned import of such maps into the country
 
 Call if a fallout of China’s ‘annexation’ of Arunachal Pradesh, even if it is only in the neighbouring country’s official maps. The Indian government has imposed a ban on the import of maps and other literature pertaining to the boundary of the country. It has also barred visitors from bringing offline or printed maps with ‘incorrect’ boundary details into India. 

 The issue has been trending on Twitter with users calling for the Survey of India and the Ministry of Home Affairs to announce official boundaries to clear the confusion. The issue popped up when customs officials refused to clear a globe ordered by a reputed school for its library. Officials claimed that the boundary marking India’s territory was incorrect. Nivedita Kashyap tweeted “mom’s school ordered a globe for the library, customs wouldn’t allow it until the offending area was disfigured by a permanent marker.” 

 	The tweet caught the attention of several others who began urging the MHA and Survey of India to publish the exact official boundaries. Bangalore-based techie, Thejesh G N, tweeted, “Travellers to India, be careful when you get offline/printed maps from outside India or just do not bring printed maps.” Nisha Thompson, another techie, tweeted, “SI should release shape files so this influx of counterfeit boundaries can be stopped.” 

 	One techie revealed that there was a discrepancy of about 200,000 square km in the figures given by MoH, Survey of India and Information and Broadcasting ministry. Techies are planning to discuss the issue at their next data camp and approach the Survey of India to release the official version of the nation’s territory. 

 Besides banning maps and literature pertaining to the country’s boundaries, the latest advisory by the customs department also prohibits bringing in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, goods that violate intellectual property rights, wildlife products, counterfeit currency notes, coins and certain live birds and animals. 
 	
 	WHAT NOT TO CARRY
 	
 	 		Travellers can be stopped by customs officials at airports if they are found to be carrying the following:
 		 	 		Firearms
 		 	 		Pornographic and obscene material
 		 	 		Narcotic drugs or psychotropic %,substances
 		 	 		 Chemicals (those mentioned in ,Schedule 1 of Chemical Weapons %,Convention of UN 1993)
 		 	 		 Sex determination kits
 		 	 		 Mobile phones without ,IMEI numbers
 		 	 		 Duty-free flat-screen (PLASMA/,LCD/LED) television sets
 		 	 		 Gold jewellery (over free allowance) ,and gold bullion
 		 	 		 Meat/fish/poultry products
 		 	 		 Seeds/plants/flowers and other ,planting material
 		 	 		 Satellite phones
 		 	 		 Indian currency exceeding Rs 7,500
 		 	 		 Foreign currency notes exceeding US ,$ 5000 or equivalent
 		 	 		 More than two litres of liquor or wine
 		 	 		 More than 200 cigarettes, 50 cigars and tobacco weighing over,250 grams