The extravangant 10-day Dasara festival in Mysuru came to an end on Friday. The final day marked a grand victory parade. The last day celebrations, which were started the royal family in 1610 in its 408th year, saw a grand procession in 2018. Mysuru was surrounded by lakhs of visitors from across the country. The parade commenced from Mysore Palace till Bannimantap. Here we bring to you the best pictures of the royal Parade and grand procession.

 Like past years, this year too folk troupes and tableaux were an integral part of the world famous Jamboo Savari. The visual delight and colourful extravaganza enthralled people with their variety.

    CM HD Kumaraswamy at the procession   
Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy and Deputy CM G Parameswara offered flowers to the goddess in reverence

   The State Higher education department tableau   
 This time, the Department of Higher Education also showcased a tableau that featured the journey of Universities in the State. The tableaux depicted the history of universities and how it has evolved over a period of time.
   The forest department tableaux   The forest department tableaux highlighted the need to conserve biodiversity. It is an attempt to protect endangered animal and plant species, along with their natural habitat. The main objective behind the design was to reflect the need to conservation of bio-diversity and to make sure that their habitats will be preserved so that the future generations of both wildlife and human can enjoy it.

   Female foeticide tableaux    
   .   
   The tableaux depicting multiple messages.   
   .   
   Following the jumbos were tableaux representing the culture from various communities.   
   .   
The tableaux also featured flood-affected people in Kodagu, welfare schemes taken by government and issues like female foeticide, polluted earth, deforestation and many more depicting multiple messages.

   CM Kumaraswamy wearing a green shawl   
 CM Kumaraswamy flagged off the procession by offering prayers to Goddess Chamundeshwari at Balarama Gate of Mysore Palace. He wore a green shawl given to him by farmers, which he wore as a sign of solidarity towards farmers’ woes.

   Final procession   
 G Parameswara and other officials were also a part of the procession and final event. Due to the demise of mother of Mysuru royal Pramoda Devi Wadiyar’s, the royal family did not participate in the celebrations on Friday. Many rituals associated with the royal family were postponed to October 22.