By Garima Prasher

The frontline staff in tiger reserves across Karnataka, who have not received their salaries for months altogether, are likely to get them over the next few days.
 
According to RK Singh, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF), Karnataka Forest Department, the anti-poaching watchers (APWs) will get their compensation due within a week from now.

This was discussed at a high-level meeting of forest department officials organised on Monday afternoon to solve the issue after multiple media reports of disgruntled frontline staff in Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve surfaced.
 
“I got to know about the issue only last week. The government of India is yet to release the fund under Project Tiger due to some issues and that has been the reason behind this delay. Having said that, it does not justify the lag in the payment of salaries to forest watchers. We are looking at the reasons behind this delay. Although we are expecting funds from the Centre any moment, pending that, we will do the needful,” said Singh.

The department officials in the meeting also brainstormed mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that the foot soldiers get their salaries without delays from here on.

“We have discussed the issues leading to the delay in the release of compensation and also brainstormed a mechanism to be put in place, so such a thing is not repeated in the future. We want to ensure that the frontline staff gets their salaries every month without any delay,” he added.

A workable solution has to be found. The department acknowledges the role that forest watchers have been playing in securing the forest area and it is as important as any other role in the department, he informed.

According to Sharath Babu, a wildlife activist who has been raising the issue of non-payment of salaries to frontline staff on time, the role that frontline staff plays in safeguarding the forests and wildlife is of paramount importance. However, the untimely release of salaries and low compensation has kept them demotivated, affecting the quality of work.

“The fact that the frontline staff across various tiger reserves are not willing to report on duty during the forest fire season is worrisome. However, it is not the first time that the department has not paid the APWs on time. To add to that, they are grossly underpaid as well. Even a security guard employed in a government school gets compensated better,” he said.

“The department is currently paying Rs 11,000 to the APWs for encountering animals such as bears, leopards, etc, and risking their lives. Such low compensation impacts the quality of work they do. Apart from increasing their monthly salaries and paying them on time, the department must also have health insurance for the foot soldiers,” he explained.