Mahesha M, a head constable attached to Hulimavu station was getting ready to work last week. 

 “I came out of my house in Srinidhi layout, Chunchagatta Road at 7 am. As I opened the boot space of my two-wheeler to keep a water bottle, I could feel something moving around. As it started moving in my hands, I realised that it was a baby cobra.’’ 

 Mahesha called his family members and tried to fish the cobra out of the boot space. “But our efforts failed. As it was already 7.15 am and I had to reach my workplace by 7.30 am, I closed the seat and headed to work. When I reached the Hulimavu station. I informed my colleagues about the snake inside the boot space. All of them came out to see the cobra nestling right below my seat.” 

 Manjunatha P, a BBMP wildlife special squad warden, rushed to help the cops out. He told Bangalore Mirror, “I was surprised to see the commitment of Mahesha, who drove despite noticing a baby cobra inside. Later, a mechanic removed the seat cover and we tried to catch the snake, but it escaped into the nearby ant hill.” 

 	The tech corridor surrounding the Bommanahalli area is turning into a snake corridor. DK Nagendra, a deputy secretary with the Coffee Board, said, “Recently, my sister-in law went to start her mixer-grinder, but was shocked to see a snake was inside the machine. Another time, a huge cobra was found sleeping next to a baby. Once, a snake was found in the living room. We are tired of calling helplines as we have been spotting so many snakes every now and then.” 

 	Manjunatha said a few days ago he got a call that a giant cobra was sleeping on a house grill on first floor. The residents were shocked to see the snake waiting outside their main door.
 	 

 	Rain and snake advice 

 	Manjunath said one needs to be extremely careful during rainy seasons as vipers can easily get into vehicles. "Where garbage is disposed of, small snakes come looking for food, like flies. The bigger snakes look for rats. Baby snakes, after eating, would like to relax in a safe places, like under the seat, in the glove box of a scooter, under the scooter and so on. In case of motorcycles, snakes can easily enter the inside panel, under the seat and tank, and inside covered handle bars. A big snake, after a good meal, can stay without food up to a month or more, while a baby snake can survive for over 10 days. Sometimes, even if you pressure wash in service stations, the snake may not come out. If the hood is raised, it is agitated. Please do not try to harm or provoke it. It will calm down."