Wednesday’s operation by BBMP wildlife team came after sightings for three days; experts suspect it had escaped from poachers who had snared it
 	
 	 		The wildlife team of the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) on Wednesday rescued a spotted deer from one of the city’s IT corridors — right in front of Forum Value Mall, Whitefield Road. With no spotted deer habitat anywhere nearby, the rescue team termed it a ‘rare’ event and suspect that the deer had escaped from the captivity of illegal wildlife traders. 	

 	 		“We received a call in the morning about the deer. By noon, the around three-year-old doe was successfully rescued and treated,” Avinash Krishnan, a city wildlife rescue team member, told Bangalore Mirror. “We have witnessed spotted deer rescues in areas off Sarjapur and Hoskote, but not in such a busy part of the city.” 	

 	 		The spotted deer, which is protected and listed in Schedule III of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, was first seen two days ago. It was sighted by residents in a vacant site, about 300 metres away from Forum Value Mall on the opposite side. Though it was spotted on and off since then, it hid behind shrubs and stayed put in the same place for two days. On the third day, the rescue team was called when it was seen again. 	

 	

 	 		PUNCTURE FROM DOG BITES 	

 	 		Though surprised, the team rushed in and found that the call was genuine, unlike several previous hoax calls. Once rescued, the team found puncture marks at several places in the deer’s body. The rescuers concluded that the injuries could have made the deer take refuge behind the shrubs. 	

 	 		“The deer had several puncture marks, which were dog bites. To save itself, it may have taken refuge in the shrubs as it seemed safe. After the rescue, we rushed it to a nearby hospital and treated it for puncture wounds. We, however, believe it could not have appeared there on its own without human intervention. After being brought from a wildlife habitat, which is a serious offence and illegal as per the IWP Act, it may have escaped captivity. While wandering, it may have been attacked by dogs. This is the most probable cause as the place where we found it has no deer habitat nearby,” Avinash said. 	

 	 		The spotted deer was fortunate to land in the hands of the wildlife rescue team as it was treated and sent to the Bannerghatta Biological Park. Besides the punctures, the deer bore marks of having been caught in a snare, said Sharath R Babu, former honorary wildlife warden of Bangalore. This raises concerns about illegal wildlife trade in the city. 	

 	 		“Poachers commonly use snares while hunting animals. As the deer had snare marks, this is a clear case of illegal wildlife trade. It is fortunate that it was not killed. The public should inform wildlife sleuths of any unusual activities, like people keeping wild animals in their neighbourhood. This alone can be a deterrent,” Sharath told Bangalore Mirror.