National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has directed the state government to initiate action against officials of Public Works Department (PWD) for violating provisions of Forest Conservation Act while working on the construction of bridge over Sakali Nala at the junction of Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) and Karwar Territorial Division.
 
 	The direction comes in the wake of Bangalore Mirror report that was first published on 3 March 2015 under the title Tigers be damned! Forest Dept calls up bulldozers. BM had reported how PWD officials have been working on the construction of a road and bridge between Bargadda and Goyar and Sakali stream respectively violating various provisions of the Forest Conservation and Wildlife Protection Act despite NTCA guidelines.
 	  	The NTCA officials who had visited DATR in March-April after the BM report had directed the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) to stop all construction work inside the forest and submit a detailed report at the earliest. Following the report by the KFD and personal inspection by the NTCA officials, the apex body on Tiger Conservation in India has directed Forest department to initiate action against PWD officials for violating various provisions of the Forest Conservation Act.
 	  	The direction signed by Sanjay Kumar, DIG, NTCA (a copy of which is in possession of BM), states, “During the inspection by IGF, NTCA in March, it was observed that the bridge was under planning only and staff of DATR had appraised PWD regarding relevant provisions of the law. The bridge does not lie within the limits of DATR but it attracts provisions of Section 38 O 1 (g) of the Wildlife Protection Act being in the corridor. As per the report, it indicates that the bridge is under construction in apparent violation of relevant section of Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 and Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972.”
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, K Srinivasulu, Director, DATR said, “PWD officials never entered into the Wildlife Area of DATR. The Karwar Territorial division had booked a case and stopped all works. Presently there is  	no work happening at the ground zero.”
 	
 	
 	Related Story: TIGERS BE DAMNED! FOREST DEPT CALLS UP BULLDOZERS