Priyanka Chopra Jonas and Nick Jonas have come forward to provide a helping hand to those affected by the devastating flood in Assam.

On Monday, Priyanka took to her social media account to announce that the actor-singer couple has pledged donation and their support to NGOs that are involved in relief and rescue operations in the state.

“While we are all still dealing with the effects of the global pandemic, the Indian state of Assam has been grappling with another major crisis. It has been devastated by floods triggered by heavy monsoon showers affecting the lives of millions. The impact to life and land/property is unimaginable. The rapidly rising water level has also flooded the Kaziranga National Park, one of the finest wildlife sanctuaries in the world,” Priyanka wrote.

She further wrote that Assam needs our attention and support at the time of crisis. “Let us support them so they can continue to help those in need,” she added.

#Assamfloods#PrayForAssam #AssamNeedsHelpYou can make a donation here:Rapid Response:https://t.co/4XD4N0vh1f… https://t.co/yGHALO0tft— PRIYANKA (@priyankachopra) 1595785806000
Meanwhile, the State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) said that the death toll has reached 96 while lakhs of lives are in distress. A total of over 2,500 villages are reeling from the effects of rising waters of Brahmaputra, among its other tributaries, which have also affected 1.22 lakh hectares of crop and damaged hundreds of houses.

The agricultural activities and transportation in the inundated areas are completely stalled even as residents complain about a shortage of fodder for cattle and the development of skin-related diseases.

Floods have wreaked havoc in Assam's various districts for the fourth time this year.

(With inputs from ANI)

Untitled Carousel Priyanka Chopra's journey from the Desi Girl of Bollywood to becoming a global sensationFrom being an outsider with no Bollywood connections to becoming a global icon, actress Priyanka Chopra Jonas has carved out a distinctive space for herself in the world of entertainment. On Priyanka’s birthday today, here’s a look at her journey and the barriers she overcame to achieve success, stardom and the go-getter reputation she enjoys.