Remember those sepia toned days… when taking pictures was restricted to one film roll and a maximum of 36 frames at a time as opposed to the zillion images that one can click with the digital camera nowadays. A group of photography enthusiasts in the city are rekindling the vanishing art of analog photography.   “The process of image making and the anticipation of what is expected is something that cannot be experienced when you shoot digital,” says Sabir Ahmed who runs a product design company. Ahmed was introduced to photography by his father as a child. “My dad would click B&W images with a Nikon manual SLR.” That was during 1980s, even now, Ahmed is one of those few photographers who’s never owned a DSLR camera. He is often called a dinosaur by peers. “But that has never dampened my enthusiasm to shoot analog,” says Ahmed who bought a Swedish-made Hasselblad, medium format camera for Rs 40,000 three months ago adding to his collection of Canon F1 and Canon EOS 1 cameras – (“I call them my beasts.”) In the last three months, he has been shooting with the Hasselblad every weekend - the cemetery on Hosur Road, Cubbon Park, bylanes of Avenue Road….. “When I shoot analog, I am in control of the process and result. The process is slower; it gives you the liberty to think about each frame and focus on the art of image making. And that is extremely satisfying.” Ahmed says, with digital images, it’s easy to manipulate and modify an image. “Digital photography gives you the scope to remove an object or add an object or change colours. But in analog it’s just you and the negative. And negatives never lie and cannot be manipulated.”     VOYEURISM VS OBSERVATION Arvind Raju, a software architect, has been shooting since late 90s and bought a DSLR Nikon D70 in 2003. But, he says, he always was interested in analog photography, particularly large format cameras. After patiently waiting for seven years, he got his first large format, 40-year-old, 5 kg camera from Burma Bazaar in Chennai for Rs 11,000. “I knew I wanted it but I hadn’t taken the plunge. I just wasn’t prepared.” So when his friend bought him the camera it was Raju’s cue to begin shooting analog. He bought his second large format camera last October from UK for Rs 1.2 lakh. “It’s not about buying an expensive camera it’s about a commitment to analog photography and particularly large format photography. It is not easy to shoot especially when you are carrying bulky equipment and a black cloth to cover your head to see the film plane clearly in the camera. People even in the West, where they don’t bother, crowd around you to see what’s happening,” laughs Raju. But beyond the attention he gets, it’s the joy of exercising economy while shooting that keeps Raju glued to his camera. “Unlike with a digital camera where you shoot 300 images and pull out two after a lot of scanning and sifting, in analog, you exercise your observational skills. You are a lot more involved and slow down with time. If digital is fast food then analog is slow cooking. Even the process of shooting, developing and printing is like what an artist does with his painting –he creates a sketch and then he fills it with the colours.”   Raju and many other analog aficionados are part of the Bang BW Community of 236 members, which was started in August 2008. They shoot analog, B&W pictures. Ahmed who started the group says, “The group began with the idea of getting people who liked to shoot black and white. However, it turned out that 80 per cent of our pictures are shot with film cameras.” They have online group discussions and photo-tours in and around the city. “Those who love film continue to shoot regardless of anything; a few pick up a film camera out of curiosity. But by and large those who like shooting on film continue, especially black and white,” says Ahmed. Though many labs that offer film developing have shut down, these photographers find help within the community.   “I have been associated with them for two years now. Out of the 52 weekends in a year, we meet up at least on 40 weekends,” says Raju. The group members’ interests are varied, “we shoot on the streets, worship places, railway stations, markets and people. We usually choose an old residential or business area of the city like Kalasipalyam, Avenue Road, Frazer Town or Pottery Town. Two weeks ago we went to Ramanagaram because somebody wanted to photograph the rocks there.” Sometimes they meet early by 5.45 am to capture the sunrise and sometimes they meet as late as 3.30 pm for afternoon light. But the group avoids taking natural history and wildlife pictures. “The equipment needs to be more specialised, typically for birds you need long lens and you need to capture different movements, so digital photography suits wildlife,” says Raju. There is another pan-India group called Film India – that has members across India in cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Calcutta and Bangalore. “Members shoot both in colour and black and white but only on film,” says Ahmed.   There are others like Madhavan from Goa Centre for Applied Photography (GOA CAP), an investigative photo journalist since 2001, who got into photography by chance. He joined the Centre for Science and Environment as a volunteer in the AV team and started shooting for the organisation. “I bought a Vivitar SLR with a 50mm lens for Rs 6,000; it was the cheapest camera in the market,” he recalls. Since then Madhavan has shot over 100 big stories and 500 regular stories in the last 10 years with the same camera. “I started my career with analog cameras. Even when the digital cameras came out, I never felt the need to own one. My reason is simple: Analog has a history of over 100 years, digital is still developing and research is on. So, why shouldn’t I go with something that is tried and tested.” The other reason is: “In digital, a photographer is more like a spy behind the camera who zooms in and shoots what he likes; it’s a kind of voyeurism. But with a 50mm lens and a film roll camera, you need to get close to the subject and capture it. That’s the joy of shooting analog,” he says.   But there are a few from the old school of photography who disagree on comparing digital with analog photography. Seasoned photographer Selvaprakash says, “There is nothing fancy in pursuing the old format. I belong to that breed of photographers who shot with the film roll but the same guys today are clicking with digital cameras. These are two different mediums,” he says. But he does agree that shooting with film roll is a process that’s enjoyable for its own reasons. “When I shoot with a 120mm 12 frames roll, I take three days to finish it. I observe and wait for the right moment… that’s a different feeling.” Though digital and analog formats have their own patrons, for now there is an increasing number of shutterbugs in the city that want to revive “old ways and memories”.