The old train creaked as it slowly crawled around the bend. It had not seen a coat of paint in years. The surly driver and ticket attendants were nothing like the rosy cheeked whiskered figures in storybooks. But the squealing children inside the Puttani Express were oblivious to detail. They shook with excitement as the train crossed bridges over waterbodies and lurched its way around the Jawahar Bal Bhavan children’s park. Childhood paints everything with a rosy hue. 
 
 	That noisy train ride in Cubbon Park took me back to a tired looking station and many childhood memories of Sunday visits to the park and family picnics under trees. There were no public spaces designed creatively for children in Bengaluru back then. There are none even now. But with no malls and multiplexes to double up as placebos, we managed our leisure time quite imaginatively. 
 	  	Historical figures and fierce battles were brought to life on weekend visits to the Bengaluru Oval Fort. It was the site of the Battle for Bengaluru (1791) fought between Tipu Sultan, the ruler of Mysore and Governor General Lord Cornwallis during the Third Anglo Mysore War. It is still a wonderful place where young minds can be introduced to Bengaluru’s history while exploring the form and function, materials and ornamentation of military architecture in the region. The fort has enough stories to fill a Sunday morning. You just have to make time for them. 
 	  	Rainy days were spent at the now dusty Government Museum amidst pre-historic pottery shards and arrowheads, hero stones and sculptures. You can also take kids on a mapping Tower Trail and spend a day tracking down the extant watchtowers perched on hillocks near lakes in the city. They are said to have been built by the Kempegowda dynasty that founded Bengaluru.
 	  	Connections to city history were extended with day trips to Nandi Hills (Nandi Betta). Some 40 plus hairpin bends later, we were protecting sandwiches from growling monkeys inside a medieval fort that was built, quite remarkably, about 4800 feet above sea level. Far down below were picturesque villages and ancient temple complexes to explore, an 18th century mosque, a colonial cemetery and Muddenahalli, the birthplace of Sir M Visvesvaraya to discover.
 	
 	The area is also where many South Indian rivers originate. A stop over at the birthplace of Tipu Sultan in Devanahalli and the 16th century Devanahalli Fort built by local chieftain Malla Bhaire Gowda was mandatory. 
 	  	The spirit of adventure ran high as we grew older, with short trekking trips in around Bengaluru. Guided climbs up the sheer rock face of Savanadurga are a great incubator for young mountaineers-to-be. The forests of Devarayanadurga also provide young wildlife enthusiasts with thrills galore while driving to the temple clusters at the top. 
 	  	Come winter, you can wake up at dawn to go birdwatching at Jakkur Lake. A pair of binoculars will put your little birdies eye to eye with ducks and herons, Moore Hens, Coots, Sandpipers, Raptors, the rare Pelican and Painted Storks standing still in a one-legged Vrikshasana pose. Discussions about ecological balance can be fun when tucking into an idli-chutney breakfast in a neighbouring village on your way home from the lake. 
 	  	Festival season found us walking through Bengaluru’s traditional markets. They were a fascinating mix of noise, colourful products, mysterious fragrances and friendly shop owners who indulged us discreetly. This Bengaluru is still out there. It takes a minute to unplug ourselves (and our children) from a device and head out to make moments into memories.
 	
 	 		The writer is a cultural documentarian and blogs at aturquoisecloud.wordpress.com