Five school-going kids in BEL Second Block, Vidyaranyapura, are living out poet William Wordsworth’s famous line, “The child is father of the man”. They are sweating in their summer holidays to conserve Narsipura lake. 
 
 The children, who call themselves Team Pancharatna, are rescuing turtles, monitoring desilting work, and keeping a vigil on the trees. 
   They have also staged protests against cutting of bamboo trees inside the lake and construction of a walking ramp at the expense of trees. To rope in adults in their conservation efforts, they have also launched a Facebook community called ‘Save the biodiversity of Narsipura lake’. 
   The core team of five kids is aged between seven and 11 years. They are joined by another 15 children in the locality. They spend hours cleaning the lake, conducting meetings and setting agendas.
   Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert who is guiding the kids, said, “These children are an inspiration and a rare phenomenon. Without waiting for anybody to save their lake, they are at it. Residents and officials are taken aback by them.”
   Rajesh Kumar M, a wildlife volunteer, narrated the enthusiasm of the kids to save the lake, spread over five acres: “We recently got calls that turtles were in danger at Narsipura lake. When we arrived at the spot, we learnt that it was these small kids who had called us. They made it a point to prevent the desilting contractor from touching the turtles till we arrived and rescued the animals. They are also not allowing anybody cut trees in the lake.” They sound off wildlife volunteers the moment they spot animals during the desilting process. 
   These kids are taking green lessons from wildlife experts and environmentalists. Their next big goal is to save the lake for birds. “Their presence of mind should be appreciated as they are aware that cutting bamboo trees affects birds like Kingfisher,” Kumar said.
   Team Pancharatna is buoyed by the support extended by city’s new conservator B M Parameshwara to their efforts. 
   Inspired by Pancharatna’s work, residents are joining hands. Sharath said, “If one such group comes up in every school, we can ensure Bangalore is a good habitat to animals and birds.”