Researchers, quite naturally, are foaming at the mouth, since the very idea of their research is conservation.

To study and suggest which species, what areas and what strategies need to be applied for conservation, “We need to go into the forests to get accurate results. If we are studying the King Cobra, we have to monitor it in the forests and not in a controlled lab in Bangalore. But we are being denied entry into forests,” a group of researchers working with a wildlife organisation told Bangalore Mirror.

Officials in the forest department have their own reasons for not granting permission. “We cannot allow humans inside the core areas of forests. This is against the law and will defeat the department’s endeavour to protect forests,” they said. ridiculous

But ecologists say that’s a ridiculous argument. “They turn a blind eye towards the mining and timber mafia, allowing them to loot forest wealth, but talk conservation when we want to conduct research.”

To add insult to injury is a letter from the forest department saying research was non-bonafide activity.

Dr Priyadarsanan Rajan, ecologist and taxonomist, from Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE), said, “I was denied permission by the forest department two months back to work in Nagarhole. The department’s letter says they cannot allow non-bonafide use of the forest. Is research a non-bonafide activity?” In circles

Rajan also cites the example of another student who was asked to take permission from the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF). Then, he was asked to get the divisional forest officer’s nod. Then again, he was asked to take permission from the ranger. When he went to the ranger, he was on leave for a week. “My student came back disgusted,” Rajan said. Blame both sides

In the war between the two sides, Professor Karthik Shankar of IISc came across as a neutral voice saying both sides are to blame. “What we need is a rational solution,” he said.

Asked to comment, PCCF B K Singh said, “I will talk about the matter a little later”.

Naxal problem

IISc researcher Ashok says one more problem comes in the form of increased Naxal activity in Kudremukh and Agumbe forest in Karnataka and elsewhere in India, forcing them to restrict their research. 

“Most times, we carry cameras, binoculars, forest map and GPS system. This makes the police suspect researchers. 

Researchers also camouflage themselves while doing research in the forest. But police don’t allow them to do so as it will then be difficult to identify them. Staying at night inside inspection bungalows in the forest is risky, considering the attacks on government buildings these days.”

And you thought research was a safe career choice?