The spider that originated in Mumbai has been named after the financial capital
 
 
 	AA team of researchers including citizen scientists have discovered a new species of spitting spider, Dictis mumbaiensis from Aarey Milk Colony in Mumbai, Maharashtra.
 	  	The team of researchers include Javed Ahmed, a naturalist and arachnologist, Rajashree Khalap, a natural historian, wetland birds aficionado and authority on native aboriginal dog breeds, Dr Krishna Mohan, a surgeon, environmentalist, ornithologist and wildlife photographer, as well as Yogendra Satam, who works with the Mumbai police.
 	  	The research paper was published in the latest issue of Indian Society of Arachnology’s, ‘Indian Journal of Arachnology’, the country’s premier scientific journal that focusses exclusively on the subject of arachnology, which reports novel and significant observations and data regarding any aspect of the biology of arachnid groups.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Dr Krishna Mohan co-author of the research paper who hails from Moodabidri said, “India, more specifically Mumbai, gets two new species of spiders, along with several additional regional records. Dictis mumbaiensis, a new species of spitting spider has been named in honour of Mumbai. Spitting spiders, or Scytodidae Blackwall, 1864, constitute a relatively small, pan-tropical family consisting of five genera and 230 species, three of which are cosmopolitan in distribution. These spiders catch their prey by spitting a fluid that congeals on contact into a venomous and sticky mass. 
 	  	The other new species of Lynx spider, Peucetia phantasma, which exclusively inhabits the ghost tree, Sterculia urens, from which it derives its specific name (Phantasma is an alternate Latin word for ghost). Most of these species make little use of webs, instead spending their lives as hunting spiders on plants. Many species frequent flowers in particular, ambushing pollinators, much as crab spiders do. They tend to tolerate members of their own species more than most spiders do, and at least one species has been identified as exhibiting social behaviour.
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Beside these new species, the Ogre-faced spider genus, Deinopis was officially recorded from Mumbai for the first time. Deinopis are net-casting spiders. Its distribution is widely tropical and subtropical. They have also recorded Hyllus semicupreus, a species of jumping spider, popularly known as  	semi-coppered heavy jumper’, or ‘heavy bodied jumper’, along with a description of the utilisation of silk constructs in the species, a behaviour 	that has never been documented before.
 	
 	
 	Humans’ fear of spiders
 	
 	 		Although spiders are widely feared, only a few species are dangerous to people. Spiders will only bite humans in self-defence, and few produce worse effects than a mosquito bite or bee-sting. Most of those with medically serious bites, such as Recluse spiders and Widow spiders, would rather flee and bite only when trapped, although this can easily arise by accident. 
 		
 		
 		 	 		The Funnel web spider’s defensive tactics include fang display and their venom, although they rarely inject much, has resulted in 13 known human deaths over 50 years. They have been deemed to be the world’s most dangerous spiders on clinical and venom toxicity grounds, though this claim has also been attributed to the Brazilian wandering spider, due to much more frequent accidents.
 		 	 		There have been about 100 reliably reported deaths from spider bites in the 20th century, but about 1,500 from jellyfish stings. Many alleged cases of spider bites may represent incorrect diagnoses.
 		
 		
 		Spiders petrify 1 out of 2 women
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 			Arachnophobia is a specific phobia – it is the abnormal fear of spiders or anything reminiscent of spiders, such as webs or spider-like shapes. It is one of the most common specific phobias, and some statistics show that 50 per cent of women and 10 per cent of men show symptoms of arachnophobia.