By Barkha Kumari 
 
 What birdwatching is for nature lovers, is plane spotting for the members of Aviation Photographers India Foundation.
 
 The birds, in their case, are aircraft
 
 Bengaluru enjoys the distinction of being the first and only Indian city to have an official plane spotting group, called Aviation Photographers India Foundation (APIF). Plane spotting is a harmless hobby driving an obsessive few to tracking the movement of aircraft by taking photographs, recording videos, or noting down key attributes of aircraft: their size, tail numbers, engines and wings, cockpit placement, colour scheme, national insignia, airline logo, etc. Some even like to learn about the aviation career of each craft: its country or airport of origin, its identification numbers and historic milestones, even the itinerary, and then share these on plane-spotting forums online.
 
 Plane spotting is a well-known hobby around the world in cities such as Zurich, Amsterdam, Miami, Frankfurt, or Dallas Fort Worth which even list the best viewing zones on their airport premises for spotters. In India, however, if you spend unhealthy amounts of time loitering around airports with cameras and binoculars, you arouse suspicion.
 
 This is why the official recognition of the APIF in 2010 was significant, says founder-president Devesh Agarwal. Members – whose count stands at 30 today – are issued ID badges and permissions by authorities such as Bangalore International Airport Ltd (BIAL), Directorate General of Civil Aviation and Central Industrial Security Force. Hence, the enrolment process (for adults only) involves diligent background and reference checks.
 
 In 2009, the BIAL set up an elevated platform outside the airport, near gates 25 and 26, for photography. “It’s a metal scaffolding that can accommodate five-six of us,” says Venkat Mangudi, the APIF president. What birdwatching is for nature lovers, plane spotting is for aviation fans, says Mangudi, also a wildlife photographer.
 
 ‘They call us mad’
 
 To get around limited access, members, a mix of techies, marketing professionals to even photographers, might at times arrive early at airports or linger until late near vantage points. Some enthusiasts even book international flights for business around the arrival, departure, or launch of a major aircraft; others such as Yatrik Sheth and Prathmesh Kini have shelled out thousands to fly from Mumbai to Hyderabad and back in five hours to see Air India Boeing 747 before it was phased out. On his first major outing in 2012, Sheth camped out in New Delhi airport for 60 hours: he was “beyond excited,” he says. Some trekked miles to find the perfect shooting angle, while others such as Mangudi parked in the middle of Miami traffic for a better glimpse of their bird, the Airbus A350 Tam-Brazil in flight.
 
 
 The younger fans have parents worrying: “Google pe itne photo hain. Wahin dekho lo. Planes ke peechey kyun bhaagte rehte ho?”
 
 “People react to our hobby with incredulity, say that we are mad,” Agarwal says.
 
 Most members, in early 20s to late 40s, have harboured dreams of working in the aviation industry at some point.
 
 A few share common childhood stories of growing up near airports, and watching planes soar up or fly down across their windows to up on roofs.
 
 Cross-country members who can’t go spotting together often make plans in their own separate cities, or even abroad relaying plans over social media. But when a major or rare aircraft touches down on Indian tarmac the odd bunch shows up to welcome it. Last month spotters from Coimbatore, Mumbai, and Ahmedabad came down to the Bengaluru to see Boeing 737, 747, 777, and A330 up and close.
 
 The debut Bengaluru landing of Boeing 747-8i, the world’s largest passenger aircraft referred to as The Queen of the Skies, in 2012, inspired much elation. As did the 2008 Mumbai visit of British band, Iron Maiden’s Ed Force One, a chartered flight of Boeing 757 captained by the founder and lead singer of the band, Bruce Dickinson. A glimpse of the Antonov An124 to ferry six fully assembled HAL helicopters to the Ecuadorian Air Force was another sensation. And when planes can’t enter India these aviation junkies may fly abroad instead to photograph Air Tahiti Nui in Los Angeles, AeroMexico in Dallas, or Cubana de Aviación in London.
 
 Keep an eye out
 
 But plane spotters claim they boost safety at airports. “We are an additional pair of eyes for the airport authorities and security agencies,” asserts Agarwal, “we have reported instances when villagers have tunneled under the airport’s outer fence out of the view of the CISF guard tower, or when the airport trumpet flyover was blocked by fallen hoardings in a violent thunderstorm."
 
 
 Since they move around their home airports to find vantage spots, they become well-familiar with the premises and know how to spot unusual activity. After 9/11, airports in the USA and Canada set up Airport Watch where spotters reported suspicious activities to authorities. Many European cities do the same. “We are keen to cooperate with government and airport authorities to initiate a similar programme in India too… However, until the government does not recognise the benefits spotters bring, it will be an uphill exercise,” says Agarwal.