A day after veteran US basketball player Jason Collins announced that he was gay, emerge reports of three gay teens who died after being tortured at a camp in South Africa. A court has heard how one of the boys died from injuries sustained while attending the camp linked to “gay conversion”, after allegedly being beaten, starved and forced to eat his own faeces.   Raymond Buys died after two weeks on a life support machine. He had brain damage, a broken arm, severe dehydration, and cigarette burns all over his body.   Of the other two boys, Erich Calitz died from severe brain injuries in 2007, reports Rapport, an Afrikaans newspaper, and 19-year-old Nicholas van der Walt died after attending the same camp that year in Swartruggens. The three-month course is run by Alex de Koker’s Echo Wild Game Rangers.    The course costs Rs 22,000 (£1,500). “I sent my son to make him a better man, to give him a better future,” said Buys’ mother Wilma. She said her son was diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, and he had struggled at school. The course was recommended by a friend, and de Koker said he could help Buys find a job in the Wildlife trade. He started the course on January 12, 2011, and over two months, she only spoke to him three times, but was told by de Koker that he had begun self harming, reports www.sosogay.co.uk.   “Raymond was only allowed to speak to me on speakerphone,” she said. “When I asked him why he was hurting himself, he told me ‘Mum, I’m not doing it to myself’.”   During the trial in the case this week, a boy who shared a tent with Buys spoke of labour such as cutting grass with machetes and stacking stones to build a dam. Gerhard Oosthuizen (19) described that Buys was chained to his bed when he tried to escape, and was not allowed to use the bathroom until he soiled himself repeatedly.   He was also forced to eat his own faeces. On another occasion, he was forced to eat washing powder. Oosthuizen also reportedly said that he saw Buys with a pillow case over his head, being shocked with a stun-gun by the defendants.   De Koker (49) and an employee of the camp, Michael Erasmus (20), are now both on trial for charges of murder, child abuse and neglect, as well as two cases of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm.