Surprise catch in Sunday cache
 
 He’s no Jason Bourne but he’s managed to give the authorities the slip, thanks to the multiple disguises he wears. But his luck ran out on Sunday. During a raid at the Attibele toll booth, Wasim Sharif alias Machli landed in the DRI (Directorate of Revenue Intelligence) net, along with 1,012 exotic turtles and tortoises worth Rs 4 crore in the international market.
 
 
 
 
 
 Machli has an Interpol lookout notice issued against him; also, multiple agencies were hot on his trail. Yet, he managed to evade arrest for over two years as he is a master of disguise – security agencies say he was adept in the use of his wig and could fool anybody.
 
 But here’s the icing on the cake. Even though multiple agencies were looking for him, he was staying a few buildings away from the DRI office in Hennur.
 
 
 Machli’s endgame came when officers of the DRI got a tip-off that sackfuls of tortoises were being taken from Bengaluru to Chennai; from there, they were to be flown to China where the little creatures would have most likely ended up as pets “for good luck”.
 
 The DRI sleuths intercepted the two cars that the tortoises were being transported in and found two men inside – initially, the officials didn’t know that they had a prize catch on their hands. In fact, even the press release issued by the forest department after Machli’s arrest does not mention his name. It simply said that a pet shop owner from Bengaluru was arrested while trying to smuggle out prohibited animals.
 
 Sources said that Machli was well-connected at the Bengaluru airport and are now trying to trace officials who used to help him run the racket.
 
 “A probe is being carried to find out if any airport personnel was involved in the racket. While Wasim (@Machli) was the key person and ensured safe exit of tortoises from India through Bengaluru, smugglers from across the country used to contact him that their wildlife consignments reached the intended destinations safely,” a forest department source privy to the case told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 
 
 
 Machli was apparently running a well-oiled machinery. In fact, at the time of his arrest, his consignment to China consisted of red eared sliders, Indian star tortoise,
 Tricarinate hill turtle, apart from the 1,012 tortoises. While the Indian star tortoise (found in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, eastern Karnataka and Odisha) is protected under Schedule IV of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, the Tricarinate hill turtle is found in northern parts of India is listed under Schedule I (offences related to species listed under this schedule attract much higher penalties).
 
 Other central agencies are now flying their investigators down to Bengaluru to question Machli. They are also trying to figure out whether he had an inside man in Chennai customs or the airport as the consignment was headed to China through Chennai air cargo.