Trump’s Mexican border wall will damage environment, threaten endangered species, say conservationists
 
 
 
  A worker stands next to a newly built section of the US-Mexico border fence at Sunland Park, US near Mexican city of Ciudad Juarez on Wednesday
 
 
 Donald Trump’s plan to build a wall between the US and Mexico is “insane, useless” and an “act of self-sabotage”, as it will have a noticeable impact on climate change and threaten endangered species such as jaguars and ocelots without actually affecting immigration.
 
 Conservationists pointed out that the amount of concrete needed to build a solid wall across the whole border would produce vast amounts of carbon dioxide – with Bloomberg New Energy Finance calculating a figure of up to 1.9 million tons depending on how high it might be.
 
 Trump has been vague about the details with suggestions the wall could be anything from 35ft to 55ft (16m) high, although he was also said fencing could be used.
 
 But the emissions produced during its construction are not the only problem for the natural world. The wall will prevent many animals from moving to different parts of their range and from heading north as the climate warms, something that many species have already been doing.
 
 Dan Millis, of the Sierra Club’s Borderlands project, told ClimateWire: “In terms of climate adaptation, building a border wall is an act of self-sabotage.
 
 “And the reason I say that is we’re already seeing wildlife migrations blocked with the current walls and fences that have already been built.
 
 “We have hundreds of these walls that were built without dozens of environmental protections.”
 
 And Bryan Lee, of the Arts Council of New Orleans, who has written about ethical issues concerning the built environment, added: “The embodied energy in thousands and thousands of miles of wall is insane and useless in so many ways.
 
 While this may sound like an impressive barrier, Millis suggested it would not even achieve Trump’s stated aim.
 
 
  ‘Trump will get rid of all of you’
 
 
 A Massachusetts man is accused of attacking a Muslim airline employee at New York’s John F Kennedy International Airport, allegedly kicking and shouting obscenities at the woman and telling her that President Donald Trump “will get rid of all of you,” authorities said.
 
 The Queens District Attorney’s Office said Robin Rhodes, of Worchester, had arrived from Aruba and was awaiting a connecting flight to Massachusetts Wednesday night when he approached Delta employee Rabeeya Khan, who wears a hijab, while she was sitting in her office.
 
 Queens District Attorney Richard A Brown said Rhodes came up to the door and went on a profanity-laced tirade, asking the woman if she was praying. Rhodes then allegedly punched the door, which hit the back of Khan’s chair.
 
 
  ‘World is preparing for war’
 
 
 Mikhail Gorbachev has urged Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump to strongly denounce nuclear war in the face of the “militarisation of politics and the new arms race”.
 
 The 85-year-old, who was the eighth and final leader of the Soviet Union and its Communist Party, said he believed it looked “as if the world is preparing for war”.
 The ‘glasnost’ Cold War politician made the comments in a piece for Time magazine ahead of Theresa May’s first meeting with Trump today.
 
 “The world today is overwhelmed with problems. Policymakers seem to be confused and at a loss,” he begins.
 
 “But no problem is more urgent today than the militarisation of politics and the new arms race. Stopping and reversing this ruinous race must be our top priority.
 
 “The current situation is too dangerous.”
 
 The Russian-Ukrainian describes how troops, tanks and armoured personnel carriers are being brought to Europe.
 
 He also writes how Nato and Russian forces and weapons, once deployed at a distance, are at “point-blank” range of one another.