Bannerghatta Biological Park plans to bring in host of new animals such as jaguars, pumas

If all goes to plan, Bengaloreans will most likely be treated to a view of exotic animals such as jaguar, puma, and hunting cheetah at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). BBP authorities informed BM that the park will have as many as 15 new exotic animals for viewing in the coming year. As per the proposal, these will include two chimpanzees, six Hamadryas baboons, one giraffe, two jaguars, two pumas, and two hunting cheetahs in at least four new enclosures in the park area.

“We have plans to bring in new animals and will also be increasing the number of enclosures inside the park. Four new enclosures will be added to accommodate these animals. We want to provide our visitors with experiential travel and something new in the coming year. Also, the number of visitors at BBP has only been increasing day by day and we need to expand our facility simultaneously,” said AV Surya Sen, deputy conservator of forests and executive director of BBP.

According to Sen, there has also been a demand for these animals per se by the visitors.

 . 
These animals will be imported from various countries and the project will take six to seven months before the animals are available for viewing.

“Visitors have been demanding to see exotic animals such as pumas and jaguars and thus we have decided to bring in these animals. However, the process of getting animals is a long one and requires various permits. All these animals will highly likely be coming in from countries like South Africa, Singapore, and the Czech Republic. Before they can arrive at BBP, we will need to do a lot of quarantines, acquire permissions at different levels, obtain no-objection certificates, and get trade clearances. While we will begin the process soon in the new year, it will take at least six to seven months for the animals to be available for viewing,” added Sen. 

 Visitors have been demanding to see exotic animals such as pumas and jaguars and so we decided to bring in these animalsAV Surya Sen, BBP
Star kids
In its effort to enhance visitors’ experience, BBP kicked off the holiday season with a daily guided tour showcasing newborn zoo animals at the park. Under the tour, visitors get to see the newborns of zebras, Hanuman langurs, and elephants. “Apart from raising awareness about these animals, the guided tour of newborn animals is also expected to enhance the level of appreciation among visitors, especially children. Also, the holiday seasons have begun and we want our children to learn about wildlife apart from enjoying the viewing,” said a BBP staff member.