Tiger succumbs to injuries after speeding vehicle struck it near Mysuru airport; conservationists say infra is eating into wildlife habitats

In a tragic incident, a one-and-a-half-year-old male tiger died after being hit by a vehicle in Mysuru on January 28 (Sunday) late at night. The incident reportedly happened near the Mysuru airport. According to officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), the tiger was knocked down by a speeding vehicle, and the vehicle has been seized by the department.

The young tiger belonged to a litter of four cubs that were regularly sighted with their mother near Nanjangud. The tiger sustained serious head injuries in the accident.

Wildlife conservationists say ill-conceived road infrastructure projects and other development work in protected areas and forest reserves are eating into wildlife habitats, forcing wild animals to cross highways or land in human habitations.

They pinpoint various ongoing and upcoming development projects in forest areas of Karnataka that would lead to higher incidents of road kills and human-animal conflict cases in the days to come.

A few months ago, the National Highway Authority of India (NHAI) got clearance from the National Board of Wildlife for a six-lane elevated highway inside the Bannerghatta National Forest (BNF). A part of Satellite Township Ring Road, the flyover will be built on a 3.85-kilometre stretch between Bannerghatta and Jigani. For the project, NHAI has also sought the diversion of 27 acres of land in the core area of BNP and 14 acres in the buffer zone of the park.

 .
The State’s National Highway Department, a couple of years back, proposed a 12-km national highway stretch in Bandipur Tiger Reserve. To add to these road infrastructure projects, wildlife conservationists have been raising the issue of various infrastructure development activities in the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve.

They opine that the proposed elevated road infrastructure in BNP and similar projects in other forests will only drive wildlife towards cities.

 The number of tigers in our forests has increased while their habitat has degraded and declined—Joseph Hoover

“The number of tigers in our forests has increased while their habitat has degraded and declined. Unless we ensure that forests are not fragmented and curtail the zeal towards eco-tourism, road kills of keystone species and other wildlife will continue. For instance, while NHAI has proposed the six-lane elevated highway through BNP, the park now houses two males and one female tiger. This indicates that the number of tigers in the landscape is expected to increase soon. These animals are already venturing out, and given the proposed and ongoing development activities, more such cases will emerge in the future,” said Joseph Hoover, a former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.