The lake, which was in a neglected state, has been given a new lease of life by community members and is slowly recovering the biodiversity it had
 
 Spread over 13 acres, Devarabisanahalli lake off Outer Ring Road was becoming a symbol of water pollution. But timely intervention by denizens from the gated community Adarsh Palm Retreat in Eco World, situated close by, has slowly brought it back to life. 

 On Sunday, to mark World Wetlands Day, the lake lovers organised a nature walk and bird watch to spread more awareness about the lake’s ecosystem and its importance to humans and animals alike. The community initiative saw the participation of over 30 school children from Devarabisanahalli school who took part in the walks and learnt about the biodiversity the lake supports. 

 	The lake was becoming polluted with sewage from the village nearby. After Ganesha Chaturthi, many idols were left half immersed in the lake. “It was in quite a bad shape. As part of our Devarabisanahalli Lake Group, we took the initiative to clean the lake and restore natural vegetation,” said Pallavi Singh, a software engineer, who gave up her profession to become a wildlife researcher. Activities started with just four people on board, but others joined later. 

 	The volunteers cleaned the lake. Their persistent efforts got the BDA to survey the lake last week after which a proper restoration of the lake with constructions of bunds and a walking track is expected to follow. 

 	“It took us a little while, initially, to figure out the jurisdictional authority. We kept following it up with the authorities. BDA promised us that the lake would be restored and handed over to us by June after which we would be looking after its well-being,” said Ramprasad Ramanna, a group member. He said the group aims to incorporate the help of kere mitra (friends of the lake) for maintenance and care. 

 	Chief naturalist at Jungle Lodges and Resorts, Karthikeyan Srinivasan, led the school children through the walk and brought the biodiversity of the lake to their notice. The thrilled children saw Purple Moorhens, Cormorants, Cattle Egrets, Pond Herons, Brahmi Kites, Black Kites and Purple Herons. “They were quite excited to see so many different kinds of birds and insects. They also found a dead Checkered Keelback snake which caused quite a buzz. They touched the snake while Karthik held it up for everyone to see,” added Pallavi. 

 	Celebrations followed with the announcement of the winners of the story writing competition based on the theme of the lake. There was also a puppet show that brought the lake and its ecosystem to life.