Three environmentalists have filed a public interest litigation (PIL) in the High Court of Karnataka against the ground breaking ceremony for the Vishnuvardhan memorial scheduled for December 30. They have alleged that the two acres of land allotted near Kengeri falls in the buffer zone of a reserved forest and cannot be used for any other purpose. 

 The PIL was filed by R Sharath Babu, an environment advisor to the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike, Shivaraj N and Deepak CN. They have alleged that the survey number 22 of Mailasandra village, Kengeri in Bengaluru South Taluk is 79.2 acres of notified reserve forest. Adjacent to it is 29 acres of buffer zone abetting the Uttarahalli main road. Two out these 29 acres are proposed to house a memorial to the late actor Vishnuvardhan (in pic). 

 	The petition says, “The petitioners have immense respect to the departed soul. However at the same time, they are involved in wildlife conservation. It is submitted that the reserved forest and also the land in question is occupied by 21 species of reptiles, 12 species of mammals and 69 species of birds. The petitioners also let the rescued wildlife in and around south Bengaluru in the forest land in question.” 

 	The petitioners have said that the land situated is about a kilometre from Abhiman Studio where Vishnuvardhan was cremated. Shivaraj and Deepak had issued legal notice to the government in October when it was proposed to clear trees from the two acres of land, the petition claims. The ground-breaking ceremony scheduled earlier for November 6 did not take place. But an announcement has been made that it will be done on December 30, prompting the PIL before the vacation bench of the HC. Advocate MP Srikanth moved the petition. The court will, however, hear the case on December 30. 

 	Earlier this week, the Vishnuvardhan Trust members, while announcing the ground-breaking ceremony, had said that it would be held in another parcel of two acres of land the government has allotted which is right opposite the Abhiman Studio. December 30 is the fifth death anniversary of the actor.