By Garima Prasher

In a bid to take action against wildlife offence cases faster and in a more organised manner, the Karnataka Forest Department is in the process of implementing an IT-based system to streamline such cases.
 
As per the department’s officials, currently, all information related to wildlife crime is not available in an organised format and a new officer joining the team often finds it difficult to know the history of the crime. They often spend precious minutes trying to be acquainted with the case.
 
The department is implementing the HAWK (Hostile Activity Watch Kernel) software, which is already being used by the Kerala Wildlife Cell and now being customised for Karnataka.
 
As per the department, the software will ensure effective management and administration of forest and wildlife, will be able to manage animal deaths and issue search warrants automatically. HAWK will also give an overview of all the forest and wildlife-related cases and will eliminate procedural mistakes during the documentation process.
 
“There is a need to move on to IT-based forest offense management. The conviction and prosecution rate in the case of forest and wildlife crime is low due to the way we have been dealing with these offence cases so far. Our process needs to be in tune with the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC). We have not been able to organise our crime records and maintain case diaries. There is also non-uniformity in handling forest offense cases,” said an officer from Information Communication Technology, Karnataka Forest Department.
 
The official was speaking at an event organised by the Institute of Wood Science and Technology (IWST) on the application of IT tools in forestry.
 
According to Dr MP Singh, director, IWST, there is a huge demand from the country’s wood sector to provide IT-based solutions for an accreditation system for the raw material being secured by the industry. The legality of timber is being reinforced in the developed world and thus, there is a pressing demand to have an IT-based management system in India as well.
 
“We need to have a good IT support system to generate a certificate to demonstrate that they are procuring wood from legitimate sources. The manual system is too cumbersome and time-consuming. We need to shift our forest management system into IT-based applications. It is possible to have an AI-based system that can simulate forest conditions and come up with a standard silviculture system for all to follow across the country. There will ensure a uniform system throughout the country,” said Dr Singh.