Bavikonda Kilichika in Kudremukh (Chikmagalur) is an offbeat place, not on tourists’ radar, yet. Trekking this trail under an open sky with a carpet of green all around – far from the madding crowds all the way to the peak is a rejuvenating experience. This trek starts from the base of Mullodi village, enroute Kudremukh, eight kilometers from Balgal. Mullodi village with its rich culture and heritage is a place noone should miss visiting. Apart from the splendid peak, Mullodi, a quaint Dakshina Karnataka hamlet, also surprises you.
 
 
 Start the journey to Mullodi early for panoramic views of the sunrise over the Ghats which begin from Mudigree and continue on to Kalasa – about 60 kilometres. The first rays of the sun are bright as torchlight and spreads beautifully across the hills. About 15 kilometres from Kalasa, walk to the village or take a jeep through village interiors, about six kilometres from Belegal to Mullodi: foothills here are covered with coffee plantations. 
 	
 	  	Mullodi’s homestays provide a glimpse into Dakshina Karnataka cuisine, culture, language and way of life. Do not miss the Neer Dosas here, a favourite on Mangaluru menus but inexplicably, having them here feels more authentic. Have a stomach-ful before you start on the easy trail up as the trajectory rises through local forest plantations. 
 	
 You ascent provides views of Mullodi village in all its glory in the shadow of the clouds on farms and peaks. the changing light is a little like changing filters on Instagram, but, naturally. 
 	
 The path is not very clear – though visible, it can be muddy and rocky at times. Keep trekking and you will come to streams which fill up to gushing during the monsoons. With no sound of anything else around, the sound of the water is soothing, and the rich plant and wildlife is a sight for sore eyes. And though the forest is not thick, it is wild with thorny bushes and serrated leaves. Watch out for edible wild berries known locally as ichullu. Though the locals warn about wild animals, they are rarely spotted in the open, but if you are looking you will see signs of them along your trail. But the most memorable part of the journey, arguably, is as you arrive at the Mullodi Village Watcher after crossing the water stream earlier. From here you get a glimpse of the village which is beautifully nestled between the peaks, surrounded by a wilderness of forest, rivers and mountains, and numerous waterfalls. A few falls may also be reached from either Belagal or Kudremukh.
 	
 The elevation increases after the Mullodi Village Watcher. Travellers say the hardest climbs always lead to the most exciting destinations – so it is here – where there are many plateaus to cross for the peak. A little further up and the forest ends drastically. Trees disappear to open up the view to the sky, valleys and peaks. This hide and seek of peaks and valleys is a perpetual source of joy and surprise. You may also spot the office of the Revenue Forest Post, a romantic, lonely-looking cabin until you reach a long ridge walk overlooking the forests you walked earlier, the peak ahead, and bushes, grasses, shrubs and small mud patches with exotic wild flowers, around.
 	
 The peak feels colder because of the height and leaves you spellbound but it is not the end, yet; you may trek further and for mesmerising views of bare mountains around. You can also spot, Kudremukh National Park and peaks like the Gomukh and the Kudremukh. You may go to the beautiful Somavati River Waterfall which is around a kilometre from Mullodi homestay. 
 	
 	
 	GETTING THERE
 	
 335km from Bengaluru, Mullodi is well-connected by road and has several state transport buses from Majestic Bus Stand to Kalasa. It is 15km away from Kalasa. Route: Bengaluru- Kunigal-Hassan-Belur-Mudigree-Kalasa-Belagal- Mullodi-Bavikonda Kalchikia 

  	—Kumaran P