The Kannada film industry is all set to leave its mark on the pan-India market in the upcoming year. Kannada films were once known for being mainly arthouse productions and festival circuit favourites, but with the commercial success of the action drama ‘KGF-1’, Sandalwood can claim to have arrived on the national screen.
 
The industry is looking up to the sequel, ‘KGF-2’, which is slated to be released in July next year, to give it the boost it is so looking forward to.

The industry enjoyed an exalted reputation for quite some time in the second half of the 1900s, when directors such as GV Iyer, MS Sathyu, Girish Karnad, BV Karanth and Girish Kasaravalli made headline news.

Now, it has a new lease of life by the rise of a pan-India superstar in the form of the ‘KGF-1’ star, Yash. The actor has also spoken about the Kannada film industry on various platforms and how he took it upon himself as a challenge to prove that it’s on a par with other language film industries.

In the year going by, Sandalwood received a jolt when superstar Puneeth Rajkumar passed away on October 29. With the entire state in a state of mourning over the loss of a beloved star, the producers of the big-budget movie ‘Bajarangi’ had to suffer huge financial setbacks. The industry, however, managed to get the box office cash registers ringing again as large crowds welcomed ‘Kotigobba-3’ and ‘Salaga’. Later, ‘Garuda Gamana Vrushaba Vahana’, ‘Madagaja’, ‘Badava Rascal’ and ‘Rider’ also managed to put up a good show at the box office.

Much-anticipated events in the coming year will be the posthumous release of the Puneeth Rajkumar-starrer documentary ‘Gandhada Gudi’, directed by the popular wildlife documentary filmmaker JS Amoghavarsha, and the commercial movie ‘James’ directed by Chetan Kumar. ‘Gandhada Gudi’, meanwhile, is expected to make a mark at the national level. After ‘KGF-2’, the Kichcha Sudeep-starrer ‘Vikranth Rona’ is slated to be a pan-India movie. This Anup Bhandari directorial is said to be one of the biggest releases of the industry in the upcoming year. Super Star Upendra, who’s popular in Tollywood, is ready to make a grand entry on the national scene with ‘Kabzaa’, which is being produced in five languages, including Hindi. Rakshith Shetty, known for his experiments, is rolling out ‘777 Charlie’, which is about the journey of a dog named Charlie. The movie is to be released in Hindi, Malayalam, Telugu and Tamil. Speaking to IANS, Umesh Banakar, a film producer and actor, stated that there is a steady increase in the number of pan-India projects led by the Kannada film industry. “There is still scope for content-oriented films,” he stated, pointing out that the number of cinema theatres in Karnataka has come down to 650 to 675 from 1,700.