By Ananth Aravamudan

For a nature chronicler like me, it really pays to stay close to a lake. The Sankey Tank in Bengaluru, a short walk from where I live, provides sanctuary to a wide variety of fauna. Quite often, the subject for my next article crawls, slithers or flies into my field of vision without my having to move my little finger. That’s exactly what happened last week, when an Indian star tortoise decided to pay us a visit. He had a little human help, of course. He was found wandering aimlessly right next to the busy road that passes by the lake, and a kind soul who knows of my interest in urban wildlife, picked him up and brought him over.

I confidently refer to him as “him”, because it’s quite easy to tell the sexes apart in adult star tortoises. This fellow had a long tail and a concave plastron (bottom part of the shell), two clear indicators that he was a boy. If there was a female nearby, he would have seemed smaller in comparison. I have seen plenty of turtles near the lake – red-eared sliders, flapshells and terrapins – but this was the first star tortoise that crossed my path. These creatures have become rare in the wild, mostly thanks to humans. Star tortoises are highly sought after in the pet trade. You will see, with an alarmingly high frequency, newspaper reports of large seizures of baby star tortoises at airports and seaports. The situation is so bad that IUCN, the International Union for Conservation of Nature, has declared the species as vulnerable. I strongly suspect that this one too must have been someone’s pet, discarded at the lake when they had no further use for him.

One look at a young star tortoise is enough to understand why this species is coveted by humans. Its carapace (upper shell) is a beautiful convex shape, with many small humps all over it. It is covered by star-shaped patterns, whose centres coincide with the peak of the humps. The stars’ light brown colour stands out in contrast to the dark background of the shell, presenting a very pleasing picture to the human eye. The pattern serves an important purpose in Nature. It is called a disruptive pattern, and works in the same way as the camouflage clothing worn by army commandos. It breaks up the outline of the tortoise and distorts its shape. For an eagle on the prowl high above in the skies, the stars on the tortoise’s shell make it really hard to recognize against the background of the forest floor. As the tortoise ages, its patterns fade away and its shell takes on a dusty brown appearance with the stars barely visible.

The star tortoise is a creature of the land, unlike turtles that spend most of their time in water. It feeds on grasses, flowers, fallen fruit and other plant-based material. It is small by tortoise standards, barely 10 inches long. Its body is well adapted to suit its terrestrial lifestyle. It lumbers along on its column-like legs, slowly but steadily, as the fable goes. The tortoise that was brought to my house seemed to be determined to get somewhere, and in the few hours that he was left unobserved, managed to find a chink in the compound wall and wander off into the wilderness.

When the star tortoise feels threatened, it quickly disappears into its shell. This part of its body is a mechanical wonder. The shell can protect the tortoise against vicious attacks. You will find several videos on Youtube showing how huge alligators are unable to bite through turtle and tortoise shells to get at the meat inside. With the star tortoise in particular, there is something even more incredible about its shell. But you will have to wait till next week to read about this!