It was a big fat Indian wedding, with lots of noise, pomp and dazzle. The extravagance also landed the bridegroom in a soup — even before he tied the knot! Chandan Mal, better known as Manish, the bridegroom, had barely arrived at the Palace Grounds from his home in Sadashivanagar for his nuptials with Dimple when forest sleuths gatecrashed the party. Usually the bridegroom arrives on a horse, but Manish arrived on Rani, a 13-year-old female elephant.    Using an elephant for commercial purposes is a violation of Central and state wildlife conservation rules. Forest sleuths have booked a case against both ‘giver’ and the ‘taker’ — Manish, who was ‘caught’ riding the elephant, and Hafiz, the mahout who had brought pachyderm to the city from the Sadguru Basavraj Deshi Kendra, a mutt in Airani, Haveri district.    “This is sheer exhibition of the callous attitude of people to wildlife laws,” said Sharath R Babu, BBMP forest cell advisor. “Neither the mahout nor the bridegroom had the required permission to use the elephant. A wildlife volunteer had tipped us off and both BBMP forest cell sleuths and officials of the forest department raided the place. A case has been registered.”   Sleuths say the bridegroom, a member of the family which owns Sri Ganesh Diamonds and Jewellery, had travelled from his home sitting on the elephant and accompanied by a music band and a huge, noisy crowd. Sleuths say it was huge risk as elephants are sensitive to drums and crowds. Moreover, subjecting the animal to such treatment tantamount to an act of cruelty, they say.    Sleuths say the elephant was brought in a Tata Acer (KA 25 C 3108) heavily chained for the entire 300-km journey from the mutt in Haveri. It is necessary to obtain permission from the principal chief conservator of forests and the deputy conservator of forests (DCF) before transporting an elephant for such a purpose, but Hafiz had none of these permits. Sleuths claim the elephant was brought for the exclusive purpose of the marriage procession and the bridegroom had paid Rs 30,000 to use the elephant.    The Wildlife Protection Act and various state government orders prohibit the use of elephants for commercial purposes and also ban the transfer of elephants to any individual or institution. In 1999, the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) in a letter dated July 28, had directed the state government to issue orders to stop transfer of elephants by way of gift or sale to temples. Subsequently in July 2000, the state government citing the CZA letter which stated that elephants were misused and not well taken care of by religious institutions, issued an order prohibiting donation, gifting and selling of elephants to any individual and institution.   “It is a clear violation of the laws,” said Suparna Ganguly, member of Central Zoo Authority’s subcommittee on circus and zoo elephants. “This should not be considered an act of ignorance as one can’t be ignorant of these laws when there are several orders from the state and central authorities. The one using the elephant, the one who gave it, the owners and all those involved should be booked.” Action against those involved   Forest department top brass said strict action would be taken against those who brought the elephant illegally. “We sent an assistant conservator of forests to the scene immediately after we got to know of the case. We will take action against the guilty,” G Appu Rao, DCF, Bangalore Urban told Bangalore Mirror.   The wedding party, however, say that they merely followed a custom and had taken police permission to use the elephant for the procession.   “In every Hindu family in North India, the bridegroom sits on either a horse or an elephant and travels to the venue in a procession,” said Sunder, the bridegroom’s uncle. “We brought the elephant and used it for the procession from the house in Sadashivnagar to Palace Grounds. We haven’t violated any rules. The police too okayed it.”Incidentally, the wedding ceremony was allowed to continue following the raid.