And that is not a good thing, as it is killing animals living in forests around city

A few months ago, a veterinarian working with a wildlife rescue centre in the city found a plastic cloth clip stuck inside a monkey’s gut. The starving animal was found in one of the forest patches around Bengaluru. The primate was unable to eat as the plastic clip had created a blockage in the intestine, causing severe infection.

Experts and activists working with wildlife say while they regularly encounter snakes and birds stuck in plastic bottles, cases of plastic found in elephants’ dungs and plastic items stuck in the digestive tracks of herbivores, primates, and other wildlife are aplenty too.

While city animals have been feeding on plastic for ages, many cases of wild animals eating garbage and ingesting plastic items have raised concerns among veterinarians and organizations working in this area.

“We have come across deer with plastic stuck inside their guts. In most cases, we identify the issue only after the animal has passed away and we conduct a post-mortem. Although plastic items ideally should pass out, sometimes it gets stuck in the intestinal loop and starts gathering rubbish, leading to infection. The plastic acts as a conduit and starts attracting trash and blocks the passage,” said Dr. Roopa Satish, senior veterinarian, at Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, Bengaluru.

Wildlife experts and veterinarians say once wild animals ingest plastic and it creates a blockage, it debilitates the animal. While they already live a harsh life in the wild, plastic in their system makes the situation precarious.

“Even if the plastic is not blocking the food passage completely, it compromises the digestive ability and thus the animal starts getting weaker and its ability to survive in the wild goes 
down drastically. Their ability to run from predators and susceptibility to infection and parasites increases multifold. Soon, the animal is suffering from impaction leading to death,” said a representative of a rescue centre in the city.

Villages located on forest fringes and municipalities discarding the city’s garbage in the wooded area are the cause of concern. Heaps of garbage attract wild animals including elephants and deer, leading to the ingestion of plastic.

“Forests should be out of bounds for humans and if they are allowed in, plastic items should be banned. People are going into the forests and leaving behind footprints in the form of plastic that ends up harming wildlife. Bannerghatta also has many porous gaps and despite all the surveillance in place, the area is littered with plastic,” added Dr Satish.

Experts say this also impacts the area’s ecology as animals become dependent on garbage and stop foraging.

“People going to forest areas for recreational purposes should be made aware of the harmful impacts of littering these areas with plastic items. Forests are not our parks or playgrounds, and wildlife is highly sensitive to us,” said a city-based wildlife activist.