There is a special buzz at the venue of a film making event in the city. Welcoming the visitors are a great hornbill and a fan-throated lizard made out of waste material. Curious visitors were eager to learn more about the conservation of these species.

This is the first time that Echoes of Earth, one of the most influential wildlife and environmental filmmaking events, has gone international with one of the hub events being held in Bengaluru.

Echoes of Earth collaborated with a Natural History Production House called Felis Creations in executing this event. The two-day event in Bengaluru was focussing on community and awareness building in nature and wildlife conservation.

The animals chosen for the installations belong to an endangered category and these animals are vital in retaining the food chain and balance to their respective ecosystems.

The Great Hornbill’s distribution ranges from Western Ghats in Southern India to the Eastern Himalayas. Due to habitat destruction and poaching this magnificent bird finds itself listed as ‘vulnerable’ in the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of threatened species. Now community-led conservation efforts involving indigenous tribes are now focussing on protecting the Hornbill’s habitats and helping the iconic bird flourish once more.

Roshan Netalkar, festival director Echoes of Earth said, “The installation was made using 120 scrapped coconut husks and jute. It was created by installation artist Yadu and his team from Brainsart studio.”

The fan-throated lizard is distinguished by the flap of skin under its neck known as a dewlap. It is found in the grasslands of Satara, Maharashtra, where one of the largest wind farms in this region is also located. Due to its limited geographic range it is now classified as critically endangered by the IUCN.

Netalkar added, “During courtship, the highly territorial males are often seen perched on rocks showcasing their dewlap, not only to attract potential mates but also to warn other males contenders. This installation was created using 20-25 kg of discarded packaging material and 5 kg of discarded CDs.”