3-month window to declare unlawful articles to end soon, but activists say fear of process keeping people from approaching officials

While the three-month window for surrendering undeclared wildlife or animal articles in Karnataka will shut soon, response by the public has been lukewarm. So far, only 65 declarations have been made with the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

“As many as 65 people from different districts have come forward to surrender animal articles that they possessed without a certificate of ownership. These items include elephant tusks, tiger claws, antlers, gaur horns and. We are expecting more calls as the three-month timeline approaches its tail end,” said an official from KFD.

However, wildlife experts say the number of declarations made so far is not even a drop in the bucket.

“The number should have been much more than 65. There are so many incidents of poaching in the Malnad area. Chikkamagaluru, Hassan, Sakaleshpura is a huge poaching belt.
 
Submissions should have run in a few hundred if not thousands,” said a wildlife expert.

The state government issued a notification under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (WLPA) in January this year, allowing citizens to surrender undeclared wildlife or animal articles in their possession. The scheme was announced on January 10 and will close on April 9. After that, there will not be further opportunities to surrender items.

Those working on-ground say many citizens in possession of these items are fearful of approaching the department and thus either keeping quiet or going ahead and destroying these items on their own.

“I have received multiple calls from people with century-old artifacts, but without documentation and possession certificates. This is probably because the transfer done earlier was not thorough or the owners lost the documents. While many of these people want to reach out to the department and surrender, they are worried about the process. Many are scared and some have also gone ahead and destroyed these articles on their own,” said Joseph Hoover, founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

As per the new rule, after receiving the articles surrendered, the authority who has received them may inquire to verify and confirm that the articles surrendered are not sourced from hunting any wild animal after the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. If so, the person who surrendered the article will be prosecuted under the Act. The inquiries will be completed by or before ninety days from the date the artifacts have been surrendered.

The surrendered items will be disposed of under the provisions of the Disposal of Wild Animal Articles Rules, 2023. Wildlife conservationists dealing with these calls say the government should communicate to the public that those reaching out to surrender will not face any scrutiny or harassment. This clarity from the department will ensure more surrenders over the next couple of weeks that are left before the window closes.

“The government and the department should clarify that the scheme is to help those who missed out on declarations in the previously provided windows and is an opportunity to surrender undeclared wildlife articles. Authorities need to be more approachable,” said a city-based wildlife activist.

The government and the department should clarify that the scheme is to help those who missed out on declarations in the previously provided windows–Wildlife activist
A similar 30-day window was opened under Wildlife (Conservation) (Karnataka Rules) in 1973, and thereafter in 2003 for 180 days to obtain a certificate of possession of wildlife items.
 
The government, in its notification early this year however had clarified that if the current window is missed, those found in possession of undeclared artifacts or involved in the trade of wildlife products will be prosecuted under the Wildlife Protection Act.