By: Niranjan Kaggere & H M Chaithanya Swamy
 
 From railway track fences to concrete pillars with spikes, state forest dept is taking new steps to prevent jumbo-human conflict
 
 S tate forests are home to only about 6,000 elephants, but in 2012-13 more than 36,000 cases of man-elephant conflict were recorded and the state government forked out a hefty Rs 13.02 crore on compensation to victims or their kin. Man-elephant conflict has risen alarmingly and it is no surprise that the forest department is determined to find a lasting solution to the problem.
 
 The government had allotted Rs 200 crore in its budget to tackle the problem and based on suggestions from experts, the forest department is trying various methods — both traditional and modern — to prevent elephants from straying into human habitation. So much so that the Rajiv Gandhi National Park (Nagarahole) and the Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Kodagu and Mysore have become a sort of laboratory for such experiments. Areas around these two forests have the highest incidence of man-elephant conflict.
 
 Besides digging traditional elephant proof trenches (EPT) all along the boundary of these forests, officials are also building rubble stone masonry walls and size stone masonry walls. In other areas concrete pillars, fabricated iron spikes, solar powered-fences and railway track fences are being set up.
 
 Even while farmers and planters are experimenting with traditional methods to keep elephants from destroying crops and straying into villages, about 700 km of various kinds of fences have been erected around the two forest areas so far. The latest to the list is the railway track fence, a measure imitated from the national parks of Africa. A total of 200 km in both Nagarahole and Bandipur will be covered with railway track fence.
 
 
 ‘Fencing is fairly new’
 
 The recent measures implemented by the forest department to prevent elephant-man conflict are fairly new. No elephants have been injured so far, but we have to wait and see how effective these measures are. Elephants are highly intelligent animals. They have better sensory organs and can clearly determine what is ahead of them. Their trunk enables them to judge every object, including small ones. Even if there is a pillar with spikes, elephants will not bang into it.
 K M Chinnappa, wildlife expert and environmentalist, Nagarahole