During different seasons reptiles can be seen dead on roads. There are several studies conducted outside India on impacts of roadkills of reptiles. However, very few of them focus on roadkills in Herpetology, branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians and reptiles. When a reptile is killed it reduces genetic diversity, decreases the potential for dispersal in fragmented habitat, diminishes the potential for reproduction and lowers the overall population size.
 
 Conservationist Ramit Singal, who was recently awarded the Zeiss Wildlife Conservation Award 2015, has observed that in the last one week different species of snakes such as green vine snake, checkered keelback, common bronzebacks, Russell’s viper and Russell’s kukris were killed on the roads in Manipal.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Singal said, roadkills of snakes are prevalent in areas where roads pass through natural areas. Speeding vehicles running over snakes is very common in these areas, he said. “Whenever there is a burst of rainfall, there is an increase in roadkills,” he said. 
 	  	High snake mortality by roadkill occurs mainly when the reptiles venture out for breeding, wintering, foraging or summering habitats.
 	  	 “In most cases, snakes are driven out from the prime habitat by rain. As water seeps into their hiding places, snakes are forced to look for other places for shelter. The rains also bring out other ground dwelling prey animals such as rats and frogs. 
 	  	“Another possibility is that since tarmac retains heat for longer periods than adjoining sand or soil, they prefer to come on the tarmac to keep themselves warm,” Singal said.
 	  	Since snake population is very hard to survey, it is difficult to detrmine the impact such incidents are having on its population.  	“However, that there is an increase in human-snake conflict is certain. More snakes enter homes in search of shelter these days,” said Singal.
 	  	Roadkills may be unavoidable but the numbers can certainly be cut down.