By Saumyangi Yadav

UGC requests institutions to organise annual tourism study tours for students UGC requests institutions to organise annual tourism study tours for students

To help students get a glimpse of the culture of Karnataka and beyond, universities and colleges in the city may soon start organising annual tourism study tours about Indian heritage, culture, architecture, wildlife, etc.
 
The University Grant Commission (UGC) has recently requested all the higher educational institutes to identify a tourism destination, encourage students to learn about the destination, organise activities centred around it throughout the year and encourage them to visit the places as a part of the annual study tour. This would help students increase their knowledge about the country. “There are already certain courses where we do annual study tours for the student such as master of social work, certain MBA courses.
 
So as part of field studies, these study tours have always been there at universities. By extending it to all the students and making it mandatory for the learning process, it would be beneficial in learning our culture, architecture and society,” said Lingaraj Gandhi, Vice Chancellor of Bangalore City University (BCU).
 
However, as part of the NEP, the students already have to compulsorily study open electives, languages, ability enhancement courses, skill enhancement courses, value-based activities apart from their core course.

Now the concern is that for the first two years, out of 26 credits only eight credits are for the core courses. So, domain learning might be restricted in some way, the students feel. But the idea is that NEP aims for holistic and multidisciplinary learning and the importance of skills. Therefore, such suggestions and recommendations are being made by the UGC for higher educational institutes.
 
The Vice Chancellor added that if such activities are introduced at the universities, it would enhance experiential learning and field knowledge among the student community.

 Study tours not only enhance learning but also help the students to develop their character and personality– Lingaraj Gandhi, Vice Chancellor, Bangalore City University 
“Study tours and field tours not only enhance learning; it also helps the students to develop their character and personality. Therefore, these suggestions will help the universities to integrate these aspects into the learning process. It is a welcome suggestion by the UGC,” he explained. The universities have been recommended to organise an annual study tour of two-three days’ duration. The students should visit some important tourist attractions, sites of historical importance, museums, wildlife sanctuaries, handicraft centres, etc.
 
Activities among the students such as painting competitions, essay writing, quiz competition, etc may also be carried out throughout the year keeping the destination as the theme.
 
Moreover, the students are also being encouraged to post their live experiences on social media and also prepare a report and submit to the university after the visit.