Karnataka government signals willingness to drop its plan to convert Turahalli forest into a tree park for people to walk in. Thanks to Bengaluru’s people power...

The large scale protests over converting Turahalli forest into a tree park have gained treemendous momentum over the last few weeks. Now it looks like the authorities might drop the project if protests continue and they see that the tree park is indeed a threat to the environment and wildlife.

On Sunday again, protestors gathered to force the government to leave the 400-acre forest as it is. “The tree park has been proposed in the CM’s Mission 2022 programme. There is no plan in the government to drop it. Forest Minister Arvind Limbaballi and Minister of Co-operation ST Somashekhar will be meeting the protestors to understand their concerns shortly. If the local residents still do not want it, we may consider dropping the plan,” said Sanjay Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife). .

  Greens not upbeat over walk-in-the-woods planThis is not the first time the forests are being converted into tree parks or public spaces.

Turahalli forest is one among the four forests identified for creating tree parks by Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa in his pet project ‘Bengaluru Mission 2022’. A while back, when the state government had announced four Cubbon park-like lung spaces in different parts of the City, most people had assumed that the authorities would convert barren land into tree parks. What has astonished citizens is the choice of protected forest space being considered for making tree parks.

    If the proposals are against the environment and wildlife, we will drop the plan— ST Somashekhar, MLA of Yeshwanthpura and Minister of Co-operation

VK Srivatsa, a resident of Hemmigepura said that there are at least 60 CA sites in Banashankari 6th stage, adjoining the Turahalli forest, which are poorly maintained, although they were meant to be developed as parks. “Weeds have grown all over, making it difficult for people to use it. Instead of wasting money on the tree park, the government should spend on improving these open spaces,” he said. He also added that the layouts around these parks do not have even the basic facilities and people still use soak pits in the absence of underground drainage connections. “We feel that the tree park here is driven by real estate considerations.”


  We don’t need park in forest, thank youArun Kumar said that the residents and activists had planted a number of saplings in the Turahalli forest area for the last few years. “The construction of the tree park will affect the birds and peacocks in the forest area. There are more than 120 different species of birds and animals here,’’ he said.
Kiran Kumar, a local resident opposed to the plan, said the government had already created a tree park on the 30-acre land coming under Turahalli forest. “We do not want another tree park on the 400-acre forest land. That will slowly lead to commercialisation if the government starts creating facilities such as parking lots, public toilets, walkways inside the forest. The 38-acre tree-park is more than enough for people to walk or jog,” he said.



     .
Abdul Aleem, president of Changemakers of Kanakapura Road said they plan to meet the local MLA and the forest minister to formally hand over a letter of their opposition to the project.

ST Somashekhar, MLA of Yeshwanthpura and Minister of Co-Operation said, “ Initially, I was not aware of the plan until the local residents brought it to my notice. I have spoken to the Forest minister, who has agreed to meet the protestors in two to three days. I will also come along with officials from the Forest department to understand what they plan to do. If the proposals are against the environment and wildlife, we will drop the plan.”