Dr Krishna Mohan is now working on documenting Indian varieties of creatures
 
 	Dr Krishna Mohan — surgeon and managing director of Prabhu Hospital in Moodubidire — also wears many other hats. And he has a passion for spiders.
 	  	He has, along with fellow researchers, published three papers on spiders of Maharashtra on August 10. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, he said, “Javed Ahmed (naturalist and arachnologist), Rajashree Khalap (natural historian, wetland birds aficionado and authority on native aboriginal dog breeds), Yogendra Satam (working with the Mumbai police) joined in and we have co-authored the papers. Till recently, we used to identify spiders because of our passion. When we met conservationist Gururaja KV, who had come to Karkala for a frog workshop, he elaborated how a casual observation can be presented into a paper. All our papers are peer-reviewed”.
 	  	He said his interest in studying the creatures began some years back when he met conservationist Shivashankar M. Mohan decided to start an FB group for spiders because of his interest in them. “Spiders are like tigers of the insect world. If you have a good spider population, it means that region is ecologically rich. Not much research work has been undertaken on spiders. This prompted me to start a group called ‘Spiders of the Indian Subcontinent (facebook.com/groups/IndianSpider/),” he said adding that they were trying to document spiders and create awareness. “There are only a handful of (spider) researchers in India,” he said.
 	  	Mohan joined KMC (Mangalore) in 1984 to pursue MBBS. After completing an MS in Urology, Mohan reopened Prabhu Hospital in 1995, which had closed down following his uncle’s death. “(In KMC) I was part of the Arohana — a group of nature lovers led by Ashoka Vardhana (of the Athree Book Centre). During the treks, I developed an interest for wildlife. I came in contact with World Wild Fund for Nature (WWF) which conducted nature camps for school children in the Western Ghats. I joined them as a volunteer and became so involved that after three years, I became an Education Officer and have conducted nearly 300 camps. There was also a defunct photography club that I revived after I bought a camera.”
 	 

 	SCALING NEW PEAKS
 	  	In 1989, he participated in an expedition to the Brahma peak which is about 21,000 ft. from sea level. The 45-day expedition consisting eight people from Bangalore and Mumbai, was hit by a snowstorm. It was called off 300 metres from the summit. He said, “We would have been the first Indians to make it to the peak. But we were without oxygen and had not taken sherpas along. The nearest human habitat was about 25 km away. Being a border area, BSF had prevented us from carrying wireless equipment.”
 	  	Mohan has climbed most peaks of the Western Ghats from Goa to Palghat, where he logged animal and insect sightings. Mohan, along with Vardhana, has visited 300 schools across the state to spreading awareness on tigers. In 2005-06, he began conducting amateur photography workshops and also launched an online photography forum called Ning, which has 3,500 members. He also serves as a guest lecturer in the PG Department of Journalism at Alva’s College. The team’s paper can be found here: bit.ly/1Klu9h7.