Imagine a nudist colony, where men and women cavort in the buff, springing up in Kodagu, Hampi or Mysore. Scandalised? Well, ‘gay tourism’, according to its promoters, will be a far more discreet and sedate affair, but its very mooting has elicited a range of local reactions, from the hugely outraged, to the ‘oh, isn’t that stretching it a bit,’ to the ‘oh, now, that’s cool.’

Following the Supreme Court’s recent ruling on Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, whereby homosexuality will no longer be seen as a criminal offence, the tourism industry has been quick to latch on to the commercial possibilities that open up. 

Gay tourism expert and Managing Director of Indiapink Tours, Sanjay Malhotra said, “This is called the pink business. Homosexual tourism has a huge potential in India where tolerance is a virtue. Gay men spend a huge amount of money on lifestyle products, and tourism is one of them.”

The 25th Annual Convention of the Indian Association of Tour Operators starts in Bangalore on Thursday and gay tourism will be on the agenda. “Anything that is new and popular is welcome. We will see how this concept will fare and then implement it soon in the state. This is news to me too.”

“Let us see how this is accepted and then go forward,” said Principal Secretary, Department of Tourism, K Jothiramalingam.

GOA MODEL 
“Gay tourism is specially for those gay men who want to be left alone. It is a no-nonsense, no-attitude trip where gay men can have fun and be at peace without being mocked at or harassed,” Malhotra said. “This package is designed for couples and not for gay groups. We design special packages for gay men according to their tastes and preferences which will also suit their pockets. Full security will be ensured,” he added.

Goa has already moved forward in this direction. There they organise special cooking classes, spa trips, wildlife treks and parties, all exclusively for gay men. Karnataka will emulate this model. And Bangalore, which has several gay communities, will take the lead. Malhotra will be holding talks with officials of the tourism department in Karnataka on implementing gay tourism in a big way. “Karnataka is a beautiful place and has a huge potential for gay men to have a good time. Places like Hampi, Mysore, Kodagu, and north coastal Karnataka hold great potential for gay tourism. I will discuss this with the department officials also at the convention,” Malhotra said. ‘GAY IS NORMAL’
The gay community seems very pleased at this development. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Abhishek, an event manager, (openly gay) said, “This is a welcome move. Couples tend to get romantic in public places when they go out on a tour. If the place and the ambience is suited for a romantic mood, they even get physical, which attracts stares and comments. If a package can be designed for them, they will not feel out of place.”

Big hotels are only too eager to encourage the concept. “Gay couples who check in are very well-behaved and they are received well at our hotels. They prefer leisure destinations which keep them away from the crowds of the city,” said General Manager, Lalit Ashok, Bangalore, Ramiah Daniels. “Gay tourism is not a different stream, it is normal tourism as they also want to be treated normally,” he added.

NOT SEX TOURISM
So how different is this from sex tourism? “Sex tourism, as I understand, is where you go to another country and pay for sex. But gay tourism is regular tourism, where privacy and harassment-free trips are offered for gay men,” Malhotra said. 

Tour operators will research about gay joints and places where gay couples would be comfortable. “This is a way to show that these things are more acceptable even in India. Till now, gays were acceptable only in the West, but we want more gay people to come to Karnataka and see places and make them feel accepted,” said Vijay Thakur, President, Indian Association of Tour Operators.


THERE IS DIVORCE TOURISM TOO!
Niranjan Kaggere

It is one more niche in the tourism industry. ‘Divorce tourism’, aimed at trying to reconcile couples on the verge of splitting up, by taking them to exotic locations across India and providing them with spiritual and relationship counselling, is fast catching up among our tour operators.

Modelled closely on the current trend in Britain, ‘divorce tourism’ in India took off recently with a Mumbai-based tour operator launching a special package. As per the package, couples whose marriage is on the rocks will be taken to an exotic resort, beach or hill station. The ambience is meant to be conducive for mutual discovery. They can also avail the services of expert relationship counsellors. 

Though the agencies which have launched the package are yet to get the desired result, many couples from the IT, banking, BPO and corporate sectors are making enquiries about the packages. 

While Shimla, Kulu and Manali are the preferred destinations in North India, places like Mysore and Kodagu in Karnataka, and Kerala and Goa are being increasingly sought after by such couples. The prices vary from Rs 20,000 for a three-day trip to Rs 40,000 for a week-long package.