Activists and locals raise concern over illegal activities being taken up inside Kali Tiger Reserve

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has recently written to the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka Forest Department, appealing to him to take action against officials of the Kali Tiger Project and the NTCA southern zone for violating the Forest Conservation Act by allowing illegal construction activities in the tiger reserve.

The authority, in the letter, has made a serious request to take action against officials responsible for the canopy walk bridge tourism project in Dandeli Wildlife Reserve. The letter has also sought a high level probe about CSR funds and tiger foundation funds for construction of an orchidarium in the core zone of Kali Tiger Reserve.

This is after NTCA received multiple complaints by wildlife activists about illegal construction and infrastructure development in the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve.
On multiple occasions in the past, the activists have alleged that various illegal construction activities have been taken up inside the reserve area without due approval. Orchidarium, jungle safaris, and canopy walks were some of the illegal activities highlighted.

Locals say that the department has been promoting jungle safaris in Castlerock of Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary, adjoining the Kali Tiger Project area. This area is administered by the Kali Tiger Project area officials.

“As per the ecotourism chapter of the Tiger Conservatory Plan of the Kali Tiger Project area, various activities are proposed at Kulgi, Anshi, and Castlerock Nature Camps. Under Castlerock Range, there is no mention of jungle safari but only trekking and bird watching. Despite this, jungle safaris are being carried out, which is against Project Tiger’s 2012 guidelines, which clearly state tourism shall be taken up on designated routes only. The same has been reiterated by the NTCA recently as well,” said a local.

Interestingly, NTCA had written to the Karnataka Forest Department a couple of months ago, asking for a factual report on the issue. However, sources from NTCA say the Karnataka Forest Department has yet to furnish this report to the authorities.

Locals fighting against these structures say the Castlerock region is under a lot of tourism pressure owing to the alleged illegal structures.


 Now, as a result, the Castlerock area is witnessing too much tourism preessure because of jungle safaris and canopy walk, both of which are illegal–a local
“Although several allegations were made that the Canopy Walk project is not an isolated activity and for sure will increase tourism pressure in the Castlerock region, both the State Forest Department and NTCA failed to act on time. Now, as a result, the Castlerock area is witnessing too much tourism pressure because of jungle safaris and canopy walks, both of which are illegal,” another local informed.


 Relook at what’s going on at tiger reserveAddressed to the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state government, the letter has cited yet another representation made by wildlife activists through the news report on alleged illegal construction activities in the core areas of the reserve.
Many added that it becomes very important to probe how these structures were allowed when tourism policy and guidelines issued by the Tourism Department itself prohibit new tourism infrastructure in protected areas.