In a heartwarming incident, the People For Animals’ (PfA) QRRT (Quick Rescue Reaction Team) saved the life of a spotted deer that was injured and lying adjacent to the Airport Road near Nandi Hills. Upon being alerted by a forest range officer a team from PfA was dispatched immediately to the site, which was 40 km away and required an hour and 20 minutes of driving from the shelter.

Chief veterinarian Col. Dr. Navaz Sharif assessed the clinical condition of the deer in consultation with the veterinary team consisting of Dr. Madhav Rahul and Mohan to determine the best course of action.

Upon reaching the location, the team of vets provided on-the-spot treatment to the deer that had a laceration in the carpal region. Using local anesthesia, the veterinarian sutured the wound and provided the necessary medication to prevent infection and promote healing.

Dr Navaz said, “After the treatment, it was decided to release the deer back into the forest to prevent capture myopathy, which is a condition caused by the stress and physical strain of captivity. The deer immediately took off into the forest, displaying a remarkable recovery and a renewed lease on life.”

Maruthi, Deputy Range Forest Officer (DRFO) Yelahanka division, had seen the deer being chased by the dogs in the forest. It reached the outskirts out of fear. While dodging the dogs, the deer was hurt on its leg and needed immediate medical treatment.

 Deer immediately took off into the forest, displaying a remarkable recovery and a renewed lease on life– Dr Navaz Sharif, PfA
“I informed the PfA team immediately and was at the spot where the deer was injured and lying. Once they reached, they immediately gave the deer medical care and it got better. They observed the deer for a while and released it back to the wild,” he added.

Maruthi added that the incident highlights the importance of having trained professionals and well-equipped rescue teams to ensure the safety and well-being of wildlife. “It also reminds us of our responsibility to protect and conserve our natural heritage, which includes not just the animals, but also their habitats and ecosystems.”