Poor management of Hemmadaga Nature Camp in Bhimgad Sanctuary over the last couple of years has now prompted the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) (Wildlife) of Karnataka Forest Department to ensure that it is handed over to the Forest Department from Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR).

In an order issued by PCCF (Wildlife) after obtaining the approval of the Head of Forest Force, the Chief Conservator of Forest, Belagavi Circle has been directed to take action.

This was after a proposal by a city-based wildlife conservationist, requesting that the operation and maintenance of Hemmadaga Nature Camp be taken back to the Forest Department with the involvement of Hemmadaga Eco Development Committee.

According to Giridhar Kulkarni, the wildlife conservationist, Hemmadaga Nature Camp was established for the dissemination of knowledge on the natural, cultural, and scientific values of the sanctuary. The camp played an important role in educating and creating awareness to the public while imparting the message of conservation through people participation, till the camp was handed over to JLR in 2021 with no clarity on sharing of revenue with Hemmadaga Eco Development Committee (EDC). 

“Hemmadaga Village Forest Committee was converted into Hemmadaga EDC to manage ecotourism activities, ensuring the welfare of the villagers through employment opportunities. However, the Nature Camp was handed over to the state-owned Jungle Lodges and Resorts in March 2021. Though the Nature Camp was handed over to the Jungle Lodges and Resorts, in the MoU, there was no mention of sharing revenue with the EDC. Thus, the committee has not received revenue since March 2021,” said Kulkarni.
 
Experts say this is a welcome move as the success of any eco-tourism effort depends on the participation of local people. This move by the department would fulfill those criteria and will help boost eco-tourism in Belagavi District and Karnataka, overall, say wildlife conservationists.

“Since the ownership and maintenance lies with the Forest Department, now tourists can visit and stay in Hemmadaga Nature Camp at affordable prices too,” added Kulkarni.