It’s official. Rearing and selling Japanese quails is not illegal in the state anymore. The state government has lifted a three-year-old ban, after a recent directive from the Centre removed Japanese quail from schedule IV of The Indian Wildlife Protection Act (TIWPA). Till recently, the state forest department not only prohibited rearing and selling the bird, but also booked those who sold it. All this even as neighbouring Tamil Nadu allowed Japanese quail farming, including farming and trading. 

 	But with the Centre’s directive in July, followed by the state’s order withdrawing the prohibition in August, it’s hoped that the long prevailing confusion over Japanese quail among breeders, wildlife volunteers, and pet traders will finally come to an end. 

 	Farming and trading in Japanese quail (known as gowjala hakki locally) was in disarray as forest officials, as well as the forest department’s investigative cell, constantly raided outlets selling meat and eggs, both of which are in demand. Not stopping there, even those who brought Japanese quails and their eggs from neighbouring states were booked by forest sleuths here. Traders faced repeated harassment in the form of stock seizures and booking of cases under various sections of TIWPA. 

 	NO LICENCE REQUIRED 

 	The sleuths had justified their actions based on a September 2011 directive from the Centre, which asked state governments not to issue fresh licences either for Japanese quail farming or to expand existing facilities. The directive had cited the inclusion of Japanese quail in schedule IV of TIWPA. 

 	As a result, thousands of people who wanted to set up quail farms in the state, as well as retailers who wanted to sell quail eggs, found their applications in limbo. The new order has dismantled the licensing system. 

 	State Forest Department brass confirmed that there is no more need for a licence, which was mandatory till recently. Chief Wildlife Warden and Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Karnataka, Vinay Luthra, told Bangalore Mirror: “Japanese quail has been removed from all the schedules of TIWPA. Henceforth, no prior permission is needed to rear or trade in it. There is no need for a licence either.” 

 	Rearing and selling Japanese quail will henceforth be hassle-free in the state, experts said. “Definitely this order is a boon to this sector. Quail is a very good bird to rear as poultry. The demand for Japanese quail meat and egg is high, and the trade has scope for expansion. With the ban gone, hatcheries will get eggs and chicks without any trouble,” said Prakash Sannamani, a doctorate holder and specialist in Japanese quail.