Officials will raid shops selling these nylon threads, warn them and seize the banned items

The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike’s (BBMP) Forest Cell is thinking of cutting off a dangerous menace at its roots. Chinese manja, a nylon thread coated with glass particles that is used for kite-flying has been leaving behind a bloody trail of badly injured birds.

So now the Palike will conduct raids on shops that sell Chinese manja. “We will raid the shops selling Chinese manja, which is harmful to birds and animals. We will take action against those selling Chinese manja based on wildlife activists’ complaints,’’ said Ranganatha Swamy, Deputy Conservator of Forests, BBMP.

According to Jayanthi of Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre, the volunteers have attended to 901 Chinese manja rescue calls so far this year. “Black kites, crows, barn owls and flying foxes are the most vulnerable to Chinese manja,’’ Jayanthi said.

  ‘Chinese Manja’ nearly kills woman in Richmond TownSpeaking to BM after being discharged from the hospital, Corrrea said, “On Sunday June 14, after walking in the Richmond Park, my husband and I started walking towards Namdhari’s at Nanjappa cirle. My husband was walking ahead of me.
She said the volunteers attended to 65 rescue calls in January, 46 in February, 27 in March, 27 in April, 45 in May, 73 in June, 102 in July, 247 in August, 232 in September, and 37 till October 6.

The Karnataka Government had banned the sale of Chinese manja on June 24, 2016, stating that Chinese manja would cause grievous injury and inconvenience to birds, animals and people.
    
“It is observed that those threads also adversely affect the soil, water, cattle and damages the environment,’’ said the Under Secretary, Department of Forest, Ecology and Environment in a circular issued on June 24, 2016.

Animal activist Arun Prasad met the Deputy Conservator of Forest, BBMP, and appealed to him to implement the order banning the sale of Chinese manja. “The BBMP Forest Cell officials should visit the shops that sell Chinese manja and penalise the shop owners for violating the ban. Many birds are being injured or dying due to Chinese manja used for kite-flying,’’ said Arun Prasad.

The BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forest said that is the plan. “During the officials’ first visit, the manja would be seized. We will penalise them if they are found selling it again. If they continue selling it after this, we will not hesitate to seal such shops and register cases,’’ he said.

  Video: With increase in kite flying in Bengaluru, the nylon thread poses grave danger for birds01:01