The sambhar and spotted deer kept in an enclosure at St John&rsquo;s Hospital          Around 50 deer have been kept corralled inside the campus of a major city hospital. It is in clear contravention of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act-1972.
 
 St John’s Medical College Hospital has been holding these deer as part of its pet therapy programme, a scientifically unproven healing process involving animals and patients with mental disorders. 
 
 Intriguingly, forest department officials had no clue about the deer, a protected species, being held in the hospital campus till Bangalore Mirror alerted them. On Tuesday evening, forest officials finally landed at the hospital to check on the status of the deer.
 
 The pet therapy centre of the hospital has been in existence for 12 years, though the senior-most forest official in the state said that permission for using wildlife for therapeutic purpose was given only two years ago. On their part, neither the hospital’s director nor its resident medical officer were able to provide any scientific evidence on the efficacy of the treatment.
 
 Fr Lawrence, Medical director St John’s Hospital, said: “Well, if you are asking for scientific data to prove that pet therapy is working, then we have none. However, we have received letters from our patients that it has helped them.” All that Dr Sunny Chunkapura, the RMO, could muster was, “When patients interact with animals, there is a rise in endorphin hormone in the body and it makes them feel better.”
 
 When Bangalore Mirror visited the therapy centre on Monday, there were around 40 deer and one sambar in a single enclosure. Right next to this enclosure a huge concrete structure, an auditorium, is being constructed. We also noticed emu, peacocks and peafowls apart from certain exotic birds in the enclosure. 
 
 The pet therapy centre started with four deer, though at one point the deer population touched 80. The hospital authorities then had 35 deer transferred to Bannerghatta National Park for lack of space. The therapy centre does not have in-house veterinarians or other animal experts to deal with the demands of having a wildlife population in its premises. The animals, kept in cages, have also become a ‘pastime’for people visiting the hospital.
 
 Fr Lawrence was very ambiguous about whether the hospital had the necessary permissions for holding wildlife in its premises. “May be, the documents are with the forest department,” he said. 
 
 On their part, the forest officials too didn’t have a clear answer. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B K Singh said: “Two years ago my predecessor is supposed to have given the order to run the pet therapy centre. I am not aware of it. The range forest officer (Bangalore South) Ganesh was supposed to be kept in the loop on the issue, and the hospital is supposed to update us on the developments.”
 
 When contacted, Ganesh maintained that he has not been briefed about the happenings at the centre by the hospital.
 
 The therapy centre does not have in-house veterinarians or other animal experts