Salman ‘thankful’ after HC acquits him in poaching cases saying pellets were not fired from his gun
 
 
 Bollywood actor Salman Khan was on Monday acquitted by the Rajasthan High Court in two cases related to the poaching of Chinkaras in Jodhpur in 1998. The court held that the pellets recovered from the Chinkaras were not fired from Khan’s licensed gun. The driver of the jeep that was used by Khan and his co- stars on their alleged hunting mission has been missing, weakening the prosecution’s case against the movie star. Khan, 50, was jailed in 2007 for nearly a week for shooting an endangered gazelle in 1998. 
 	
 	  	Appeals of Khan against sentence in the two cases relating to poaching of Chinkaras in Bhawad and Mathania was allowed by the HC which acquitted him in both the cases. Justice Nirmal Jit Kaur rejected the plea of the state government against the actor.
 	
 	  	Two separate cases had been registered against Khan under section 51 of Wildlife Protection Act for poaching of two chinkaras in village Bhawad on 26-27 September, 1998 and one chinkara in Mathania (Ghoda Farm) on 28-29 September, 1998.
 	
 	  	The trial court (CJM) had convicted him in both the cases sentencing him to one year and 5 year imprisonment on February 17, 2006 and April 10, 2006 respectivel. The convictions were challenged by Khan in the sessions court, which dismissed appeal in Mathania’s case and transferred appeal to high court in Bhawad’s case, where already two appeals by the state government had been pending.
 	
 	  	Hearing on both the petitions in HC had begun on November 16, 2015 and were completed on May 13, 2016, after which justice Nirmal Jit Kaur had reserved her judgment. While arguing the case in the HC, defence counsel Mahesh Bora had contended that Khan had been falsely framed in these cases, merely on the statements of a key witness Harish Dulani, the driver of the vehicle.
 	
 	  	Bora argued that Dulani was never available to them for cross-examination and hence his statements could not be relied upon in conviction of Khan. He also argued that both of these cases have been built on circumstantial evidences and there was no eye-witness or any material evidence against Khan. Besides this, the major observation by the court was that it did not find the pellets recovered from the vehicle matching with those, recovered from the possession of Khan. Defence also strongly argued that these pellets had been planted since they were not found in the vehicle during forest department’s inspection and were found there surprisingly by the police later.
 	
 	
 	Similarly, the defence also argued that Khan was not in possession of weapons allegedly used in poaching and were brought to Jodhpur from Mumbai only on demand of the forest department. Also, it was argued that the pellets produced belonged to air gun, which has no capacity at all to kill an animal. In its reply, the prosecution counsel K L Thakur had argued that Dulani was present in the court twice but the defence did not examine him. Thakur citing the statements of the co-accused, tried to prove the case by corroborating the statements of Dulani, though, some of them had turned hostile later. Citing the FSL report of the bloodstains taken from Hotel Aashirwad, where the carcass is said to have been taken by Khan in first case and the blood-soaked soil from the spot of poaching in second case, Thakur tried to prove that it was chinkara’s blood. Prosecution also produced the FSL report of the tyre marks of the vehicle in question in the second case and maintained that out of 6 samples, 4 matched proving that it was the same vehicle.
 	
 	
 	SALLU’S SISTER THANKS FANS
 	
 	

 	 		 Salman Khan’s sister Arpita Khan (pic, above) has thanked his fans and well-wishers for standing by the family during the tough period. “Thank you god for always showering us with your grace and blessings. Today is a big day for us... Salman Khan. Thank you to all bhais and the family’s well-wishers for your prayers, support, love and best wishes. This wouldn’t have been possible without you,” Arpita said. Later, Salman to thanked fans. He wrote on Twitter, “Thank you for your prayers and support.”
 		
 		
 		 			THE CASE
 			
 			 		 			Salman Khan was accused of killing a blackbuck and a chinkara in two separate incidents. One of the animals was killed at Bhawad on the outskirts of Jodhpur on September 26, 1998, and the other at Ghoda Farms on September 28, 1998. The actor was shooting for Hum Saath Sath Hain when the incident happened. Salman had earlier been lodged in Jodhpur jail in the cases