Officials attribute birds being attracted to area to dumping of waste on plots near airports

How safe are our skies for fliers? Well, danger is always lurking for the aircraft in the form of bird hits. Karnataka has reported 367, one of the highest bird hits involving aircrafts in the last six years. In 2023 alone, 87 incidents were recorded (Delhi topped the list at 169).

The figures for Karnataka in previous years are 56 in 2018, 28 in 2019, 49 in 2020, 43 in 2021, and 104 in 2022. Officials blame the dumping of hazardous waste on the ground as one of the reasons for attracting birds.

Confirming this, Union Minister of State for Civil Aviation General VK Singh said the regulations and guidelines by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) for managing potential wildlife hazards at licensed airports. Rule 91 of The Aircraft Rule 1937 prohibits activities like garbage dumping and animal slaughter within 10km of the Aerodrome Reference Point.
 
“Aerodrome Advisory Circular AD AC 06 of 2017 instructs aerodrome operators to implement effective wildlife control mechanisms to prevent strikes. Civil aviation requirement Section 4 Series B Part 1 mandates aerodrome operators to identify, manage, and mitigate wildlife-related risks by adopting measures to avoid collisions between wildlife and aircraft. Aerodrome Advisory Circular AD AC 01 of 2022 stressed for identifying gaps and ensuring the strict implementation of plans for wildlife hazard management both on and around the aerodrome. It calls for aerodrome operators to identify high-risk areas and take appropriate action to manage potential wildlife hazards. The compliance with these regulations and guidance is monitored through annual surveillance inspections of the aerodrome,” he said.

Status of airports
It may take over a year at least for work on the Hassan airport to get done. Minister for Heavy Industries and Infrastructure MB Patil said, “The first package of the Hassan airport is 63.40% over while the second phase is only 12.14% completed. We estimate the Hassan airport completion by the financial year 2024-25.”
 
Patil said that the Hassan airport was being constructed at a cost of Rs 193.65 crore at 536 acres. Hassan airport is being developed so that it can accommodate only ATR-72 flights.
Besides this, Karnataka may get six more airports as the aviation sector expands. The proposed airports are to come up at Vijayapura (Bijapur), Hassan, Raichur, Karwar, Koppal and Davanagere.
 
The proposed Vijayapura airport is located at Buranapura and Madhubavi villages, at a distance of 15 km from the city centre. The airport will come up at an area of 727 acres. The first phase of works started from February 2021 and the government hopes that the construction work will be completed by 2024. The Raichur airport will come up in an area of 320 acres at Yeganur village which is at a distance of 12 km from the City centre. An administrative approval has been accorded for Rs 185.57 crore project. However, there is a requirement of an additional Rs 33 crore (Rs 20 crore for construction and Rs 13 crore for land acquisition and rehabilitation). 

Currently, the Indian Navy is constructing an airport at Seabird naval base which is at a distance of five kilometres from Ankola. The Karnataka government is proposing a tie up with the Navy to allow part of the airport as a civil enclave. For this purpose, 97.10 acre of land is under acquisition process. There is a plan to start airports at Davanagere and Koppal districts as announced in the 2022-23 budget. The Airports Authority of India has conducted a preliminary survey and the state government is yet to take a final call on the project.

The advisory calls for aerodrome operators to identify high-risk areas and take appropriate action to manage potential wildlife hazardsGeneral VK Singh, MoS
Meanwhile, to promote tourism and for disaster management, new air strips are being developed across the State. An air strip has been planned in Dharmasthala.