Chunchaghatta Lake in JP Nagar experiences fish kill; lake activist asks BWSSB and KSPCB to put in place efficient water monitoring system

Chunchaghatta Lake has witnessed a fish kill, making it the 19th fish kill of the year in city. Lake activists have called on authorities to ensure an efficient water quality monitoring system is put in place to curb the frequent fish kills.

The 18-acre Chunchaghatta Lake is located upstream of the Sarakki Lake in JP Nagar and was rejuvenated only a few years ago by the municipal body Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) at a cost of Rs 2.7 crore. Raghavendra Pachhapur, a lake activist, noted that this lake does not have a diversion channel, leading to an unregulated flow of untreated water into the water body.

“Even if there is a small shower of rain, all the water within channels enters the lake. Though the water might look clear, either the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) or the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) must test it for various parameters to ensure that it is fit to be let in,” he said.

All the debris that collects within storm water drains (SWDs) stays stagnant on the bottom unless there is a heavy flow of water, while a thin flow of clear-looking water still continues to flow into the lake, he added.

A study by the ActionAid Association regarding fish kills in Bengaluru (2017–22) noted that the number of fish kill episodes in 2022 stood at eight, whereas the number has significantly increased this year. The study had noted that 51% of the fish kills were due to the entry of sewage into lakes.

“Sewage constituting 51% seems to be the biggest challenge, making lakes vulnerable to fish kills in Bengaluru. Organic matter in sewage uses up the dissolved oxygen (DO) in the lake, causing levels of DO to reduce, which ultimately causes fish kills. Effluents containing toxins and chemicals are disposed of, and solid waste dumping in the storm water drain contributes to 33% of causes for fish kill. Effluents are a threat to aquatic life; depending on the quantity, they might affect a portion or a larger portion of the waterbody,” the study observed.

Fish kill at lakes could imply that there are issues with the water quality; DO needs to be 4 g/litre or more in the case of the propagation of wildlife and fisheries. Reduced DO is an indicator but not a factor or a reason for fish kill. Depletion of DO occurs due to excessive algae and phytoplankton growth driven by high levels of phosphorus, nitrogen, and high biological oxygen demand (BOD), as well as changes in temperatures, it added.

 Even if there is a small shower of rain, all the water within channels enters the lake–Raghavendra Pachhapur, lake activist
“These negative developments need to be reported to the custodian of lakes for corrective action and to avoid fish kill as a first stage of prevention. Custodians of the lake also need to act as per the recommendations of KSPCB on the issue of pre-monsoon rains and frequently monitor the lake water quality until it improves to Class ‘D’. KSPCB must investigate all fish kills in the lakes of Karnataka, take necessary action against the polluters, and place the reports in the public domain,” the report recommended, among other suggestions.

Pachhapur called on the BWSSB as well as the KSPCB to put in place an efficient water monitoring system, followed by measures to curb the various negative developments taking place. He added that the authorities need to be collaborative with the BBMP.