A newborn monkey that was rescued by a family has now become an inseparable part of their daily lives. The 20-day-old baby monkey now eats, plays and sleeps with the Vaidyas. ‘Meenu’ as they have named it, has comfortably mingled with the surroundings, so much so that it knows when to demand for food and when to sleep.
   Meenu’s association with Manish Vaidya and his family began on the last day of June. Some locals were standing under a peepal tree at D Cabin in Sabarmati when all of sudden they saw an infant monkey fall from the tree. Apparently, a female monkey which was sitting with a group of monkeys (langurs) on the tree had given birth to a young one. Soon a crowd gathered around the injured animal. It was a Saturday, which is considered auspicious as people worship Lord Hanuman on that day. 
   Vaidya, an animal lover, who came to know of it reached the spot and asked people to vacate the place. He  thought the baby monkey’s mother would take her back once the baby was left alone, but nothing of the sort happened and the group of monkeys went their way. According to Vaidya who is a wildlife activist, “At times a female monkey does not realise she has  delivered a baby, if it happens to be her first delivery.”
   Vaidya took the baby monkey to a veterinary hospital for treatment. Once it was treated, he brought it to his house at Harshnagar Society. Vaidya’s family welcomed it with open arms. It was decided that after treatment, it would be handed over to a zoo.
   “We contacted the Kankaria Zoo, but the authorities said that since the young monkey was rescued from an area that fell under Gandhinagar forest area, they can’t take it,” Vaidya said. He then contacted Gandhinagar Indroda Park, but they pleaded lack of infrastructure.
   Not wanting to leave it at the mercy of anyone, the family decided to look after the little animal till they found a proper place for it. 
   Vaidya said, “My son Khanjan who studies in class 9, has named it Meenu. He is very fond of her. However, with passage of time, even Meenu will get attached to us. Some arrangement must be made before that happens. It must reach its natural habitat and surroundings.”   Daily routine Till that happens, Meenu is comfortable snuggling close to Khanjan and his younger brother Nisarg in bed. According to Khanjan, “As soon as we shut the lights, it is off to sleep. Only twice it gets up in the night and starts shrieking. But after we give her a bottle of water, she goes off to sleep till day breaks.”
   Hearing the commotion in the morning, Meenu is up by around 8 am, walks around the room and slowly gets into the mood to play with Khanjan. She climbs over him, literally kisses his cheeks and clasps him as a baby does to her mother.
   With Meenu having teething problems, it wants to put everything in its mouth. To ensure that its soft gums are not hurt, the family has brought some soft toys for it to chew on. Breakfast time is a bottle of milk. Thereafter it is fed some cerelac and protein powder. During lunch it has some rice mixed with curd and in the evening some soft khichdi which is crushed in a blender.
   Like a lord of the house, it moves around from room to room, but never crosses the door to move out. It is happy with its surroundings. When Khanjan goes to school, it keeps children of the neighbourhood entertained with its antics. Meenu is the happiest when Khanjan returns, literally jumping on to him. After feeding the baby, he takes her for a stroll in the park. He helps her climb a tree, for he knows that it has to soon leave for its familiar surroundings. But for now, this is the only world Meenu knows and is happy to know.