An official notification over appointment of Chief Wildlife Warden of the state on Friday has caught Karnataka’s wildlife circles by surprise. The notification, while separating the posts of Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden of the state, has also brought forth a squabble within the Indian Forest Service (IFS) circles to grab the post of Chief Wildlife Warden — the custodian of wildlife and wildlife areas across Karnataka. On Friday, the government appointed Jayaram C, APCCF as the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka.
 
 
 Safeguarding the forests of Karnataka, Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) had two top posts —Head of the Forest Force and PCCF Wildlife. While the former looked over the administration of the department and territorial divisions of the Karnataka Forest Department, the latter supervised the wildlife conservation and wildlife areas like national parks and sanctuaries. Until the latest order, many had even assumed that the post of Chief Wildlife Warden and PCCF (W) are one and the same. But Friday’s notification from Forest, Environment and Ecology has clarified that the two are different.
 
 Had the state government appointed a PCCF-rank officer as Chief Wildlife Warden, there would not have been any confusion. But with the appointment of APCCF rank officer, who is a step below the rank of PCCF, has triggered confusion within the department over who wields control over conservation of wildlife. The notification has also raised questions over the duties and responsibilities of PCCF (Wildlife), the top position in wildlife conservation, when a subordinate has been appointed Chief Wildlife Warden of the state.
 
 The notification was however slammed by several retired IFS officers saying that it would set a bad precedent besides affecting the conservation work. “The notification will have huge impact on the morale of the IFS and it is certainly not in the interest of the department and conservation. The move also exposes the bitter squabble within the department to bag the coveted position. The government should not have yielded to such lobbying,” opined a retired IFS officer who also served as PCCF Wildlife in the past.
 
 Sources in the KFD revealed that, until 1992, Karnataka formally had no wildlife divisions. “It was only during then CM S Bangarappa’s tenure that wildlife divisions were created. While the PCCF Wildlife looked over the affairs of wildlife conservation, state had the responsibility of appointing Chief Wildlife Warden as the sole authority for any wildlife issues under the provisions of Wildlife Act of 1972. However, it was not clear who should be appointed as Chief Wildlife Warden. The government making use of the clause has yielded to the lobby and appointed a APCCF rank officer as Chief Wildlife Warden thus triggering confusion within the department,” explained a KFD official attached with administration wing.
 
 Initially, in 1992, a Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF)
 rank officer was appointed as
 
 CWW and later on the post was upgraded to APCCF. For years, both the PCCF Wildlife and CWW were assumed to be the one and the same as government never differentiated the two.