Forest dept claims fire incidents at BRT have been deliberate acts by those who are in illegal possession of forest land

A battle of sorts is on between the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) and ‘locals’ at BRT Tiger Reserve. The outcome is that the reserve witnessed its second major fire incident of this season on Friday evening, apart from multiple small incidents - all man-made, according to KFD officials.

The repeated and deliberate act of setting forest land on fire so far has destroyed nearly 80 acres of forest land in BRT in the two major incidents that took place within a week, they said.
Wildlife conservationists say they fear more such incidents are in store as villagers around the reserve do it out of vengeance.

“The pattern of these incidents shows that these are being put down by locals as they are upset with foresters. We expect more such incidents over the coming days. In this battle between the forest department and villagers, wildlife is suffering the most,” said Joseph Hoover, founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

KFD officials say these incidents are sabotage and an act of revenge by those who are in illegal possession of forest land (land granted after 1980, the year of enactment of the Forest (Conservation) Act).

There has been an ongoing Lokayukta case since 2016 to clear the dispute over land ownership and to establish a forest area in BR Hills. In 2019, a joint survey was conducted by the Forest Department in association with the Revenue Department. The case was to be presented in 2020, however, it got delayed as the pandemic struck.

“We are now finalising the survey. The ‘wrongly’ classified RFs are lands released post-independence for poor people, where the grants of forest land are legal and valid and where grantees are in possession are being considered. All others (forest land given away in 1980) are to be canceled. These illegal grantees are well-connected people who are trying to change the map. When the department has refused to give in to the pressure, they have resorted to setting forest areas on fire. Lokayukta’s most recent response in February made it clear that we will be canceling these grants. These incidents have started since February in forest ranges where these grants exist,” said BRT Tiger Reserve DCF and Director Deepa J Contractor.

According to Contractor, while 59 acres were impacted in the fire incident early this week, nearly 20 acres have been damaged due to Friday’s fire incident.

Trust deficit
However, wildlife conservationists underline the lack of coordination and trust between KFD officials and villagers, a major reason leading to fire incidents.

“Unless there is an interaction between forest officials and the local community, these incidents will continue. The department should focus on winning people’s confidence in the area.

When the department has refused to give in to the pressure (from the illegal grantees), they have resorted to setting forest areas on fire­–Deepa Contractor, BRT Tiger Reserve 
Minimal outreach activities are happening on ground,” said a conservationist.

Officials say this allegation is false.

“Since January this year, we have conducted nearly 40 outreach programmes, all with the help of local performers. BRT Tiger Reserve has 185 fire watchers and they are from tribal settlements inside the reserve. In a one-of-a-kind initiative, we have also provided uniforms, first aid kits, water cans, and backpacks to our forest watchers. Higher officials of BRT also attended the recent Shivaratri pooja organised by the tribal community,” said Contractor.