Bamboo groves burnt at Chunchagatta Lake

Dry leaves and garbage burning is continuing in many parts of the city. Two days ago, miscreants entered the Chunchaghatta Lake and are said to have burnt the bamboo at the lake. Many of the regular walkers and lake activists were surprised to see a major portion of the bamboo plantation burnt to a crisp.

There is no fencing at the lake and no guards are appointed to keep a vigil. Lake activists pointed out despite the lake having been restored, fencing was not carried out appropriately resulting in such activities.

Earlier garbage was being disposed of at the lake premises and sewage used to enter it untreated. The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) restored the water body last year, but lake activists had spoken then too about the fencing not being done.

Raghvendra Pachhapur, Senior Leads Project, Action Aid, said, “On March 5, we noticed fire at parts of the Chunchaghatta Lake. People have been burning the grasses and bamboo very frequently. The BBMP hasn’t completed 100% fencing of the lake. Lapses in works of this sort have led to such issues. Incomplete lake fencing and broken fences are the gaps which allows miscreants to enter the lake after dark. I have made complaints regarding the fence issues to the BBMP Sahaya app and updated officials regarding the same.”

Chunchaghatta Lake has three frequent bird visitors which are near threatened (Oriental darter, painted stork and black-headed ibis). Both black-headed Ibis and Painted stork bank on wet soil and shallow waters at the lake where they find food. The lake activists pointed out that the security needs to be tightened at the lake to protect these birds.

He added, “Home guards are deputed on different assignments at lakes. In February, many were assigned for the Aero Show, during this period there were issues in opening/closing lake gates. Guard presence at lakes is a necessity until the community is sensitive about the environment. BBMP should ensure that dedicated guards are on duty at lakes.”

This apart, he pointed out that in 2018, many birds used to rest in the wild vegetation before lake restoration work. “Every lake needs isolated/private wildlife areas so that they can use it as a habitat. BBMP lake design allows for a walking path that allows human disturbance all across,” said the activist.