Officials said they will launch a team to capture the tiger soon
 
 After days of scepticism, the Bannerghatta park authorities finally confirmed sighting of a wild tiger near Bannerghatta.
 
 Interestingly, this is the first sighting of a wild tiger so close to Bengaluru. Confirming this, Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) executive director Range Gowda said, “This was known to be a tiger territory. We had a suspicion of a wild tiger prowling in the area for the last six months. On Saturday, some BBP safari staff and public was the tiger from a close range and even clicked its pictures. So, now, we can say with confirmation that a wild tiger has been spotted.”
 
 Meanwhile, officials said they will launch a team to capture the tiger at the earliest. When asked as to where the tiger could have come from, Gowda said Bannerghatta forests had a connection with the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. “The prey base in and around Bannerghatta was good and hence the tiger could have reached here,” he said.
 
 An equally excited IT employee, Prashanth Kumar, said, “For a couple of years, there have been sightings of tiger pugmarks in and around Bannerghatta. However, there has never been a sighting of the wild cat itself. As a regular visitor to the BBP,
 anything new around the area can be spotted by me immediately. Just two days back, I sighted tiger pugmarks in the area.
 
 Being a wildlife photographer, I have some knowledge on the subject. I could immediately identify that they were pugmarks of a male tiger. The size of the pugmarks are big, clearly indicating that they belong of a male member.”
 
 He added that they were on the lookout for the tiger since then. “Finally on Saturday, around 3.30 pm, a tiger was spotted neat the Rescue Centre at Mulegundekere. As a wildife enthusiast, this is a very exciting moment for me. However, there are two other factors that need to be looked into, with the wild cat moving around. Human settlement is just a kilometre away from where the tiger was spotted and an animal-human conflict can arise. Another factor to be kept in mind is that a lot of cattle grazing activity takes place inside the park. The animal should not be a threat to them,” he cautioned.