The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) is looking to replicate the success of its elephant tracking and warning system in Kodagu, bringing it closer to the city where man-animal conflicts have been recorded.

People living around the elephant corridor that passes through Kanakapura Road and Bannerghatta will now be able to get SMS alerts any time a herd of jumbos are nearby. The model will also be used in Chamarajanagar as well as Sakaleshpur and Ballupet areas in Hassan district.

Testing out the new technique 3-4 months ago in the Kodagu circle, the KFD officials collared as many as six elephant herds and began tracking their movements through satellite communication. Through SMS alerts, the department was able to warn people living on the route that these herds travelled. 

Read Also:
Meet Sathya Shankaran, first bicycle Mayor of Bengaluru 

These advanced alerts have not only helped planters and plantation labourers, but also prevented possible man-animal conflicts. The KFD now wants to replicate this model in other conflict-prone areas.

C Jayaram, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), told Bangalore Mirror that the experiment has come in handy for officials in the circle. “We tried Elephant proof trench, solar fencing and rail track barricades; but the problem had persisted as the space between their habitat and human habitat is either altered or occupied. However, after collaring elephants in every herd and tracking them through satellite, it has become easy to monitor their movement. Soon, a similar method will be put in place in other areas too,” he said. 

The department has only recently acquired the technology to collar elephants. “In every herd, the main elephant, preferably the female, will be collared as the rest of the elephants move around it. A total of six such herds in the Kodagu circle, predominantly in Virajpet division, have been collared. Based on the satellite communication on their movement, we send out SMSs to people living along their route. They, in turn, send it out to others. This way, we have built a large network of users to disseminate information.”

Collaring an elephant takes no more than 15- 20 minutes, say officials. “We do not sedate the animal for long. The entire exercise will get over in 15-20 minutes. Assisted by Kumki (trained) elephants, the personnel approach the elephant to be collared. A small dose of xylazine (a sedative) will be shot. The readied collar will be fitted around the neck even as the animal is still standing in between the Kumki jumbos. After this, it is monitored through satellite communication,” a senior official explained.