Leopard death: Human-wildlife management rules suggest imposition of Sec 144 to prevent crowding

An ineffective crowd management strategy during the operation by forest officials to catch the leopard that had strayed into the city could be the factor that jeopardised the outcome of the operation. Going by the rulebook, section 144 of Cr.PC should have been imposed in Kudlu to avoid crowding by locals.

According to guidelines laid down by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) for human-wildlife conflict management, in all instances of wild carnivores straying into a human-dominated area, the district authorities should ensure law and order by imposing section 144 of the Cr. PC. This is essential to avoid agitation and locals surrounding the spot, which hampers capture operations, leading to injuries to people and staff.

“If such an operation is taking place close to human habitation, the District Collector/DM and SSP/SP of the area should be involved to maintain law and order, besides preventing crowding. The authorities should be acquainted with human-tiger conflict issues and guidelines of the NTCA. If the situation demands, the district authorities need to ensure law and order by imposing section 144 of the Cr. PC. Coordination with police and local administration is critical to controlling mobs which worsen the situation and lead to avoidable fatalities/tragedies,” notes the NTCA guideline.

Wildlife experts say crowd management is crucial to any successful animal rescue operation. The emergency response team gets obstructed and hindered in its activities by a gathering of people, making it difficult to discharge its responsibilities.

“Support of the police and civil administration should be ensured in advance to facilitate crowd control and to discourage crowding and this should be done by imposing Section 144 that is mandated as per the standard operating procedures by NTCA whenever carnivores stray into human habitations. During the operation on Wednesday too, the public could have been more responsible by avoiding crowding which probably created pressure on the rescue team and on the animal,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist.

Crowd stress
According to the officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), leopards or any other wild animal, when surrounded by many people, get scared and become aggressive, which is their defence mechanism. In this case, too, the animal was already under a lot of stress and the crowd presence made it more aggressive. It panicked and that was the main reason it attacked people. Thus, the department had to shoot it down.

“While officials from the forest and police departments kept asking the civilians to keep away from the campus, the majority did not budge. We tried to drive them away to the maximum possible. Such situations arise in every operation, even in villages. Hundreds gather and make so much hue and cry that it becomes difficult for us to carry out the operation. Moreover, our priority in such situations is to capture the animal and with limited force, it becomes difficult to keep everyone away. Civilians should be more mindful and understanding. They should cooperate with the department,” said a senior official from KFD.


Our priority in such situations is to capture the animal and with limited force, it becomes difficult to keep everyone away. Civilians should be more mindful ­–KFD official

Experts highlight that given the NTCA guidelines were followed on Wednesday, the outcome of the operation could have been favourable. MOEF&CC guidelines for human-leopard conflict management also talk about crowd management measures in such situations. As per the guidelines, a primary response team comprising paid or volunteer members from the local communities, who are trained to respond immediately to a conflict situation, should also be established to control the crowd and secure the area until the next level of help arrives.

“The area should be cordoned off with barricades, and the public alerted through a public address system. Regular updates should be made available to the administration and local public.
 
It is important to spread awareness and sensitise people about such issues so future incidents can be managed better,” said another wildlife expert.