By Shreyashi Mukherjee

People for Animals, a wildlife refuge in the city recently saved a Purple Rumped Sunbird and helped it reunite with its parents. The officials mentioned that they have received an increased number of these kinds of rescue calls.
 
Dr Nawaz Sharif, chief veterinarian and general manager, of PFA, said, “It was a very heartwarming incident. It was a Purple Rumped Sunbird fledging that had fallen on the balcony and the parents were not to be seen. We immediately sent two of our officials. They found that the bird was very small and it was dehydrated. They fed the bird a rehydration solution with a special sugar solution. Initially, the bird was too weak to move, however, with time the bird gradually started regaining its strength. It was decided that they will wait there and try to reunite it with the parents.”

After an hour and a half, the sound of the parent birds could be heard as they were hovering nearby. First, the male bird approached and after it recognized the fledging and finally the female bird came and took the fledging with them.
 
“It felt really good to see them get reunited. Otherwise, we would have to bring the bird back and it would have been quite difficult,” added Dr Sharif.

He added that these kinds of rescue calls have increased quite a lot.
 
“We are getting a lot of rescue calls like this. The reason behind this is the rapid commercialization, the increasing pollution. Even the bright lights have a role in this as they cause the birds to get disoriented. Since the birds are quite small, they lose their balance and end up falling and getting dehydrated and not every time we are able to reunite them with their parents.
 
When the parents do not come back, we bring these birds back and put them in the incubator and then start the rehabilitation process,” he said.
 
Concerned residents told Bangalore Mirror that cutting down of trees may be the reason for these incidents.
 
Praveen Kumar, a resident of Jalahalli, said, “In my area, there used to be a lot of trees and we would see a lot of birds. However, over the years, the trees were cut and houses were made.
 
As a result, the birds started disappearing and some started building their nest inside houses and apartments. But often the eggs would end up falling and breaking. Or some were even thrown by the owners.”

Abhijith K, an environmentalist, said, “These kinds of incidents of small birds falling and losing their life will continue as long as we keep taking up their space and make it our own. It is important to plant more trees and not build houses and apartments near areas with a lot of trees. In addition to that, the people should switch off all the lights when they are not required to prevent the birds from getting disoriented.”