Vinay Luthra’s sudden ouster from the board and replacement with an IAS officer has riled the IFS fraternity that is calling it a harmful political interference
 
 Barely a year after being appointed to the post, chairman of the Karnataka Ecotourism Development Board Vinay Luthra has been shunted out abruptly.
 
 Luthra, the man behind the recent eco-trail and green passport initiatives, was hired for his expertise in the field. His sudden exit has not only triggered concern for the department’s performance but also sparked an IAS-vs-IFS debate as his replacement is the former chief secretary, J Alexander, who is new to the subject of environment and forests.
 
 The recent development comes close on the heels of a string of ‘setbacks’ for the forest department including the taking away of some of the powers from the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests PCCF (Wildlife) through the post of Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW). Some are calling it “excessive political interference” in a department that is being bogged down by one or the other controversy, the previous one being the appointment of honorary wildlife warden postings that allegedly witnessed political nominations instead of merit-based appointments.
 
 Luthra, a retired PCCF, was appointed chairman of the board in October 2016. He had initiated several measures to boost ecotourism in the state. But his removal from the post may cast a shadow on the implementation of these projects and affect Karnataka’s prospects as a touristic destination, say insiders.
 
Read Also:
Appoint wildlife wardens based on merit expertise 
 
“It is a classic case of political interference in forest administration, which was not the case in all these years. One politician is calling the shots. Forest officers are helpless. Luthra had been doing quite a lot, including eco-trails, a certification course for eco-volunteers, training programmes for over thousand volunteers – all aimed to give the concept of ecotourism in state a new dimension, using his expertise in forest issues. His removal at this stage derails the entire exercise,” a forest department source told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 The abrupt removal of Luthra, a forest man and a retired IFS officer, and replacing him with a retired IAS officer who has not worked in forests and wildlife departments, has not gone down well in the forest circles either. Replacing people with academic expertise such as Luthra who was Chief Wildlife Warden and CEO (KEDB), to serve the interests of select people, affects the department badly, a source said. The issue has triggered a debate within the IFS circle with some saying that they were being overpowered through former or serving IAS and IPS officers.
 
 	 
 
 The reasoning
 
 Last week Luthra was removed and the government had appointed Alexander without any delay. The former chief secretary has assumed power too.
 
 “There was one or the other issue between one of advisors of the board [who was Luthra’s Man Friday, and his choice in most conservation initiatives] and the politician who is calling the shots in the forest department. This could have been one reason for Luthra’s removal. Luthra not falling in their line could be another.
 
 After Luthra, it could now be the turn of Luthra’s man to exit the board, which seems to be the motive behind Luthra’s ouster,” the source added.
 
 Luthra was not available for comment and the new chairman, Alexander, said he would share his plans soon in the new role.
 
 Meanwhile, forest, ecology and environment minister B Ramanath Rai denied any political interference. “His (Alexander’s) name had been decided for the post long back and only the orders were passed recently. There was neither any political interference, nor were there any differences between Luthra and any politician.”