GoK hauled up by Union Ministry of Environment and Forests over road asphalting in Dandeli-Anshi tiger reserve
 
 
 	The state government’s hush-hush effort to widen state highway-34 inside Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve in Uttara Kannada district has come under criticism by the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA). The NTCA affiliated to Union Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in its latest order has rapped the state government for illegally taking up road works without consultation and clearance from the MoEF that too inside a core tiger reserve area. 

 	Acting on a complaint, NTCA officials visited the reserve in July 2011 and inspected the disputed stretch spanning across 25km. Even though the officials and engineers from Public Works Department (PWD) refused to co-operate with the inspection, the officials after verifying all the communication and documentation, submitted a report to the ministry that the state had violated the provisions of Indian Wildlife Act, Forest Conservation Act of 1980 and Directions of the Supreme Court and caused damage to the environment. 

 	Genesis of problem 

 	The state government had taken up several developmental projects including the widening of SH-34 (Londa to Sadashivgad) and laying of water pipeline from Kaneri bridge to Kaneri village. SH-34 is about 120km in length and connects Karwar with Londa. 

 	Both the PWD and Karnataka State Highway Improvement Projec (KSHIP) failed to get clearance from the SC set up Central Empowered Committee (CEC), while the PWD decided unilaterally to go ahead with the project in a phased manner. 

 	“In the last two years since 2011, the PWD has executed road improvement work on a stretch of about 25km inside the tiger reserve out of the total 28km stretch. No permission was availed to execute any of the projects from the competent authority. Even block topping should not have been done inside the reserve,” said CM Shivakumar, assistant inspector general of forests, NTCA, regional office, Bengaluru in his report. 

 

 	Officials shielded 

 	The report has also revealed that the executing authorities took shelter under local political leaders and ministers whenever they were obstructed by forest officials. 

 	“Officials of line departments hardly submitted their proposals to the forest department to seek necessary approvals despite several remainders by the local forest staff as they are supported by local politicians. When work was stopped by forest officials, they would approach local ministers and leaders to pressurise the forest officials to allow the execution of work. Local leaders and ministers, instead of asking line department officials to submit the proposal well in advance to seek necessary approvals, pressurised forest staff to allow the execution of such projects,” the report revealed. 

 	Criticising the callous attitude of forest officials for stopping such violation, NTCA officials said, “Unfortunately, officials of state forest department have hardly shown any resistance for implementing such works by invoking the provisions of existing law.”