By Asha Chowdary

East Bengalureans bitten by the travel bug have their sights on exotic locales and traditional travel destinations in 2023

A wildlife experience, a wellness destination or a cultural capital -- which will it be in 2023?
 
It is time to travel again, say East Bengalureans who are making vacation plans already. While last year was about revenge travel and getting away to leave lockdown blues behind, this year, the itinerary has been planned much in advance.
 
Food and Beverage consultant and chef, Abraham Jacob, who lives in Fraser Town, has chosen many interesting travel destinations this year.
 
“I plan to visit New Orleans around the time of Mardi Gras, during which time, revellers from across the country congregate in the city to experience the parades and the celebrations,” he says. “I would like to try their incredible offerings of French and Creole cuisine and I will also be watching out for the food trucks serving beignets, po’ boys, and Chef Linda Green’s ‘yak-a-mein’ in particular.” He also plans to visit Turkey in 2023.
 
The avid traveller had a chance to travel to many countries in 2022. He visited Dublin and went to the historic St James’ Gate Brewery, where Guinness is brewed. Later in the year, he took a trip to Spain. “The lazy beaches and clear waters of the Catalonian fishing region of Costa Brava were my favourite places. We drank sangria by the litre and ate our weight in tapas and paella.”
 
Cooke Town resident, Dilip Maitra, who is a former business editor of a national newspaper, says that he and his wife usually plan one long vacation and a few short ones every year. “For every trip, I do a lot of research and planning, advance booking of trains and flights and accommodation, checking the weather conditions and clothing requirements and much more,” he says.
 
Dilip is planning a long trip to North India in the month of March. “We will go to Benaras first and spend four days there,” he says. “I want to go there again to see the completely revamped Kashi Vishwanath Temple complex where nearly 80 small temples have been discovered.”
 
His next destination is Shimla, Manali, and Sangla Valley, followed by Spiti Valley in Himachal Pradesh. “Spiti is a beautiful district where one can see many snow-capped mountains, green meadows and crystal-clear rivers fed by glaciers. We will be spending 21 days on this trip. Later in the year, we are planning a few short vacations in the southern states of the country.”
 
Dilip’s love for travel took him to many places in 2022. He visited Jabalpur where the main attraction was the Narmada River. He also went to a small hill station called Panchmari in MP, the old temple town of Ujjain and the city of Indore. He and his family also visited Valparai, a lesser-known hill station in Tamil Nadu and Kanyakumari.
 
Another resident of North-East Bengaluru, Sonu M, lives in Cox Town, and is a manager in a startup firm, plans to go on an adventurous trip this year. “I have been looking at Instagram ads about travelling to Meghalaya, so I plan to go there this year. My itinerary is exciting as it includes trekking and camping. I love meeting new people and learning new things,” she says.
 
Travel is a top goal for many people this year as it offers a plethora of new experiences. “But nowadays, the concept of ‘deeply travelled’ is as important as being ‘widely travelled’,” explains Abraham. “It’s one thing to visit a country and only see its capital or biggest city, but quite another to take the time to fully explore the region.”

Are you an East Bengaluru resident? We’d like to hear from you. email: seena.menon@timesgroup.com