Nearly 200 farmers and wildlife activists gathered in front of Gundulpet Tourist Temple near Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Thursday to stage a protest against illegal construction activities inside the eco-sensitive area of the reserve. Members of the Karnataka Farmers’ Association along with 14 other organisations were present during the protest to highlight biases in the implementation of the Eco-Sensitive Zone (ESZ) rule.

“Bandipur Tiger Reserve is a sensitive area and thousands of farmers have their land in the ESZ area of the reserve. While the Forest Department denies the farmers to build a small shed for installing solar panels to protect our farmlands, many permanent commercial structures and new permanent structures in that area are allowed. The most recent being Kannada actor Ganesh’s farmhouse. We have gathered to protest against this bias,” said Dr Guruprasad, secretary of Karnataka Farmers’ Association.

Farmers staging the protest say in the absence of a concrete structure to put the solar panels atop, the panels are frequently damaged every time elephant herds enter the area. While economically sound farmers re-establish the system, many end up without solar power fencing for crop 
protection.

“The Forest Department, after multiple protests and petitions, has now permitted us to create a temporary structure to install the panels. Currently, we are using 20 feet 20-foot-high wooden structure to install panels for solar fencing. We have been requesting the department to allow a small concrete structure for the panels, to safeguard them from elephants, but we have been refused. Many farmers in the area have their farms unguarded,” said Honnur Prakash, a farmer in the area and member of the Karnataka Farmers’ Association.

The Supreme Court recently modified the earlier rule on eco-sensitive zones and said that ESZ cannot be uniform across the country and has to be protected area-specific. However, wildlife conservationists say the order is being misuse.

As of the June 2022 report, each protected forest, national park or wildlife sanctuary must have an ESZ of a minimum of one kilometre measured from the demarcated boundary of such protected forest in which the activities proscribed and prescribed in the ESZ guidelines of 2011 shall be strictly adhered to. The guidelines list various activities categorised as prohibited, regulated, and permitted.