By Hemanth CS
 
 The Bangalore International Airport Limited (BIAL) wants to conduct a special ornithological study for evaluating bird activities in and around the Kempegowda International Airport (KIA).
 
 BIAL’s proposal to have such a study done and to appoint a consultant comes in the backdrop of the expansion plans undertaken by it to increase the passenger capacity at KIA.
 
 BIAL is constructing a second terminal building (T2) at KIA and, when completed, it is expected to handle a total of 65 million passengers per annum.
 
 As it undertakes this expansion activity, the airport authorities have also proposed to have three rainwater harvesting tanks of which two are proposed to come up in an area which would be in close proximity of the approach surfaces.
 
 “The Safety Case Assessment and Reporting System (SCARS) meeting committee has raised a safety hazard that the introduction of these facilities (rainwater harvesting tanks) may cause an increase in bird activity in the concerned area,” stated BIAL in its request for quotation seeking consultancy services for the ornithological study.
 
 BIAL wants the consultant to “provide the quantifiable risks and recommendations to assist BIAL in establishing appropriate mitigating measures to make the ponds unattractive for birds.”
 
 The authorities are not in favour of wired nets due to safety reasons and want alternative mitigating measures.
 
 Like other airports in the country, KIA is no stranger to bird strikes. According to officials, in 2017 alone, there have been 18 incidents of bird strikes at the airport.
 
 In order to avoid such incidents, BIAL has a wildlife controller who is designated to keep a constant vigil on stray animals (if any) or birds entering the airside. A trained team of bird watcher and bird chaser are deployed with a bird hazing kit at the identified critical bird crossing locations in the airfield to deter birds on a routine basis from dawn till dusk.
 
 The Bird Strike Research Group of India, a city-based body which works to make aviation safer as part of its bird-strike hazard management system, has in the past proposed placing bird avian radars, lasers and acoustic devices to emit short light and sounds to scare birds away.