Three rare guests dropped in on residents in Vidyaranyapura, Frazer Town and Ashoknagar. The guests, robed in dazzling colours, were tired and exhausted from a long journey. But with a touch of the city’s famous hospitality, they were soon revived and refreshed.    It’s not uncommon for the Indian Pitta to, quite literally, drop out of the sky during the migratory season. Three birds were rescued in the last three days by residents, who found them almost dead from exhaustion. These stubby-tailed birds migrate from the foothills of the Himalayas, their breeding ground, to Sri Lanka in the winter, travelling a distance of close to 3,000 km. This trip is accomplished in 30 to 45 days. They usually travel by night — to avoid predators.    They rest during the day, but the younger ones invariably crash to the ground from sheer exhaustion. The city is about 1,500 km from their breeding ground and the birds usually begin to feel the effects of the journey by the time they reach the city.   Residents, who found the birds, revived them with food and water. The birds were fed with insects and worms, their staple food. One of the birds was released on Friday, while the other two would be released in a couple of days, once they recover fully. Once released, they catch up with the flock and carry on their journey.    Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, revealed the birds pass through Bangalore only twice a year.    “They are special birds as they are not found in Bangalore,” Babu said. “It is due to exhaustion from flying that they fall to the ground. We find them during the same time each year —during September-October when they fly to Sri Lanka and again in February-March when they return to their breeding ground.”   The birds also breed in the Western Ghats and these too fly to Sri Lanka for the winter, following almost the same flight path as the ones from the north. Experts say these birds are solitary migrants and its young ones who suffer from exhaustion.   “The ones found in Bangalore are the ones flying from the foothills of the Himalayas,” Arun Nandavar, a city-based ornithologist said. “They fly towards Sri Lanka, but a few also settle in the southern parts of India if they find conducive habitat. They fly back around February and reach the Himalayas in March-April the next year. They are known to fly continuously for over a period of a month to 45 days. They are solitary migrants and young ones fly along with adult birds. Interestingly, adult birds are known to communicate with the young ones and once released, they rejoin the flock.”    Residents of Vidyaranyapura who found the bird called BBMP wildlife volunteers, but when they learnt that it was the Indian Pitta they decided to treat the birds themselves, feeding it with garden lizards, cockroaches and earthworms.   “Dhanush, a member of Pancharatna Plus (the group of children dedicated to restoring Narasipura Lake), found it first,” said Kiran Venkatraman, a resident. “Later, the bird was treated after consulting BBMP wildlife volunteers. It was found near the lake in exhausted condition. After treating it, we released it. We hope it rejoins the flock.”
 
 Migration pattern
 The Indian Pitta migrates from the foothills of the Himalayas to Sri Lanka and parts of southern India. They are known to return to the same place where they breed. June-July is breeding period and after the chicks hatch, they start flying in August-September. They cross several states in the subcontinent. While the also breed in the Western Ghats, the ones found in Bangalore are mostly from the foothills of the Himalayas.