At Victoria Falls in Livingstone, Zambia                 Collado Mediano is quaint, surrounded by mountains and located about 40 kms from the Spanish capital. When the chess champ and his wife Aruna first moved there, there were 2500 inhabitants and one supermarket. “Now there are about 5000 people and four big stores,” Anand says, “It almost seems commercial. It’s also the kind of place where everyone knows everybody.” His wife Aruna laughs and says that of course, as Asians, we did tend to stick out. 

The world chess champion has a natural felicity for languages, and he already knew Spanish when they moved. His wife had to learn it and had many comical situations to overcome.  Favourite haunts
Anand’s complex mind is also a curious one. He loves travel, astronomy and is interested in the sciences and mathematics. The chess master displays an understated sense of humour as he reveals his favourite destination in Europe: Iceland. Well, he could probably buy it, you tell him wryly. He laughs as he shoots back, “I don’t think you’ll get insurance.” 

The grandmaster also has an unabashed love for South America. “We enjoyed Rio a lot. We also took in the Inca temple, Mexico City, etc. But I would say my favourite place is Atacama Desert in Chile,” he says. “It is the driest desert in the world and offers an immense sense of solitude.” The desert, one of the most inhospitable places in the world, is also a landscape of stunning beauty. In fact, some parts of this 600-mile stretch have not seen rainfall since people started keeping records!
Another gem they discovered was the picturesque colonial town, Patzcuaro in Mexico, situated in the Michoacan hills. Patzcuaro sits on a slope rising from the shores of Lake Patzcuaro and is wonderful to explore on foot.  Adrenaline junkie
Anand loves throwing himself off heights or volunteering for stomach churning roller coaster rides. Aruna isn’t terribly seduced by the thrill. Her husband has tried parasailing, bungee jumping and extreme water sports, while she prefers dry land anyday!  Two-gether always 
Though Anand travels extensively for tournaments, he doesn’t always get the time to explore the destination. His wife Aruna is almost always his constant companion and the chief planner of their holidays. She says, “We discuss options and collectively decide on our destination. When we’re on vacation, the only rule is that we don’t check email or access a computer. We love going for safaris together as you can also watch the sky apart from the animal spotting.”  

Anand’s fondest memory is of his trip to Bandhavgarh sanctuary. He recalls, “We’d been trying to catch a tiger for a while. On our last morning in Bandhavgarh, the tiger showed up and sat there for 45 minutes. We couldn’t have asked for more.” Their other excursions have been to Makalodi Botswana where they befriended and petted Duma the cheetah, and they took in the Victoria falls in Livingstone, Zambia which also offers a safari in the Mosi Oa Tunya national park. Closer to home, Yala wildlife sanctuary in Sri Lanka was their most recent safari.  The reluctant romantic 
Aruna laughs when asked if her husband is a romantic. “Mildly,” she says. “For our honeymoon, we went to a tournament.” But in all fairness, she adds, he’s romantic in his own way. She narrates an anecdote to prove her point, “He’s very caring. Once, when he was training in Frankfurt, I was coming from India around Valentine’s Day. I jokingly told him that you should buy me flowers for everyday we’ve not been together. He showed up at the airport with roses and said, “These are only 20 roses, they didn’t have 32. I cut them up and kept them because I didn’t know when he’d buy me flowers again!”  

Her husband smiles indulgently. They both enjoy photography, but he is meticulous about labelling and organising the photos. They fuss over minor issues like Aruna squeezing the toothpaste tube in the centre, instead of the bottom. He is an enthusiastic shopper and has a kink for T-shirts, while she likes handicrafts. So does she mother him? Aruna laughs, “We complement each other.”  The foodie
Flowers may be optional, but dinners for two are always high on Anand’s priority list. He says, “I’m a foodie, so I enjoy experimenting with cuisines and new restaurants. Mexico was memorable for its food.” He confesses to a weakness for Japanese food, especially wasabi. Aruna adds, “He loves wasabi so much that sometimes his nostrils start smoking!”  Addicted to travel
Despite the amount of travelling the Anands do, they still can’t get enough. Aruna says, “There is some travel fatigue. You miss the simple comforts of home, like not having to get up for breakfast or eating breakfast in your pyjamas.”   

During tournaments, they may not always socialise with the grandmasters. It is a limited circle and consequently, they have a limited social circle as well. And usually it is the women who feel the rivalry more than the men!