The big cats at all the zoos in Karnataka are getting obese as they are being fed chicken and not their staple diet — beef

Seems like the animals in state’s zoos have to start watching their weight. Ever since the beef ban kicked in, zoos have started feeding the wild animals chicken. Officials are noticing some weight gain among the carnivores as they pack in the chicken.

The trend was witnessed even at the Bengaluru Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBBP) and other zoos in the state where officials noticed that the animals have started gaining weight. So much so that the officials are cutting down a bit on the chicken feed. The Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) during its latest meeting requested the state government to exempt zoos from the prohibition of beef and ensure unhindered supply.

ZAK chairman LR Mahade­v­aswamy told Bangalore Mirror why chicken is causing trouble. “Many times, farmed chicken is injected with a growth hormone so that it can gain more mass. When this chicken is supplied to the zoos, the excess fat content in their body mass makes the wild animals gain weight. Most of the carnivores actually don’t like chicken as they are used to beef. Hence, we have requested the state government to allow the supply of beef to all the 10 zoos in the state.”


The BBBP that is located on the outskirts of the city used to procure close to 600 kg of beef per day and now buy an equal proportion of chicken. Mahadevaswamy said that 1,400 kg of beef used to be bought for all the 10 zoos and it has been replaced with 900 kg of chicken. A wild animal which used to eat 10 kg of beef is now eating only 5 kg of chicken, according to Mahadevaswamy who added that a team of veterinarians and experts were now monitoring the wild animals in the zoo on a daily basis following the change in diet plan.

  Many times, farmed chicken is injected with a growth hormone so that it can gain more mass. When this chicken is supplied to the zoos, the excess fat content in their body mass makes the wild animals gain weight. Most of the carnivores actually don’t like chicken as they are used to beef— LR Mahadevaswamy, chairman, Zoo Authority of Karnataka

Officials also said that they had to drop the idea of buying mutton as it was too costly. The zoos used to spend close to Rs 6 crore to buy beef and if they shift to mutton, they may have to spend close to Rs 18 to Rs 20 crore annually. The revenues of the zoos have also taken a severe dent due to Covid.

Vanashree Vipin Singh, Chief Conservator of Forests and Executive Director, BBBP, said, “For several years, the animals were given beef. Just seven to eight days in a year, the carnivores were fed chicken. However, during lockdown, BBBP faced a lot of issues with supply of beef and hence we replaced it with chicken. With the easing of lockdown, beef was back on the menu but from January, chicken has become a regular part of the menu.”

However, experts say that it was too short a span to comment on the weight issue. Dr. C Ansar Kamran, Professor, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinary College, Hebbal said, “It doesn’t matter much if the carnivore is fed chicken, beef or pork. However, the wildlife in captive conditions may suffer and are likely to have problems as they are not used to eating so much chicken as they were earlier fed both beef and chicken. They may suffer a bit with regards to the palatability of the food.
 
Any deficiency can be ascertained only after studying it for a long time and we cannot say anything certain in a short time. The beef ban may not affect domestic carnivores much because of the availability of readymade food and hence only the captive wildlife will be impacted.”

Dr Sushantt Rai, President of Karnataka poultry farmers and breeders association said that there was no reason to fear that consumption of broilers will lead to obesity. 

"There is practically no carbohydrate in chicken meat. It contains protein, vitamins and minerals. It is a rich package of all nutrients. Chicken is lean meat and there is no question of excess fat content in it. The cost of hormones is costlier than the bird itself. Already, the cost of production is so high, why will anybody increase the cost by adding hormones? The growth of broiler to its full size in 40 days has been attributed to scientific rearing methodologies with the assistance of feed formulations and efficient management practices. The broiler birds are growing faster than their ancestors on account of advanced technology in poultry rearing, as a result of lots of research and development by qualified poultry nutritionists and veterinarians across the world. Moreover, the Indian poultry farmer, both in the organised and the unorganised sector, is fully aware that it is not just the health of the poultry but also that of the end-consumer which is important", he added.