Ruth has been coming to India since the past six years, first for her bestseller nature book Tiger in Red Weather and now for her forthcoming novel Where the Serpent Lives which is based on king cobra conservation. Her current visit is on a British Council Darwin Now grant. Talking of her tryst with wildlife, she speaks of an organisation that has brought much cheer to environmentalists, “Wildlife First has done wonders for Karnataka’s Bhadra forest. From my last visit, I can see that the forest is coming back and the bamboo is growing once again. For my book Tiger in Red Weather, I started my quest (through the Asian jungles) from Kerala and ended it in Bhadra forests.”  

But Ruth began her life in an attic. She explains this bewildering information with a laugh, “My parents, who at that time did not have enough money, were living on the top of the house of my great aunt who was the daughter of the doctor to Queen Victoria. I was born there in what I call the attic.” She shrugs her slim shoulder as a way of explanation. She has an impressive lineage and is the great-great-granddaughter of Charles Darwin from the maternal side. “When I was growing up, I did not realise what it meant to have such an illustrious ancestor.”  

Ruth is probably then best qualified for the book of verses Darwin - A Life in Poems, which brings out the connections between Darwin’s personal life and work. “I had suggested the idea to my editor and she asked me to complete it before his upcoming birthday on February 12.” Reading out selected verses from the book to an appreciative audience at a city bookstore, Ruth explains the context too in an inimitable style.  

She has written poems on diverse subjects with contemporary references. She has even mentioned the Mahabharata in her poem Indian Princess picks lover out from Gods. “I wrote that after seeing an exhibition at the National Gallery in London which was curated by Richard Gombrich. I used the idea of shadows from there,” Ruth explains.   Incidentally, Ruth has been a teacher for years. She has taught Greek and English. Her first job was to play viola, she has sung professionally in several places including a nightclub in Istanbul, she has taught horse riding, has helped in archaeological excavations and has been a freelance journalist. She has written the immensely popular weekly poetry column for The Independent. From 2005, she has written and presented a series of talks for BBC 4. Still, according to Ruth, if she were not a poet she would have definitely been a singer. But that would have been a loss for the literary world as she is the master of the craft. “A good poet needs to have the heart as well as the craft. By reading the poem, readers should be able to see something new or get some insight of the world. You should be able to see your life through the poem,” notes Ruth. That may well be used to describe her poems and style. Truly vintage Ruth Padel.