There was a new prime minister on the Bear Grylls show, talking environment, not development

What a relief it was to watch survival instructor Bear Grylls grill the prime minister in the wilds of the Corbett National Park. There was no fawning. No convenient questions. No toadying up. Bear Grylls was respectful all through and did not ask any uncomfortable questions. He spoke with easy camaraderie and cracked a few charmingly irreverent jokes which the prime minister politely ignored. Particularly the last crack, as the interview was about to close, as to whether his underpants were still dry. The prime minister sidestepped the query as he was busy, as always, putting out the message he was there for.

What was that message? Why would the prime minister brave the jungles at the foothills of the Himalayas, where Bear Grylls repeatedly reminded us tigers roamed free, looking for prey and nature is unpredictable? In fact, it kept raining through much of the latter half of the interview and the director showed us repeated bolts of lightning tearing up the sky. The walk was brief and uneventful, uninterrupted by any kind of wildlife, benign or dangerous – though we were shown visuals of tigers and elephants and even pretty deer in separate single shots. Equally safe was the crossing of the rather gentle looking river on a makeshift boat of branches and blue tarpaulin (the kind we see all over Mumbai when the monsoons come) where Grylls chivalrously stayed off the boat on which the prime minister sat and pushed it through the shallow waist-deep, arse-freezing waters (his words, not mine – but muted by the channel in deference to his august company) so as to reach the other side safely.

No, no crocodiles were seen in the water as Grylls had earlier warned the prime minister. But we heard a charming story about how the young Modi had once brought home a baby crocodile and was admonished by his mother and asked to return it to the river where its mother was basking in the sun. Clearly the message being sent out was that the prime minister was a brave man, unafraid of the wild, in great love with nature and all animals that lived in the forests, a man who did not fear the elements. Lightning and rain did not bother him. Nor wild beasts. In fact, he told Grylls that fear is not a word he knows. That the two of them spoke in two different languages made not the slightest difference to their bonhomie.

What interested me most were some stray comments. One, when Bear Grylls broke a branch and tied a knife to it and handed it over to him, suggesting he use it for his personal safety should he meet atiger on the way. He was firmly told that the prime minister did not believe in killing wild animals for his own safety. He would, instead, carry the crudely made spear only to keep Grylls safe. It sounded good. In fact, quite noble. I also liked his comment on plants and trees, and how important the humble tulsi was to Indian homes. Grylls was chewing on neem leaves and telling him how it kept him safe after all the weird stuff he ate in the jungles.

The prime minister then told him how an uncle of his had once tried to sell off some logs of wood lying at home and was scolded by his grandparents. Trees are not meant for chopping and selling, he was told. They feel pain. This is sagacious advice and I hope people in government were listening since we have seen how, in recent times, thousands of trees are cut down at the slightest pretext. Even forests are being killed in the pursuit of so-called development projects, which are often a euphemism for rapacious industrialisation. Wild and beautiful rivers are being tamed by monstrous dams that (as we have seen during the recent floods) cause more damage than good.

I love the prime minister’s newfound concern for nature and wildlife, trees and forests, rivers and mountains. He described with great romance his years of travel in the Himalayas as a young man. What I am now looking forward to is his support for some of our serious environmental concerns. The very idea of cutting down a huge chunk of a forest in Mumbai (the only city in the world with a forest in its heart) to create a metro shed sounded sacrilegious to most of us. As did the idea of a wrap-around coastal road violating all CRZ rules.

But we have taken heart from the prime minister’s words on the show. (Thank you Bear Grylls.) And we hope that people in his government follow the advice. Our environment today needs more protection than it ever did. Protection from those who come in the name of development. For development, as we have seen, always benefits the rich and the privileged. Whereas the environment is for all of us. You, me, Bear Grylls and the prime minister as well.