What’s up, doc? 
 
 Where do famous and really, really hard working doctors go to play (along with their family, of course)? Somewhere close enough so they can head home in case they get called on an emergency, but far enough to get the much deserved R&R without being mobbed by the public. (Mobbing happens if you are a cardiologist who goes by the name Dr Devi Shetty). The diarist saw Dr Shetty at the Kempegowda International Airport on Friday morning getting ready to board MI423 Silk Air to Singapore. His wife was in-charge — of checking in and other details — while he stood tall and relaxed. He also had an assistant dragging five plump bags behind him and also guarding the good doc from getting paparazzified. Looks like Dr Shetty does not believe in travelling light. Anyway, happy hols, Doc.
 
 Run for the hills
 
 Coorg is where you will find the most verdant landscape, majestic hills, beautiful women and handsome men. Now you can also add runners to the list. The diarist will let you know that the first ever Coorg Marathon will take place in this lush land later this year (November 6). The event is being organised by Tejini Kariappa of the famed HalliBerri Coffee and golfer Nikki Ponappa. Of course, the other famous personalities from the fraternity — Robin Uthappa, Ashwini Ponappa amongst others — are also expected to get on board the marathon train. Once-upon-a-time supermodel and now barefoot messiah MilindSoman is already on board. By the way, the run is also a celebration of Soman’s 50th birthday. Oh well, normal folks get a cake on their birthday, supermodels (even those prefixed with an ‘ex’) get other beautiful people to run for them. Some folks have it all.
 
 Walk on the wild side
 
 Former treasurer and VP of WWF India, a passionate preservationist and wildlife photographer, the indefatigable Ashok Mahindra has put a chunk of his life’s work in the form of a coffee table book, Capturing Wildlife Moments in India. Launched by Jamshyd Godrej, the book features 120 photographs, from 30 national parks and resorts. A quick peek into the tome revealed how Mahindra has detailed every species and threats posed to them, and efforts at conserving them while identifying the IUCN rating for each of the species photographed and linked to mythological legends. Mahindra says that his endeavour as a photographer is to encourage people to care for all threatened species “from the smallest insects to the biggest cats”.
 
 Tailpiece
 
 In the middle of all the chaos on Double Road, in the corner of a lane is 1 Shanthi Road, the gallery that offers art residencies to artists from across the globe. There is a Badam tree inside the compound. Under the shade of this tree, usually, you will find much chai and chatter amongst artists and time-swatters. Artists from foreign lands come here, imbibe the local culture and create meaningful art (one hopes). This is a place where regulars go for great art and even greater chow, sometimes cooked by the resident cook-cum-art historian-cum-walking-talking-art encyclopedia Suresh Jayaram. What’s interesting is, international artists usually come bearing food from their homeland (they must’ve been fed terrifying tales of our spices), and put them in refrigerator only to be forgotten, because the artists soon fall in love with the local tarkari. Within a few days of their arrival, the dining table is usually filled not with stale bread and month-old-cheese from Australia or wherever but with lemon rice, bendaikaaikuttu, bhajjis, et al. On some days, you can also find apple strudel and cheese fondue. Unlikely bedfellows, but yummy all the same. When the artists go back home, they usually carry with them fond memories (especially the antics of resident Mona ‘darling’ the housekeeper) and some local recipes too.