Puttenahalli Lake near Yelahanka, which welcomes 127 species of both wetland and waterfowl species through the year, has been gazetted as a conservation reserve
 
 IT city has got its own bird reserve. The state government has declared Puttenahalli Lake, spread across 37 acres, near Yelahanka as ‘Puttenahalli Lake Birds Conservation Reserve’, through a gazette notification on September 10. The move makes Bengaluru arguably the only Tier-I urban area to have a bird sanctuary within the city limits. “Considering that the lake is of ecological, faunal, floral and geomorphological importance, and for the purpose of protection, the lake has been declared as bird reserve,” the gazette order states. Even though the lake spreads across more than 40 acres, the order says that 37 acres of the lake will be part of the bird reserve; the remaining will be utilised as common servicing area.
 
 According to Avani Kumar Varma, former PCCF who first received a proposal from Bengaluru Bird Watchers group led by Dr S Subramanya to declare the lake as ‘Bird Reserve’, Puttenahalli Lake was the last resort for Bengaluru birds. “By 2004-05 due to rapid urbanisation in Bengaluru, several migratory and local species of birds had left the city and started moving out. During that period, the pristine Puttenhalli Lake, located on the outskirts of the city away from urban activities, managed to retain those birds,” Varma recalled.
 
 A good breeding centre
 The lake, while losing its idyllic ambiance thanks to sewerage from Yelahanka and Attur, turned out to be a perfect breeding ground for various species of birds. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Harish Bhat, a noted bird expert, said, “The Puttenahalli lake is confluence of several elements of eco system. It has freshwater body, swamp and green pasture all around it. Because of these traits, it was the breeding centre for species like painted stork, spoon-billed pelican, grey heron and night heron. Several important species like white ibis have also been found at the lake.”?
 	

 Dr SK Sangunni, a retired professor from IISc and a resident of the locality, and several other from the neighbourhood had formed the Yelahanka Puttenhalli Lake and Bird Conservation Trust in 2013 demanding restoration of lake and it to be declared a bird reserve. “The decision was made somewhere in June and we too were communicated about it. Now it has been officially notified and we are happy over the government’s decision. I feel that now there is even greater responsibility to protect and safeguard the lake. We are thankful to all those who had joined hands with us,” Sangunni explained.
 
 Interestingly, even though the lake was filled with water hyacinths and other aquatic weeds, some of the birds fed on such aquatic weeds and continue to thrive at the same lake. The lake has been home to migratory birds coming from as far as Siberia. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, a senior forest official from Bengaluru Urban said, “The lake is not only habitat for the fresh water swamps but also houses important local species besides accomodating migratory birds. No other lake in the city is home to these many species that you find in and around Puttenhalli. There are about 127 species of both wetland and waterfowl species at Puttenahalli.
 
 The declaration comes in the backdrop of biotic and climatic intervention in recent times posing threat of degradation of rich natural forest and to the wildlife of the area. “The conservation reserve does not include any private area or patta lands. The lake between Puttenahalli and Attur villages of Yelahanka has been in the custody of Karnataka Forest Department for the last 25 years. The department is committed to protect the water body and safeguard the precious avian life that depends on it,” he said.
 
 Where they come from?
 
 	Northern pintail (Anas acuta) is a duck breeding in northern areas of Europe, Asia and North America. It is often seen at Puttenahalli Lake 
 	
 	The white stork (Ciconia ciconia) is commonly found in Europe, Northwestern and Southern Africa and Southwestern Asia 
 	
 	Northern Shoveler (Anas clypeata), a common duck species of Northern European countries and North America, came visiting Puttenahalli during winter in the last decade
 	  	Garganey (Anas querquedula) is a small dabbling duck that breeds in Europe and Western Asia and comes to South India in large numbers during winter. For the past few years bird watchers have been seeing these ducks in Bengaluru
 	
 	 		Glossy ibis (Plegadis falcinellus) a wading species of birds spread across Europe, Africa and Carribean. City birdwatchers have recorded sightings of the ibis species occasionally a wading species of birds spread across Europe, Africa and Carribean. City birdwatchers have recorded sightings of the ibis species occasionally