Kavalugaaras appointed to guard the reserve are busy growing crops there

The High Court has taken note of the encroachment of forest land in the Basur Amruth Mahal Kaval Blackbuck Conservation Reserve in Kadur, Chikkamagaluru, which is posing threat to the wildlife there. It has directed the authorities to set up a Conservation Management Committee to oversee the protection for the reserve. A report will be filed before the HC within a period of four weeks on what action has been taken for the protection of the reserve. 

A petition in the court pointed to the encroachment of forest land in the reserve and the inaction of the government to prevent it. The Wildlife Conservation Action Team had filed the petition which was heard by the court on Thursday. It is alleged that ‘kavalugaaras’ (guards) appointed to protect the land are growing commercial crops there. The Reserve is spread across 1,820 acres and was declared a Conservation Reserve in 2011. The petition claimed that the Reserve land is being illegally encroached upon by the ‘kavalugaaras’ appointed by the government itself. Moreover, the Wildlife Protection Act mandates the appointment of Conservation Reserve Management Committee which has not been done. “All of this is leading to the destruction of the existing ecology and biodiversity of the said Conservation Reserve,” the petition said. 

There was over 7 lakh acres of ‘Kaval’ lands in Karnataka which were reserved for the grazing of the local breed of Amruth Mahal cattle. The kaval lands have diminished to less than 50,000 acres now. A new scheme in 1994 gave five acres of land for ‘Kaval Guards’ to grow crops for their sustenance and another 25 acres for their livestock to graze. In turn they were to guard the kaval lands. The scheme prevented them from using the land for commercial purposes. 

The 1,800 acres of land was declared as a Reserve as it was a tropical scrub jungle hosting a wide range of flora and fauna and rich in biodiversity. The kavalugaaras are supposed to have started growing commercial crops on the land since 2014 and selling the produce in markets for profit. Complaints to the authorities did not elicit reply. So the Wilidlife Conservation Action Team filed a petition in the HC.