By Saumyangi Yadav

No evidence of leopard found on campus; videos, pictures are not of Bengaluru, says wildlife expert 

Experts suggest that news of a leopard being sighted on the Bangalore University campus was most probably untrue and there is no need to panic. However, safety precautions continue to be enforced on campus for the security of students.
 
Joseph Hoover, president of the United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Board for Wildlife, said that the videos and pictures being circulated about the sighting is not from Bengaluru.
 
“So far, the university itself has not called the forest department for any inspection. This is just a wild rumour. The video being circulated is also not of leopards, but of jaguars from South America and nearby areas. This is just being circulated to create fear and excitement among the people and there is no need to panic,” he explained.
 
Lately, wildlife sightings and human-wildlife conflicts in the state have been on a rise. In the past, experts have warned that due to rapid urbanisation and encroachment on wildlife areas around the city, man-wildlife conflicts are expected to increase.
 
“We had checked around the university area but there are no pug marks, no evidence of any leopard so far… At Magadi Road, a CCTV camera caught footage of a wild cat and a rumour started that a leopard has been sighted. Yes, there are leopards in areas like Turahalli, Chinnakurchi, etc but not inside the city or in areas around Bangalore University,” he further added.
 
To ensure the safety of the students living on campus, the university had already issued an advisory asking students and staff to be extra careful while moving in or around the campus.
 
Lokesh Ram, a postgraduate student from Bangalore University told Bangalore Mirror, “The university has started to close the entry gate at around 7:30 pm as a precaution. The sighting has not been confirmed yet but the local people are concerned and have come to the campus to ask about the situation. There are about 2,500 students staying in hostels on campus who are also panicking The university administration has advised us to avoid any unnecessary movement.”


 The university’s main gate is being shut around 7:30 pm for safety and also to ban entry of vehicles– Lokesh Ram, a postgraduate student
 
The students have been advised not to venture out alone and take fellow students or staff members along if needed.
 
On the other hand, the students are happy that due to the restrictions, the traffic on the campus will decrease.
 
“The university main gate from Nagarabhavi Circle to Mariyappanapalya is being shut around 7:30 in the evening as a precautionary measure. This will also help avoid any unnecessary vehicle movement inside the university campus during non-peak hours. Moreover, it will also stop public nuisance and stop sandalwood smuggling,” Lokesh added.
 
Due to multiple accidents inside the campus, the students have been demanding a restriction on vehicle movement inside the university campus for a long time now.