High Court stay brings to a halt all forest department work at the unique Kaggalipura urban forest 
 
 Work on the city’s first urban forest (Nagara Vana) at Kaggalipura has ground to a halt after the High Court, hearing a plea by some aggrieved locals, has imposed a stay on all green activities in 343 acres of land. The stay covers the 162 acres set aside to create one of the biggest green spaces in Bangalore, the first phase of which was ready to be thrown open to the public.
 	
 	Related: The first phase of Nagara Vana — city's third biggest lung space after Cubbon Park and Lal Bagh — is all set to open 

 	Following the stay, even forest officials themselves can’t step into the designated area and plant a single sapling. The order has stopped all afforestation activities in the area that was in recent years recognised as forest land by both the joint legislature committee on encroachment headed by former lawmaker A T Ramaswamy, and the land task force led by former bureaucrat V Subramaniam. 

 	“All green activities have come to a standstill in the forest area, which is unfortunate. With the new order, those who are believed to have encroached upon government land have gained an upper hand and have started exercising their rights on a protected forest. We will try and bring this to the notice of the honourable High Court and also place before it the bogus papers used to make the claims. We will also make efforts to move the subject to the green bench of the High Court,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife activist, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	A unique concept 	BM had reported recently about work on the Nagara Vana (Enter hundred acres of green, January 28, 2014). When completed, the one-of-a-kind urban forest would have been different from regular parks maintained by civic agencies like BDA and BBMP. Though there were facilities for visitors like parking and even benches to sit, there would have been no paved roads or lawns. Only a mud pathway had been cleared for walking. The concept was to make it as close as possible to a real forest. Even the species of plants and trees introduced had been carefully selected to be in harmony with other existing species. 

 	Some 6,000 saplings had been planted, which included around 100 native and 40 new species of plants. An estimated 60 species of birds and animals had made the urban forest their home. Pipelines had been drawn, stone benches erected, and the whole area had been fenced in. But what would have been a major city landmark has now suffered a setback. 

 	The litigants who claim ownership of the land, who number around 80, have asked the forest department to stop all activities, including fencing of the entire urban forest. 

 	“It is a setback for us. In the past, the land in question was declared forest property and even the Bangalore Development Authority was fined Rs 1.18 crore by the joint legislature committee. We will try and bring these facts before the court,” a senior forest official told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	The Nagara Vana initiative was flagged off during former chief minister D V Sadananda Gowda’s tenure. The High Court stay applies to 343 acres out of the Turahalli minor forest that’s spread across 595 acres in and around Kaggalipura on Kanakapura Road.