As their space shrinks, elephants are confronting all in their way, killing 158 in the state in 3 years
 
 On World Wildlife Day, the state lost Forest Officer S Manikandan, who was Field Director of Nagarahole Tiger Reserve, after a wild elephant attacked him when he had gone to the area to assess damage caused by a mild fire.
 
 This was just the latest and most high-profile of deaths in a state that is reeling with violent confrontations with elephants. In the last three years, at least 158 people have been killed by elephants in the state. Across India, from 16 states, 1,557 have died since 2014 and in 2017-18 (up to November), 201 people died, of which nine were from Karnataka.
 
 Dinesh Holla, convener of Sahyadri Sanchaya, told BM, “I have been observing the Western Ghat region for several years. Due to an increase in forest encroachment, the elephant corridors are shrinking. The other reason for shrinking elephant corridors are the mafias that are into mining, hydel power plants and resorts. When the elephant does not have sufficient place to move around in its corridor, they come to the villages. Villagers have their own techniques to chase elephants away.
 
 This is when the elephant is helpless, it has nowhere to go and when hungry and angry attacks humans.” Holla said the state government has failed to implement the Forest Act. “Acres of forest land have been encroached upon. The government only talks about compensation for attacks,” he said.
 
 Trespassing estates
 
 He said elephant corridors in Barimale, Banjarumale, Elimal, Amabatti Male, Baluru and Kelagoor regions of the Charmady Ghat have been allowed to shrink. “Part of it is turned into private estates. In the Ghat section, the area may look green, but it is mostly manmade forests and not natural forests,” he said.
 
 He said forest fires are another reason for elephants coming to human settlements. “The forest minister does not speak of forest fires or rampant hunting, but will talk about the money sanctioned by the government. We have also seen ministers like Kagodu Thimmappa giving irresponsible statements when it comes to forest conservation. Many areas of Shiradi Ghat that used to be part of elephant corridor have been destroyed and we have seen elephants attacks labourers when works related to projects are going on,” he said.
 
 The need of the hour is to take suggestions from experts such as Yellappa Reddy, Shivananad Kalave, KM Chinnappa and Ullas Karanth to protect the Western Ghats. Environmentalist AN Yellappa Reddy said, “Most reasons are manmade: Habitat encroachment, destruction of forest, loss of water bodies, destruction of forest species and making roads inside the forest, railway lines, transmission lines passing through the forests are just a few to name. We don’t want elephants, tigers or birds, all we need is apartments and malls.”
 
 Destructive development
 
 Sahadev SH, convenor, Paschima Ghatta Jagruti Vedike, said the government follows a dual policy. “On the one hand, it speaks of elephant corridor and on the other, starts work for the Yettinahole Project and other infrastructure projects at the corridor, causing large scale destruction. It is high time the government bans acacia, eucalyptus and teak and instead opts for native species of the Western Ghats. Bamboo cultivation should have been encouraged. The monkey menace has also increased because monkeys are not getting fruits inside the forests. In the past, the elephant habitation especially at Kabini, Bhadra and Tunga dams areas were affected because the area was submerged and elephants moved to different places. Now in the name of Shishila Byrapura Road, we are all set to lose the elephant corridor. India is the only country in the world that will destroy a forest to provide drinking water to a dry area,” he said.
 
 
 
 
 
  Animal instinct
 
  The state has faced various forms of man-animal conflict. From monkeys attacking plantations to attacks by bears, leopards and tigers, Karnataka has seen it all. The country needs urgently to strengthen human-wildlife conflict management, as up to 32 wildlife species are damaging life and property, stated a study published last year. The authors of the study, ‘History, Location, and Species Matter: Insights for Human–Wildlife Conflict Mitigation’, Dr Krithi Karanth, conservation scientist with the Wildlife Conservation Society and Sahila Kudalkar, research associate with the Centre for Wildlife Studies, examined the patterns of human-wildlife conflict and mitigation use by 5,196 families from 2011 to 2014 from 2855 villages near 11 wildlife reserves. Of the more than 5,000 households surveyed, 71% households had lost crops, 17% had lost livestock, and human injury and death were reported in 3%.