Dishy Bipasha Basu, in her tight shorts and sleeveless tease, is progressively sold to public imagination as your next-door neighbour. She is the hero in this film. My neighbour, like yours perhaps, looks more like Smriti Irani. Tough luck.
 
The heroine catches her neighbour taking a picture of hers from his window. The boy later sort of saves her life. The camera belongs to an early vintage. Its pictures are developed in a dark red-room, with silver bromide, and contact sheets. The jobless leading man goes to a branch of a bank to enquire from the teller if he has money left in his account. He hasn’t heard of an ATM. This film hadn’t released at a multiplex near me. I watched it at a dank theatre; smell of piss around the ticket-counter; seats half-broken; no AC.

The film itself is futuristic. The camera that the hero has inherited from his scientist grandfather captures images of a person or object, exactly 24 hours ahead of the time the picture is clicked. This is a ray of hope for an out-of-work wildlife photographer Mr Ray (Neil Nitin Mukesh). He snaps lottery and horse-race result tables. He bets accordingly, and piles up millions. The thought is intriguing, and on first sight, seemingly original. I was interested to know what you could do beyond with the idea.

There is the dizzy concoction of easy cash that leaves the greedy hero’s neglected girlfriend waiting alone, strumming her baby-blue box guitar. This makes sense; money makes heads spin in various ways. It is everything that is spun around the film thereafter that doesn’t convince me that the person who thought up the concept, also devised its conclusion, or even made this movie. 

One anonymous Mr Captain lands up out of nowhere, shooting everyone down. He is after the hero’s future-cam. A hot RAW agent seduces the hero. She and her boss want the camera for India’s “national security and economic growth”. The hero and the heroine are chased on cars and boats across Bangkok, as they periodically go heaving their chests and dancing at goons’ dens. The plot itself has such fat loopholes you could stuff a full buffalo inside. The clock still ticks to a countdown of the hero’s death. That’s the problem with knowing the future. You also know when you’re going to die. It means a blank picture in this camera. The hero hasn’t lost his resolve. “Ek baat kahoon (Can I tell you something?),” he mysteriously whispers to his girlfriend, “Don’t laugh. Tum himmat mat harna (Don’t lose your determination); not now.” 

Seriously, I don’t know where that and much else came from. You feel glad for only one thing of the future, whether or not you can see it through a camera. This mayhem will get over at some point. It does.  This is when photographer Ray casually fishes out his grandfather’s time-machine, announcing the movie’s exciting sequel. Thank you. I know that’s the one you’re desperately waiting for.