Forest officials reviewing project rejected twice earlier because of the havoc it would wreak on elephants
 
 
 
 
 Proving its indifference towards environmental issues, yet again, the state government appears to have yielded to a powerful lobby that wants to set up a mini-hydroelectric project in Chamarajanagar district. Interestingly, the State Wildlife Board and the forest department had rejected this very project twice – in 2013 and 2015 – because of the havoc it could wreak on the wildlife of the Gaganachukki-Bharachukki forests, which adjoin the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary.
 
 But clearly buckling under pressure from the government and forest minister B Ramanatha Rai, top forest officials of the department visited the project site on Saturday to reconsider its feasibility.
 
 The project proponents, from Andhra Pradesh, have been trying to push for the plant for over five years, according to sources in the forest department. What started out initially as the Madhyaranga mini-hydel project went through some changes and was now known as the Basaveshwara mini-hydel project.
 
 A senior member of the State Wildlife Board told Bangalore Mirror that in 2013, the board had rejected the project following a report by a team of experts led by Anil Kumble (the then vice-chairman of the Wildlife Board), who visited the project site.
 
 “The committee had laid out the impact of the project on wildlife, particularly elephants, which included obstruction of movement for the wildlife, possibility of increased man-animal conflict, and violation of various forest laws. In fact, the committee had suggested that no new project should be permitted, or old ones allowed to renew their lease, in the said area,” said a member of the State Wildlife Board.
 
 BM accessed several documents of the State Wildlife Board that unanimously resolved to reject the project, twice, under the directions of chief minister Siddaramaiah.
 “The Basaveshwara mini-hydel project across the Cauvery by Shivasamudram Power Pvt Ltd has been recommended for rejection. There are already eight projects around the place and the proposed project is within the proposed eco-sensitive zone and is also in the Elephant Home Range and corridor. Hence, the proposal should be rejected and ongoing projects need to be closed after their lease period gets over. CM too agreed and directed to reject the proposal,” said the minutes of the Wildlife Board meeting that was held on September 11, 2015.
 
 AGAINST HC VERDICT
 
 Previously, a high-level committee comprising the then additional chief secretary Madan Gopal, Ajai Desai and Sanjay Gubbi, among others, visited the site all over again and submitted a report in January 2015 and recommended the rejection of the project.
 
 Further, the Elephant Task Force set up by the Karnataka High Court of Karnataka said in its report that “penstocks and impounded water can create significant obstacle to the movement of wildlife, particularly long-distance foraging animals such as elephants”.
 
 The recommendations were accepted by the high court, which on October 8, 2013, ordered review of clearances granted to all projects that had come up in elephant habitats, and violated the law.
 
 Despite the HC order and its own officials’ rejection, the state government has insisted that its top officials revisit the site and provide necessary permission for the project.
 
 
 HOW IT STARTED
 
 The energy department had allotted 4 MW hydel power project to Shivanasamudram Power Pvt Ltd, way back in 2002. In 2011, the Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Ltd recommended enhancement of the capacity from 4 MW to 24.7 MW, with a plant adjacent to the existing Ranganathaswamy small hydel project.
 
 However, the committee headed by the then principle secretary of forest department, R Sridharan, had consulted electrical experts from Visvesvaraya College of Engineering for a detailed opinion and they too revealed that it was difficult to generate the desired quantity of power.
 
 Acknowledging that the team of senior officials had visited the site on Saturday, principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife) BG Hosmath said: “It was true that the project was turned down twice in the past. The government had constituted a review committee to look into the project and as part of the committee, we have visited the site and will submit a report to the government. Based on the findings, the government will take a final decision.”