State pollution control board issues the notice after a resident complains that the water board was releasing raw sewage into Madiwala and Arakere lakes
 	
 	

 	 		Madiwala Lake was once one of the largest fresh water bodies in the city, but the lake has been reduced to a pool of filth. The message is far more portentous than one would think. A resident has found that the water in Madiwala and Arakere lakes off Bannerghatta Road is so polluted that it is not fit even for animal consumption. 	

 The culprit primarily responsible for dirtying these waters, claims Wg Cdr (rtd) G B Athri, is the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB). Athri claims that the BWSSB is illegally discharging raw sewage into the two lakes through storm water drains, polluting the waters and leaving residents at risk of serious diseases. Athri had filed a complaint with the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) against the chairman, BWSSB, the joint commissioner, BBMP, and the chief engineer storm water drains, BBMP. The civic agency is in the picture since storm water drains are their responsibility. The pollutant though is raw sewage which is the BWSSB’s responsibility. Trouble is now brewing for the BWSSB chairman as the KSPCB has decided to issue a show cause notice against him and the two civic agency officials. 

 	

 	 		HAPPENING FOR YEARS 	

 The cornerstone of Athri‘s evidence against the BWSSB is a certified lab report which finds Madiwala and Arakere lake water fit only for industrial use. Athri argued his case in person before a KSPCB chairman and member secretary. “The Water Act very clearly states that sewage or pollutants cannot be discharged into water bodies including lakes,” said Athri. “Section 17 of the Water Act also states that it is the duty of the state pollution control board to intervene and stop such activity. The three officials refused to act on several complaints in the past. Now, the KSPCB has decided to act against them.” 

 	 		In his complaint, Athri states that sewage and other waste from wards like Arakere and Bilekalli were directly being discharged into the two water bodies. He claims that this has been happening for years. Plastic, solid matter and other trash were also choking storm water drains and blocking the flow of water. These stagnated pools have become breeding grounds for mosquitoes, posing a health risk for residents. 	

 	 		“The water samples were tested in their own (state pollution control board) laboratory in Basaveshwaranagar,” Athri said. “Results show that the water class is ‘E’. This means it is fit only for industrial use. Yet, thousands of birds and animals drink this water. Also, if the pollution is left unchecked, it will eventually contaminate ground water resources in the vicinity.” 	

 	

 	 		THE LAW  	

 	 		Those found guilty of violating section 24 of the Water Act face imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six months, but which may extend to six years with fine. The Water Act clearly states that for offences by government departments, the heads should be held responsible (Section 48) and deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 	

 	 		“Despite several petitions, the chairman of BWSSB has not acted. We have sought action against him under the provisions of the Water Act. If the top brass is booked, things will change,” Athri said. 	

 	 		Vijay Kumar, member secretary, KSPCB confirmed that a show cause notice was sent to the BWSSB chairman. “We received a petition in which several charges have been made against authorities including BWSSB chief,” Kumar said. “We have decided to issue a notice to BWSSB chief and others under the provisions of the Water Act asking to show cause why guidelines were not adhered to.” 	

 	 		Dr Vaman Acharya, KSPCB chairman, said a case would be filed if the need arises. “We will summon the officials for an inquiry and if they fail to adhere to the norms, we will file a case,” Acharya said. 	

 	 		Reacting to the petition, M S Ravishankar, the BWSSB chief was terse. “We are working to our capabilities,” he said. 
 		 	 		“If we are given a free hand we can do much better.”
 		
 		
 		WATER CLASSES
 		 			A- Drinking water source without conventional treatment but after disinfection 		 			B- Outdoor bathing organised 		 			C- Drinking water source with conventional treatment followed by disinfection 		 			D- Propagation of wildlife, fisheries 		 			E- Irrigation, industrial cooling, controlled waste disposal