The shooter may have shot at the monkeys due to monkey menace in Koramangala 3rd block
 
 	In a first such case in Bangalore, two monkeys were allegedly shot dead by a civilian on Saturday in Koramangala. The dead monkeys (Bonnet macaques) are protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. 

 	According to Eranna B, Range Forest Officer, K R Puram range, Roopesh, an engineer who resides in Raheja Residency, behind Wipro in Koramangala 3rd block, seemed to have shot at the monkeys as he was irritated by monkey menace in the vicinity. On Saturday noon eyewitnesses saw him shoot at a troop of five moneys, including two infants (baby monkeys), from the balcony of his second-floor house. 

 	Drivers, who work for the apartment residents, rushed the injured monkeys to a veterinary hospital, but they died on the way. After the dead monkeys were brought back to the apartment complex, the two baby monkeys were seen crying beside the corpses. 

 	Later, forest sleuths arrived at the apartment to investigate. Mohan K, BBMP forest cell volunteer, who was at the spot told Bangalore Mirror, “Both the monkeys that died are females. One of them was pregnant.” 

 	The monkeys died from bullet injuries. The carcasses of both the monkeys were sent for postmortem at Bannerghatta National Park to know the nature of weapon used, said officials. 

 	Eranna said, “Roopesh could have either approached us or called the BBMP forest cell to handle the issue. Before we could recover the weapon, he escaped. We expect the postmortem report on Monday which will throw light on the type of bullets used.” 

 	Shooting at monkeys is a violation of Section 9 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. Bonnet macaques are listed in schedule II, part 1, which makes Roopesh’s offence serious. An FIR has been filed against Roopesh. If found guilty, he faces a minimum three years in jail and a maximum of seven years.
 	
 	Monkey menace? Call BBMP
 	If there is monkey menace in your area call BBMP forest cell at these numbers: 22221188/9880108801