As Washington hints at cyber espionage, Beijing warns of retaliatory measures

HOUSTON/BEIJING The US has told China to close its consulate in Houston, both countries said on Wednesday, deepening a deterioration in bilateral relations.

Beijing was considering shutting down the US consulate in Wuhan in retaliation, said a source.

Washington had “abruptly demanded” closure of the Houston consulate, a Chinese foreign ministry spokesman said, and the editor of an official media outlet said on Twitter that China had been given 72 hours to do so.

Beijing condemned the order and threatened retaliation, but did not say what measures it might take. Houston media reported that documents had been burned in a courtyard at the consulate building.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin said the consulate was operating normally, declining to comment further on those reports.

Ties between the US and China have worsened sharply this year over a range of issues, from Covid-19 and telecoms gear-maker Huawei to China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea and its imposition of a national security law on Hong Kong. It was not immediately clear why China’s Houston consulate had been singled out.

The US Department of State confirmed the closure decision. “The United States will not tolerate (China’s) violations of our sovereignty and intimidation of our people, just as we have not tolerated [its] unfair trade practices, theft of American jobs, and other egregious behaviour,” said the statement, which was attributed to State Department spokesperson Morgan Ortagus.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Wang Wenbin condemned the “unilateral closure” at a regular news briefing, saying it was an unprecedented escalation of the US’ recent actions against China. “We urge the US to immediately revoke this erroneous decision. Should it insist on going down this wrong path, China will react with firm countermeasures,” he said. The US government had been harassing Chinese diplomats and consular staff for some time, Wang said, and “intimidating and interrogating Chinese students and confiscating their personal electrical devices, even detaining them”.

He said the US had interfered with China’s diplomatic missions, including intercepting diplomatic pouches and confiscating Chinese items for “official use”. He did not specify whether the actions were related to the Houston consulate.

A source with direct knowledge of the matter said China was considering closing the US consulate in Wuhan, where the State Department withdrew staff and their families early this year amid the coronavirus outbreak that first emerged in the city. It was not immediately clear what other measures China may consider.

  This is in order to protect American intellectual property and Americans’ private information—Morgan Ortagus, US State Department spokesperson

  This is a unilateral political provocation. It is a grave violation of the international law... It is revolting—Wang Wenbin, Chinese foreign ministry spokesman

HOUSTON, WE HAVE A PROBLEM: As news of the closure order trickled out, a fire was reported at China’s Houston consulate, apparently due to burning of documents in its courtyard. Videos showed several garbage bins with flames coming out of them. Dozens of first responders arrived at the site but they did not go into the property as under international convention, the consulate is considered Chinese terr

HURTLING TOWARDS A CONFRONTATION

► Slander, says China on research hacking claims

Beijing accused the US of “slander” after two Chinese nationals were indicted for seeking to steal coronavirus vaccine research and hacking hundreds of companies. Li Xiaoyu, 34, and Dong Jiazhi, 33, targeted biotech companies but did not appear to have actually compromised any Covid-19 research, the US Justice Department said. “The Chinese government is a staunch defender of cyber security, and has always opposed and cracked down on cyber attacks and cyber crime in all forms,” said Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Wang Wenbin. The US must “immediately stop its slander and smearing of China on cyber security issues,” he added.

► China cannot threaten, bully countries: Pompeo

Attacking China for its aggressive moves against its neighbours, including “instigating” a deadly confrontation with India in Ladakh, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has said that Beijing cannot threaten countries and bully them in the Himalayas. “You can’t go make claims for maritime regions that you have no lawful claim to… You can’t engage in cover-ups and co-opt international institutions like the World Health Organisation.” Besides the May 5 Galwan valley clash, China recently staked claim over the Sakteng Wildlife Sanctuary in Bhutan and claims almost all of the South China Sea as its sovereign territory.