The electrocution of seven elephants in just four months has set off alarm bells in the forest department. Waking up to the call, the department top brass have reportedly written a stronglyworded letter to the energy department citing the inaction of its officials despite repeated requests. The letter also seeks an explanation on why action shouldn’t be initiated against engergy department officials under various sections of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.   In the letter written on Friday to the principal secretary of the energy department and MDs of all five power suppliers in the state, the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) and chief wildlife warden Deepak Sarmah has said that energy department officials would be held responsible in case any more electrocution of elephants occurs in the future.   The move comes after the department was irked by energy department’s silence despite repeated requests and letters, pointing how electric lines were turning into death traps to elephants, a source said.   This is second shocker to the energy department this week, as the High Court, hearing the same issue last Thursday, had asked its principal secretary to appear before the court.   “Though writing letters pertaining to elephants’ death has been a regular affair, the recent one is different,” said the source. “The latest letter has been written to the principal secretary of the energy department. Unlike past ones, it is a warning to the department officials who used to take the matter lightly.”   The letter said the state was losing elephants due to lacklustre reaction from the energy department officials, who have been permitting and installing electric lines and poles in areas frequented by elephants.   “We have been writing repeatedly. We have lost over seven elephants since April, which is alarming. However, this time we have made it clear that unscientific installation of poles and lines won’t be tolerated anymore. The same has also been brought to the court’s notice recently,” said APCCF Shivananda Murthy.    Sources said the letter also cited section 9, section 11 and section 39 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act which say permission is necessary for hunting and wildlife is government property. The letter was a warning to energy department that its officials would now have to face charges if they were found responsible for elephant deaths due to electrocution, sources added.    Besides this, the letter also mentioned the specifications to be followed while installing electric poles and lines in forest areas, hilly terrains and villages bordering forests. Some of them include keeping 220 kV lines and 11 kV lines at least 20 feet above the height of elephants, which are 10-12 feet tall and including trunks, measure up to 17 feet.    The letter also points that electric fencing and illegal tapping of power were also proving to be death traps for jumbos. It has also been made mandatory for officials of the department to sign in the Mahazar reports in cases of elephant deaths due to electrocution.    When Bangalore Mirror contacted Sarmah, he confirmed a letter was written to the energy department requesting action regarding jumbo deaths, but preferred not to divulge its contents.