If you believed Mowgli existed only in The Jungle Book, then you must meet Paul Rosolie, the 25-year-old naturalist, author, researcher, filmmaker and conservationist who lives deep in the Amazon rainforest. Known for his anaconda encounters, Rosolie is a regular on Discovery and National Geographic Channels, where he is usually seen with monstrous looking snakes draped around him. However, unlike Mowgli who was left behind in the forest as an infant, Rosolie, ventured into the Amazon on his own when he was an 18-year-old environmental science student. “Even as a child I was fascinated by the Amazon,” recalls Rosolie, sitting in Jagaa on KH Road where he had earlier interacted with a group of travel enthusiasts on Friday. “I had read every book and watched every documentary (about the Amazon). I was in college when I got to know about a camping trip to the Amazon.”     THE ADDICTION BEGINS  Rosolie worked part-time as a life guard and saved every penny to fund the $1,000 air ticket. And when his flight landed in the middle of the jungle and the door opened….just smelling the forest air was worth every dollar. “The tall trees looked like kings and animals seemed to reign the forest,” recollects Rosolie. “I smelt the moss, touched it and drank water from a flowing stream. Ecologically speaking it was a religious experience.” This was just the beginning for the teenager at the Laspiedras Bio Diversity station where he camped with a group of boys for two weeks without being able to catch a wink. “I would not sleep. I loved the jungle so much that I would go on night treks and JJ (Juan Julio Duran) the Peruvian naturalist and Emma, the British biologist, both researchers at the station would catch me and put me to bed.”    Rosolie’s father is an English teacher and mother, a sign language teacher for the hearing impaired. And he, Rosolie, was dyslexic. Mama Rosolie found a way to teach her son; she’d blindfold him and make him touch the bark of trees to identify it; “Those were my first lessons in nature,” says Rosolie who is now known all across the globe for his  anaconda adventures.   Rosolie grew up in Hudson Valley, New York. “NYC is not all about the city that you see,” he says. “I grew up near the woods where I fell in love with the animals.” And that includes snakes. He fell in love with snakes when he was 10.    Rosolie’s addiction for the Amazon brought him back to the research station in 2007; he joined JJ as a volunteer. One night, in 2008, JJ, and he were in the floating forest in the middle of the Amazon. “You take one wrong step and you will go underwater,” says Rosolie, “…there are all kinds of species living there.” Also, the place is infested with anacondas. It was 2 am when JJ pointed something out to Rosolie. It was a 15ft long anaconda - his first sighting! “It was this monster creature and you just feel crazy and don't know what to do with it. It felt very much like you are in a movie,” recalls Rosolie. “But strangely, she saw us and slithered away. We tried to catch it... (for documentation) and imagine you need to  wrap your arms around her, but she dived and the water was up to our chin and we couldn't go in the water and had to let her go.”    AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE BEAUTY  However, one adventure was when he spotted a 25ft-long anaconda,one of the biggest he’s ever seen, remains etched in his memory. “I was the tour guide for a Finnish boy and a girl from the US. It was close to two weeks and we hadn’t spotted any anacondas. The girl was really disappointed. So we decided to split and look in about 30mt radius. You won’t believe it; the boy (who sounded like Arnold Schwarzenegger) started calling me within a few minutes… and when I reached the spot… I was like… ‘Mother of God’; it was a 25ft female anaconda… its black scales gleaming in the sunlight as it rested in the lake. Just as I was planning to get my camera to shoot, the anaconda saw us, got terrified and started slithering away. Before I could think, the boy screamed, “I trust you Paul,” and jumped on it. I had to jump too - to get the boy. We were literally riding an anaconda.” But Rosolie explains that getting an anaconda is not like coiling a snake around a stick. “They are docile creatures (scientists may not agree with me) and difficult to spot. The 25ft female anaconda we encountered was a rare one. And even she was terrified when she saw us and slithered away.” Though he loves all the creatures in the Amazon, he has a strong affinity for snakes. “Nobody loves them. So I love them,” he says.   Rosolie, is married to Bangalorean Gowri Varanashi, who works with him in the Amazon rainforest. He met her in 2009 when he first came to India on a study-abroad-programme. While she is headed to New York to complete her graduation in environmental science, Rosolie continues to work towards conservation. Currently, his sights are trained on the Western Ghats. “These Ghats are equally beautiful and the wildlife there is in trouble just like in the Amazon. We are fortunate we are living in a time where we can see all these wonderful species,” he says, “and can do something about saving the ecosystem.”    LIVING FOR THE AMAZON  Today, Rosolie runs the conservation project called the Tamandua Expeditions that uses tourism to support rainforest conservation. Travellers from across the globe have trooped to the Amazon to know more about it. Being in the jungle is not without living in fear. “I am always terrified, but I am scared only if I am in a situation and by the time I realise, I am already out of it.” Rosolie has chronicled his seven years of experience in his first book Mother of God that will release next February in the US. Currently, he is staying in India to explore the Western Ghats. This brown-eyed man with a wild boar tooth (he found a boar’s skull that had fallen prey to a jaguar) dangling from a chain around his neck, says he loves New York. “It's my city. But in the forest, I can run to a stream and drink water from it, which I cannot do in NYC or any other city. I feel claustrophobic in such an environment.” Life for Paul Rosolie is in the forests, and if it is infested with gigantic anacondas, all the better!