By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 n November 2015, a group of wildlife researchers poring over images from camera traps set up around Bannerghatta National Park (BNP), just 22 km southeast of Bengaluru, were in for a pleasant surprise. One of the cameras had recorded a picture of a honey badger or ratel, a creature rarely spotted in Karnataka, and definitely never seen before in BNP. How did this elusive creature show up so close to a densely populated metropolis? Was this a one-off sighting, an unintentional visitor that had strayed far from its home turf? Or was there a larger population just waiting to be discovered? Camera traps set up in habitats similar to BNP, like the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary in Chamarajanagar, have been throwing up honey badger images from time to time. Clearly, the honey badger is not as rare in Karnataka as it was once thought to be.
 
 But its habits make it hard to spot. This is a solitary creature that moves around mostly at night. During the day it rests in burrows that it digs in the ground. It tends avoid most other creatures, except the ones it hunts. The honey badger steers clear of trouble, but when trouble comes looking for it, it is a different animal altogether.
 
 The Guinness Book of Records, 2002 edition, lists the honey badger as the world’s most fearless creature. When confronted or threatened, the honey badger follows the philosophy that attack is the best form of defence. First it threatens its opponent with a formidable display of aggression – a loud rattle-roar, glandular secretions that cause a foul stench, and gnashing teeth. Even as the opponent is digesting all this, the honey badger attacks, catching the other side by surprise. Mind you, this could be against adversaries like lions or leopards, many times larger than itself. A few minutes into the fight, the roles have reversed – the honey badger is the aggressor with its opponent on the defensive. Even when the other side is ready to throw in the towel, this creature just keeps attacking. Numerous videos on Youtube bear testament to this. The most popular, “Crazy Nastyass Honey Badger” has gone viral, garnering more that 83 million views till date. No wonder most predators keep a safe distance from this animal!
 
 When it comes to warding off attacks, the honey badger’s skin is its best ally. It is so thick that most predator bites cannot penetrate through. In case an enemy manages to grab the creature from behind, the skin hangs so loosely on its body that the honey badger can swivel around and face the threat. And by now we know where that leads to! This thick skin also makes the creature almost immune to insect stings, which gives it a great advantage while gathering its favourite food – honey. The honey badger’s approach to gathering honey is uncomplicated – it barges into the beehive and takes what it wants. Poor soldier bees sacrifice themselves by the thousands in trying to sting their enemy, but never get past its skin.
 
 Honey forms a very small chunk of the honey badger’s diet. For the most part, it hunts and eats other small animals and reptiles. It has been known to raid chicken farms at night and gobble up scores of birds, causing huge losses to the farmer. Honey badgers often prey on snakes. Snake fangs do get past the creature’s skin but like the mongoose, the honey badger has also developed immunity to snake venom. At worst, it gets knocked out for a few minutes before it jumps back on its feet and continues to make a meal of the snake. The forest department in Karnataka is setting up many more camera traps to get a better understanding of the fauna on BNP. Let’s hope they reveal a large and thriving population of honey badgers right in our city’s backyard.