By:Harsha Bhat
 
 They crave social contact and mourn the way humans do. Discover more endearing facts about the large mammals
 
 In May 2007, Dr Goering, veterinarian and photographer, was on a visit to Jaipur to study camel medicine. He was asked by local veterinarians to check in on an 11-hour-old-calf born to a captive elephant — this was happening in the city after almost 100 years. This, his first tryst with pachyderms, changed his life forever. Besotted, Goering went back to Canada and returned to India with his wife to study the mammals.
 
 Elephant Enigma is an art and information exhibit at the Rangoli Metro Art Center by Dr Goering and his wife, author Maria Coffey — a culmination of their experiences with elephants over two decades.
 
 The exhibit features large photographic panels with images, shadows and text, which reveal various facets of the lives of elephants, their interaction with humans and their struggle for coexistence. “As I was looking at the infant elephant, one of the other elephants grabbed my waist and pulled me close. I was staring deep into the eyes of a female elephant,” recalls Dr Goering, calling it one of his life’s most profound experiences. “There was something mysterious about them. Her eyes contained strong emotions and this is what I have tried to capture in the installation.”
 
 In 2008, he founded Elephant Earth, an organisation that works for the welfare of elephants, and has since been travelling across Asia and Africa, working on discovering aspects of their world. He aims to “make earth a better place for elephants to live in”.
 
 The exhibition will be followed by a multimedia presentation Elephant Earth — Into the World of Giants, which traces the couple’s personal journey and explorations across SE Asia and Africa and their discoveries about the challenges facing these animals. “We have so much in common with elephants. Our lifespans are almost the same to begin with. Their family is very important to them too,” says Dr Goering, adding that if you take an elephant away from its world, it’s like subjecting it to solitary confinement. Elephants mourn the way humans do, and even give a burial to their deceased kith and kin. A 40-minute documentary Apology to the Elephants will be screened, followed by a talk by various experts in the field of wildlife research.
 
 
 
 Elephant Enigma, 11 am to 8 pm, Jan 24 to 26, Rangoli MAC, MG Road