CAN’T MAINTAIN HYGIENE WHEN CITY IS UNHYGIENIC Miffed over diktat to install CCTVs in kitchens, restaurateurs are asking BBMP to check the rodent menace first
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi had once said, “You must be the change you wish to see in the world.” But what happens in the real world is entirely different. The recent diktat by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) making it mandatory for all hotels in Bengaluru to install CCTV sets in their dining areas so that customers can see what’s cooking, seems to be a damp squib. “Before asking us to maintain cleanliness and hygiene in the kitchen, please ensure the city is rodent-free,” said the hotels’ association.
 
 
 According to sources, there are more than 2,000 hotels in the city and this diktat includes all five-star hotels as well. Though several small hotels called darshinis do have a system where the kitchen is visible to diners, when it comes to bigger hotels, this provision is almost absent. You are not allowed to poke your nose inside the kitchen, it says with the sign ‘No admission’. Though a few hotels in Bengaluru have already expressed their willingness and follow the BBMP norms, others are gearing to take on the civic agency.
 
 
 “If I am paying Rs 2,000 or more to have my meal in a good hotel, then I expect them to follow the BBMP’s diktat. If they (hotels) want to indulge in a blame game, then let them serve food at road-side prices,” S Chetan Kumar, who frequently eats on the road side, said.
 
 
 The Bruhat Bangalore Hotels Association alleges that due to rodents in the city, it is not just hotels that are badly affected, but also software companies. B Chandrashekhar Hebbar, president of the association, said they were maintaining cleanliness in hotels and that nothing was being hidden from customer. “However, we are already losing business due to street vendors. Moreover, rodents are entering hotels during the night and wreaking havoc. We are unable to control the situation. Will BBMP clean up its own backyard before preaching?” he asks.
 
 
 Rodents are a nuisance in the city, especially during the night. Though there is no specific machinery with the civic agency that can control rodents, something needs to be done, and urgently. “If people are affected by rodents, it’s their headache. They should clean up their properties,” said an officer who did not wish to be named.
 
 
 However, Hebbar holds garbage responsible for the menace. He alleges that due to unhygienic conditions on roads, rodents are entering hotels, bakeries and even software companies.
 
 
 
  Signs of a rodent invasion
 
 
 * Electrical short circuits taking place overnight
 
 
 * Eatables being damaged
 
 
 * Urine on vegetables, fruits and other eatables
 
 
 * Damage of sanitary pipelines
 
 
 
  To catch a rat, BBMP spends Rs 10K
 
 
 Though there is no specific policy available with the BBMP to catch rodents, to lay a trap on its premises, BBMP spends Rs 10,000 for each rat catch. According to MPED engineers, they have not done any survey of rats getting trapped in BBMP offices. On a regular basis, medicines and gum plates are kept. One fine day, around 50 rats are trapped, but on other days there is zero progress. The number of rats is calculated only when they are trapped in the gum plates. And, the presence of rats is discerned only when the place stinks. These rats die after consuming the drug (Bromodiolone), the officer added.
 
 
 With the civic agency having set aside Rs 2 lakh to rein in rodents, it has managed to catch a dismal 20, raising the cost of catching each rat to as high as Rs 10,000. The result was that the rodent menace continues unabated in BBMP offices.
 
 
 
  My house, my problem
 
  “In my home, I have to take care of rodents or pest-related issues. The same applies to everyone. They cannot ask BBMP to take care of it. Around two months ago, we fined Malleswaram Adigas hotel Rs 1 lakh after a rat was found in the food display premises. But we have taken steps to eradicate black spots and once those are cleared, there won’t be rodent issues even on streets.
 
 
 — Sarfaraz Khan, Joint Commissioner (Health)
 
 
 
  We cannot ask BBMP to control rodents
 
  If a rodent enters your premises, then it’s your problem. There are pest control people providing 24/7 services. Rodents can be controlled but we cannot blame BBMP for that. Wherever there are human beings, there is garbage, and where there is garbage, rodents aren’t afar. And where there are rodents, snakes and owls may be seen as well. We can’t interfere with the processes of nature. We have to live with them. A simple solution would be to cut down roadside garbage. If rodents still persist, the owls and snakes are always there as a balancing factor.
 
 
 — BBMP’s wildlife chief warden Sharath Babu