Susi Ganeshan remakes his own 2006 Tamil hit Thiruttu Payale as Shortcut Romeo, starring Neil Nitin Mukesh, Puja Gupta, and Ameesha Patel. Now I haven’t seen the original but if the remake is anything like it then it’s hard to tell what Tamil audiences were smoking in 2006 to make it a hit. Either that or makers have messed around with the source material so much that it is now a wreck beyond recognition with zero positive takeaway.
   NNM plays Sooraj, a badly raised boy who is obsessed with money and indulges in minor cons with his group of loutish friends. When he comes to Bombay the opportunity of his life presents itself as he stalks and films super rich Ameesha Patel having sex on a golf course with her husband’s best friend with a king cobra lurking nearby. Yes, that’s right Ameesha Patel is playing golf!
   Anyhow, Sooraj blackmails AP and begins to lead a life shaped by obnoxious amounts of wealth. Because, you know, her husband doesn’t check her credit card statements and in any case is worth … 13,000 crores. But it is Sooraj who wears a massive rupee sign around his neck. Also, you’d think AP would get a room with all that money to avoid such a situation in the first place, but no. Complications follow when Sooraj decides to take a wildlife trip to Kenya where he meets and makes out with PG. Eventually he must choose between love and money to redeem himself. This path takes two and a half hours of screen time. They could’ve simply cut out a few reels and it still would (not) make sense.
   The “coolest” line in Shortcut Romeo, the one where the screen flashes and characters walk away in slow-mo to loud dramatic music is “doodh ke saath karela khaoge, to ulti aayegi na”. Neil’s crooked character also loves to spew “iss par mera naam likha hai” on a variety of objects including sunglasses, cars, and Puja Gupta (hey, don’t blame me, he said it!). This is as good as the dialogue and writing get.
   The film tries so hard to be slick, you wonder that if it was shot in a realistic manner with real characters, it might have worked. Instead the movie is replete with pathetic production values. A world tour is clumsily green-screen’d against images of famous landmarks, songs are shot on a helipad that is a set, and there are one too many low-angle shots of actors framed against tree-tops. If you don’t have money, don’t make a film about money.
   Shortcut Romeo has it all – racism, classism, and every other ism you can think of. The Maasai tribal people are made to sound and look like hyena-howling kung fu fighters as they’re bashed up single-handedly by Sooraj for no fault of their own. At one point – midway in the first half – when they’re about to get the better of him and drive a dagger through his chest you can’t help but hope they succeed and put an end to our collective misery.