They inserted steel or cast-iron barricades deep into the ground along the forest periphery at uneven heights. When the elephant stepped on the uneven rods, the lack of balance led it to retract. Though smaller animals can cross over, it is impossible for elephants to do so, says Mukund, who is well known for his snake-catching skills.

                                 Captive elephants Vanaraja (with tusks) and Gayatri refusing to cross the iron barricades during the demonstration at BBP          

The rods, though set up for the purpose of a demonstration, still function inside the park. The officials at Bannerghatta have “recommended” the experiment to their higher-ups so that it can be implemented in other parts of the state too.

Dangerous

But several wildlife activists say the experiment is not only inhuman but also dangerous for thousands of wild elephants in state national parks and sanctuaries. Shobha M Lolanath of Yamini Foundation, which works to conserve wildlife, told Bangalore Mirror: “Elephants normally cross any barrier in their way and in trying to do so, they could end up being wounded. This could endanger their lives in the long-run. Already, manmade techniques like electric fence, solar fence, food dynamite, poisonous food, gun shots etc have killed several elephants. This is another such dangerous experiment.” Hari Somashekar, honorary wildlife warden of Bangalore rural district, agrees and says there is also a high possibility of elephant calves being injured. The activists are more in favour of long-term studies based on animal behaviour rather than temporary measures. Conservationist and wildlife biologist Sanjay Gubbi said, “Any mitigation measure should be tested on wild elephants rather than captive elephants. Without field experiments, it could prove costly for both elephants and humans.”

                                 Mukund hammering steel rods into the ground to carry out the demonstration at BBP          However, Mukund thinks the problem of injuries can be sorted if the tips of the rods are softened with polish or flat metal caps. “Since it was a safari area,  we could not carry welding machines and other apparatus during the demonstration,” he said.

Expensive
 
There is also the cost factor. Setting up a metal barricade covering acres of forest area would be very expensive for a department that is struggling to pay its ground level and frontline staffers, said one activist.

Though the demonstrators successfully planted the rods deep into the ground, “places with loose soil or marshy swamps could make it easy for elephants, or anyone else for that matter, to remove the rods. This kind of project could attract thieves who will sell the rods in the scrap market, causing huge losses to the department,” Shobha explained.

Mukund admits that that is a possibility but asks, “What will we lose by testing it in the wild? Our demonstration showed good results but we will get the true picture only after testing it in the wild.” Moreover, he thinks iron and steel can be substituted with fibre or bamboo sticks and need not be planted along the entire forest stretch.