Meghamalai                  
Loosely translated, Meghamalai would mean mountain of clouds. What strikes a visitor about this hill station is the lush green tea gardens cushioned by thick forests on all sides, huge water bodies and silky clouds forming an umbrella over green cover.

We checked into the Sand River Cottage, a cozy retreat, in Upper Manalar. As we pulled up the the porch, what caught our eye was the canopy of bright purple bougainvillae over the portico. The two-bedroom cottages, complete with fire places et al, sit pretty on the steep face of a hill surrounded by tea gardens.

A sprawling lawn of buffalo grass, with a ‘sprinkling’ of impatiens and other hill station variety of little flowers adds to charm of the setting. The cottage is furnished with rich period furniture. Its library is full of British magazines and novels dating back to mid twentieth century.

Post sundowners, we were treated to an excellent dinner followed by caramel custard. Later, we tucked ourselves in thick blankets in mid-April when the cities we left behind were reeling under a heat wave.

CHIRPING SYMPHONY

We woke up to a ‘thousand piece’ symphony being played by birds. At the break of dawn, we walked through the tea plantations. As we stepped out, we saw the ‘real’ Meghamalai. We were enveloped in pure white rolls of clouds.

On our return, cups of fresh brew were brought from the kitchen. A quick shower followed and we lined up at the table to indulge ourselves in the vast spread of breakfast. 

Even as we could reach out for the next cup of tea, Narayanan presented himself. A tall and well-built frame with sharp eyes and a trademark moustache, he was going to be our guide.

Narayanan suggested we begin the exploration with a visit to Meghamalai’s ‘Hardrock’. It’s not a cafe, but a waterhole for the wild. A jumbo’s jaw bone welcomes you at the entrance of the hard rock. Narayanan tells us an elephant had rolled over the rocks and fallen to death many years ago and the townsmen had taken away every little bone as a souvenir during their expeditions.

SOAKING IN NATURE

We waded through the low hanging tree canopies and made our way to this gigantic single rock waterfall and plunged into the pool right below the water landing. It was freezing and when we emerged out, the chill winds added to our trauma.

After the waterfall experience, we returned to our nests for lunch. Siesta followed and I chose a lemon tea at the customary evening tea at the lawns.

Next on the agenda was a sunset drive to the highest point on this part of the hills, a mix of grasslands and rocks. Halfway through, Narayanan got off and directed us to remain silent and vanished into the bushes. He had smelt something. After one of the longest ten minutes of our lives, we spotted him emerging ahead of us. He signalled us to tiptoe and follow. What we saw at the end of our tread was a vast grassland with some massive gaurs and a calf blissfully grazing, unaware of our presence.

GAUR AND GRR!

A ‘protective aunt’ felt our presence. With her head high up and ears set like antennae, she stared at us. Soon, others followed, tucking the calf to safety. Before Narayanan commanded “run”, I had started the jeep and the entire group was safely in. We offered our pre-dinner prayers from the bottom of our hearts!

Meghamalai is a heady mix of charming environs and rustic wilderness, where you have a chance to trek as well as spot wildlife, topped with hot water showers and elaborate dinners in the comfort of old-world charm.

Thekkady is just an easy trek away from Meghamalai and can even be seen from one of the peaks. We saw the Periyar reservoir and Mangaladevi temple from a viewpoint of this hill station. We pray Meghamalai remains unspoilt forever.

HOW TO REACH

Meghamalai is about 560 km from the Silk Board Junction. Except for the half a dozen toll stations at regular intervals, the first 400 km from Bangalore to Dindigul on the four-lane highway is a delight. Reach Theni and then head to a little town called Chinnamannor, which leads to Meghamalai. It takes about three hours to cover 45 km with 18 hairpin bends and some bad estate roads.

WHERE TO STAY

To experience a planter’s life, get in touch with Parameshwari of Tea Estates India at Coimbatore on reservations@teil.in or dial 0422 4351500.The writer is an engineer by profession and an adventurer by heart