Cabinets says rhino horn and tiger bone can only be obtained from farmed animals for ‘medical research’ or healing

China says it will allow trading in products made from endangered tigers and rhinos under “special circumstances,” reversing a 25-year-old ban amid condemnation from conservation groups.

A notice from the Cabinet issued Monday avoided mentioning any change in the law, saying instead that it would “control” the trade and that rhino horns and tiger bones could only be obtained from farmed animals for use in “medical research or in healing.”

“Under the special circumstances, regulation on the sales and use of these products will be strengthened, and any related actions will be authorized, and the trade volume will be strictly controlled,” the statement said, adding nothing about regulating the farming of tigers and rhinos. It said the central government “urged governments at all levels to improve publicity activities for protecting rhinos and tigers to help the public actively boycott any illegal purchases.''

Tiger bone and rhino horn are used in traditional Chinese medicine, despite a lack of evidence of their effectiveness in treating illness and the effect on wild populations. Chinese demand for ivory is also blamed as a driver behind the slaughter of African elephants, despite Beijing banning all trade in ivory starting from this year.

No reason was given for the lifting of the ban, which was implemented in 1993 amid a global push to protect disappearing endangered species.

The World Wildlife Fund said the move to overturn the ban would have “devastating consequences globally'' by allowing poachers and smugglers to hide behind legalised trade.

Nepal counts big cats with 3,200 hidden cameras

More than 3,200 camera traps helped conservationists track Nepal’s wild tiger population, which has nearly doubled in recent years as the cats claw their way back from the verge of extinction.

After a nine-year push to protect tigers, an exhaustive census across 2,700 km of Nepal’s lowlands completed earlier this year revealed the population has grown from 121in 2009 to an estimated 235 adult cats today. 


60 per cent of vertebrates wiped out since 1970: WWF

Unbridled consumption has decimated global wildlife and triggered a mass extinction due to humanity’s expanding appetites, the WWF warned Tuesday. From 1970 to 2014, 60 per cent of all animals with a backbone — fish, birds, amphibians, reptiles and mammals — were wiped out by human activity, according to WWF’s “Living Planet” report, based on an ongoing survey of more than 4,000 species spread over 16,700 global populations.