India’s first birder to complete one ‘Big year’ and record 1,128 species of birds from across India in 2015, Shashank Dalvi, has now brought out a digital bird guide in the form of an mobile application called Vannya. Launched about a month ago, the free app that is available on Android and IOS already has over 3,000 downloads from across 15 countries.
 
 Dalvi told BM that keeping pace with the exponentially growing birding community of India, Vannya is built to be the one-stop solution for all birding hiccups.
 
 Currently the app has a database of over 1,000 species of birds in just its basic version. “We have uploaded images with bird details such as quick facts- that provide details such as the bird status, size habitat and basic information. It also has features such as Bird of the Day, what’s trending, mark a species as “seen”, make a note and so on,” he said.
 
 “I have worked on building a data for nearly a year and we have documented India’s 1,300 species that we would be gradually update with images. We are also excited about the new features that would be launched soon that include bird calls. The updated versions of Vannya will be helpful for seasoned birders and the bird call feature can be used offline. In addition, elevation of birds is also being documented,” he said.
 
 The biggest advantage is that henceforth birders when on field need not depend on bulky books. “All photographs used in the app are clicked by brilliant bird photographers in the country,” he said.
 
 The idea of bringing out an app hit Shashank when he was working on Big year- which is an informal competition among birders to see who can identify by sight or sound the largest number of species of birds within a single calendar year and within a specific geographical area. Popular world over, Shashank became the first Indian to take up the challenge.
 
 He recently also won the Wildlife Service Award constituted by Sanctuary Wildlife Awards for using his knowledge, commitment to science, and love for gruelling expeditions in pursuit of his long-term goal that is to pioneer a nation-wide conservation programme for birds outside Protected Areas. He was also instrumental in starting the Amur Falcon conservation programme in Nagaland to save species from severe hunting pressures. Last year, he became the second Indian to describe a new species of bird to Science- the Himalayan Forest Thrush.
 
 The app that is a product of Eco Connect Ventures also has two other conservationists Vishnupriya and Ajay Tolia working for it.