Cat person
AND now on to Taimur’s celebrated cousin, Shaaz Bin Jung. This evening sees a wildlife photography show by Jung, one of the five top cat trackers in the world. Shaaz, 30, is the son of Saad Bin Jung, the grandson of Iftikhar Ali Pataudi and nephew of Tiger Pataudi. Till the privy purse was abolished by the newly democratic India, the prime tiger forests around central India and Bhopal belonged to Shaaz’s family for three centuries. Shaaz is also from the Paigah lineage, his great-grandfather built the Falaknuma palace, where Shaaz was married. Like his cricketer-turned-conservationist father, Shaaz (he says he couldn’t swing a bat to save his life) is passionate about the forests of India. “It started when I saw my first leopard at Nagarhole in south India, I called it Scarface and I explored the forest with him,” Shaaz tells us. Shaaz’s opening will be attended by Soha Ali Khan and her husband Kunal Khemu, Celina and Jeh Wadia, Ness Wadia, Dino Morea, and perhaps, Saif Ali Khan too. “He has been a part of many adventures in the jungles with us,” Shaaz says.

Ahead of his times
THERE is little doubt that Taimur is ahead of his times. He has not even turned two, but a film has already been registered in his name. Interestingly, the registration was done not by his parents, but by Madhur Bhandarkar. A source tells us that the award-winning director was enamoured of the name and went ahead with the registration. Surely, it must be the name; it wasn’t for nothing that Ajay Devgn recently called Taimur the biggest Khan of Bollywood.

Waiting for Choksi
THE CBI may be upbeat about scoring three international successes—Christian Michel, Vijay Mallya and Mehul Choksi—but the Interpol’s arrest warrant against Choksi, which was issued yesterday, may take some more time to fructify. Our sources in Antigua, where the former tycoon who is complicit in a Rs 13,000-crore scam is ensconced comfortably, say he has a legal case and his lawyers are fighting hard to protect him. Last heard, his extradition case was adjourned till early next year and there is little chance of Choksi coming home soon. Surely, not for the New Year.

Talking pictures
A charming show comes on this weekend at Kala Ghoda’s Artisans’ gallery. Put together by the Godrej Design Lab and its archives section, ‘Perception/ Production’ is a compilation of photographs shot by industrial and advertising photographer Mitter Bedi in the 1970s. The renowned photographer’s works will be juxtaposed with Dayanita Singh’s Godrej Museum, a part of her ‘Museum Bhavan’ set of miniature museums that are books and installation artworks at the same time. “I love that they are displaying the book. The idea of the book as exhibition has worked,” says Singh.