By Sudeshna Dutta

This Fraser Town couple is all set to open Bangalore Creative Circus, a creative space that brings art and sustainability on one platform

Following in the footsteps of naturalist David Attenborough is not easy, but that didn’t stop Ajay Raghavan and Manisha Vinod from doing their bit to save Planet Earth.
To bring the concept of art and sustainability on one platform, the couple from Fraser Town has created a new, sustainable performance space called Bangalore Creative Circus (BCC). This 20,000-square feet warehouse in Yeshwanthpur is slated to open its doors some time in January next year.

“We want to use this space to draw attention to climate change and sustainability. We are also using art as a medium to draw people into the experience. We saw the space near Orion Mall in 2019 and took it over. The debris that we dug out while redecorating the space was used to construct our office block as well as a number of other features, keeping in line with our philosophy of recycle, reuse and re-purpose,” says Raghavan. Alok Agarwal, an entrepreneur, also came on board in June this year.

The space is many things but the underlying message is sustainability. BCC has a dedicated studio for artists to work with scrap materials and upcycled products. “A few artists have tied up with us and they are free to walk in at any time of the day to unleash their creativity with waste products,” says Raghavan. One of their art installations depicting the hump-backed Mahaseer made of scrap metal was displayed at the Echoes of the Earth music festival last year, in association with Wildlife Association of South India (WASI). 

  Ajay, Alok, Manisha
The fish is believed to be endemic to the Cauvery river and was put up in a public forum to spread awareness on marine conservation.

When it opens to the public, the space will be a museum, with graffiti. It will also be a space to host live events, with a recording studio, a farm-to-table café and a store selling sustainable products. BCC is also setting up facilities for sustainable urban farming methods like aquaponics, hydroponics, permaculture, rainwater harvesting and more, which will be on display. 

If people find them interesting, they can even get the BCC team’s help to set up the systems at their residences. “We are working to address the universal challenges of urban sustainability, starting with Bengaluru. BCC will be a sort of live museum for people to experience. They are free to come here and exchange ideas for a sustainable future,” Raghavan adds.