Project launched to attract bird to Yediyur lake where its count has dropped
 
 How does one ensure a comeback of sparrows near city lakes? The Bruhat Bangalore Mahangara Palike (BBMP) has finally got an answer. In an attempt to attract local sparrow to Yediyur lake area in the city, BBMP is now planning to purchase different species of birds and create an artificial habitat for them. BBMP officials say that the move will help attract the local sparrow as the sounds of other brids chirping may draw them to the lake in the belief that the habitat may be safe. If the project yields good results, it will be replicated in other lakes. There are reports that sparrows are deserting the city area due to rapid urbanisation. 
 
 BBMP has already floated a tender to purchase 14 types of birds, some of which include Budgerigar, African Budgerigar, Finches, Geese, Golden Dove, African Java, Fan Tail Pigeon, Lutino, Silver Finches, African Bulfinch among others. The BBMP will purchase a total of 162 birds (all in pairs). Prices quoted by BBMP ranges from Rs 400 to Rs 6,000 per pair of bird. Budgerigar birds (parakeet) costs Rs 400 while geese cost Rs 6,000. As many as 15 silver finches will also be procured. The contractor will also provide a bathing tub, a feeding tub, a display board on the birds. The project will cost a total of Rs 6.39 lakh.
 
 An official of BBMP said, “We have introduced a project called Banadi Marali Gudige, basically to attract local sparrow which has deserted the area due to various reasons. There is a need to provide a safe environment to birds. It is said that chirping of these birds will attract sparrows and help them settle down in the area. The project will be replicated if this initiative is successful.”
 
 Yediyur Lake located in BBMP (south zone) was developed in 2004-05. Information provided by the BBMP on the lake suggests that it is spread across 18 acres and is located in Dasarahalli. Like other lakes, this is also not free from encroachment. The BBMP says 267 houses have encroached upon 10 acres of lake area. After the lake was rejuvenated, it is said that more birds have started visiting the area.
 
 Vallish Vasuki, a wildlife expert, said, “Over the past few months, several initiatives have been taken to attract more birds around Yediyur lake. After the rejuvenation of Yediyur Lake, several birds have been flocking to the water body. We want more birds to nest around the area. Food stations have been set up at vantage points, apart from bamboo units to store left over food for birds. Because of these efforts, several bird species are beginning to frequent the water body.