By Amit Kumar
 
 The All-India Tiger Estimation, 2018, which began on January 8, at the tiger reserves and wildlife sanctuaries in the state has completed its first phase. Forest department sources said a total of 34 tigers were found in Bandipur and Nagarahole Tiger Reserves and another seven were sighted at the BRT Wildlife Sanctuary.
 With this, the number of tigers sighted during the drive rose to 41. The camera trapping of tigers is scheduled to be held from January 20. On the first day of Tiger Estimation at Nagarahole, the tiger census team spotted a mother tiger along with his two cubs.
 
 On the second day of estimation, only one tiger was spotted. On the third day, a tiger along with three cubs were spotted. On fourth and 5th day, totally 16 tigers were spotted and by the sixth day, 34 tigers were found. Along with tigers, eight leopards, 63 wild dogs, 224 wild elephants, 15 deers, 12 sambar deer and 19 wild goats were spotted.
 
 Around 700 volunteers participated in the first phase. Along with forest department officials, volunteers belonging to private NGOs were also participated in the Estimation programme.
 
 Director of Bandipur National Park Ambady Madhav told BM, “Yes, we have wrapped up the first phase of Tiger Estimation in Bandipur. We got amazing results on the first phase itself. We are expecting better results in the second phase. Camera-trapping will begin from January 20 at Bandipur. This time, the exercise is done in a scientific manner. We are hoping to get good results in the future as tiger estimation will be done all over the country.”
 
 Nodal officer of All India Tiger Estimation Manoj Kumar told BM, “We can’t get the exact count on how many tigers found until the survey is over. Survey in the non-wildlife areas will begin from January 22.”
 
 The camera-trapping exercise will be undertaken for nearly 25 days. “Cameras will be installed in every 2 sq km of the area. With the help of captured visuals, final estimation of wild animals will be conducted and final result will announced later,” the officer said.