After a snake catcher died on Saturday in Nerale village in Nanjagud while trying to rescue a reptile, snake rescuers in the city pointed out that there has been an increase in the number of snakes this year.

 About 3,000 snakes were rescued in Bengaluru this year, by the nine BBMP wildlife wardens. And the BBMP rescuers blame urban development, encroachment of the snakes habitat and cleanliness drive in the city, due to which snakes are driven out of their natural habitat. 

“Most snakes are found in garbage dumps and construction areas. The garbage pile attracts rats and frogs and they are the snakes’ food. Bengaluru is a developing city, with many houses, stores and malls being constructed. When the construction debris is not cleared, it attracts snakes,” said BBMP wildlife warden, Hiss Mohan who rescued 450 snakes this year.

This year the snakes have been spotted not only in summer and monsoon but also in winter. “In December alone, I rescued more than 30 snakes. This is surely surprising. The snakes are getting out of garbage dumps and getting into nearby houses in search of warmth. They prefer to settle in cosy places like shoe racks, kitchens, toilets, or even in shoes,” said Prasanna Kumar, BBMP wildlife rescuer. Kumar has rescued 400 snakes in 2018.
Recently, Hiss Mohan rescued one snake from inside an air-conditioner another from a washing machine. “On Monday at the BMRCL office, the AC had stopped working and when people tried to check, they saw a rat snake inside the AC. I rescued it. In HRBR Layout, another rat snake was found inside a washing machine,” said Mohan.

“Earlier you would see more of greenery and open spaces for snakes to take shelter in. But now they have no place to go. You find them in open drains or in a dry, warm place,” said Prasanna.

There are about 23 species of snakes found in the city. The venomous snakes include spectacled cobra, Russell viper, saw-scaled viper, common krait, while non-venomous species include rat snake, checkered keelback, cat snake and so on. The rescuers urge people not to panic when they spot one. Stay seven feet away from the snake, and do not block it path. Don’t kill it, call a rescuer instead, they say.