Between April 2022 and March 2023, Karnataka diverted nearly 102 hectares of forest land for non-forestry purposes. This is nearly 70% more than the land diverted for non-forestry purposes last year. From April 2021 to March 2022, only 60.45 hectares of forest land was diverted across the state.

Over the last five years, over 778 hectares have been diverted for various projects such as mining and quarrying, road, railways, transmission lines, and irrigation.

Data from Karnataka Forest Department shows that in 2018-19, as many as 137 hectares were diverted, which went on to be 36.31 hectares in 2019-20, 442.27 hectares in 2020-21, 60.48 hectares in 2021-22, and 101.8 hectares in 2022-23.

Ecologists and experts say diverting even a single inch of forest land is criminal looking at the ongoing climate crisis. Redirecting more and more forest patches will only degrade the ecology and biodiversity of the area. According to Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), with the total forest cover in Karnataka less than 33%, infrastructure projects in forest areas should not get a green signal. When forest cover has declined so much, the department cannot divert more forest land and make people more vulnerable to climate change.

“Forest sequesters carbon and ensures sustenance of water. Looking at the current forest cover, any infrastructure projects should not be allowed. If the department has to go ahead with a project, deforestation should be compensated for by planting native species in degraded forest patches. If forest land is unavailable, they must acquire it elsewhere and carry out compensatory plantation. The forest officials must be made accountable for forest degradation and such irrational decision,” said Dr Ramachandra.


Experts say it is time we learn a few lessons on sustainability from countries like Bhutan which take pride in being a carbon-negative country.

“Given the climate crisis, every inch of the forest must be saved. The forest department must put its foot down even if there is bureaucratic pressure. On one hand, we have the Prime Minister who has promised carbon neutrality by 2070, on the other hand, we are removing our green cover at a much faster rate. While our forest area is dwindling, Bhutan has 72% of its land as forest cover. We should learn how to emulate them,” said Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Wildlife Board.

    Given the climate crisis, every inch of the forest must be saved. The forest department must put its foot down even if there is bureaucratic pressure— Joseph Hoover, president, United Conservation Movement
While the department carries out compensatory afforestation to compensate for destroyed forest land that has been diverted to no-forest activities, experts say there is a complete lack of transparency, and such policies only remain on paper.

“The department’s claim of compensatory afforestation is only on the ledgers. There is a total lack of transparency. Every tree under CA must be geotagged and data should be made available in the public domain. We say this, as despite all the claims of CA by the department when we carry out remote sensing data analysis, we do not see a significant change in tree cover,” added Dr Ramachandra.