By Iffath Fathima

‘Objective of map to bring perspective on use and abuse of rivers’

A group of researchers from the city has mapped rivers of Bengaluru which include the Vrishabhavathi, Arkavathi, Dakshina Pinakini, Chinnar, Suvarnamukhi, Cauvery and Netravathi rivers. Not many are aware of these rivers, the experts pointed out, as most of these rivers are polluted, depleted or even converted into drains.

The map has Bengaluru district and its five taluks including Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) area at the centre. The data points from the map indicate the rivers’ origin, length, elevation, ground water status, past and present drinking lifelines of Bengaluru, alongside the downward and upward movement of water and even the hydrology and administrative boundaries.

The experts from Paani Earth, Dr Nidhi Paliwal, Nirmala Gowda and Madhuri Mandava in their study stated the objective of the map was to bring perspective on the use and abuse of rivers. Waste flows in natural river corridors without exception and water in man-made pipelines. Both devoid of life, flow in opposite directions. The situation is especially stark for the rivers passing through the district, the Vrishabhavathi, Arkavathi, Dakshina Pinakini, Chinnar and Suvarnamukhi, as the water bodies are already converted into sewage drains. Cauvery, the current drinking water source, is not spared either. Heavily polluted and altered, the river is in a dire state.

For instance, from representation of the map, it is showcased that the Arkavathi River which is 172-km long, originates in Nandi Hill ranges, and flows down to Hessaraghatta and then towards Chamarajasagara connecting to the Manchanabele Minor Forest, and then towards Ramanagara linking to the Cauvery river.

Dr Nidhi Paliwal, one of the founders of Paani Earth and trustee of Bangalore Environment Trust said: “Presently Hessaraghatta is dry or filled with waste and is abandoned as a drinking source. Even the Chamarajasagara is filled with waste carried by Arkavathi and is abandoned as a drinking water source. After Manchanabele, there is a polluted stretch which goes through Ramanagara town and towards Kanakapura. The Central Pollution Control Board has identified it as a polluted stretch. This area is frothing. From there it connects to the proposed Mekedatu Dam and then to the Cauvery.”

Dr Paliwal pointed out that the waste water generated is high due to unplanned urbanisation. “Peenya industrial area, one of the biggest of its kind, is located where Vrishabhavathi River begins; the industries are dumping their waste into it. Other countries would try to save the river. There is a policy of water use and reuse which is not being followed. Our effort through the map is to recognise the resources around and manage it. We have left the sewage line in the stormwater drain. No sewage should be let into the stormwater drain. The water is not being treated and released. The water here goes to the drinking source, which have become carriers of Bengaluru waste,” said Dr Paliwal.


  .

Many do not even know the existence of the Chinnar River which is 45 km in length. The Chinnar is a tributary of Dakshina Pinakini river, which is 426-km long and flows to Tamil Nadu. Even Dakshina Pinakini is frothing.

“The rivers have to nourish us. We are abusing our surface water and exploiting ground water. Through the study of five years, we have come out with the data. We have abused the rivers and we need to save them. If we go back to history, we see all civilisations flourished around rivers. Civilisations were wiped out, as many rivers vanished. And in years ahead these rivers will undergo further depletion and future generations will face the brunt,” she said.

While the common man is definitely affected with the rivers carrying polluted water, the wildlife is equally affected by it, as many rivers carry the water to nearby forests; the forest flora and fauna are dependent on the same water.

The researchers gathered data for the map from different government records and through the Karnataka State Remote Sensing Application Centre. They also referred to Survey of India topo sheets amongst other sources.