Arvind Limbavalli meets residents, says plans to convert 400 acres of forest land into Tree Park will be on hold

Greens, you can afford to heave a sigh of relief. For the plan to convert 400-acres of Turahalli forest into Tree Park has been temporarily put on hold. Forest minister Arvind Limbavali, who met resident groups opposing state government’s plan on Wednesday, said he would instruct officials not to take up any work on the tree park. He, however, said the decision to drop the project would be taken after consulting officials of the forest department.

“The proposal to create a tree park was drafted following complaints that there are not many places to walk and jog. Since you do not want it, I will direct officials to put the project on hold temporarily. The only work we will be carrying out is that of fencing the forest,” Limbavalli said after listening to the suggestions of around 200 people who live close to the forest. He however urged the residents not to trespass into the forest and stated that the final decision on dropping the project would be taken after consulting the officials. The forest minister also promised to upgrade the 32-acre tree park that was created in the Turahalli forest in 2011.

Minister of Co-operation ST Somashekar, under whose constituency the forest falls, suggested the forest minister drop the project. “We do not want to take up something the residents do not want,” he said.

People who are part of around 80 residents welfare associations attended the interaction with the ministers.


It won’t be TourahalliTurahalli forest is one among the four forests identified for creating tree parks by Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa in his pet project ‘Bengaluru Mission 2022’. 
In December last year, the state government had proposed 400 acres of the protected Turahalli Minor forest land to be converted into a tree park. The park was aimed to provide access to the public, which was currently restricted. The forest department had also planned to create amenities such as walkway, entry arch, toilets, canteen, parking lot, children’s play area, senior citizen’s gym, yoga sites etc.

Many resident groups had opposed this plan, stating that it would endanger the remaining flora and fauna in the urban forest. “Turahalli minor forest is a thriving forest and a home to more than 120 species of birds, more than 29 species of butterflies, many species of small mammals, reptiles, amphibians, bees and wasps. There have been instances of spotted deer and wild boar making a visit to this part of the forest. All these species of wildlife are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. The site is also the breeding and nesting ground for peakcocks,” a letter submitted by Save Turahalli campaign organisers had stated. They had also opposed the use of heavy machinery in the forest.