Minister suggests modes like cable cars for last-mile connectivity issues 

With the Bengaluru-Mysuru expressway nearing completion, Union Transport Minister Nitin Gadkari has asked the state government to take steps to decongest Bengaluru. He said that the city’s traffic had reached saturation levels and it was time the government looked at alternatives.

“The Bengaluru-Mysuru highway will reduce the distance between two Cities. The state government can look at building townships along the highways now. From our end, we can provide connectivity. The state can also encourage IT companies to relocate to the less congested areas. Even educational institutions can be set up. I have already held discussions with private bus manufacturers about whether they can build a business class bus where techies can plug in a laptop to work while travelling.

 Overall, we need to focus on encouraging public transport. If we can provide better buses, traffic can be reduced,” said Gadkari.

Last-mile connectivity
During the meeting, Gadkari suggested that the state look into different transport modes like double-decker buses, cable cars, and personal pods. While the Union Transport Ministry would provide the feasibility report, the state government has to look into funding.

STRR project to skip Bannerghatta forest
The proposed satellite Ring Road project (STRR) was proposed to cut across Bannerghatta forest, which was opposed by activists. Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai said, “We are opposing this project and we had taken a decision during our state wildlife board meetings for the same. Gadkari has agreed to our request and the STRR alignment will be revised so that it doesn’t pass via Bannerghatta forest.”

He added that precious forest land could be preserved even though it would mean the length of the road and cost of the project would increase.

Road safety audit
Gadkari, who took an aerial tour of the highway, said he has asked officials to conduct a road safety audit in the wake of increasing accidents. “There is a requirement of signage near curves which can alert drivers to slow down. Officials need to ensure highways aren’t.”

He said that the Bengaluru-Mysuru highway will be completed by March this year. The 117 km long project has been taken up at a cost of Rs 8,408 crore.
 
“The work is almost done and aims to be completed in all respects by February 2023. Out of 117 km, 52 km is Greenfield Road consisting of five bypasses which will reduce congestion in the towns,” informed Gadkari.