The dramatically changing face of the city and the pressure its growth is exerting on the green cover have transformed many Bengalureans from sympathisers to ground-level volunteers, those that are not afraid to get their hands dirty. These are city-dwellers who realise that deforestation, poaching, man-animal conflict are real problems that require concerted efforts from regular people. More and more professionals are now becoming a part of conservation efforts. Nitindra Bandyopadhyay brings to you a few of such determined doers
 
 
 A JUMBO PULL
 
 The death of an elephant after it was hit by a bus on July 4 in Shoolagiri, on the Chennai-Bengaluru national highway, moved this software engineer so much that he conducted an awareness programme on this very stretch, as a tribute to the animal.
 
 
 
 
 
 Srivenugopal Ramacha­n­dran, an employee of Biocon, said: “The loss of that elephant affected me deeply. It drove me to conduct the awareness programme even without much support except from a few others in the vicinity and from Bengaluru.”
 
 He is not the only one involved in such work. Many professionals from the city are now becoming more vocal about animal rights and are coming forward to support wildlife conservation and joining non-governmental organisations to do their due for the cause.
 
 Srivenugopal runs his own small NGO called Nature Nurturers Society, which works primarily for the welfare of elephants. Through this forum, he aims at reducing fatal accidents on national highways, especially during the migratory period when animals move out of Bengaluru and head towards Tamil Nadu forests.
 
 His NGO covers an area of 10-15 km on the migratory route of elephants (which includes the national highway) and educates drivers on safe driving practices through this stretch.
 
 
 
 A FOX GOT HIS HEART
 
 Naveen TS, an engineer with a data management company in Electronics City said: “My friends and I would often go biking through the woods. During one such trip, we found an injured fox. It had a broken hind limb.”
 
 They were initially wary of approaching the animal. But when it didn’t seem like a threat, they went up to it and found it surprising “friendly”, he said. “We gave it some biscuits and water — the only thing we had. It nibbled on it but kept whimpering. Its cries of pain melted my heart,” said Nave­en.
 
 While looking for a veterinarian, Naveen and his friends realised the plight of wild animals, which later drew them into wildlife conservation. “Since then, our group of amateur bikers has started volunteering for various conservation activities,” he said.
 
 
 
 AN EARLY START
 
 Saradhi Roy, a city-based engineer working with Cognizant Technology, said: “I was fascinated with wildlife and wild animals since childhood. I was introduced to the jungle through the books of Ullas Karanth and Jim Corbett. I was so mesmerised that I started wildlife photography and pursued it as a hobby.”
 
 
 
 An engineer with Cognizant and his team donated 28 LPG cylinders to workers at anti-poaching camps
 Roy is a member and trustee of a small NGO called Conservation Awareness Team Trust (CATT) that works in tandem with the forest department and other big NGOs in the field of wildlife conservation. Recently, a team of CATT conducted a workshop to strengthen enforcement and bring down poaching at the Nagarahole Tiger Reserve with help from the Wildlife Trust of India.
 
 Roy, along with his team, spearheaded a programme and donated 28 LPG cylinder connections to workers at anti-poaching camps within the tiger reserve. The initiative spared the workers from the tedious task of collecting firewood (which was not always easily available), and ensured better air quality indoors.
 
 He pursues wildlife photography as a hobby and wants the green cover to stay vibrant and abuzz with wildlife so that he can continue to capture the magic through his lenses. This connection has inspired him to work for conservation, so much so that he dedicates his weekends for the cause.
 
 
 
 FIGHTING THEM LEGALLY
 
 A group of lawyers from Mysuru decided to become the voice of the wild to put an end to the menace of poaching, and the rampant trade of forest products and animal parts. They also found that the conviction rate in crimes related to wildlife and environment was less than 1 per cent, mostly because the cases failed in court.
 
 KS Sudheer, one of the members and a trustee of the NGO Voice for Wildlife Trust, said: “We help forest officials with investigations, and conduct workshops to train and empower them on how to deal with such situations better.”
 
 The efforts made by the members, who work closely with forest officials, have helped them build watertight cases against smugglers and illegal wildlife trade. It has even seen the conviction rate in such crimes going up. “It is hard to give a number at the moment, but the increased conviction rate has also brought down the instances of such crimes,” he added.
 
 The trust also works to provide better amenities for workers in anti-poaching camps. It assists workers and trains them in managing crime and situations of man-animal conflict.
 
 There are many small NGOs working for wildlife conservation in the state. These include Vana Jaagruti at Biligiri-Ranganatha Temple Tiger Reserve; Vanya at Bandipur Tiger Reserve; Kenneth Anderson Nature Society at Banner­ghatta National Park; and WildCat-C at Bhadra Tiger Reserve. Many of these NGOs have volunteers from Bengaluru.
 
 
 TREK TO CONSERVATION
 
 Pratap Sikdar, who works with Tata Elxsi, is an avid trekker and has been going on expeditions for the last five to six years. During one such expedition, he realised how much damage was being done to wildlife and the environment.
 
 
 
 
 An avid trekker joined a group that helps the forest staff in creating fire lines
 “Every time I went back to a range to trek, it made me wonder about our legacy for the generations to come. The hills, I saw, were turning barren by the day due to forest fires and massive deforestation. It was then that I decided to take a stand and do something to change things,” said Sikdar.
 
 “It made me realise that sitting in our cubicles and talking about wildlife won’t help. I now participate in conservation activities. I joined CATT as a trustee and now we assist the forest department in conducting awareness campaigns. We also assist the department in creating fire lines, a critical activity taken up in the early summer to contain wildfires.”