‘Draft wildlife corridor improvement policy aimed at restoring connectivity of fragmented habitats’ 

Taking into account increasing human-wildlife conflict cases and need for better wildlife conservation, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has rolled out a draft wildlife corridor improvement policy. The policy is aimed at restoring the connectivity of fragmented habitats and improving existing corridors to enhance wildlife conservation.

According to officials from KFD, the draft policy has been submitted to the state government, and a decision on it will be taken soon after the general elections in the state.

“From the conservation point of view, it is extremely important to ensure that the fragmented forest patches are reconnected. The policy has been framed keeping the larger interest of conservation in mind. Moreover, we are not looking at just elephant corridors, but for all other animals too. Once approved, the government will notify the policy from time to time based on specific corridors. Improvement strategies strengthening corridors with or without changing land ownership shall be formulated,” said Kumar Pushkar, assistant principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), KFD.

“Land acquisition is a costly affair and this along with many other aspects has to be taken into consideration when we talk about corridor restoration. Moreover, corridors are a dynamic concept, especially in case of elephants. However, we have identified a few corridors for improvement and to facilitate movement of the wildlife,” said SK Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests, wildlife, and chief wildlife warden, KFD.

Wildlife conservationists said the corridor policy is a great initiative and the department must consider improving green cover and removing disturbance from these areas. Many important corridors in the state are under threat due to illegal encroachment and violations of eco-sensitive zone rules. However, they are of the view that securing more private land to widen every corridor may become a risky proposition for the department.

“KFD should focus on removing encroachments such as illegal farmlands and bore wells from wildlife corridors as part of this policy. The department should look at preserving important corridors, instead of creating new ones. Wildlife movement is always dynamic and the idea of buying land to expand or create new corridors might fall flat in time. For instance, a highway passes through nearly 500 metres of a corridor in BRT Tiger Reserve. Such areas should be identified and brought under KFD. Highways in such important corridors should be diverted. Similarly, Kaniyanpura – Moyar, Moyar – Avarahalla, Kalmalai – Singara, and Avarahalla are some existing corridors that should be strengthened,” said Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

The Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MOEF&CC), in association with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII), had recently identified nine elephant corridors in Karnataka and underlined that one corridor required immediate restoration to facilitate the movement of elephants.

   A highway passes through a stretch of a corridor in BRT Reserve
These nine corridors are: Kaniyanpura-Moyar (in Karnataka), Beguru-Brammangiri (interstate - Karnataka and Kerala), Edayahalli-Doddasampige (in Karnataka), Edayahalli-Guttiyalattur (interstate - Tamil Nadu and Karnataka), Chamarajanagar-Talamalai at Punjur (interstate - Karnataka and Tamil Nadu), Chamarajanagar-Talamalai at Muddahalli (interstate - Tamil Nadu and Karnataka), Karadikkal-Madeshwara (in Karnataka), Tali-Bilikkan (interstate -Tamil Nadu and Karnataka), Bilikkal-Javalagiri (interstate - Tamil Nadu and Karnataka).
 
The ministry recommended that seven of the nine corridors should be notified by KFD so they are legally protected from encroachment and development activities, which can be detrimental to wildlife.

For the remaining two corridors, the ministry has suggested eviction of encroached areas and habitat improvements, including removing invasive species, creating waterholes, and establishing fodder plots.