2010 Told that a Sea Cadet worked in a night-club (as a barmaid), the Duke asked: “Is it a strip club?” Observing her surprise, he dismissed the suggestion, saying it was “probably too cold anyway”.
 
 4At a prize-giving ceremony for the Duke of Edinburgh Awards, a girl told him that she’d been to Romania to help in an orphanage. He replied: “Oh yes, there’s a lot of orphanages in Romania — they must breed them”.
 
 4Discussing tartan with then-Scottish Tory leader Annabel Goldie: “That’s a nice tie... Do you have any knickers in that material?”
 
 4During a visit to a Tamil Hindu temple in London, he asked the priests: “Are you [Tamil] Tigers?”
 
 4Said to mixed-race dance troupe Diversity at the Royal Variety Performance: “Are you all one family?”
 
 4After noticing business leader Atul Patel’s name during a Buckingham Palace reception for 400 influential British Indians, he said: “There’s a lot of your family in tonight.”
 
 4“Can you tell the difference between them?” The Duke’s question after President Barack Obama said he met leaders of the UK, China and Russia.
 
 4While honouring a blind British soldier injured during a bombing attack, the queen asked the 15-year-old if he had any of his vision left. Prince Philip quipped: “Not a lot, judging by the tie he’s wearing.” 2005 Being told of Tony Blair’s re-election, “Well, bugger me with Ragman’s Trumpet”. 2004 “Bugger the table plan, give me my dinner!” Showing his impatience to be fed at a party. 2003 To schoolboy who invited the Queen to Essex: “You who wrote the letter. So you can write?” 2002 During a visit to Australia, he asked aborigines: “Do you still throw spears at each other?”
 4To the Aircraft Research Association: “If you travel as much as we do, you appreciate improvements in aircraft design of less noise and more comfort, provided you don’t travel in something called economy class, which sounds ghastly.”
 
 4After breakfast of bacon, eggs, smoked salmon, kedgeree, croissants and pain au chocolat from French chef Regis Crépy: “The French don’t know to cook breakfast.”
 
 4To a blind, wheelchair-bound woman who was with her guide dog: “Do you know they’re now producing eating dogs for the anorexics?” 
 
 4To a wheelchair-bound nursing-home resident: “Do people trip over you?”
 
 4To Simon Kelner, editor of The Independent, at a reception: “What are you doing here?” “I was invited, sir.” Philip: “Well, you didn’t have to come.”
   2001 “Oh, it’s you that owns that ghastly car, is it? We often see it when driving to Windsor Castle.” To near-neighbour Elton John who sold his gold  Watford FC-themed Aston Martin soon after.
   2000“ Ah, so this is feminist corner then.” Joining a group of female Labour MPs, who were wearing badges reading “Ms”, at a Buckingham Palace drinks party.
 
 4“People think there’s a rigid class system here, but dukes have been known to marry chorus girls. Some have even married Americans.”
 
 4On robots colliding at the Science Museum: “They’re not mating are they?”
 
 4At the opening of a school: “Holidays are curious things, aren’t they? You send children to school to get them out of your hair. 
 
 Then they come back and make life difficult for parents. That is why holidays are set so they are just about the limit of your endurance.”
   1999 In Cardiff he told children from the British Deaf Association, who were standing by a Caribbean steel band: “If you’re near that music, it’s no wonder you’re deaf”.
 
 4While touring a factory near Edinburgh he said a fuse box was so crude it “looked as though it had been put in by an Indian”. He later apologised: ‘I meant to say cowboys. I just got my cowboys and Indians mixed up.’
 4To black politician Lord Taylor of Warwick: “And what exotic part of the world do you come from?” 1998 The Duke asked a British student who had been trekking in Papua New Guinea: “You managed not to get eaten then?”
 4On smoke alarms to a woman who lost two sons in a fire: “They’re a damn nuisance — I’ve got one in my bathroom and every time I run my bath the steam sets it off.”
   1997 4Having observed a plaque claiming 2,000 casualties during a controversial visit to Jallianwala Bagh massacre Monument, Prince Philip observed, “That’s not right. The number is less.”
   1995 He asked a Scottish driving instructor: “How do you keep the natives off the booze long enough to pass the test?”
 4On stress counselling for servicemen: “We didn’t have counsellors rushing around every time somebody let off a gun. You just got on with it!”
   1993 To a British tourist in Hungary: “You can’t have been here that long — you haven’t got a pot belly.”
 4Philip to fashion writer Serena French at a World Wildlife Fund gathering: “You’re not wearing mink knickers, are you?” 1992 Asked to stroke a Koala bear, he exclaimed: “Oh no, I might catch some ghastly disease.” 1991 4“When a man opens the car door for his wife, it’s either a new car or a new wife.” 1987 He wrote in his book If I Were an Animal that “In the event that I am reincarnated, I would like to return as a deadly virus, in order to contribute something to solve overpopulation.”
 4To a woman solicitor: “I thought it was against the law for a woman to solicit.” 1986 At World Wildlife Fund meeting: “If it has got four legs and it is not a chair, if it has got two wings and flies but is not an aeroplane and if it swims and it is not a submarine, the Cantonese will eat it.”
   1981During the recession he mused: “Everybody was saying we must have more leisure. Now they are complaining they are unemployed.”
   1976 On a tour to Canada: “We don’t come here for our health. We can think of other ways of enjoying ourselves.” 1970 “If it doesn’t fart or eat hay then she isn’t interested”, he says about his daughter, Princess Anne, an avid horse lover. 1969On Royal Family’s finance: “We go into red next year. I’llprobably have to give up polo.” 1967 When asked if he would like to visit Soviet Union: “I would like to go to Russia very much, although the bastards murdered half my family.”
   1966“You have mosquitoes. I have the Press.” To matron of a hospital in the Caribbean. 1965 On seeing an exhibition of “primitive” Ethiopian art, he muttered: “It looks like what my daughter brings from her school art lessons.”
   1961 To a group of industrialists: “I’ve never been noticeably reticent about talking on subjects about which I know nothing.” 1958 Stuck in a Heriot Watt University lift: “This could only happen in a technical college.”
   1956“The art of being a good guest is to know when to leave.”
 4In a speech: “It is my invariable custom to say something flattering to begin with so that I shall be excused if by any chance I put my foot in it later on.” Full marks for honesty.
 
 — Compiled by Beena.Kuruvilla@timesgroup.com
 
 
   Dontopedalogy . . . the science of opening your mouth and putting your foot in it, a science which I have practised for a good many years . . .”
 — Prince Philip to the General Dental Council in 1960