Learning the trade at a simulation grave                 Being in the business of digging the truth out of a crime scene using techniques those bearded archaeologists from Discovery Channel do, Khan’s routine is far from mundane. The 35-year-old is currently seeking closure to a December 2009 case in Borivili where a three-year-old Shreya Rai’s body was found at a construction site. “To me, the evidence indicates this was a case of child sacrifice,” she tells us, sounding gratified. She has reason to be so, in July, the Bombay High Court ordered the senior inspector of the Borivli police to file his report after due investigation. 

Six years ago, Khan wouldn’t have foreseen herself working on the case though. Long after a graduation from Sophia college with a degree in Life Sciences, it was on a muggy March afternoon that she was brooding over the formulaic rudimentaries that she without much reflection had done with. “I had rounded off a checklist of to-dos — engaging in social work, taking time off for myself, getting married and settling down.  I was inching 30 and knew I was missing out on learning something new.

 On a whim, I Googled for options after life sciences — and the answer, as if chosen by destiny popped on my screen. Forensic Sciences it said, with a link to UK’s esteemed Bournemouth University. That was my moment of clarity.” Khan wrapped up her two-year course with a Masters degree in Forensic Archaeology: Crime Scene and International Investigations, a niche expertise only a handful of Indians have attained. She mastered crime scene management and forensic archaeology mostly by working on simulated graves and simulated crime scenes organised by the Scotland Yard and the FBI. When Iraq’s ugly secret of numerous mass graves was slowly unravelled after the American invasion ousted Saddam Hussein, Khan and her colleagues trained 40 Iraqis in simulation mass graves created in the hinterlands of UK so that they could return home and repatriate hundreds of bodies with their harrowed relatives. Close to 4,000 Iraqis are feared buried in mass graves, says Khan. 

“Truth and hope more or less disappears here. Which is when we forensic archaeologists come in. We locate anything that is buried and forgotten, recover it, identify it and repatriate it,” Khan said, adding, “I believe bones speak. You just have to keep an ear out for them.”

Her self-assured, breezy persona belies the shrewd detective that she comfortably co-exists with. Deriving notions of her being the archetypal sleuth as featured in CSI or the home-bred CID, she is subjected to many an assumption. Khan lights up, “When somebody asks me — Beta yeh sab toh theek hai, par tum kaam kya karti ho? I flash my standard response with a smile — Jee, main gadey murdey ukhaadti hoon.”  Khan’s week-long research on avian scavenging of a buffalo carcass and its forensic implications, at UP’s Katerniaghat wildlife sanctuary, has been widely published in Indian and international journals. 

In India, Khan believes forensic science is mostly restricted to fingerprint, DNA and ballistic tests. One of the pioneering fingerprint classification systems, the Henry system, was discovered and developed in India in 1897 at Kolkata’s Fingerprint Bureau by experts Hemchandra Bose and Azizul Haque. Ironic then that more than a century later, Khan rues over how substantially we are lagging in research and implementation of forensic techniques. “Forensic archaeology is direly needed for investigations but few know of its existence. Here, the police get bodies hastily excavated through labourers. But the process itself is a treasure trove of evidence; from examining each layer of soil to how the bones are carefully handled while removing to yield maximum answers to the mystery.”
                                        Khan at a sanctuary in Katerniaghat, UP,researching on scavengers of buffaloes                 
Amidst counseling harrowed relatives seeking advice on dealing with body remains and helping out desperate dead-end-hit cops to nail the culprit, Khan often helps achieve both justice and closure, like in the Borivli case. Following Shreya’s grisly murder, Khan had conducted her own investigation by visiting the site; her report is a part of the petition before the HC. She stresses on the closure that a family needs as an aspect as critical as finding the criminal. “Repatriation provides a much-needed closure to families. It is the first step to healing.”

Perhaps the shocking travesty of Nithari Killings held the most ideal ground for Khan’s exploits. “Though not directly, but I had helped the investigators by submitting my research findings to the scientists who were unknotting the gore that lay buried.” As the CEO of her NGO ‘INSAAF’ or Investigative Scientific And Anthropological Facility, Khan aspires to build a research establishment and a body farm so as to assist investigators and provide closure to families of the dead. For a living, Khan as a senior manager handles the corporate social responsibilities section at WNS, where she gets to still tap her altruistic side to help the needy. “Earlier, I wanted to do something for the living; and then something for the dead. Now I do both, as and when it comes.”