&ldquo;Mera naam Tom hai&rdquo;                 

When my brother suggested that we go on a road trip, this was not exactly what I had in mind. I had visions of driving a convertible through sweeping Alpine passes; maybe cruising down Route 44 on a Harley; or at least living out of a camper van on Australia's Gold Coast. Three thousand miles in an Indian auto-rickshaw was not in the brochure!

But on offer was a charity race that pits man and machine against the very worst the Indian roads can throw at them. And so my brother Tom, friend Nick ""Buster"" Hamilton and I found ourselves sitting in a 150cc vehicle on top of a mountain in the far north-east India. We had been given a starting point, and a finish line to aim for. Other than that, we had no route, no help, and, it seemed, no chance!

And all this, in the name of charity. And adventure. And in my case, television. Upon hearing of our ridiculous undertaking, the editor of BBC World News' Fast Track programme had an idea. He wanted to take the three of us driving a motorised tin can across a sub-continent we had never visited before, and give us some camera equipment!
 
Do, and die!

There are some bits of advice that, no matter how sensible, you just don't want to hear. I'm sitting in a plane from Mumbai talking to a former rally driver about the challenge we are about to undertake. I explain the premise: Shillong to Goa in an auto-rickshaw - 3000 miles, 3 men, 13 days, no route. His advice comes flowing: don't do it, you'll die; if you're going to do it, get a jeep; if you have to use the rickshaw, at least get a support car to follow you; if that's too expensive, at least get a bigger engine installed; if that's cheating… well, at least take spare spark plugs!

And so, condemned to failure, we sit at the starting line of a race that, it seems, no sane person would attempt... but at least we've got spare spark plugs. We set off from Shillong to Goa, ready to spend around 12 hours a day in a rickshaw.
          
Incredible India 

I will not try to provide a full account here of all the places we went to, the people we met or the things we saw in our 13 says; to do so would be an injustice to the views of Darjeeling, the majesty of Varanasi, the wildlife reserve at Pench or the spectacular caves of Ellora. My words would be inadequate, and their virtues are already well known.

More interesting, to my mind at least, are the experiences one can only have as an outsider. Whether it's encountering the extraordinary (if often overwhelming) friendliness of remote villagers, the terror of co-existing with lorry drivers on roads that claim more lives than any other, the challenge of distinguishing professional mechanics from enthusiastic amateurs, enjoying the surprising efficiency of the Indian healthcare system, or just slowly realising the incomprehensible size, diversity and contradictions of the country you are trying to cross.

Before leaving the UK, the impression I had been given was of a country where much should feel familiar. Shared pasts, and converging futures, had lured me into believing that I would not seem alien to most Indians, nor them to me. We would share language, political traditions and our national love/hate relationships with bureaucracy.

While this is no doubt the case for visitors to Delhi, Mumbai or any of the great metropolitan centres, the picture in the remote areas we crossed could not have differed more starkly. The arrival of brightly coloured rickshaws, filled with brightly dressed Europeans, was met with a combination of bewilderment, joy and, on occasion, suspicion. Meeting people who, by their own admission, had never seen a western traveller before, was something I never thought I would experience, and that will stay with me for a long time.
 
Price of enthusiasm

Not every encounter was positive, however, and on more than one occasion our rickshaw was damaged by the enthusiasm of somebody claiming to be a mechanic. Whether they were acting in the hope of payment, or out of a genuine desire to help was usually impossible to tell. When both cause you equally long delays, it is also difficult to care. But these were minor blemishes on a national character that has a huge amount to commend it.

                                        Joe filmed some kids on the way                 This difference in urban and rural reactions, between east and west, from Meghalaya to Maharashtra highlighted the diversity of India, its contradictions, and the undeniable gap between the developed and the developing. Indeed, to experience both the troubles of Bihar, and the civility of Pune within the space of one week was curious to say the least.
 
P.S: As we neared the iconic beaches of Goa, I was forced to reflect, almost for the first time, on the entirety of my experiences in India. Trying to find an interesting - and relevant - note on which to end the films, it suddenly dawned on me quite how much we had experienced in just 13 days, but also how much more there was to see. Summing it all up was not easy. There was one conclusion, however, that needed no debate. Another visit to India was in order. Now, where is that map?