Hundreds of wildlife enthusiasts gathered at the Freedom Park in city in protest against the proposed lifting of night traffic ban in Bandipur forest. Wildlife activists and lovers have urged the state government not to lift ban on night traffic to save lives of wild animals. The protest was also against the proposed elevated highway through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. According to organisers, over 700 people participated in the protest.

Wildlife activist Joseph Hoover told BM, “We expected more number of people to participate in the protest. I guess due to Tipu Jayanti, many people couldn’t make it. Our intentions are clear. The state government should not succumb to the pressure asserted by the Kerala government. 

    Low-key Tipu Jayanti celebrations in cityChief Minister HD Kumaraswamy and Deputy chief minister G Parameshwara skipped the event for political and personal reasons.  
Protecting wildlife is every citizen’s duty and government should seriously consider our requests. We are also against the proposed elevated highway which passes through Bandipur forest. We will soon send a memorandum to the Chief Minister on Monday.”

According to wildlife activists, a huge racket is operating behind the move to throw open traffic at Bandipur Tiger Reserve and Muthanga Wildlife Sanctuary at night.

 Illegal activities like hawala, timber and sand lobby will be intensified. Private transport lobby is also desperate,” said an activist. 

Members of private nature clubs, biking clubs, environmentalists, social activists, college students also participated in the protest. Renowned Kannada Actor Suresh Heblikar was there to show his solidarity towards #Save Bandipur campaign.The ban is between 9pm and 6am now.
    Thyagarajanagar building collapse kills 22-year-oldThe construction of ground plus four floored building was almost complete, but a major disaster was averted since it was unoccupied. Two workers, including the victim, identified as Sohail, was present at the site when the incident took place.