Photographer and filmmaker Shaaz Jung on shooting the black panther, Saya, and forming a deep bond with elusive subjects

A year into filming, the black panther who was the subject of a documentary being made by wildlife photographer Shaaz Jung, disappeared for two months. Till then, Jung had had fairly regular sightings of ‘Saya’ as he was nicknamed (mainly because of his colouring) at Nagarhole national park. Jung had heard Saya was injured in a fight with another leopard, and he feared the worst. 

Then, one stormy afternoon, just as the sun was going down, Saya appeared on the branch of a banyan tree. He had a huge gash across his face and an eye almost gouged out. The moment had all the drama and unpredictability of the jungle: A darkening day and a panther as black as night with a bloodied face. But Jung could only feel relief. “It was a bittersweet moment,” he says. “We were happy that he was still out there, but it was also scary because big cats, when injured, prefer to stay hidden from the world till they heal. Saya later emerged twice as strong.”

Jung’s concern is understandable. After tracking and shooting the melanistic leopard from December 2017 to January 2020, he feels a kinship with his subject. Photographs he had taken during his twoyear quest have recently gone viral, and generated a lot of interest.

As the smallest of the big cats, leopards are elusive and extremely hard to spot. Their skin camouflages them well in the foliage. “I have always been obsessed with leopards and spent the last 10 years documenting them,” says the 31-year-old photographer. “They’re the reason I gave up a corporate job and took up the camera instead.” Jung has graduated with a degree in economics from Utrecht University in the Netherlands. “But I have learnt more from leopards than humans,” he says. “They’ve been my mentors in the wild.”

Saya is particularly fascinating. “He has a black coat because of a recessive gene, and has had to adapt to a forest he doesn’t really belong in,” says Jung. Leopards prefer thick, lush jungles with tall trees in which they can laze unharmed. But Nagarhole is a deciduous forest which provides little cover for Saya. “He understood that he is different and has had to use this to his advantage, like lurking and moving in the shadows of the forest,” says Jung. “He has been thriving against the odds of natural selection. It’s incredible.”

    Saya, the black panther, is the subject of a documentary that Jung recently shot
Of the 120 sightings of Saya, there have been several memorable ones. Once Jung and his crew spotted the panther with a freshly-killed faun between his jaws — and he obliged by giving them a perfect shot for the documentary. During filming, the team tracked the panther for 10 hours every day for over two years, starting at 6 am and spending large amounts of time sitting in their vehicles, at locations where he had been spotted. Since Nagarhole is open all year around, at times a tourist jeep would go by and disturb the peace, and they had to start over. Sometimes, after waiting for weeks, they would hear the alarm call of the deer or the monkey, and Saya would show himself. “We got a lot of help from the forest rangers of Nagarhole,” says Jung. “They’ve been doing an outstanding job of protecting the animals in the park.”

Leopards aren’t the only animals Jung has photographed. His Instagram account has photos of tigers, elephants and even lions that he shot in Serengeti national park in Tanzania. The photographer can speak knowledgeably about many of these species as well. Jung, who is related to the Pataudis (his grandmother and Mansur Ali Khan were siblings; Saif Ali is his uncle), spent a lot of his formative years at forest reserves. His parents built resorts in Bandipur and Serengeti, and he now runs one in the Kabini forest in Karnataka. Although Jung lives in Bangalore, he shuttles between the city and various national parks through the year.

He has tremendous empathy and respect for the wild. “The forest does not belong to you,” he says. “When you visit, you enter the home of the animals who live there, and your are no longer at the top of the foodchain.” Filming wildlife comes with its own challenges. “You need to pre-visualise every shot, since you’ll only get a glimpse of the animal before it takes off,” he says. “Not only does it require years of patience sometimes, but you must also have multiple scripts.” Chances of getting that frame, of the tiger playing with its cubs or hunting, are slim, so you’ll have to modify the script.

“Nature works in raw and beautiful ways,” says Jung. “Every animal in the jungle, for every minute of the day, is doing something purely for its survival — whether it’s crossing the road or getting off a tree. It’s hard enough for them to survive in the jungle, so its crucial that humans respect that and don’t make it harder.”

    He has a black coat because of a recessive gene, and has had to adapt to a forest he doesn’t really belong in. He’s understood that– Shaaz Jung