Real estate heavyweight Syed Beary of Bearys Group (the architects of city's Twin Towers near Hebbal flyover) has been booked by the city forest mobile squad on charges of illegally possessing protected wildlife - common langur, rose-ringed parakeets and Mandarin ducks, the last being one of the world’s rarest birds reported to have been spotted in India only a few times so far.
 
 	The animals were rescued by the mobile squad sleuths during a raid last Friday on the Bearys Group’s facility in Whitefield, Bearys Global Research Triangle.
 	  	After a spot mahazar the rescued langur and the birds were shifted to the wildlife rescue and rehabilitation centre in Bannerghatta on the same day. A case was registered on Saturday under the provisions of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
 	
 	 		Bearys Group managing director, Syed Beary, has claimed innocence citing ignorance about wildlife rules that restricted such possession.
 		 	 		“A common langur, two Mandarin ducks and four parakeets have been rescued. They (the Bearys Group) don’t have any documents pertaining to these. They claimed that the langur was brought to check monkey menace in their coconut grove. The Langur was there for about six months. The Mandarin ducks were kept as pets. They had other birds like love birds and emu in a separate shed. They claimed they were unaware that they are restricted. We were told that the owner is Syed Beary of Beary Group. We have made a case against him,” Thimmarayappa range forest officer of the forest mobile squad, Bengaluru city, confirmed to Bangalore Mirror.
 		 	 		Common langur (Presbytis entellus) is protected under Schedule II; the rose-ringed parakeets (of Psittacidae group) are protected under schedule IV; and Mandarin ducks (of Anatidae group) are protected under schedule IV of the act. 	 		Beary has been booked under charges of illegally sourcing and possessing protected wildlife as he neither had any valid document pertaining to these animal and birds, nor had he sought any permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) as per the Indian Wildlife Protection act, the wildlife officials said. 	

 	 		Another langur killed?
 		 	 		The wildlife sleuths said while the rescued langur was found with injuries, another langur which was also kept illegally was killed in the facility by dogs, which is a serious issue.
 		 	 		“Out of two langurs one was killed by the dogs in their facility and another had serious injuries, which shows the way the langurs were being treated inside. Illegal possession of wildlife is a serious offence and Mandarin ducks are spotted only a few times in India and this is the first such rescue in city,” Sharath R Babu, honorry wildlife warden, Bengaluru urban, said. 	 		The state’s Chief Wildlife Warden Vinay Luthra confirmed that the animals were rescued and that a case had been made. 	

 	 		We were not aware, says beary
 		 	 		Syed Beary said: “When we started the construction the monkey menace had become a major issue. We had taken a lot of measures including bursting crackers and other things. We had seven to eight people just to manage the show. But the monkeys used to find one way or the other. Finally, a gentleman advised us that the only solution was to get a Langur. That is when we brought the Langur. To be honest, we didn’t know that this species is not supposed to be possessed. We were not aware at all! When I was talking to that person (wildlife official) he said we have to get official permission/official permit to seek the Langur.
 		
 		I have a younger brother who has a hobby about these birds. God is a witness. We were not aware that we are not supposed to keep those birds. The moment we realized we allowed them to take it. We don’t even cut trees or branches. Will I ever do something to harm these birds? We will never do that. Only when they came with the squad, I realized. And we told them that we were extremely sorry; we were never aware of it.”