Alisha Vikram is back from a 10-day summer internship in South Africa.
 
 From visiting unprotected forest areas, learning the tactics of anti-poachers, collecting data on the number of animals while tracking their GPS, and using a machete to cut down invasive plants – Alisha’s programme of being part of the conservation of the Big 5 at the Greater Kruger National Park – has been intensive.
 
 This 17-year-old is only a part of the growing number of students who are opting for off-beat internships across the world to understand what their course of action in life should be. “We get a certificate at the end of the programme, and it looks good on our resumé,” says Aprajita Jayaram, 16, a class 10 student, who was also part of the same internship.
 
 Aprajita has a genuine interest in the subject and plans to pursue studies in animal conservation. “Here, through the hands-on programmes (including working with reptiles) and documentaries I realised we aren’t being nice to the animals. Six years ago, about six rhinos used to be poached. Today, more than 100 are. In fact, black rhinos are the most endangered species because their horns are believed to bring good luck and hold a lot of value in the black market. We’ve got to do something about this,” she says.
 
 Each day was different – camping, cooking their own meals, toasting the bun and patties, making hot chocolate and sitting around a bonfire; a night safari where they drove around the forest to spot animals armed with data sheets; visiting a village to understand the culture of native Africans, where they had a local lunch – the staple grain of maize, a tomato delicacy, and even a “worm”; star gazing and photography. Upon their return to the office, they would feed the data collected into the system along with a whole bunch of volunteers which helps the owners of the reserve keep a tab on the animals and their movements. For their anti-poaching course they had to run in the river, crawl in slush and experience what exactly it is like being part of an anti-poachers squad. “I really had to learn to be patient because you can’t get what you want. You have to be patient with animals,” Alisha says.
 
 For the class 12 student, the choice was between an internship in conservation of sea turtles in Sri Lanka and this one. “I was looking for wildlife internships that I could take up. The marine internship in Sri Lanka… my parents were concerned about safety especially since this was going to be the first time I was travelling by myself,” Alisha says.
 
 
 
 For the youngest member of the team Aadya Srivathsa (13) the rapidly decreasing number of animals was an eye-opener which she now realises is a “real big problem”. “I didn’t have as much knowledge about their living styles and habitats as I do now,” says Aadya, whose birthday gift was this programme.
 
 Stepping stone
 
 Nineteen-year-old Drithika spent six weeks teaching autistic students between two and 10 years of age, in Ho Chi Minh city in Vietnam. A typical day began at 7am, where she would feed students customised breakfasts after which classes would begin at 8am. From making sure they sit down through the lessons (a challenge for those with autism) to helping them use the washroom, teach them paper folding, putting them to sleep in the afternoon, help them in their swimming lessons and clay making Drithika’s day was full as she taught three levels – Doremi, Doremon and Xuka (the students are grouped according to their abilities)
 
 “I’m interested in studying child psychology and this programme was like a stepping stone,” she says. Knowing that it would be emotionally draining, her parents suggested that she do it in Bengaluru – she would know the language and they would be here to support her at the end of the day. “But I told them that I needed to learn to handle the whole situation by myself. I had to experience what it was like to come back at the end of an emotionally heavy day and manage my own work,” she says.
 The first hurdle she came across was when she landed and found out that her host family wasn’t in town and would be back the following day. From moving to a centrally-located hostel to shifting to a dorm which had to be shared by eight others, managing food and stay – it was nothing short of a “crazy” experience. “And then I suddenly started wondering whether I’d gone there to just babysit. But later I realised how difficult the lives of these children are – most of them are monosyllabic and often the word is gibberish. They need help at every step of the way. While it appears that they are completely normal it’s only when you work with them closely do you realise the extent of their problems. But they are not ashamed of being autistic unlike it is here. And that’s what I want to change here,” Drithika says.
 
 Next week, law student Vikram Ramalingam will be heading to Vietnam to teach English to those between the ages of seven and 21. This, he says, will help him if he chooses to specialise in human rights where he’ll have to learn to deal with people of different races, in addition to honing his classroom skills. “I have been teaching students here but going to a different country and working with people whose ideas and thoughts differ from ours is what I’m looking forward to. Right now, my knowledge is limited to the city. I’m going for the exposure and hopefully it will change my perceptions. I’m also hoping to come back as a better person,” says the 20-year-old.
 
 Gap year
 
 He’s chosen to take a gap year and doesn’t want to jump onto the corporate bandwagon. Neither does he want to fritter away time before he chooses what he wants to do next. Which is why he’s chosen to go to Dharamsala to work with local Tibetans, a community Nithin Anil feels we don’t know enough about. In the last one week that he has been there, he’s trying to teach Tibetan monks basic English which will not only help them communicate with foreigners but also help them pass on their teachings. His students are anywhere between 10 and 60.
 
 While he teaches for four hours a day, the rest is spent at a library helping them cover books, visiting the monastery for cultural programmes, and watching documentaries to understand the Tibetan crisis. “We’re not well-informed about the problems the community faces, we’re just used to reading about it online. I’m volunteering with four organisations, but they are sceptical about volunteers. From their experience they’ve found that people comes here for a couple of days and then don’t turn up again. In fact, at one of the organisation I just walked in to find out if I could volunteer, they said they don’t hire Indians. I told them that I was here to help and they could decide after seeing my work,” Nithin says.
 
 He had initially planned to stay for three months, and while he’s quite happy to work without the Internet, Nithin plans to come back within a month. “I don’t even want to begin talking about the living conditions. When I walked into the hotel, the bed had cigarette stubs. And the rates for locals and foreigners are the same, which is working out way too expensive,” says Nithin who plans to come back and go to Nepal to volunteer.
 
 Not a holiday
 
 Drithika’s father Adishekar admits that when his daughter decided that she wanted to volunteer in a different country, he was not confident of sending her alone. “I was concerned whether she’ll be able to manage on her own. We wanted her to volunteer somewhere in the city or at the max within the state,” he says. But after her return, he finds that she’s come back focused on what she wants to do and hopes that she’s able to do her bit for those with autism in Bengaluru.
 
 Gauri Jayaram, who organises these value-added programmes says that this internship (to South Africa) has been on her mind since last year. “We needed to research the logistics in depth as this is a huge responsibility to take schoolgoing teenagers, so it took us close to nine months to fine tune the programme,” she says.
 
 Around 200 parents of teenagers enquired about this trip of which only 20, between the ages of 14 and 18
 years, went. “We are a little flexible on the age but not too much. Essentially the teenager has to be really interested in wildlife, nature and conservation.
 
 This is not a holiday. Once there, they do real work. And of course there’s no turning back once you are there. Each
 
 child has to submit a statement of purpose on why they want to join this programme,” she says.
 Some parents are apprehensive considering the distance and having to be away from parents for 10 days in the middle of a jungle. “This was one of the main reasons we took such a long time to get it all together because we have to 100 per cent safe and we are. 99.99 is below standard for us,” she says.
 
 An internship like this, Jayaram believes is a life changing experience in terms of learning about various professions, the environment, and also an overall sense of responsibility. “They have to be responsible for themselves and they have to turn in great quality work at the end of each day. The schedule is tight and it teaches them independence. We also hone leadership qualities by dividing them into smaller groups. The older teenagers are responsible for the younger ones,” she says.
 
 Jayaram admits that today more than ever before parents are accepting of the fact that there are many things children can do for a living besides engineering, medicine, MBA etc. “Formal education at most places is based on what masses demand and as such children with different interests have limited opportunities for a real life exposure. Also, I think internships are a great way to learn about one’s own interests. Sometimes they open new doors and at other times they may shut them once the child realises it is not really what they ’thought’ it would be,” she says.