Bright ideas 
Be part of ‘Innovation for All’, an unconventional conference by social enterprise incubator Villgro. It will have over 700 delegates including social entrepreneurs, CSR professionals, impact investors, policymakers and academia, to discuss the present and future of social entrepreneurship in India and globally. 

At Taj Yeshwantpur, Tumkur Road, from 11am to 8pm, from December 6 to 7, (entry) `2,500 onwards, townscript.com

Raga rewind 
If you love Hindustani and Carnatic music, this is for you. Lahe Lahe’s signature Hindustani and Carnatic music jam session is now launching on every first Friday of the month. So while you can jam with the established artists, you can also simply indulge in your love for Hindustani and Carnatic music. 

At Lahe Lahe, HAL 2nd Stage, Kodihalli, from 7.30 to 9.30pm, on December 6, `150 onwards, lahe-lahe.com 

A story untold
If you like reading love stories, drop by the launch of ‘Unloved in Love’, a book written by Rituparna Ghosh. The book dwells on how you can have friends, family, work and an SO but yet feel unloved. The story is told through the eyes of Kiara Sen, Kyle Wolf and Karan Shergill, whose paths cross in this relationship mangle. 

At Atta Galatta, KHB Colony, 5th Block, Koramangala, 6pm onwards, on December 6, entry free, call 41600677

Writers corner 
The 13th edition of Almost Island Dialogues will kick off today and with that, it will bring Indian writers and writers from abroad together for conversations. This is the first set of dialogues to be held in the city and is partially supported by the Windham-Campbell Literature Prize. On Day 1, it will feature readings by Togara Muzanenhamo and Irwin Allan Sealy. 

At Bangalore International Centre, Domlur II Stage, from 6.30pm to 8pm, on December 6, entry free

Wide and varied 
Pradyutit, an ongoing exhibition of paintings and sculptures in the city, is a unique one. In Sanskrit, Pradyutit means ‘beginning to shine’ and so the show is giving an opportunity for up and coming artists to present their work. Curated by sculptor Kapil Kapoor, it has artists from various backgrounds and age groups, ranging from 25 to 80 years. 
From cosmic realms to spirituality and heritage – the subjects of the art and sculptures on display are as varied as the artists themselves. The artworks are a melange of graphic designs, cartoons, paintings, architectural designs, portraits, charcoal shading and more, and their prices range from `5,000 to `5 lakhs.
One of Kapoor’s sculptures is of mirrored figures facing each other, which, he describes as “the relationship between a guru and his disciple.” 
Among the collection of paintings are two masterpieces by MK Puri and Tirthankar Bishwas which cost `5 lakhs each. The inspiration behind these were the people they met every day, like the man playing a matka (pot) and a group of women singing to earn money. 
These paintings tell stories not just about what’s on the canvas but also of the struggles of artists. Some artists featured in this exhibition found fame and were then forgotten. Some were not discovered at all. Some paintings and sculptures on display are of artists who have passed away but their creations live on.
The youngest artist featured in this exhibition is 25-year-old Maneesha Manocha. The topics of her charcoal drawings range from a cluster of bamboos to a group of women dancing. Kapoor said that Manocha sees art in everything.

 Catch the show at Navrathan Art Gallery, MG Road, from 11am to 8pm, till December 14, call 25586513
- By Poojitha Girish & Urvashi Sethi


Music with a mission 
Echoes of Earth, Bengaluru’s very own eco-friendly music festival, is coming up this weekend. In its fourth season, it will feature world fusion, live electronica, techno and acoustic and pop-up performances for children as well.
To prove that large-scale events can be executed sustainably and responsibly, the entire festival is made using upcycled and recycled materials. Along with a solar-powered stage, Echoes will be powering many areas of the festival with renewable energy. And since this year’s theme is ‘The Sanctuary’, it will highlight the splendid yet endangered species of flora and fauna in India and the world.
Watch out for some of these highlights: The Mahseer installation by the Wildlife Association of South India, a flea market selling sustainable products, an opportunity to dress up as your favourite animal, a chance to have brunch with your favourite artist, a highball lounge, a food court, a pet zone and a Nat Geo Wild Zone.

 WHERE: Embassy International Riding School, 149/223, next To Stone Hill International School, 
Tarunhunse Village WHEN: 1pm onwards, December 7 and 8 Entry: bookmyshow.com

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’