A Bengaluru-based techie is determined to stop the government from going ahead with a project that would require felling of thousands of trees along National Highway 4A in Belagavi and Uttara Kannada districts.
 
 	
 The Regional Empowered Committee (REC) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change took a decision, recommending the diversion of the area falling outside the protected area to an extent of 78.43 ha early last year (including the territorial division and wildlife sanctuary) in an attempt to connect Belagavi and Goa through the Western Ghats.
 	
 	  	The first stage of the widening of the highway was approved recently under which 37,862 trees, covering the 70 km in the territorial division, are proposed to be felled. The second stage of the project will require felling of approximately 1,790 trees within the Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary limits, which will require diversion of 6.423 ha of forestland.
 	
 Giridhar Kulkarni, techie and wildlife activist, who is leading the fight against this, told BM: “Even though the first stage of the project has been approved, the committee mentioned that the part of the area that falls under the Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary limits shall be the referred to the REC after the National Highway Authority of India gets the prior approval from Supreme Court.”
 	
 “We cannot stop the tree felling in the territorial division. Hence, we are now requesting the state and Centre to improve the road without felling any trees within Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary limits. We are also submitting a written recommendation to the National Tiger Conservation Authority in this regard,” said Kulkarni.
 	
 Noted environmentalist and former environment secretary to the state government, AN Yellappa Reddy, who was a part of the committee, had raised objections over the implementation of the project. He said it would lead to massive tree felling in the region. Reddy said: “The area connecting Belagavi to Goa is one of the most ecologically sensitive zones in the whole country. The landscape here is highly fragile and forms an excellent water catchment area for east- and west-flowing rivers for peninsular India. These are also supporting a wide range of endemic species such as the monkey fruit.”
 	
 	  	When the meeting had taken place in January 2015, Reddy had submitted a fact file listing out a series of adverse impact and opposed the project, but the committee decided to go ahead with the project. Following this, Reddy opted out of the committee.
 	
 	  	“Opening up the forest will not only cause irreversible damage to the environment but also open a pandora’s box, giving poachers access to the forest. The heavy traffic influx in the area will scare away animals,” he said.