The petitioner is not entitled to be released on bail. If he is released on bail, he may abscond and may not be available for trial

A 40-year-old school teacher from Tarikere is accused of smuggling parts of wild animals in conspiracy with other accused. 

Allegedly, elephant ivory, leopard skin, wild gaur horns and antlers from spotted deer were recovered from the accused. 

Considering the serious nature of the crime and the seizure of parts from animals listed in Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act, the accused will not get bail till at least the charge sheet is filed. 

anja Naika is the school teacher and one of the accused in the case filed by the Range Forest Officer (RFO) of Lakkavalli. He has been booked under the Wildlife Protection Act and the Wildlife (Transaction and Taxidermy) Rules. 

The RFO’s complaint was that he received information about illegal transaction in animal parts and searched the properties of some persons. Six people were arrested. Based on the voluntary statement by the arrested people, five more persons were found to be involved. A search was made of their properties and similar wildlife articles were found in their possession. Naika was also one of those arrested in the second arrest.

Naika’s advocate contended in the HC that he was a school teacher and has not committed any offence mentioned in the complaint. His statement, along with the statements of the other accused, has already been collected and he is not needed for any more investigation. Therefore, he should be released on bail pending trial, it was argued.

The government advocate, however, submitted to the court that Naika was involved in a serious offence and wildlife articles have been seized from his possession. There were chances of him indulging in similar activities and absconding from trial if released on bail. 

The HC, in its judgement, noted that wildlife articles “were seized from the possession of the said accused persons and there is material to show that at the instance of the accused, the said articles have been recovered and accused-petitioners are involved in serious offences relating to wildlife.”

The court said there was possibility of the accused absconding and therefore, no bail will be granted to them till the investigation is complete and charge-sheet is filed. “The petitioner is not entitled to be released on bail. If he is released on bail, he may abscond and may not be available for trial as investigation is still in progress,” the court said dismissing Naika’s petition.