A monitor lizard that wandered into a home in Banaswadi was taken away to Bannerghatta Biological Park; officials suspect illegal trade
 
 	It resembled a snake, but walked like a crocodile. An unexpected visitor dropped by to meet a family at their home in Banaswadi on Monday, thoroughly frightening the family. 
 	  	BBMP forest cell volunteer and civil defence warden, Mohan K told Bangalore Mirror: “I got a call early in the morning. The caller said he had sighted some creature in the utility area of their backyard. As we rushed to the place, the man, his wife and son seemed terrified. They said it looked like a crocodile. When I saw the tail of the animal, I thought it was a red sand boa. When I tried to capture it, I found it was a monitor lizard.” 
 	  	The three-foot monitor lizard weighing around five kilos, was rescued and shifted to Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP).
 	  	Mohan said that when in distress, monitor lizards retaliate. Though non-venomous, they can cause severe injuries. They have strong jaws and claws that they use to clasp attackers and a release is very difficult. In this case, the family members closed the door of their backyard, shutting the creature out and no one was injured.
 	  	The family initially thought the creature was a snake. On seeing its scaly limbs, they figured it may be a crocodile.
 	  	“Due to superstitious beliefs that their meat and blood brings great strength, monitors are illegally traded. The animal, in this case, may have escaped captivity. Confining monitors illegally amounts to violation of the IWPA and the guilty can land in jail for up to three years,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru urban, told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	
 	
 	 		A protected species
 		 	 		Monitors are protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA). They are not normally found in urban, residential areas. They are in demand in illegal wildlife trade circles. Their meat is considered aphrodisiacal. With an iron grip, it is also believed they helped warriors scale fort walls in ancient times. Monitors are carnivores and feed on small reptiles, birds and fish. They can grow up to ten feet.