Animal rescue volunteers, vets save dehydrated Indian Ornamental Tarantula that had strayed out from the forest

When an Indian Ornamental Tarantula landed in a spot of trouble due to starvation and dehydration, veterinarians at PFA wildlife Hospital came to its rescue. The rare species of the spider was rescued a month ago from near a bus stand close to the Savandurga forest area. The tarantula was rehabilitated into its natural habitat on Wednesday.

This Tarantula was spotted by one of the animal rescue volunteers, away from the forest area, near a bus stand. The rescuer found that the spider was on the ground and not moving. He, out of concern, contacted PFA and told the veterinarians about the condition. The spider was then brought to the wildlife rescue and conservation center for treatment.

“The tarantula was brought in by a volunteer. We noticed that it was very weak and starved. Normally, Indian ornamental tarantulas are very aggressive and fast, but this individual was not moving and was very weak. However, it has been with us for over four weeks now and is completely fit to be released to the wild,” said Dr Madhav, veterinarian, PFA.

Experts say the abdomen of spiders directly indicates the health and starvation status of the tarantulas. It should be only slightly smaller than the cephalothorax which is the front part of the body where the legs arise.

“The stomach of this particular tarantula was shrunken, indicating starvation. We moved it into a small temporary enclosure with mud as a substrate. Water was added to maintain humidity and a small water bowl was used to keep water. The enclosure was kept in a dark and quiet place with slightly high temperature,” informed Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA wildlife hospital.

After some time, the tarantula was seen near the water bowl. The veterinarians immediately added a worm to the enclosure to see if the spider eats the worm.

“Tarantulas are known to eat only about once a week. As they are ambush hunters, they hide in a spot and wait for the prey to come near and pounce on them and envenomate and then eat them, so keeping a starved tarantula in bigger enclosures would have made it difficult for the spider to hunt and eat. will only make it difficult for it to hunt,” said Dr Shariff.

The spider was then shifted to a bigger enclosure with proper enrichment mimicking its natural environment, which further encouraged its natural instincts with properly maintained temperature and humidity.

“We fed it various insects such as cockroaches and super worms. The tarantula was with us for four weeks and was completely fit to be released into the wild on Wednesday. We successfully released it inside the Savandurga forest area,” informed Colonel (Dr) Shariff.