Monsoon is perhaps the most awaited time for every trekker. The pleasant weather marks the right time for some adventurous treks that are often challenging and strenuous. One must-visit place this monsoon is Tadiyandamol in Kodagu. 
 
 
 	“I am the tallest”, that’s the meaning of Tadiyandamol in Malayalam. The first thing you spot is a huge carpet of greenery, from Kakkabe, the place where the trek starts.
 	
 	
 	Tadiyandamol Mountain rises to a height of 1,717 meters above the sea level and poses a challenge for adventurous trekkers. The climbers have to spend the night at Yavakapadi, which is close to Nalaknad Palace and walk a distance of three kilometres in the jungle to reach the foot of the mountain. Camping at the base is thrilling. Be rest assured to treat your eyes with the best natural imagery that you can imagine.
 	
 	  	The breeze and the chirping birds make your trek feel more like an expedition. You will spot lot of coffee and areca nut plantations. The steep serpentine path to the trek demands stamina and determination. The rains leave the path slushy and muddy filled with leeches. Remember to wear suitable clothes and don’t lean on trees or hold branches as leeches stick to the body easily. There are several rare and exotic insects you can find on the way.
 	
 	  	The one way trail at least takes a good three hours; you can rest in between and use your pit stops to restore your energy. While the breeze keeps hitting you hard, rain droplets keep pouring. Your fatigue will be rejuvenated by these cool breezes.
 	
 	  	The trek from Honey Valley is equally adventurous. The trail passes through dense tropical rainforests that are infested with leeches but provides magnificent views enroute. A lot of trekkers take this route, and while returning they take the shorter route through Nalaknad Palace. That way, it’s a good option to try both the routes because you just cannot afford to miss a single thing about this incredible place. 
 	
 	  	There are umpteen numbers of hills that will come along. Eyeing for the last one, and thinking that’s the place you are supposed to reach then you are wrong; the path keeps surprising you all the way and keeps you waiting for the peak view. When the group is really small, ranging from three to four, make sure you tag along with another group or take a guide with you, who will actually point out the neighbouring hills and tell their names and they would make you halt at the right places from where you can click a picture. 
 	
 	  	There is a great chance to get lost in the lush green forests. As it is a wildlife region, make sure you trek during daylight hours as wildlife is known to pass through this terrain during the nights. The slippery terrain and the mist can also make you slip or fall during the night.
 	
 	  	On reaching the peak, the breath taking view will leave you in awe. You might have slipped, jumped, come across small sized snakes, different kinds of insects and continuous croaky noise of various birds, but the view will make you forget all of that. You will forget the tiredness as the cool breeze wafts around the flat peak relaxing your muscles. During the cloudless evening, the trekker is rewarded with a glorious scene of the setting sun is the western sea. 
 	
 	  	The peak also offers a space for camping, which is one of the best things once in a lifetime. But, the challenge is, if you reach early, you can get some space or else you won’t get a space to camp and the next place recommended for camping is the base of the hill. 
 	
 	  	Imagine, you camp during the night at the base of the hill and trek all the way to the peak in the morning and spend the evening watching the majestic sun set in front of you and spending a night with campfire and halting at the peak that night. Sheer bliss! 
 	
 	
 	
 	GETTING THERE
 	
 	
 	 		Tandiyandamol is around 268kms from Bengaluru and 43kms from Kodagu. Take the Bengaluru- Mandya- Srirangapattana- Mysuru- Hunsuru- Kushalnagara- Madikeri- Kakkabe route. 
 		 	 		There are public transports plying from Bengaluru. Take the KSRTC buses to Virajpet from Satellite bus stand and get down near Kakkabe.  	

 	
 	  	- Kumaran P