Pet parents laud tranquillity of PFA’s pet cemetery, donate even in tough circumstances to ensure help reaches other injured, abandoned animals

The pet cemetery situated inside the six-acre plot of the People For Animals (PFA) hospital premise is a truly tranquil place. Pet parents of all walks of life and religions come here to give their best friends a dignified farewell. “In a month, on an average, there would be around 60 pet burials - during the pre-covid times,” PFA’s General Manager and senior vet Col Navaz Shariff tells Bangalore Mirror.

The pandemic has been tough and despite the restrictions during the lockdowns, the organisation managed to conduct 45 burials a month. And even if they financially in a tight spot, pet parents are trying to keep the donations going -- even in installments every year, Shariff added.

According to Shariff, wildlife rescue and rehabilitation is a costly affair for PFA, so the organisation struggles to make judicious use of donations. “But it is these donations that we use to tend to sick animals and reptiles. We tell pet parents that their pets resting here helps give life to so many injured and displaced urban wildlife of the city,” Shariff added.

The PFA cemetery is not just a burial space for dogs or cats. A couple of years ago, a family came with their dead rooster named ‘Chilli Chicken’. The words on the rooster’s gravestone indicate how well-loved the bird was. Rabbits, birds, mice, guinea pigs, fish and also most recently a goat are buried here.

 There is space for all pets here; above is the graveyard of Chilli Chicken, who use to wake its owners up early in the morning 
What is unique is, this burial ground is for all religions -- all pet parents conduct the rituals based on the religions they follow. Some pet parents keep visiting their loved ones even after their final rites are over. “They even come on the third day and the eleventh day to conduct rituals as per their religious tradition and culture. They also visit around twice a year, on their pet’s birthdays and or death anniversary and make a donation at the shelter/hospital to feed the injured and sick wild animals that arrive there,” he said.

Pet parent Bharath Kumar said this cemetery is a very peaceful space. “And the donation is for a good cause to rescue animals in the name of our own beloved pets. I will suggest people must support this organsiation to help other animals and reptiles,” he said.

Gayathri Hiremath, who buried her pet Fluffy here a couple of months ago, said the staff really do care for the animals. “They decorated the grave on the 11th day as per my request,” she said.

During the pandemic, burials were affected but PFA’s ambulance would go get the pets from their homes and animal welfare officers were given covid passes as their services were considered essential. “As we had an ambulance and Covid Passes, we came up with a pickup service for burials. Most of the burials were done during the night,” Shariff said.