Well, this is not a special effects scene from a Hollywood thriller, but something that will soon become a reality in the rocky terrain of Ramanagaram district, the place haunted by Gabbar Singh in Amitabh Bachchan’s Sholay.

The forest department is planning to earmark an area near Ramadevara Betta in Ramanagaram as the feeding place for the long-billed vulture (Indian vulture), which is on the verge of extinction. Called the vulture restaurant, it is part of the department’s grand plan to set up an exclusive sanctuary that is aimed at conserving and fostering the vulture population in the state.

A senior forest official told Bangalore Mirror: “A few months ago, a long-billed vulture was spotted at Ramadevara Betta. Since then, wildlife enthusiasts and forest department officials have spotted around 150 vultures suggesting their comeback. An area of 15-20 sq km area around Ramadevara Betta has been earmarked for the sanctuary.”

The sanctuary will have a ‘restaurant’ where vultures will feed on the carcasses of animals free from diclofenac chemicals, which is another threat to these birds. “Veterinarians were using medicines containing diclofenac for livestock in these areas. The chemical which stays active in the body of the dead animal for a week is dangerous for vultures which feed on the carcasses. But in this restaurant, special care will be taken as per the directives of the Supreme Court and the environmental ministry and diclofenac-free carcasses will be provided,” the officer explained.

The concept, when implemented, will be the second such of its kind in the country after an artificial breeding centre in Pinjore near Haryana. Places around Bangalore including Ramanagaram, Bannerghatta National Park, Mysore and Bellary were known for these species.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) I B Srivastav said: “There is a proposal to declare that area as sanctuary. Since the recent spotting of the bird, we have taken all measures to protect them and provide suitable habitat for their breeding. Vulture conservation efforts are on in other parts of the state too.”

In the last decade, the disappearance of vultures has caused widespread concern and the central government has taken measures to remedy the situation by ordering controls on the use of diclofenac.

Though the forest department’s interest in protecting vultures has to be lauded, it appears to be a delayed move. “They should have done it at least five years ago. Now this vulture habitat is turning into a concrete jungle. Moreover, quarrying is taking a heavy toll on the flora and fauna,” an wildlife activist said. “Greedy land developers and unscrupulous forest department officials have to be stopped before anyone embarks on any mission to save vultures. Otherwise, it will be a sheer waste of tax payer’s money.”

Vulture stats

The long-billed vulture has a bald head, very broad wings and short tail. It weighs between 5.5 and 6.3 kg and measures 80-100 cm long and has a 205 to 229 cm wingspan. It is largely found in India, Pakistan, Cambodia and Nepal.