Seventh grader becomes the youngest to clear NPTEL’s course on ornithology

Krish Anand, 12 years old, has become the youngest in the country to clear the Ornithology course conducted by National Programme on Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL). Anand was the youngest among the 372 who cleared the course out of 5,045 national enrollees.

The course covers topics like bird anatomy, physiology, taxonomy, behaviour, conservation. Generally, this course is considered as ideal for students pursuing their Bachelors and Masters degree in life sciences and for those who want to explore ornithology as a career option.

Anand was always keen on observing trees and birds. His interest geared up when he and his father rescued a white-cheeked barbet (Psilopogon viridis). “During this process, I was very much moved and started to know more about birds.
 
But, there were many questions which were unanswered. From that day, I started observing so many birds and nests and their behaviour. I would narrate those experiences with my parents. Then, I borrowed my father’s 18-year old camera and started clicking birds,” said Anand.

His father Anand C K Shashidhar, a member of the Wildlife Association of South India (WASI) said that from a very young age Krish enjoyed nature. He said, “In due course he even made an information sheet for WASI with a list of birds present in the Cauvery stretch at Shivanasamudra. Although his interest is very much spread across all things to do with nature, birding activities, Ornithology in particular is what he is mostly focused on.”

 I wish to be part of a movement that will emphasise on the importance of nature, build awareness in everyone– Krish Anand 
He also added that Krish now spends whatever time he gets in trying to make documentaries on particular nesting species from building of nests to laying of eggs to incubation of eggs to hatchlings to feeding and fledging etc till the family leaves the nest.
 
Krish has a number of certifications under his belt. Being a nature lover he wants to do something for climate change. He said, “It hurts me to be a witness to the super large forest lands we lose every day from deforestation in the name of development, from mining in the name of manufacture and from climate change which is largely because of the pollution that we humans create.
 
I wish to be part of a movement that will emphasise on the importance of nature, build awareness in everyone and help make this planet a better world for all.”