Rs 500 crore sought from CM to construct railway barricades to prevent elephants from venturing out of forest areas

Karnataka has witnessed a high rise in human deaths due to human-elephant conflict in Karnataka has been increasing in recent years. According to data released by the Forest, Ecology, and Environment Department of Karnataka, 148 people have been killed in such incidents over the last five years.

While 13 deaths were recorded between April 2018 and March 2019, this number went up to 30 in 2019-20. In 2020-21, 26 deaths were recorded, followed by 28 deaths in 2021-22, 30 deaths in 2022-23, and 21 human deaths between April 2023 and September 3, 2023.

Forest, Ecology, and Environment Minister Ishwar B Khandre disclosed these numbers at a meeting with the officials held on Tuesday in the wake of increasing incidents of wildlife and human conflict in the state. The Chief Minister expressed concern over the numbers. Giving details of human-wildlife conflict cases, the Minister said that since April 1, 2023, 22 lives have been lost due to elephant attacks, two deaths have been reported due to bear attacks, one death due to tiger attacks, two deaths due to leopard attacks and one person died due to wild boar attacks.

He further informed that the department has requested the Chief Minister for a grant of Rs 500 crore to prevent wildlife-human conflict in Karnataka. He said the fund is needed for the construction of about 640 km of rail barricades to avoid conflict cases in the state. Currently, 312 kilometres of rail barricades exist in Karnataka and the construction cost of this barricade per kilometre is about Rs 1.50 crore.

“In the last 15 days, 11 people have been killed in human-wildlife conflict and it is imperative to take necessary and urgent action to avoid loss of precious lives. We have requested the Chief Minister for a grant of Rs 500 crore for the construction of railway barricades to prevent elephants from venturing out of forest areas. Forest area is diminishing while the number of wild animals is going up, leading to a higher number of conflict cases. Below average rainfall has led to lesser availability of food and water inside the forest, leading to more animals venturing out,” said Khandre.

The two recent cases of human-elephant conflicts include the death of sharpshooter Venkatesh who was trampled by a tusker in Hassan last week and a forest watcher Girish who was killed in an elephant attack in Madikeri on Tuesday. Girish was part of the Rapid Response Team (RRT) assigned to drive elephants away from a coffee estate.

The monthly human-elephant conflict data by the department also shows that the number of deaths is higher in July and August months. Out of 148 deaths over the last five years, 44 deaths happened in July and August.

Khandre also expressed deep condolences over the death of a seven-year-old boy Charan Naik near Heggada Deva Fort in Nagarhole zone on Monday in human-tiger conflict and informed that an operation to catch the tiger has started.