But wildlife activists allege the wild cat escaped by breaking open its shoddy cage
 
 Unable to withstand the ferociousness of a rescued leopard, the forest department officials chose to release in back into the wild. The interesting episode on the leopard’s ferociousness has been reported from Chitradu-rga. After gate-crashing into an iftaar party in Hosadurga taluk of Chitradurga, the two-year-old leopard was rescued by KFD officials of Chitradurga and rehabilitated at Aadumall-eshwara minor zoo last week.
 
 In fact, Bangalore Mirror reported about the strange incident of the leopard walking into the Iftar party in its edition dat-ed June 11, 2016. The leopard was rescued by a team of KFD experts from Ghousiyanagar of Hosadurga and brought to the Aadumalleshwara mini zoo in the Jogimatti Wildlife Sanctuary on the outskirts of Chitradurga. The leopard, appeared to be under tremendous stress, so was given due veterinary attention at the zoo and provided with nutritious food.
 
 However, according to forest officials, a day after the rescue and care, the leopard turned ferocious to scare its caretakers out of their wits. “It was so wild and ferocious that we could not control it at the zoo. Further, it also failed to adjust to the food. Fearing any complications and adverse effects, we chose to release it back into the wild. It was released into the Marikani-ve forest area,” K Chandrashe-khar Naik, deputy conservator of forests, Chitradurga, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 But wildlife activists allege that the leopard was smart enough to escape from the cage by break opening the top portion of the shoddy cage. When the allegations were brought to his notice, Naik clarified that they were only rumours and they officially released the cat back into the wild.
 
 “We have documented the entire process and video-graphed the entire chain of events till its release. Only because it was ferocious that we decided to release it into the wild. We have brought this to the notice of the chief conservator of forests (CCF), Ballari circle under which Chitradurga division is located,” Naik explained. CCF Gokul too acknowledged that he was given a report about the formal release of the leopard into the jungle.
 
 Meantime, trekkers and birdwatchers who frequent Jogimatti Sanctuary were gripped in panic following reports of the escape of the leopard. “There are five-six leopards in the vicinity and people may have spotted any of them. But it would be difficult to say for sure that the sighted leopard was the same one that was released by forest officials,” Naik clarified.