A recent study by a team of international researchers states that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes covid-19, has been circulating in a specific family of bats for decades unnoticed. The study says horseshoe bats may have been intermediary hosts to the virus.

The study done by a team of researchers and published in Nature Microbiology further states that Horseshoe Bats are the most plausible origin of the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen.

While it can be recalled that bat researchers and conservationists from South Asian countries have already ruled out that bat coronaviruses (BtCoVs) found in Indian bats have no relevance to Covid-19 as they are very different from SARS-CoV-2, what do they have to say about Horseshoe Bats being the most plausible origin of the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen?

“The virus has not been circulating in bats, but in a family of bats called the Horseshoe Bats. This is a relatively small group of the 100-odd species found in the Old World and so far disease outbreaks have happened only in the Middle-East (MERS) and in China (SARS and covid-19),” Rohit Chakravarty, Phd student, Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research, Berlin, told Bangalore Mirror.


  Bats are Bengaluru’s enemy No. 1 nowAccording to an article published in the Economic Times on April 15, a first-if-its kind study by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has found the presence of a different kind of coronavirus -- bat coronavirus (BtCoV) -- in two bat species from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu.

There are 19 species of horseshoe bats in India and some of these are endemic and/or endangered.

Baheerathan Murugavel, Phd student, Indian Institute of Science Education & Research (IISER) Thiruvananthapuram, said that horseshoe bats are typically not found close to human habitation in India and have less scope of causing diseases (unless their spaces are intruded upon).

The fact that the disease may have been circulating in them for 40-70 years has only just emerged supports this claim, he said.

“Moreover, the paper (published in Nature Microbiology) also says that the virus has generalistic properties with respect to infecting mammalian cells. 

The authors also don’t discount that the virus may have been transmitted to humans via pangolins (they only say that in their samples, they didn’t find any evidence). This possibly suggests that the virus may reach humans via many other animals (intermediate hosts) that humans interact with -- a claim we are getting verified from virologists and disease ecologists -- because humans and horseshoe bats rarely come in close contact,” said Kasturi Saha, PhD student, IISc.

The trio said that the closest viral relative of SARS-CoV-2 was found in only 1 out of 1,421 species of bats.