The Bashyam Park in Malleswaram is in urgent need of a pied piper. Considered a gateway to the upmarket locality, the park, opposite Mantri Mall, has turned into a home for hundreds of rats. So much so that they are turning into a grave threat to walkers and visitors in the park.    After his pleas to BBMP fell on deaf ears, senior advocate and walker Ramachandra Reddy approached the High Court with photographic evidence of the rodent menace. Speaking to BM, Reddy said, “I tried to bring it to the notice of BBMP officials, including the joint commissioner and the chief health officer. But when there was no response, I moved the court, and now they have started acting.”   The park, spread over more than an acre, sees 200 footfalls both in the morning and evening, and more on weekends. Reddy says the park is riddled with rodent burrows, and the menace is a fall-out of visitors feeding the birds there.    Reddy sent two emails to BBMP officials, but when there was no response he took pictures of the park rats and approached the High Court. In his petition, he has urged the extermination of the rats in the park.    “We have made four important pleas in the petition. The authorities should initiate measures to stop the feeding of birds; the officials should be directed to cull the rats in the park; BBMP should appoint a watchman, and action should be taken against the officials responsible for the mess,” Reddy said, adding, “Even the droppings of the rodents pose a threat to the health of park visitors.”   After the high court issued a notice, BBMP has sprung into action and put up boards warning against the feeding of birds in the park. “They claimed they have acted to set things right. However, we have sought time to file objections and the matter is posted for two weeks later,” Reddy said.   BBMP officials maintain that necessary action has been taken to address the issue. K N Shivaprasad Reddy, superintendent (horticulture), Bangalore (west), told Bangalore Mirror, “We have put up boards stating that feeding of birds is prohibited and action will be taken against violators. We have also taken measures to check the rodent population in the park.” 
  NATURE’S WAY
  According to wildlife experts, rat snakes are nature’s own mechanism to check the increase in rodent numbers. “A decrease in the number of rat snakes is also a reason for an increase in the number of rats. People either kill or call wildlife rescuers to catch rat snakes,” Sharath R Babu, wildlife expert, said.