Pooja Sawant and Asha Bhat will make their debut in the action-adventure Junglee, which releases on April 5

Junglee Pictures’ upcoming family action adventure, Junglee, featuring Vidyut Jammwal and a herd of elephants, will also mark the Bollywood debut of two actresses. While Pooja Sawant will be seen as Shankara, the mahout of an elephant, Asha Bhat plays a wildlife journalist in the Chuck Russell directorial.

Pooja informs that her character in the film, which is produced by Vineet Jain and co-produced by Priti Shahani, is modelled on the only female mahout in India and for the animal lover, there can be no better beginning in showbiz. “I have rescued many street dogs and cats, and apart from it being a great script, I was happy to get the opportunity to interact with so many animals during the shoot,” she smiles.

Asha’s Meera is an ambitious scribe, fearless when it comes to chasing after her goals. “She is doing a newsbreak on elephants and that’s how she gets drawn into this world. She’s a force to reckon with,” she asserts, admitting that being surrounded by animals was an experience she will cherish all her life.

This was her first close encounter with animals. “While intimidated, I quickly discovered that elephants are quite pleasant and sensitive. And they never forget,” she quips.

Pooja is a big name in Marathi cinema, having worked in films like Poshter Boyz, Daagdi Chaawl and Satrangi Re. She hopes to get the same love and appreciation from B-town. And having spent a lot of time with the majestic beasts, the actress has become quite knowledgeable about them. “You never look an elephant in the eye as they take it as a challenge. And they will only bond with you if they are convinced you won’t harm them,” she says, adding that as part of her prep, she learnt how to feed, bathe and interact with them.

Prod her on co-star Vidyut and Pooja gushes, “He is the definition of hard work, discipline and patience. There is so much to learn from him.” Asha is gung-ho about Chuck, who has worked with Hollywood stars like Arnold Schwarzenegger (Eraser), Jim Carrey (The Mask) and Dwayne Johnson (The Scorpion King). “I couldn’t have asked for a better director for my first film, having Chuck as a mentor was phenomenal,” she exults.

The Junglee Pictures production offers some never-seen-before stunts with not just Vidyut, but both the ladies as well. “I have one action scene with Vidyut and he made the process really comfortable. He pushed me to do the stunts myself,” says Pooja. Asha confides that she enjoyed performing the stunts. “It wasn’t difficult because I have incorporated martial arts and fitness in my daily regime. It is all about flexibility,” she concludes.