Gowri pulls off a climbing route never accomplished by an Indian woman
 
 Outdoor rock climbing may be a new sport for India and for Indian naturalist and photographer Gowri Varanashi from Bengaluru, it was all about completing a personal goal and inspiring women climbers of India.
 
 On Jan 19, Gowri executed climbing route ‘French-Indian Masala’ at a grade of 5.12 c (Yosemite Decimal System, US) or 7b+ (French rating). The project was part of a ‘Live Your Dream’ Grant by the American Alpine Club and The North Face. She spent nine days studying the route and familiarising herself with the climb, a process called red pointing. She then lead climbed the route successfully on her first attempt.
 
 “Women can pretty much equal men in climbing. I was looking for organisations that offer grants to amateur climbers to push their limits. It was a last-minute decision and I applied for it. When I received an email that I have been selected for the grant, I realised that there is no looking back. I decided to pick a climb in India and zeroed on Badami in Bagalkot distict. I have been climbing for almost six years but took it up seriously during the last three years. My first few lead climbs where in Ramnagara with my friends from BCI (Bangalore Climbing Initiative) who are actively establishing new routes and conducting beginner climbing workshops as well. I have noticed that there are a lot of strong women climbers in India but not many come forward to try harder. I wanted to push myself and inspire more women climbers in India to push their climbing not just on plastic but on rock too,” Gowri said.
 
 She reached Badami on Jan 11 and worked on the route every morning for a few hours because, by 10.30 am, it would get too hot. “There were two sections that were challenging on the 60-feet wall and I had to figure out the moves. I worked on each section of the climb separately and eventually linked it. On Jan 19 morning, after a warm up, as some of these climbs are strenuous, I lead climbed it in my first attempt,” explained Gowri.
 
 Gowri is an avid wildlife conservationist and works with local communities in the Amazon rainforest to help provide sustainable employment and habitat protection. In the US, where she lives with her husband dare devil naturalist Paul Rosolie, she works with school children and takes them outdoors for nature education. In the US, she has climbed in New York, Arizona and California at the legendary Yosemite National Park. She splits her time between India, US and Peru.
 
 “Because of the challenging grade of this climb, I was unsure if I would successfully complete the climb. Ultimately, over six months of training paid off and my fingers tips were able to cling to the overhung rock in a series of advanced moves that brought me to the top. As far as I know, this marks the hardest roped climb by an Indian woman in India to date,” Gowri explained.
 
 Gowri is at this stage an amateur climber from a non-competitive background in the sport. The grade, she said, is a big grade for India but not internationally. She hopes that this achievement will inspire others to continue to embrace India’s budding climbing community.