363 attacks over 16 months; survey shows hoofed animals are the most targeted group
 
 
 	While dogs may be man’s best friend, they are certainly a threat to wild animals in protected and non-protected forest areas.
 	
 	  	A survey conducted between September 2014 and March 2016 showed 363 attacks by free-ranging dogs on wildlife, spanning 291 locations in India. Nearly 74 percent of attacks on wildlife were by dogs and out of these, 36 percent were reported within protected areas.
 	
 Many attack locations were recorded from Karnataka. Of these 37 attacks were reported in locations in Karnataka including Kabini, Dandeli and Masinagudi. The survey was done by Chandrima Home, Abi Tamim Vanak of Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment (ATREE), and Yash Veer Bhatnagar of the Nature
 	Conservation Founda-tion and Snow Leopard Trust.Overall, 363 attack incidents were reported by those who responded to the survey, spanning 291 locations in India.
 	
 	  	Chandrima said, “Dogs function like any other predators in a landscape. The important thing to understand is that their numbers are much higher than any other wild predator as they are subsidised carnivores. Other than predation of species, they can compete with native carnivores and are reservoirs of disease. My study shows that dogs target a range of taxa (mammals, birds, reptiles) and amongst them largely mammals. Within mammals, ungulates are the most targeted mammalian order. Amongst ungulates, spotted deer was the most targeted species although dogs also attacked many other Schedule 1 species such as blackbuck, chinkara, blue sheep, argali etc. They also targeted critically endangered birds such as vultures and Great Indian Bustard,” said Chandrima.
 	
 The study aimed to understand the ecological and social dimensions of threat by free-ranging dogs. This part of the study aims to understand the impacts that free roaming dogs have on wildlife. “Although there has been growing evidence of threats posed by such dogs to wildlife globally, there has hardly been much of an effort to understand the threats in India,” said Chand-rima. The study is yet to be published. It was presented as a poster at India-Behavior, Ecology and Evolution conference held in March this year in Corbett, Uttarakhand.
 	
 	
 	 		How to reduce the threat
 		
 		 	 		Chandrima says, “India has a population of 60 million dogs and therefore it cannot be a single solution for control. Dogs are companion animals and people need to restrict free-ranging movement. We should have better pet ownership laws, pets should be registered and taken care of and not abandoned. In some areas, un-owned dogs have to be removed. Avoid feeding strays on roads. You are not helping them in any way. If you want to take care of dogs, take them home from the streets. Even if dogs are sterilised, it does not reduce the problem of predation or interaction with wildlife.” 	 		
 		 	 		Mammals worst hit
 		
 		 	 		Mammals were targeted in 78 per cent of the attacks. Ungulates (hoofed animals) comprised 67 per cent of the attack species followed by carnivores (17 per cent, lagomorphs comprising of seven per cent, primates (5 per cent) and rodents (4 per cent). Amongst ungulates, spotted deer was the most attacked species (34 per cent), followed by sambar (14 per cent), blackbucks (13 per cent) and nilgai (10 per cent).