By:Kailash Koushik 
 
 
 The list of leading wildlife and conservation biologists of India would be incomplete without Krithi Karanth. The city-based biologist has added one more feather to her cap and something for the city to be proud of.
 
 	The World Economic Forum has selected Karanth, an associate conservation scientist with Wildlife Conservation Society(WCS) and part of the teaching faculty at National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), as a 2015 Young Global leader (YGL). The prestigious honour was announced on Tuesday and recognises the scientists as one of 187 such leaders from around the world.
 	  	From the South Asian sector, 18 leaders were selected including Karanth, other leaders being president of IndiGo Aditya Ghosh, CEO Metropolis Healthcare Ameera Shah, portfolio manager Bluecrest Capital Ashish Goyal, Member of Parliment Gaurav Gogoi, chairman, corporate, GMR Kiran Kumar Grandhi, founder director, India Art Fair, Neha Kirpal, partner of Bain & Co Prashant Sarin, Pepsi CEO Shalini Puchalapalli, India Today associate editor Shweta Punj, HRD minister Smrithi Zubin Irani and Vijaya Gadde.
 	  	“Being selected as part of the YGL programme is an incredible honour and provides me with a unique opportunity to engage with a broader network of entrepreneurs, business leaders, politicians and change-makers in society. I hope to develop a stronger constituency for wildlife conservation in India and globally,” said Karanth. “For me, Bengaluru is home and this place has a lot of innovative and creative people. But I feel a lot of them get boxed into their professions. What we need is collaborations between different vocations to bring about change, and especially for wildlife,” she added.
 	  	Working with research and conservation colleagues from the WCS India programme, Karanth has implemented over 25 projects and involved over 500 citizen science volunteers. With a master’s degree from Yale University and a doctorate from Duke University, Karanth has carried out extensive research on Indian wildlife, particularly human dimensions of wildlife conservation, publishing over 60 scientific and popular articles.
 	  	Karanth has not only helped advance wildlife research and innovations in conservation, but has also shaped numerous conservationists to take the cause ahead. She also holds an adjunct assistant professorship at the Duke University (USA).