No-objection certificate and permit to transport Suma, an elephant from Trichy, for a cultural event in city, was faked and signature of top forest department official forged. Officials of the department said to be involved
 
 The illegal use of jumbos for temple occasions, cultural celebrations and social functions has, for long now, been the elephant in the room. Conservationists and animal activists have cried themselves hoarse over the issuing of renting elephants, but the racket only appeared to grow stronger. 

 Last week, forest department officials stumbled on a racket that involved transporting jumbos from Tamil Nadu and Kerala for commercial use in the city. The issue came to light when the forest officials checked the papers of an elephant, Suma, brought from Trichy for an event organised by Bannerghatta Yuvajan Kreede Mattu Samskruti Dasara Samiti in the city. Officials say the permit which N Shekar, the mahout, carried were fake. 

 Officials found that the no-objection certificate from the chief wildlife warden and the state department letterhead was faked and the signature of Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (wildlife) was forged. Although the elephant is now back in Trichy, officials in the department have launched a probe. Officials believe the case could just be the tip of the iceberg involving fake permits and are investigating permits issued over the last three years. 

 	N Venkataraman, president of Bannerghatta Yuvajana Kreede Samiti, however, said he was unaware that the permit was a fake. “I had sought permission on September 23 to use the elephant. I was busy arranging things for Dasara when somebody from the department came and handed over the permission letter to me. I have done nothing wrong. As far as I am aware, everything was done legally.” 

 	The Wildlife Protection Act and various state government orders prohibit the use of elephants for commercial purposes and also ban the transfer of elephants to any individual or institution. In July 2000, the state government had prohibited donation, gifting and selling of elephants to any individual or institution. Despite this, NOCs were issued, allowing elephants to be used for commercial purposes. 

 Sources, however, say that the department had not issued an NOC for Suma for any religious events between 13 October and 15 October this year. A senior forest department official said, “It appears that since the forest department has initiated stringent measures to check use of elephants for commercial purposes, operators have found another way to beat the system. A probe may reveal more such cases.” Sources say the racketeers had made a template of the permit and had cut and pasted the content, changing only the name of the elephant and other details such as the venue. 

 Wildlife activists and former Union minister Maneka Gandhi raised the issue of 'NOCs' being issued by the state government to use elephants in religious and other non-state functions in contravention of rules. On October 3, last month, Dr SK Khanduri, the inspector general of forests, Union ministry of forests and environment, had requested the principal secretary of the state forest department to probe and initiate appropriate action into the use of elephants for commercial purposes. PCCF (wildlife), G S Prabhu, then began looking into permits issued and stumbled on the case of Suma. 

 	“Someone has faked the order and forged my signature,” Prabhu said. “We have tracked down the miscreants. One of them is in hospital and is unable to answer questions at the moment. He will be able to reveal the name of officials from the department who are involved in the racket. The APCCF (vigilance) will probe the case. We are also considering introducing new licensing methods where signatures cannot be forged.”
 	
 	
 	ELEPHANTINE BLUNDERS
 	 		In November 2011, an elephant from Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) was transported to RV College of Engineering at the behest of then home minister R Ashoka for the college’s Rajyotsava Day celebrations.
 		 	 		In April, 2013 two calves from BBP, Drona and Champa, were swapped with two adult elephants, Lakshmi and Maasti, of the Suttur Mutt in Mysore, again drawing the ire of wildlife activists and CZA member Suparna Ganguly. 
 		 	 		In the same month, the office of the PCCF had drawn flak for permitting Kanchi, an 18-year-old elephant from Andhra Pradesh, to be used in a magic show in the city.
 		 	 		In May, Rani, a 13-year-old elephant belonging to Sadguru Basavraj Deshi Kendra, Airani mutt, Haveri district was brought in chains for a wedding in Bangalore. Rani was to carry the bridegroom to the wedding hall in Palace Grounds, but the procession was stopped midway by BBMP wildlife sleuths.