The tick-borne viral hemorrhagic fever also known as Kyasanur Forest Disease is being studied by experts from various organisations led by the Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, UK
 
 This season, about five positive cases in humans of Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) – a tick-borne viral hemorrhagic fever also known as Monkey Fever – have been reported from Theertahalli of Shivamogga district. In Soraba taluk, there has been a monkey death. According to the department of Health and Family Welfare, no cases have been reported from other parts of the state so far.
 
 A new research project has begun which aims to understand how and why a deadly tick-borne disease is spreading in forest ecosystems in India. The project is being led by scientists from the Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (CEH), UK.
 
 Focusing on the potentially fatal Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD), this project links expertise between CEH and India in Public Health (the National Institute for Tribal Medicine, Karnataka Government Department of Health and Family Welfare Services, the National Institute of Epidemiology, the Institute of Public Health, Bengaluru), Animal Health (the National Institute of Veterinary Epidemiology and Disease Informatics), wildlife and forest ecology, human behaviour and priorities and Earth Observation (the Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment). The geographical focus of the study will be the Western Ghats, a region of immense significance for both biological diversity and human livelihoods.
 
 CEH has stated that KFD is a tick-borne viral haemorrhagic disease, also known as monkey fever, which can be fatal to humans and other primates, and which first emerged in degraded forest ecosystems in India in 1957. Since 2012, this disease has spread to new districts and states within India, and human cases have increased significantly. At least 340 people have died from the disease in the last five years with the mortality rate currently between 10 to 30 percent of those infected. Poor forest communities are most affected, including tribal forest-dwellers who harvest products such as honey, as well as plantation workers and marginal farmers who collect wood-fuel and graze their animals in forests. Although KFD is managed through vaccination, lack of awareness about the disease and poor vaccine uptake can exacerbate epidemics.
 
 Dr Kiran SK, Theertahalli Taluk health officer, said this study is in a very preliminary stage. “In addition, the department of Health and family Welfare has also collaborated with Veterinary College Shivamogga to undertake a study on tick-borne and other related diseases as most of the existing studies are about 30-40 years old. We had a discussion last week and the studies would commence in the next 15 days. The season begins in December and goes upto April. In the year 2016-17 about 30 cases were reported,” Dr Kiran said.
 
 He said the biggest challenge is making people accept the vaccine. “The disease is first seen in the month of December. The vaccination drives are launched in Sept- Oct. Since most of them live in forest they are so reluctant to take the vaccine. We go to their doorstep by 7 am; still they refuse to take the vaccine. Only when there are casualties will they come for vaccination. We also distribute tick repellents- known as the DMP oil. This begins in October-November. We ask them to apply the repellent before leaving home, but they do not bother to follow the instruction. Last year, about 45,000 vaccinations were administered and this year about 35,000 vaccinations have already been administered. There is a burning sensation for 30-45 seconds as soon as it is injected and that is why people are probably hesitant. No other adverse effect has been reported so far,” said Dr Kiran.
 
 Recurring nightmare
 
 “Since 2002, KFD has persisted Theertahalli. Between 2004 and 2006, there were a few cases in Chikkamagaluru. In 2012, there were about five cases in Chamarajanagar from the Bandipur forests. More than 95 per cent of the total cases are from Theertahalli. In the same year, it was seen in Wayanad and Mallapuram of Kerala. In Tamil Nadu, a monkey was tested positive. In 2014, cases were reported in Goa and the following year cases were reported in the bordering areas of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Goa. There is a possibility that KFD goes unchecked in many other parts of the state,” said Dr Kiran.
 
 “We know very little about KFD as it is concentrated in very small pockets, hence, there is a need for a study. We also maintain surveillance and check for KFD whenever a case of fever is brought to our notice,” Dr Kiran concluded.