A three-day workshop to train senior officials who will take part in the survey concluded a few days ago at Bandipur, about 80 km from here.

SPECIAL PROTECTION

The estimation is being taken up to ensure special protection to the tigers. The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) and the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) will conduct estimation with the help of state forest departments, the implementing authorities of Project Tiger.

WII and NTCA are holding workshops at all four regions of the state. The talk for the southern region, which comprises Karnataka, Andra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, was held from Nov 10 to 12.

“The importance and the process of estimation, including data collection, was explained to us during the workshop,” said Dr K T Hanumanthappa, Deputy Conservator of Forest, Bandipur National Park.

GPS TECHNOLOGY

He told Bangalore Mirror, “We are using Global Positioning System (GPS) and other latest technology for the first time, which will help identify tiger density as well as prey density in various places. The data thus collected will play an important role in the protection of tigers.”

“Training for tigers’ estimation will be conducted in a phased manner. Three regional workshops for senior officials have been completed. The fourth one will be held soon. Junior staff who take part in data collection will be trained in the second phase, to be held next month,” he said.

The data collection and estimation process will be held between December and February.

SAMPLE SURVEY

Both the state forest department and Wildlife Institute of India will collect data through sample surveys which will be matched using a software. The data collection will be done through two methods: Carnivorous Sign Survey, which includes collection and analysis of pug marks, and the Camera Trap Method.

“For the first time, we are using GPS for installing camera traps. A software will help us in locating the area where the camera traps have to be fixed,” said Hanumanthappa.

“Camera trap method is the latest and more accurate method used in the tiger census. Stripes on each tiger differ in size and dimension. High-resolution cameras which are capable of taking pictures in 360 degrees within a radius of 4 sq km, will be fixed in places rich in tiger habitat for a specific period. It is easy to estimate number of tigers present in the area more accurately by analysing the pictures,” said D Rajkumar, a wildlife activist.