Overfishing is putting popular varieties of fish at risk of extinction. A marine geographer from Chennai on how you can change this with your diet

For those who appreciate seafood, menu choices in restaurants across Bengaluru are typically limited to basa, salmon (either imported or the Indian variety known as rawas), seerfish, kane or ladyfish, pomfret, prawns, squid and crabs. In certain specialty seafood restaurants, there may be three or four more varieties on offer. But the fact of the matter is that we can literally count the number of fish varieties we consume on our fingertips. This dependency on a few popular varieties of fish is leading to a huge decline – 84 per cent of Indian fisheries are either depleted or are fully exploited. At a talk on sustainable seafood held at Bengaluru International Centre, Chennai-based marine geographer Divya Karnad brought to light the need to diversify our seafood diet if we don’t want to run out of our favourite varieties of fish. The talk, incidentally, was titled, ‘Seer Today, Gone Tomorrow’ due to the fact that one species of seer (out of the three available is India) is facing extinction due to overfishing. 

Another victim of overfishing is the prized hilsa or illish, considered a delicacy in West Bengal. Incidentally, the hilsa, which spends half its life in the sea, used to get fished in the sea as well as rivers. However, over a 15-year-old period, marine and inland hilsa catch has declined by a whopping 89 per cent. “Once caught as far upstream as Delhi, the hilsa in India now swim listlessly in a shallow and heavily polluted 75 km of river. While the Farakka barrage [on the Ganges located in Murshidabad district] was the first nail in its coffin, unrelenting consumer demand also played a part. As the hilsa became harder to find and catch, the slowing supply pushed its price to record highs, thus providing the incentive for fishermen to continue catching the ever declining fish,” says a post on In Season Fish’s Facebook page. With a slew of conservation interventions implemented by the government of Bangladesh, it is the only country where the hilsa population is increasing. 

    How to get the best adviceWe’re sometimes so focused on what we’re asking that we neglect to consider who we’re asking. The reality is that people are rarely objective about anything, no matter how innocuous or straightforward the issue seems.   
Given that there’s plenty more fish in the sea that are perfectly edible, Karnad has been urging consumers and chefs to discover new varieties of seafood that can help reduce overfishing of a few species. To this end, Karnad along with wildlife biologist, Chaitanya Krishna and creative head, Anil Adireddi launched the In Season Fish website earlier this year. Acting as an eco-friendly seafood guide, In Season features a seafood calendar that tells you which fish are safe to eat and which to avoid during different months of the year. The calendar is further divided into one for the West Coast and another for the East Coast. For instance, this month tuna should be off the menu as it typically breeds from August to January. As Karnad explains, “People assume that fish only breed during the monsoon or when the fishing ban is in place but how can you expect so many different species of fish to synchronise their breeding cycles?” 

Talking about how fishermen are forced to discard huge quantities of fish that are caught in the net while fishing for other popular varieties, the 33-year-old says, “As consumers, there is lack of awareness of what’s seasonally or locally available. Most fishermen will sell only about one kg from every six kgs of fish caught because there is no demand for other varieties. Sadly, this wasted fish either gets discarded overboard or are sold at dirt cheap rates to be down-cycled into pet food or fish meal.” One example of this is trawling for prawns. Typically, trawl nets are dredged across the sea bed to catch shrimp but a whole lot of other species are trapped in the process. “Most of these fish either get crushed inside the net or are then thrown overboard because there isn’t enough ice or space to store them,” Karnad explains. 

 They have also been putting up recipes sourced from homemakers and chefs on their social media handles to highlight different ways in which people can cook lesser-known varieties of fish such as needle fish and silver belly. Needle fish, which is considered a delicacy among the fishing community in Ramnathapuram district in Tamil Nadu, is treated as trash elsewhere. “The silver belly, on the other hand, is a small fish that people assume is bony but it only has one single bone. We sourced a recipe from someone whose great grandmother would use it as a restorative to help people recovering from any illness,” says Karnad, adding that silver belly has become a favourite at her home. Currently, they have curated about 12 such recipes. 

As part of the conservation effort, Karnad and her team have also been reaching out to chefs from across Chennai, Delhi and Mumbai in an effort to educate them about different varieties of fish that they could offer at their restaurants. “We have actually taken chefs to landing centres with our season calendar to help them identify different varieties of fish that could be used. In fact, many of them were happy to note that the prices for lesser-known species were so low and hence, economical for them to use,” she adds. And while aquaculture or farmed fishing may seem like the right answer to overfishing, Karnad reminds her audience that most fish are carnivores or omnivores and hence, dependant on other fish to survive. “It doesn’t take the pressure off the fish [in the sea].” Also, the high use of antibiotics in overstocked ponds puts humans at risk as well. 

While acknowledging the fact that lack of ethical fishing practises and inconsistent implementation of government policy with regard to fishing regulations are also to blame for this decline, Karnad reiterates that each seafood consumer has a big role to play. So, the next time you go shopping for fish, do your bit for marine ecology and ask your local supplier for new varieties of seafood. According to Karnad’s calendar, September is a good time to indulge in delicacies such as ribbonfish (pambole in Kannada) and Barramundi (known as koliji in Kannada). 


Recipe for Kumari Paarai This is a recipe for Trevally fi sh (known as paarai locally) as cooked in Kanyakumari

 paarai or trevally cut into 3 pieces, handful of curry leaves and garlic cloves, oil for frying (For the marinade) 3/4tsp turmeric powder, 1tsp chilli powder, 1/2tsp salt, 3/4tsp tamarind paste, 3tsp coconut milk
1 Mix the marinade ingredients well and ensure there are no lumps. 
2 Make shallow cuts on the fish and smear with the marinade. 
3 Heat a pan with some oil. Add the pieces of fish and cook on both sides until cooked through and brown. 
4 Sauté a handful of curry leaves and garlic cloves. Add the fish and cook for five minutes.

    Does Your Partner Shut Down During Arguments?Although this happened in the first few minutes of our first session, I let it play out (couples therapists need to see how couples argue in order to understand what goes wrong).