The recent rain may have cooled the city, but it has kept wildlife volunteers on their toes. What’s the connection, you may ask. Wildlife volunteers say calls to catch snakes from residences and offices have more than doubled over the last week. And a number of these calls have come from celebrities and VVIPs. 
 
 With rain water flooding holes, snakes move out and take refuge in houses and other buildings. Wildlife volunteers were called in to catch and rescue snakes from actress Bhumika Chawla’s residence, twice from the house of state legislative council chairman D H Shankarmurthy, while one slithering reptile was rescued from former Upa Lokayukta Justice Patri Basavangowda’s residence.
   Volunteers have also caught snakes from offices of top establishments including BEL, DRDO and LRDE as well as private firms in the last week. On Friday alone, more than 80 snakes were captured and set free in the wild.
   “The calls have more than doubled,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden told Bangalore Mirror. “We have been attending to these calls virtually round the clock and volunteers have been on their toes. We have attended to several calls from residences belonging to VVIPs, celebrities and well as office establishments over the last five days.”
   On Monday, within a gap of two hours, two rat snakes were caught at Shankarmurthy’s house. On Thursday, a rat snake was rescued from actress Chawla’s residence in Mahadevpura and on Friday, a water snake measuring over seven feet was rescued from former Upa Lokayukta Justice Basavanagowda’s residence on Hesarghatta Road. “The rescued snakes are being released in habitat conducive to them,” said Mohan K, wildlife volunteer, who caught the snake from Chawla’s residence.
   Wildlife volunteers say they receive more than 100 calls every day. There are over 20 species of snakes found in the city, but water snakes, rat snakes, vipers and cobras are the ones most commonly found. Wildlife experts caution people not to panic when snakes enter their homes. “Snakes know that humans are not their prey and won’t attack anyone unless provoked,” Babu said. 
   In case you sight a snake in your home, call 9880108801 and a volunteer will catch the snake.
 
 
 How to handle snakes
 
 »	Don’t panic or stress »	Stay at least five feet away  »	Keep track of the snake  »	Call BBMP-authorised snake rescuer  »	Never attempt handle the snake »	Don’t attempt to chase it away with sticks or fire as it may provoke the snake to attack  »	Avoid sudden movements, as it may provoke the snake