Wildlife enthusiast and photographer-cum-naturalist Sathischandra Karanth was busy clicking pictures of a garden lizard at Puttenahalli Lake, when he caught a glimpse of a rare spider. The spider belonging to the Chrysilla Volupe species, jumped up and sat on the lizard’s head and Karanth captured the moment. The Puttenahalli Neighbourhood Lake Improvement Trust (PNLIT) and naturalists who frequent the lake are ecstatic about the spotting of the rare spider and even conducted a Bioblitz event last Sunday to explore the world of smaller insects in the park around the lake.

Usha Rajagopalan, chairperson of PNLIT, told Bangalore Mirror, “We are ecstatic about the sighting of the Chrysilla Volupe, because it’s such a tiny creature that one would certainly miss during our normal course of activities at the park. We are elated because all these years we have been keeping tabs only on birds, butterflies and trees, but with this, we realised there is a whole new world of smaller insects under the leaves, stones.”

Rajagopalan added that they ensure that there is no pesticide usage on the flora around the lake which could be why smaller rare insects thrive around the lake and its garden.

Karanth says he was fortunate to get the shot of Chrysilla Volupe. “I saw some colours dangling on the Garden Lizard’s head and since I was using a flash due to poor light, I got the spider’s iridescent stripes reflecting light,” Karanth.

Karanth then followed the male spider that was moving on the park’s railings and soon spotted a female spider too. He says he would have spotted at least 20 different species of spiders at the Puttenahalli lake’s flora.

Karanth has been frequenting the park over the past one and half years and spends more than two to three hours at a stretch in a particular spot photographing smaller insects. Earlier he was interested in insects like lizards, dragon flies, butterflies etc. and with this rare spider spotting, he is now particularly interested in smaller insects.

Chrysilla Volupe spider species was considered extinct for 150 years until it was found in Wayanad, Kerala in 2018. Male spiders measure 5.44 millimetre long and 1.76 mm wide, and females measure 2.61 mm long and 0.88 mm wide. Males have a carapace in reddish orange color with two iridescent blue stripes. Legs have iridescent scales that make them appear golden and purple shades. Females have greyish carapace with grey eyebrows with all legs yellow in color. The female was described 139 years after the species was first described by Karsch in 1879. Until 2018, only males had been identified and described.