We keep hearing about great mountain passes in the Himalayas, and wonder if there are any such passes nearby. As a matter of fact, there are a few passes, and while they can’t be compared to Himalayan passes, they can be impressive.
 
 One such pass is the Mogili pass. The pass which crisscrosses the Eastern Ghats stretch (now called Koundinya Wildlife Sanctuary by Andhra Pradesh government) connects Bengaluru with the Andhra Pradesh/Tamil Nadu plains. One can plan a day trip to this pass as driving is a pleasure (though with the utmost care). In fact, there are a number of trekking options near the pass. One of the interesting trekking places around this pass is ‘Vibhudi betta’ or fly ash hill. People climb a tough terrain to reach the summit of this hill where you find a material similar to fly ash. The nearby forests also have a beautiful lake with mountains in the backdrop that make it a perfect place to unwind. However, as these places are located in interior areas, it is suggested that you take the help of the locals.
 The place was also witness to one of nature’s wonders. There is a temple dedicated to Mogileshwara. In olden days, there was a spring and a constant flow of water from the mouth of the stone bull here. It was believed that the water would never dry up, and just to witness this, people would travel from long distances. The water table at this place was also so high that water would ooze out of a borewell 24x7. However, things have changed with excessive deforestation and depletion of ground water.
 	  	The rugged hills find mention in numerous British accounts. Travelling through this pass became a bit easier when a tar road was laid. However, the ascent from the Chittoor side was so tough that the vehicles would travel at a dead slow pace for the ascent. This slow ascent created an opportunity for robbers who would wait in nearby rocks to climb the buses and rob whatever they could find. The place became so notorious that people would be scared to pass through this pass. Finally, patrolling had to be increased and vehicles started moving in a convoy to avoid such situations. A few years ago, the highways department decided to reduce the steep ascent by cutting down rocks.
 	  	It is a spectacular sight, when you descend, to see the lights of the rising sun spreading across the valley.
 	 

 	How to reach there
 	  	The place is at a distance of 140 km from Bengaluru. You can take the Bengaluru-Kolar-Mulbagal-Palamaner-Mogili route.