Just like how the Vistadome train between Mangaluru to Bengaluru offers passengers a panoramic view of the Western Ghats, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has introduced a 360-degree safari bus for the tourists in the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve.
 
The inauguration of the safari bus took place on October 1, and online bookings have started recently. This 360 Safari bus was launched at the Kakanakote safari zone and replaced one of the four safari vehicles which wasn’t in good condition.

According to Harsha Kumar, Director, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, “This is the first time in India that a 360-degree safari bus has been launched. There is no bus so far with tempered glass on the rooftop. The tourists sitting in the bus will get a 360-degree view of the forest and they can feel like they are inside the forest itself. Often, animals and rare birds are perched high in the trees, and tourists tend to miss seeing them. With the 360-degree view, spotting them on the top will be effortless.”

 Kumar pointed out that the bus’s design includes larger window openings and designated spots where tourists can stand and capture stunning photographs of the forest. “The safari ride costs Rs 855, with a 50% discount for children. Bookings for the bus are in high demand, with both weekdays and weekends seeing full reservations. Last year, we had 1.2 lakh tourists visiting the safari, and this year we expect even more,” said Kumar.
 
The safari bus was developed and designed as part of the CSR initiative. The forest safari is very popular among wildlife enthusiasts. Tourists can enjoy an unobstructed panoramic view of the forest in the new safari bus. Most of the spotted wild animals during the safari are tigers, leopards, elephants, sambar deer, Indian gaur, wild boars, peacocks and others.
 
The time slots between the safari are 6:30 am- 9 am and 3:30 pm- 6 pm. According to some of the tourists who have already visited the forest, they have definitely enjoyed the forest safari and even got a good chance to see animals. “During the weekdays, the safari hours are longer due to fewer crowds. We enjoyed our safari ride.
 
Booking tickets online is advisable, as it ensures a smoother experience. The forest view is beautiful, and we had the chance to spot deer, bison, elephants, and wild dogs. Although we couldn’t spot a tiger, we cherished the overall experience. We took the closed-top safari bus, but the new safari promises an even more incredible adventure for tourists,” said Apoorva Gowda, a stock trading professional.