Study finds that fear of human presence has restricted elephants to only 64 per cent of the area hospitable to them
 
 Despite the vast stretch of forest areas in Karnataka, animals, particularly elephants, are scared to spread out across conducive habitable landscape and are getting crammed within a limited area.
 
 Reason: Presence of humans in all these forest areas.
 
 A study by a city-based conservationists has revealed that elephants occupy only 64 per cent of the total area considered to be hospitable to the elephant population in the state.
 
 Even in the Western Ghats, housing the largest population of Asian elephants, less than half the region is occupied by elephants currently.
 
 According to the study that spanned more two years, out of the 38,000 sq kms of landscape—the subject of the study, scientists found that only 21,000 sq kms were favourable to accommodate elephants in Karnataka.
 
 “Out of the 21,000 sq kms, the elephants have occupied just 13,483 sq kms while leaving out the other area despite it having considerable natural vegetation to support their population,” explained Dr Varun R Goswami, one of the scientists who was part of the research. The study titled ‘Patterns and Determinants of Habitat Occupancy by the Asian Elephant in the Western Ghats of Karnataka, India’ done by a group of five conservation experts from Bengaluru-based Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) was recently published in the global science journal PLOS ONE.
 
 The study, hailed as the first of its kind in estimating elephant numbers across large landscapes, has been modelled on scientific principles. The team included Devcharan Jathanna, K Ullas Karanth, N Samba Kumar, Krithi Karanth and Varun Goswami.
 
 The total 38,000 sq kms of chosen landscape with natural vegetation was suitable for both humans and wildlife.
 
 However, the 21,000 sq kms was considered potential elephant habitat while the rest supported cities and towns.
 
 “But what leaves us worried is that even the 36 per cent of the area within the potential elephant habitat does not support elephant presence due to human disturbances. The nature of the disturbance includes human settlement, agriculture, extraction of biomass, developmental and recreational activities within potential elephant habitat areas,” another researcher said.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror about the findings of the study, Dr Varun said, “It is indeed a logistical challenge to estimate the elephant population across a large landscape. The occupancy modelling that we adopted provides useful details about population status across vast areas. The findings help us in the conservation of elephants, particularly in the backdrop of loss and fragmentation of habitat. Through the study, we have been able to assess and map the distribution of elephants across the Western Ghats of Karnataka.”
 
 The researchers, dividing the 38,000 sq kms into different grid cells of 188 sq kms each, trekked the locations to document the presence of elephants and their signages.
 
 “The study area included the entire The Malnad area. All across the area human presence played a key role in determining where elephants were found much more so than environmental attributes. Hence only 64 per cent of the identified landscape is occupied by elephants,” explained Devcharan Jathanna, lead author of the study.
 
 Noted conservation scientist and director for science-Asia, WCS, Dr Ullas Karanth said, “Many methods used to assess elephant distribution, for instance ‘presence-only’ method, can be highly inaccurate. What we use in this study is a vast improvement, and is easily applicable over large landscapes besides being reliable. The study underscores need for strict regulations to secure this official landscape.”