By: Rishi Majumder
 
 
 The Rajasthan government’s effort to beautify railway platforms is nurturing its cultural wealth
 
 
 We communicated mostly through WhatsApp.” Ten stations spread over Rajasthan have been covered with fine traditional Indian art in a duration of, roughly, six months. But, even more interestingly, each station has been painted with motifs and images and in art forms unique to the places they are located in. Malvika (Mala) Singh, best known as the publisher of Seminar magazine — but who is also currently an adviser to the Government of Rajasthan on culture and tourism — has been a catalyst in this process. She ideated on the themes, and coordinated with the artists and local IAS officers for this, mostly, from behind her desk at the magazine’s Connaught Place office.
 
 
 It began last September, when wildlife conservationist Valmik Thapar (also Singh’s brother), came up with the idea of getting artists from the Ranthambore School of Art to surface paint the Sawai Madhopur Station. He approached Railway Minister Suresh Prabhu, who gave him the go-ahead. The World Wide Fund for Nature funded the project. Within four months, the station acquired a distinctly new avatar. The famous banyan tree of Ranthambore covered one wall. Tigers, leopards and hyenas strode
 past others. People were less likely to litter, spit or urinate now, as they often do, since the station resembled an accidental art gallery.
 
 
 “People are curious, excited and are asking questions, taking photographs,” Thapar had said at the time. “It is generating awareness and will have other ripple effects.”
 
 
 Singh also credits Rajasthan CM Vasundhara Raje for backing these efforts. “She (Raje) has always believed in art in public spaces.” Raje’s initiatives towards this include getting Jogi painters to paint hoardings, bus stops and autorickshaws in Jaipur under a project titled ‘Living Arts of Rajasthan’. So, when Raje saw pictures of Sawai Madhopur, she asked if Singh would help replicate this artistic endeavour in major railway junctions throughout the state.
 
 
 But projects planned by the state government seldom see light of day in the time accorded to them, if at all. How is this one meeting targets? “First of all, we decided to ask the district collectors of each station to finance this out of their allocated fund,” Singh says. Last year the CM had approved an untied fund of Rs 50 lakhs for each DC as part of her campaign Sarkaar Apne Dwar. “Say, artists charge approximately Rs 4 lakhs for each station, that’s not a drain on such a fund at all.” This did away with the question of Central or Rajasthan state funds which would have added to the red-tape and risked payment delays for artists as well as leakage — because of the number of hands it would have to pass through before reaching recipients. Next, each collector was made in charge of the actual surface-painting at his or her station, “creating a sense of ownership”. It was the collectors who found the local artists, with whom they would discuss broadly what could be done. “There were no expensive state-funded ‘inspection tours’ with bureaucratic assistants, no hotel expenses,” says Singh. “The only request to the DCs was: Please don’t bargain with the local kalakaars, respect their art.” Then, initial colour themes and designs, and later work-in-progress pictures, were sent by artists to Singh and the collectors on WhatsApp to ensure everything was progressing in the right direction.Apparently, they were.
 
 
 The theme for Bikaner Station draws inspiration from the city’s Badal Mahal, built in the late 1800s by Maharaja Dungar Singh, where the walls and ceiling are painted with rain clouds.
 
 
 “The CM suggested this. I asked the artist not to leave any white space on the ceiling or walls,” Singh says. The arches were painted with flower motifs for contrast. The Ajmer station actually has cartouches made of flowers, leaves and animals (elephants and camels). Pillars painted with characters from myths and legends. On the domed ceiling, enlarged traditional battle shields with horses on either side. On the wall adjoining platform 1, artists are currently painting a procession for Garib Nawaz, Sufi saint Moinuddin Chishti. “The ceiling of Udaipur station has ornate floral motifs. The frescoes, painted in the style of the Mewar School, depict Holi and Raas Leela, the floor plan of the Nathdwara Temple and older cityscapes. Bharatpur was painted, naturally, with images of birds and the sanctuary. For Jodhpur, Singh suggested artists replicate the Pabuji Ki Phad (a 14th century Rathore folk deity). This is a scroll painting of folk deities and legends on canvas that bards travel with and use for folk performances. Kota was supposed to be painted by Usman Ali, a renowned artist from the area, but he fell ill. “So his shagirds did it in the style of the Kota School (characterised, among other things, by foliage and jungles in the background).”
 
 
 Jaipur (main) was done by the Jogi
 
 
 artists, from a family which had spawned their own (Jogi) art form, inspired by artist and cultural anthropologist Haku Shah, who had asked them to draw on paper in black-and-white. The Jaipur Gandhinagar Station has paintings of traditional Rajasthani puppets (kathputalis) on its walls. The third Jaipur station was painted with the city’s skyline, “an architectural drawing the painters were asked to blow up”.
 
 
 Rajasthan lends itself to much artistry, according to Singh, because of a longstanding tradition of surface paintings and frescoes in the region. “Most of the artists are young. Their art is alive,” she says. “The local government has been supportive — there’s hardly been any interference,” says 42-year-old artist Deependra Singh Shekhawat, who’s working at the Ajmer station. “The railway officers did try to tell us what to do, or not do, in the beginning, but they came around soon enough.
 
 Shekhawat says it’s especially heartening to see people at the station admire his work.
 
 
 Three artists were awarded for their efforts on Independence Day. Future plans include an app to connect buyers to the artists who painted these stations and a place for them to sell their art outside the stations itself. Singh discusses other ideas: “Redesigning all the signage (Vivek Sahni has designed a typeface and cartouche pro-bono); smart uniforms for porters and sweepers and substantial sponsored cash prizes – say, Rs 10,00,000 per station with 10 sweepers, so Rs 1,00,000 per sweeper – for the cleanest station; in smaller stations, getting women to do traditional folk paintings on cow-dung, for instance, Mandana paintings.”
 
 
 The success of this initiative seems to have pumped life into a national movement for the beautification of train stations. Prabhu, in his Railway Budget speech this year, spoke of the beautification of stations at pilgrimage centres, but Rajasthan has taken the idea beyond that. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who had connected swachhata (cleanliness) to saundarya (beauty) while speaking about train station beautification in his Mann Ki Baat in January. He indicated that this was an initiative the Central Government would follow through on when he lauded students of a fine arts college in the district for surface-painting the walls and pillars of Aligarh Railway Station
 this August.
 
 
 Other stations that are undergoing, or will undergo, such a metamorphosis around the country include Bengaluru, Agra, Bhubaneshwar and Puri.
 
 
 And yet, whether these stations will manage to truly capitalise on the potential of local traditional artists remains to be seen (so far the Rajasthani stations seem to be the only ones doing so). In Mumbai, for instance, the NGO Make A Difference (MAD) engaged up to 500 volunteers to paint images – soldiers, trees and animals of various kinds – as per pre-decided blueprints at the Borivali and Khar stations. The idea seemed to be not to promote traditional art as much as to engage as many citizens as possible.
 
 
 From October 2-8 this year, Shishir Joshi, CEO of Bombay First, will take this initiative to the next level by surface painting 36 stations across Mumbai’s central and western lines. The effort will involve thousands of volunteers and be collectively funded from private sector sponsorship and crowd-funding. “The surface painting of 10 out of 36 stations have been almost entirely crowd-funded,” says Joshi proudly. This, too, will help citizens feel invested and involved in keeping these stations clean. Joshi is collaborating with the Indian Railways for the project, who have requested him to eventually take on 19 more stations. Various social groups, such as a parish at Orlem, Malad, or 1000 senior citizens from a walker’s group in Ghatkopar, or students from Poddar School (for the Santacruz Station) will join in.
 
 
 Bombay First has been trying to crowd-source ideas for design as well. “The three elements of the initiative will be: the concepts, which designers will come up with, the outline or sketch, which artists will draw, and the colour, which the volunteers – lay people like you or me – will fill in,” says Joshi. The walls of heritage stations – like Bandra or CST – won’t be painted but instead the NGO is planning temporary exhibitions here at the time. There will be history walls with brief histories of the suburban stations in Marathi, Hindi and English. “For every suburban station, we’ll try to bring in the culture of the suburb into the design,” says Joshi. “But Mumbai has a huge
 floating crowd, so there will be a mix of everything.” Including generic social messages, relating to, say, safety, organ donation or the importance of voting.
 
 
 The outreach of this initiative too can be immense. Mumbai’s local train population is unique not just by its character, but also its sheer size. “Every day, 120 lakh people travel by local trains,” says Joshi. “A figure comparable to India’s entire daily train population.”