Wildlife volunteers have the onerous task of ensuring the well-being of 60 cobra eggs that were laid by two snakes rescued from vacant sites in Nagarbhavi and HSR Layout in the past three days. The snakes laid the eggs while in the custody of the volunteers. The snakes have been released in the wild while their eggs have been put in an incubator set up by wildlife volunteers who will try to recreate conditions similar to their natural habitat.    Dhruvakumar R S, who is caring for the eggs, told Bangalore Mirror, “The BBMP has eight wildlife centres for incubation of snake eggs. It takes up to 70 days for these eggs to hatch. It is important to maintain constant humidity and temperature. Once hatched, the young ones are released in their natural habitat.”   Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert, told Bangalore Mirror, “All the eggs are those of the Indian cobra (Naja naja), also known as Asian cobra or spectacled cobra. This is the breeding season among cobras. This increases the number of sightings of cobras, but people need not get petrified or worry. We get to see them only in the middle of the breeding season, but many people have already reported sighting of cobras.”    Mohan K, a wildlife volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror, “Cobras hibernate in October-November. The mating season is December-January. The breeding season is in March-April. The eggs start hatching in May. This goes on till August. The breeding season coincides with summer when snakes comes out of hibernation.”   Experts say that Bangaloreans have a role to play in ensuring that the breeding season passes off without any untoward incident.   “Snakes are sighted more often in summer. Never attack or try to rescue a snake. If you see one, avoid crowding around the reptile. It may disturb the snake, which will attempt to strike back. If found inside a house, close the door of the room where it has been sighted and call wildlife volunteers. If found in a garden, stay at least 15 feet away. Wait and watch till the reptile goes away. If it does not, call wildlife volunteers,” Mohan said.     What to do if bitten by a snake In case of a snake bite, immediately mark the area, as it will disappear post-swelling. Remove watch or ring and other such items, if any. Tie a crepe bandage, or a piece of cloth, leaving space equal to the width of a finger between the cloth and the bitten part. The bandage should be towards the heart. It shouldn’t be too tight or loose. If bitten on the hand, keep the affected part at heart level. Rush to nearest hospital. Bowring, Manipal, Victoria, Columbia-Asia, St John’s, Baptist, KIMS and M S Ramaiah are some hospitals that offer treatment for snake bite. The wildlife helpline number is 9880108801.