It is time to rethink our relationship with other animals - especially at this crucial point in time. No doubt they do figure in the scheme of things that sustain life on the planet whether we like it or not.

It is immensely critical that we embrace a holistic stance sooner, that includes the rights of other living entities to the planet just as we enjoy it through our laws and such, when all ecosystems are, as we speak, being pummeled by extreme weather.

Perhaps the worst of the climate emergency’s fallout are hurtling towards us at a rather considerable pace now. The animals, as per our scientific understanding based on research, have no clue of the phenomena that may prove critical to each species.

Not just wildlife, but those animals too that we have subsidised over the ages, are on the frontlines of this conundrum as much as we are. But seldom do we think for them or of them in a manner that they would like us to, if you like, or take into account our bonds with them and how those bonds have shaped them over centuries before jumping to rein them in in the modern urban and rural scapes in knee-jerk reactions inspired by bar-talk-standard social media rhetoric.

Stray dogs for instance or neighbourhood cats, feral pigeons, cattle and all such creatures, even rodents like rats in urban settlements, that have adapted over time to life alongside humans, are left on the wayside as species whose future is hanging in the balance. Why so? Because seemingly no one, especially the dominant entity which is you or I, cares.

In fact we humans are so self-obsessed busy telling each other how selfish each one of us is.

Illustrating the ludicrous nature of this dilemma that seems like the precursor to some sort of apocalyptic doom are two instances that have been in the news of late.

The so-called stray dog menace where hostile canines feel threatened in their own territory, bestowed to them by their masters, mounting attacks on the same masters, as some of these animals are now unnecessarily antagonised in specific scenarios.

Now what strikes as a paradox here is the case of stray canines in different settings: for instance in a city such as Bengaluru and in the neighbouring state of Kerala. The behaviour of the dogs in the two aforementioned settings is starkly different - in Bengaluru seldom are the strays violent whereas in Kerala they are often aggressive. This is a testimony to the changing evolutionary patterns of humans and human-subsidised carnivores in a societal setting. In the ensuing climate churn, a clear understanding of the aforesaid dynamic is key.

The second example is of wild elephants venturing into human settlements or rather to spaces that humans have encroached adjacent to elephant habitats.

At present we are scrambling to deal with so-called human-animal conflicts across geography. It is as though we are at war with animals, often portraying them as villains in the collective with no rhyme or reason whatsoever.

So the question, must we relook at the dynamics at play between us humans and animals, assumes greater resonance provided whole ecosystems are undergoing tremendous and perhaps unfathomable changes in a relatively short span of time triggered by the climate fallout.

Now to the elephant in the newsroom: The general penchant for spectacle in the country at the moment would not spare even the last of the gentle giants of the Western Ghats.

The aforesaid is abundantly evident from the spectacle being made of the poor creature, sadly, often having to stray into human settlements in search of food, whatever the reasons for it may be.

An expert told Bangalore Mirror that the anthropomorphic naming of elephants - such as ‘Arikomban, Padayappa, Chakkakomban’ and so on - point to the distorted approach we often adopt as far as other living entities are concerned.

No doubt, elephants are having a rather strenuous time across continents due to multiple factors, just as us humans. Most importantly the case in point of the so-called Arikomban is a decisive moment for both elephants and humans. In fact, truly bleak and blue for the elephant.

So perhaps at this juncture in such a regal animal’s diminishing evolutionary history how insanely absurd is it to call it rogue? Elephants are not rogue. We are.

All of this pretty much sums up the gargantuan nature of the conflicts heading our way, fed primarily by the climate emergency and many allied local, societal, political and flawed policy level aspects feeding into each other. Instead of making television extravaganzas of these instances perhaps we must dwell into much needed deep thought that may provide us that tiny window to catch up with the climate fallout: indeed it is a minuscule window which is now seeming like a certain mirage.