Dealing with slithering snakes, wild animals and creepy-crawlies is not everybody’s idea of a decent job, but for Ajay Prabhu and Sandeep G, both 19-year-olds, animal rescue and conservation are a passion. Students of MES College, Malleswaram, the duo work part-time with the BBMP forest cell and have rescued over 200 snakes, 100 birds and 20 other animals so far.  
 Apart from search and rescue, they spread awareness on conservation and dispel myths on things like treating snake bite. Both have been involved in the elephant census and have assisted forest officials in forest fire rescue operations. Their dream is to join forest services, but for now they balance studies with conserving wildlife.  
 “I rescued a bird once and handed it over to my friend who was already a volunteer at the cell,” said Sandeep, a resident of Nelamangala who has been with the cell for three years now. “He introduced me to the cell and ever since, my interest in wildlife has only grown. For about a year after I joined, I was asked to simply identify species and observe how seniors rescued animals. After that I began rescuing animals on my own, often with Ajay. We rescue birds and animals on weekends, after college, vacations and during tudy leave.” 
 Ajay began volunteering two years ago and is also associated with Centre for Environment Education (CEE), an NGO. “It is not only about rescue,” Ajay said. “It’s also about educating the public on how to treat snake bites or react if they spot a snake. Too often, we have found that people blindly follow vague beliefs, for example, when treating snake bite. Many people tie a cloth to the affected area or peel off the skin. We tell them that these practices are wrong and the only thing they need to do is get to a hospital immediately. Many think that snakes drink milk which also a myth.” 
 The two are contacted directly by the general public or through calls routed through the BBMP forest cell. They have rescued kites, slender loris, hares, turtles and many rare snakes. Their services are rendered free of cost. If the animals rescued are healthy, they are released into the wild. If not, they are handed over to rehabilitation centres.
   Ajay gets the full support of his family, but Sandeep’s parents frown on his activities. “My parents are not very supportive,” Sandeep admitted. “Often they are not aware of my rescue missions. But I do it because it is my passion.”