Swatting the shutterbugs Former president Dr APJ Abdul Kalam has always been Mr Jolly Good Fella.  However, some shutterbugs came close to dinting that tag. At the valedictory function of degree students at the NMKRV College, Dr Kalam was requested by photographers to pose for a group picture with the management. He amiably obliged (like always).  As he sat, uncomplainingly, with a smile on his face, the photographers got busy squabbling amongst themselves trying to get the best frame (like always). A peeved Dr Kalam decided to exit the frame, but was pacified by Dr MK Panduranga, president of the RSS Trust. And then... everything was picture perfect.
 
 
 Turning 60 in Male
 Kiran Mazumdar Shaw, chairman and managing director of Biocon, ushered in her 60th birthday with a hush-hush party at her home on March 22 night. But when you are a living-life-to-the-fullest-kinda persona like Shaw, then you don’t wake up on D-Day and be satisfied with just your hubby singing ‘Happy birthday, darlin’ (In the diarist’s Note 2 it doesn’t cut even if John Shaw could  do it in a Monroe-esque voice). So what do you do? You do a Kiran Shaw and invite 65 prominent business leaders for a party at Male, Maldives. On March 23 morning, at 9.30 am, the likes of Narayan Murthy, chairman emeritus, Infosys; Azim Premji, chairman Wipro, along with his son and daughter-in-law; Geetanjali Kirloskar, wife of Vikram Kirloskar, deputy chairman of Toyota Kirloskar Motors; Nina Lal Kidwai of HSBC; and Shaw’s childhood friend Vijay Mallya and his wife, Rekha, were seen trotting down the departure terminal at BIAL. They all flew Air India flight AL-265 at 11.45 am to arrive at the exotic island at 1.15 pm. Drum roll... and…they all flew economy class! There’s something alluring about moneybags flying economy even if it is to a party at an exotic island. The group returned on Sunday afternoon.
 
 Shiva, Tripathi and some dinosaurs
 The world knows about author Amish Tripathi’s BFF status with Lord Shiva. The latter is omnipresent wherever the former goes. Still, the author of the famous Shiva trilogy often gets lonely on his promotional tours. (Groupies-for-writers are nonexistent, unless you are a Tharoor with silky hair, smoky voice and an accent). Tripathi often prefers to travel with wife Preeti and their four-year-old son, Neel. The trio was in Bangalore where Tripathi had a few book readings. While papa Tripathi was busy earning the bread, butter and lots of jam for the family, mother and son enjoyed a trip to Bannerghatta National Park. Apparently, Neel is a mini-wildlife enthusiast. Tripathi proudly told the diarist that his son can name 50 species of dinosaurs. (We know the ones in Jurassic Park, does that count?) “He’s a smart kid… takes after his mom,” said Tripathi. The man knows himself well and sure has a polished funny bone. Despite his busy schedule, Tripathi managed to squeeze in a dinner with some of his buddies from IIM Calcutta.
 
 Down to earth
 Film director-turned-farmer Mansoor Khan is preparing for a new launch. The man who says with charming candour that he hates cities is self-publishing his first book titled The Third Curve. If you are wondering if it would be the book world’s QSQT (for the Bollywood-illiterate: Qayamat se Qayamat Tak, Khan’s debut directorial romantic blockbuster which made his cousin, Aamir Khan, and Juhi Chawla household names), you couldn’t be more off the mark. It is a cerebral subject – did we hear someone say ‘not a Chetan Bhagat’ — dealing with economics, oil and growth. The writer himself told the diarist that “it is a concept book that debunks the ado about growth”. Mansoor, who has found his mojo in the farmstay being run by him and his wife Tina in 7,200-feet-above-sea-level Coonoor, has been spreading the word that it is an energy crisis and not an economic one over the last few years in various circuits, including IIM Bangalore, ISB Hyderabad, and even TED. He decided last year to put down his concept in a book. So 14 months of writing and he is done. He holds up a sheaf of possible book covers and is unsure to heed Aamir’s in-jest advice: “Just go with the red one, yaar. It works in Bollywood.” The book is due for release in June—it would be interesting to see how Aamir and nephew Imran promote Mansoor’s ‘serious’ debut work.
 
 Tailpiece
 F or long, the BCCI has been stumped by sundry ‘leaks’ about its often secretive workings which appear in the press quoting anonymous sources, usually some functionary who doesn’t want to invite a reprimand from the bosses. But clearly it’s a game two can play. The Rajiv Shukla-led IPL, which will unleash another season of the T20 tourney from 3 April, has attached a flurry of superlatives for the Shah Rukh Khan-helmed opening ceremony. The official ‘teaser’ issued by the BCCI sighs about the song and dance routine promised by SRK and Katrina Kaif at Eden Gardens, going on to breathlessly explain how international rap star Pitbull readily agreed to be part of this extravaganza only because of King Khan – most of this, of course, attributed to an unnamed ‘source’. The only official comment from Shukla carries restrained optimism about “a spectacular commencement to what promises to be a memorable tournament.” We live, we learn.