During this ongoing season, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has to manage forest fires on its own. Officials from the department confirmed to BM that they do not have Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services (KSFES) vehicles this year to assist them.
 
This is after a notification last year from the Road Transport and Highway Ministry that scrapped vehicles older than 15 years owned by central and state governments.

“We do not have the fire department’s Quick Response Vehicles (QRVs) this year. Every fire season, the fire department would deploy over 30 QRVs to fight forest fire incidents in sensitive areas. However, due to a shortage of these emergency vehicles, we are engaging traditional methods to douse a fire,” said a senior official from KFD.

The department has made makeshift arrangements in the absence of KSEFS’ emergency vehicles.

“We have used CAMPA vehicles that we use to transport cages, rations, etc. We have fitted these vehicles with plastic water tanks with small submersible motors and sprayers. This makes the vehicle act like a makeshift QRV. If a fire is next to a road, this vehicle will be useful. In certain areas, if near the road, we use water tankers. The department is taking all the action to ensure we rein in forest fires,” said another official.

However, the department stated that firefighting is not entirely QRV-driven owing to hostile terrain that emergency vehicles cannot access.

BRT Tiger Reserve DCF and director Deepa J Contractor told BM that the fire in the tiger reserve a few days ago had to be put out manually due to difficult terrain.

.
“The importance of QRVs in putting out fires is a gross representation. At BRT Tiger Reserve, the terrain alters between 900 metres and 1,820 metres. Even the best emergency vehicles cannot be used in such terrain. The fire on Monday started at the top of the hill and was approaching the valley. Even if we had QRVs, we are not sure how much difference it would have made,” said Contractor.

However, KFD officials said the speartment has raised a request for QRVs looking at weather conditions.

“We have anyway asked KSEFS for emergency vehicles that are in good condition. However, they have certain protocols to follow.

Every fire season, the fire department would deploy over 30 QRVs to fight forest fire incidents in sensitive areas— official, Karnataka Forest Department 
We have been told that the fire department has also requested the government to allow QRVs that are still in good condition to be operated. It is not feasible for the forest department to procure its vehicles as QRVs are expensive and not required throughout the year.
 
So when another government department has the wherewithal to maintain such vehicles, there is no reason for the forest department to procure them,” said Kumar Pushkar, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.