By Akhila Damodaran

50 volunteers, including residents attempt to clean up Nallurahalli Lake

Srinivas, a businessman and a resident of Nallurahalli, remembers the Nallurahalli Lake to be a catchment area for rainwater. The water was used for farming, drinking water for cattle, washing and other chores, he recalls. 

The water of the 48-acre lake used to be clean until the software companies came up and the ensuing developments happened in the area. "That's when the dumping of garbage and construction waste began, and the lake bed was encroached upon." 

Srinivas, along with 50 other residents and volunteers from Nallurahalli Rising and Whitefield Rising and also five Pourakarmikas cleaned and collected two tonnes of waste from the lake, which included meat and chicken waste, medical waste, waste from salon shops and coconuts shells dumped by the vendors. The volunteers said that none of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) officials took part in the drive. The Pourakarmikas volunteered due to the bond they share with the volunteers. 

Shanthi Chandola, a wildlife photographer, says, "We have been working on this lake for five years. We have planted around 300 trees that have now grown to up to 4 to 5 feet high. The shops around the area have been dumping garbage in the lake since BBMP doesn't collect garbage from them." 

The northern side of the lake is encroached by some villagers who have created a shanty town to rent it out to Bangladeshi immigrants. "There are more than a 100 shanties. These rag pickers segregate waste and take whatever is useful and throw the rest into the lake. Complaints to authorities have fallen into deaf ears. In fact, the garbage dump on the lake has been increasing day by day," Srinivas adds. The lake comes under two wards, 82 and 84. Srinivas points out that there are not enough auto tippers to collect the garbage in the wards. According to him, 26 auto tippers have been allotted to the area but only five or ten are operational.

S Uday Kumar, Corp-orator of Hagadur, Ward 84, denies garbage being dumped in his 'part of the lake'. "We clear the garbage dump. The problem exists on the side that is under Ward 82. That area is occupied by the Bangladeshi immigrants and the villagers who have rented it out to them have filed a case in the court that the land belongs to the them," he says.