By Amit Kumar

Forest dept has banned entry of tourists into Muppane area in Shivamogga due to outbreak of a disease spread by ticks

Trekkers from Bengaluru be aware: The Muppane area in Shivamogga will be off-limits for a while for you. The forest department has banned the entry of tourists and trekkers to area following an outbreak of the Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD). 

As per the latest order issued on Tuesday, entry to areas in and around Muppane will not be allowed till the next order is issued. This place is famous among travellers for camping and trekking. Recently, the Shivamogga district administration had decided to take up travel awareness for those heading to Sigandur due to outbreak of KFD. Places like Muppane and Sigandur are even popular among Bengalureans. 

The forest department is also issuing an advisory that those people heading to forests near Shivamogga district must take with them repellents against ticks (bloodsucking, disease-spreading parasites). Wildlife experts have been advising trekkers and researchers venturing into the forest to take adequate precautions (tick repellant being the major one) after the recurrence of the Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD), categorised as one the ‘neglected diseases’ in the world. The outbreak of KFD, a tick-borne hemorrhagic fever, had affected the forest staff too. The disease can strike both animals, particularly monkeys, and humans. Suspecting an outbreak, experts and doctors have increased surveillance in Shivamogga area.

KFD has a unique existence in five districts of Karnataka. In Shivamogga district, unusual deaths of monkeys led to the further investigation and confirmation of KFD. The symptoms include sudden onset of fever and headache. Monkeys, which come in contact with infected ticks in the forest, get the virus and act as the host. Some small mammals are also known to act as hosts for the virus. Campers or others passing through the forest get the disease from the bites of infected tick or through contact with the infected monkey or a monkey which died recently from the infection. KFD is prevalent in forests in Chikkamagaluru, Shivamogga and Bandipur areas, which are full of ticks. It is better for research teams and trekkers to take precautionary measures.