Music for a cause
 
 Various music artistes have come together to perform for a cause in the 10-city tour of musical extravaganza. The concert will showcase India’s legendary classic rock band Parikrama and Ehsaan Noorani, Rudy Wallang (Soulmate), Tipriti Kharbangar (Soulmate), Shilpa Rao, K Mohan (Agnee), Koco (Agnee), Bruce Lee Mani (Thermal & a Quarter), Luke Kenny, Suraj Jagan. Their performance in ‘A few good musicians - play for a cause’ is dedicated towards underprivileged homes.
 
 Where: BlueFrog; When: Oct 30, 7.30 pm; Contact: 080 6999 9549
 
 
 Art attack on MG Road
 
 Give colour to your imagination at the Great Bengalooru Art Festival. This is a platform for artist and art lovers to meet and showcase their creativity and talent. Artville, brain behind the mega art festival, had partnered with UNICEF last year and witnessed over 300 participants. Considered as the largest live painting festival in the country, this event hopes to paint the MG Road Boulevard red!
 
 Where: Rangoli Metro Art Centre; When: Nov 1, 2 pm; Contact: 080-40944107
 
 
 Captivating Cinderella
 
 The magical fairy tale of Cinderella needs no introduction. Yet, this innocent play has captured young and adult alike, through the generations. The tale has been adapted to stage form by many and the presentation by Prabhath Kalavidaru has had packed audiences. From its first performance in 1978, the tale has mesmerised the audience albeit with new music, stage and a sound techniques.
 
 Where: Ravindra Kalakshetra; When: Oct 31, 7 pm; Tickets: bookmyshow.com
 
 
 Friday: Get ready for a super funny Friday as comics Kritharth, Kjeld and Praveen Kumar will floor you with their witty performances at Fiat Caffe-Car-O-Bar at 8.30 pm.
 
 Saturday: Watch pianist Takafumi Mori perform IMMERSE - Titled and Untitled compositions through the ages at Alliance Francaise on at 7 pm. This is a fund-raiser event for Aamod Centre for Liberal Arts
 
 
 Workshop
 
 Food and finesse: Learn how to marinate, grill and bake veggies, pizzas and deserts. Taught by a chef, discover how you can barbeque at home, complete with cooking secrets at Weber Experience Centre, Central Mall, on Oct 30, 11 am. Call: 424066660
 
 
 In the wild: This is a space to allow your children’s imagination go wild, where they will create stories along the line of wildlife. Vikram Sridhar will sensitise little ones about wildlife at Atta Galatta on Oct 31 at 5 pm
 
 Down under: Focus your lens on fascinating subjects obscured by the grass, during the photo walk at Lalbagh Botanical Garden on Nov, 1 at 10 am. Tickets: birdwing.in