One of Bengaluru’s foremost animal rights activists on a journey of love, that led to her winning the Nari Shakti Puraskar
 
 Small Talk With Suparna Ganguly
 
 As a child, it wasn’t uncommon for visitors to Suparna Ganguly’s home in Lucknow to run out screaming from the bathroom. You would too, if you were ready to take a leak, only to find an eagle staring down at you. Or a snake, sometimes a kite. Ganguly relates all these tales with an impish laugh; a childish enthusiasm that belies the grey on her head. It is difficult to imagine that just 24 hours ago, this energetic lady was at the stately Rashtrapati Bhavan, receiving an award from the President. Ganguly, founder-member of Compassion Unlimited Plus Action (CUPA) was presented with the Nari Shakti Puraskar for her work with the environment and animal rights. And the story she recounts makes it amply clear that it’s the same sense of self-depracating humour and innocent cheer that’s held her in good stead.  	Today, CUPA has a permanent footprint in Bengaluru. But it wasn’t always so. When Ganguly came to the city from Kolkata, following her husband, she had little idea of what she wanted to do. But for a fleeting stint with Crystal Rogers’ work in Delhi, a childhood love of animals, and an involvement with the Animal Birth Control plan in Kolkata, there had been no big move. But for someone who grew up with everything from “turtles to peacocks and even pet deer” in the house, courtesy of her IAS father’s posting that led him to bring sick and injured animals home “in the absence of any Wildlife Protection Act at the time”, these initial flirtations with rescue offered a glimpse of the bigger things to come.  	It was when an 82-year-old Rogers moved to Bengaluru in 1989 that things began to take shape. “In six months we decided to start an animal welfare organisation,” Ganguly recalls. “I told her, ‘Mishi you are so old, and my children are so young. Who will run it?’”. To which Rogers responded with: “God always sends the right people.” And with that faith, the “two blind people” went into the launch. CUPA was born in 1991.  	“I wanted to have a place where animals could be rescued, an organisation that was a phone call away for rescue cases. Any city should have that. Yet, these tend to be the last numbers you know when you go somewhere new. You have a child helpline, a women’s helpline, but not an animal helpline. It’s not mainstream,” she rues. But not everybody understood. “People knew I was slightly eccentric – as all animal lovers are,” she says with a laugh. “But nobody understood what I was doing.” Street dog electrocution was rampant, in the “notorious Koramangala dog pound”, she recalls. But there was little consciousness, and the silent majority was “indifferent”.  	In 1994, backed by Maneka Gandhi, who, “horror of horrors” singled them out and asked them to begin a sterlisation programme, Rogers and Ganguly took one of many ‘thoughtless’ plunges. “We started the first programme at the Cantonment Hospital. Out of eight vans that went for electrocution, two would come with us,” she says. Progress was slow but steady, and they needed a jolt. It came in the form of the Hospital asking them to move out, and the commissioner asking them to work from the dog pound instead. The rug had been pulled from under the feet, and the sky was falling on their head. The idea of working from a “ghastly relic of the British Raj” was the very antithesis of their work. But there was no option. And like much of history, what seemed a curse turned out to be an epochal blessing. The presence of CUPA actually reduced instances of electrocution. “We did what we could – dogs were fed, their cages were cleaned, sick animals were taken out, etc. We didn’t get into revolutionary mode, but saved as many as possible without being thrown out,” she says. They also had to steel themselves against criticism that they were abetting the inhuman practice. It taught them one of their first big lessons – managing media perception and garnering public support by spreading information. “We smuggled someone in to take photos of what was going on – the electrocution cages, the process.” That was it. The “whole of the city” supported them after that, in and 1999, they paved the way for Gandhi to change the law in 2001. Today, that very room is their office. How things turn around.  	There have been other setbacks, but like much else, Ganguly has sailed through with passion, luck and a lot of laughter. Like when the “idiotic, clueless” people they were signed a weak MOU to construct a shelter on 1.5 acres of the veterinary college, only to have the product of their blood and sweat taken away from them after 15 years and many hard-fought lease extensions. But fortune favours the compassionate, and not only were they called back to run a trauma centre there, they also moved on to a space for a shelter in Kengeri.  	Along the way, Ganguly also got involved with Project Elephant, going up to Supreme Court for the rescue and rehabilitation of Girija Prasad, an elephant in Jalahalli. That too was a blind plunge, an uninformed but well-intentioned move into unknown territory. “There comes a time when there are no choices left, and there’s no one else to do it. I saw what was happening: baby elephants being sold to temples, elephants being mistreated. There was no choice,” she stresses, her genial countenance taking on a determined veneer.  	It’s the same resolve that sees her debate reports of rampant rabies (“we get alerts of any rabies case, Bengaluru has been rabies-free for three years”); exaggerated reports of dog bites and hysteria. “There is only one way to control the dog population and that is only through control of reproduction,” she explains. “When the female comes on heat, male dogs get very aggressive, and follow the female in packs. Cut out the female, and the dogs will not have an issue to rile them up. Don’t throw garbage indiscriminately, that will bring in new swarms. Of course if there’s one dog that’s very aggressive, it can be put into a shelter, but you can’t kill 50-60 dogs.” She urges that the same empathy be extended to the three major human animal conflict situations – elephants, monkeys and dogs.  	She also urges us to shift focus: instead of headlines that scream 'Child mauled by dog', present nuance. "She was in an area where people had thrown meat and chicken waste. We need to be careful about garbage disposal". The issue of 'rampaging' lephants too, she stresses, needs better management. Barriers need to be built and encroachments need to be checked.  	Like she says, it’s up to us, humans, to take charge and affect change. Not everybody can be an crazy, eccentric animal lover with “weird behavioural habits” and tendencies, she says with a laugh. But certainly everyone can show a bit of compassion.