Visitors to the zoo at Bannerghatta Biological Park were terrified by a snake which slithered near a bird enclosure on Saturday. While the park staff were casual about the reptile’s presence as if it was a daily affair, a brave pregnant mother prevented hundreds of school children from going close to the spot where the snake was seen.   Vatsala (name changed on request) was visiting the zoo along with her child. A commotion ensued after a group of visitors saw the snake coming out of a bamboo bush about 10 feet from the enclosure of parakeets. Vatsala, who also noticed the six feet long snake, went in search of zoo staff and alerted them.    Vatsala said, ""It was moving towards the cage of Rose Ringed Parakeet. I spotted a few zoo staff sitting idle at a distance and alerted them about the snake. I also told them that half a dozen schools have brought children to the zoo and that they should be warned. They initially did not budge and when I refused give up, one of them came with me to the spot and then returned to the group, saying he would report it. I did not see how, as none of them had a phone.""   Vatsala was shocked by the staff’s reaction and tried calling the zoo office. ""I dialled both the landline numbers available, but nobody answered the calls. I went back to the spot to warn other visitors.""    For the next one hour, Vatsala stood guard near the spot and prevented schoolchildren and families from going close to the parakeets’ cage and the bamboo bush. Finding no signs of any action being taken by zoo staff, she called Bangalore Mirror and requested if we could inform zoo authorities about the snake.    When zoo authorities finally sent a snake catcher to the spot , Vatsala was still at the spot. ""The snake catcher searched for the reptile for some time and said it must have gone into a hole and that he would also ‘report’ the matter. He said he had been trying to catch the same snake for the last few days and that it was a non poisonous species.   A wildlife expert said, ""Bird feed attracts rodents, and this in turn attracts snakes. It is common in such spots. However, visitors do not expect to find snakes, poisonous or non-poisonous, moving around inside zoos. The panic it creates among people is more dangerous.""    Vatsala said, ""Why didn’t they warn people, especially when so many children were around? It seems the focus was more on making the place plastic-free than a safe place for children. The snake is still at large and they claim that it is non-poisonous. I hope it is.”   No matter how the zoo officials took it, Vatsala's efforts won applause from fellow visitors who described her as a socially conscious woman.    ""I did not do this to garner publicity. That’s why I am requesting you (BM) not to publish my name. I just wanted to ensure that everyone was safe,"" she said.