Andaman bush toad is the proposed common English name for this new species, indicating its arboreal habit and restricted distribution 
 
 Mangaluru: A team of researchers have discovered a new genus and species of arboreal toad with phytotelmonous larvae, from the Andaman Islands.
 
 
 The discovery of the new bufonid amphibian, belonging to a new monotypic genus, from the Andaman Islands, in the Bay of Bengal is based on unique external morphological and skeletal characters which are compared with those of known Oriental and other relevant bufonid genera.
 
 
 In a paper published in Zookeys, the researchers have distinguished the new taxon from other bufonid genera by its small adult size, the presence of six presacral vertebrae, an absence of coccygeal expansions, presence of an elongated pair of parotoid glands, expanded discs at digit tips and phytotelmonous tadpoles that lack oral denticles.
 
 “The taxonomic and phylogenetic position of the new taxon named as Blythophryne beryet was ascertained by comparing its 12S and 16S partial genes with those of Oriental and other relevant bufonid lineages.
 
 Resulting molecular phylogeny supports the erection of a novel monotypic genus for this lineage from the Andaman Islands.
 
 Interestingly, the native Andamanese people had knowledge about this toads existence and also had a vernacular name for it; thus showing respect to their knowledge we have used their vernacular name as the species epithet of the scientific name of this poorly known toad ,” stated Ramesh K Aggarwal corresponding author of the paper.
 
 The team of researchers included R. Chandramouli associated with the Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun Karthikeyan Vasudevan from CSIR-CCMB, Laboratory for the Conservation of Endangered Species, Hyderabad, S. Harikrishnan from Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun, Sushil Kumar Dutta Nature Environment and Wildlife Society (NEWS), Odisha, Jegath Janani, Richa Sharma and Ramesh K. Aggarwal from Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad and Indraneil Das from the Institute of Biodiversity and Environmental Conservation, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Malaysia.
 
 This species has been documented from five islands of the Andaman archipelago, including the South Andaman (Mt. Harriet), Rutland, Little Andaman, Havelock Island in the Ritchie’s Archipelago and North Andaman (Saddle Peak).
 
 Adult females and males range between 25.2–27.4 mm and 21.8–25.5 mm, respectively.
 
 The new species is often seen on surface of leaves of herbaceous bushes. It is nocturnal and regularly seen year round.
 
 It was the third most common anuran in the islands. The high abundance of this species seems to be the result of it occupying a narrow range of distribution and a unique niche of frogs belonging to the Old World tree frog family (Rhacophoridae), which are not known to occur on the Andaman Islands. All other anuran amphibians recorded from these islands are ground-dwelling, with the exception of Kaloula baleata ghoshi.
 
 During day time, bush toads were found under leaf litter on the forest floor. The Andaman bush toad emits a white, viscous, pungent smelling secretion from the parotoid glands when handled; the secretion seems to be toxic, as other frogs kept within the same bag as one of these toads suffered mortality.
 
 Breeding commences in June with the onset of the Southwest Monsoon.
 
 Males were observed to call from heights of 1–1.5 m above ground while sitting on leaves of bushes and females deposit ova in phytotelms, which are tree-holes at a height of about 1–1.5 m above the ground filled with rainwater. Tadpoles develop in these phytotelms.