Forest dept wants more vets in sensitive zones, curbs on traffic, after Rowdy Ranga, a 46-year-old elephant from Mathigodu elephant camp, died when a private bus hit it 

This is definitely not the way the State government would like to celebrate the wildlife week. On one hand, Koppal region has recorded the death of several blackbucks and on Monday, the State woke up to the death of an elephant known as Rowdy Ranga.

“It is unfortunate that we have lost Ranga, a 46-year-old elephant from Mathigodu elephant camp. He died in an accident after he was hit by a private bus when he was grazing at 3.30am. As soon as the camp staff got to know of the accident, they rushed to the spot and detained the driver. The incident took place about 200 metres away from Mathigodu elephant camp on the Mysuru- Kannur State highway. The private bus was plying from Virajapete to Bengaluru,” said Dr Hanumanthappa, conservator and field director, Nagarahole Tiger Reserve.

Rash driving through forest area to blame

Preliminary information indicates that the accident was caused by rash and negligent driving along with over speeding on the part of the bus driver, Ismail Nalakat (40) from Kerala. The left side of the bus was damaged and 35 passengers travelling in the bus escaped unhurt. They continued their journey in other buses. The impact of the accident was such that Ranga’s backbone broke and the elephant was bleeding profusely. The veterinarians from the Rajiv Gandhi National park, Hunsur, rushed to the spot for treatment. But the elephant did not respond to treatment and died at 7.30am.

Despite sign boards at about 100 meters and 300 meters away from accident spot, the driver was over speeding. On the right of the highway is Nagarahole Tiger Reserve on the left is Devamachi Reserve Forest of the Titimati range, Virajpet. The driver has been handed over to the Ponnampete police.

Sources said that Ranga was captured by Dr Umashankar in December 2016 from Savandurga forests adjacent to Magadi and Bannerghatta. He was looked after by Dr Puneeth at the Bannerghatta Biological Park. Ranga was in the forefront, with another elephant Dhananjaya, as a possible candidate for carrying the golden howdah during Mysuru Dasara. 

More vets needed in sensitive zones

“This accident is an eye-opener that the sanctioned strength of veterinarians in sensitive zones like Nagarahole has to be increased. We need at least two trained wild life veterinarians at Nagarahole because of its location,” a forest department officer said.

Another officer added, “This has been a terrible year for wildlife. On March 19, a female elephant of about 35 years died in Kodagu. She was rescued by the forest department after she had come from Meenukolli forest in North Kodagu in search of food. Another female elephant, Mythili (52), died at the Dubare elephant camp due to a suspected heart attack on July 11.”

In May, 46-year-old Airavatha, an elephant captured near Nelamangala, died due to heart related issues Mathigodu. Recently, Lakshmeesha, an elephant that Shiroor Lakshmivaratheerta swamiji owned, also died. Lakshmeesha was sent to Sakrebail elephant camp in Shivamogga to be tamed a few years ago. Later, he was sent to Mathigodu camp. According to sources, the elephant suffered injuries when a wild elephant attacked him while he was grazing in the forest. The elephant did not respond to treatment and died on September 19. However, another version alleges that the aggressive Lakshmeesha had escaped from the camp four days before his death and he was shot with tranquilizer darts, which is not supposed to be done when elephants are musth.

“The state needs to have specialised teams for emergency medicine and we definitely have a shortage of experts. The government postings are designed in such a way that often wildlife experts end up doing only post-mortem. We hope the government looks into the system and changes it to prevent animal deaths,” an officer added.