Citizens & wildlife researchers urge the city to show respect to ‘jungle in our backyard’

On Sunday, 30 people went to Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) for a ‘Plogging Party’. No ordinary party it was. It required them to scour Suvarnamukhi Anjaneya Temple, located deep inside the reserved forest, as well as Hakki Pikki, a tribal village standing on its fringes, of 500 kg of paper and plastic waste. The dry waste collected was later dumped at a BBMP-designated site. 

This ‘party’ was ideated by digital entrepreneur Jacob Cherian along with Jhatkaa, a campaigning organisation, and it fell in line with the philosophy of Bangaloreans For Bannerghatta (BFB). Now what is BFB? It is a freshly minted citizen science initiative, which wants to create awareness about the BNP, a forest that is right in our backyard but one that people confuse with Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). 

Avinash Krishnan, a senior wildlife researcher with A Rocha India that is backing this collective of students and working professioanls, sets the record straight: “BNP is a reserved forest of wild animals whereas BBP is just a part of it — it is a zoo”. 


         It’s the moral responsibility of everybody living in Bengaluru to care for and protect BNP and its ecology which is under threat— Avinash, wildlife researcher       

He says, “It’s the moral responsibility of everybody living in Bengaluru to care for and protect BNP and its ecology (which is under threat from the exploding real estate and infrastructure projects in the vicinity). When we can have residents welfare associations for Whitefield or Indiranagar, should we not have groups to take ownership of the forest that is giving fresh oxygen, beauty, and other ecological services to us?”

But cleaning up the jungle of over 260 sq km of garbage is not a one-off affair. This will be done frequently for up to a year, software engineer Thejaswini, who is one of the seven core members of BFB, says about this ‘Zero Plastic Campaign’. But BNP is a reserved forest, mostly close to the public, so where is the trash coming from? Krishnan explains, “There is at least 200 km of road network that cuts through the national park, so people litter it when they are out on weekend road trips.” 


         .       
Clean-up is not their only focus. Earlier this month, during BFB’s inaugural event, it organised a drawing competition for kids from the locality, and young photographers from the city area. 

“One kid drew animals on a paper and wrote pointers such as Do not kill them, or Do not throw plastic. Other drew elephants marching into farmlands or elephants standing near watering holes. It’s nice to see that kids observe the nature around them. For instance, this area has a lot of elephants. Photographers, on the other hand, went around clicking birds, butterflies, and elephants on their cameras,” Thejaswini informs. 

Coming up in January is a sketching workshop for forest staffers and people staying inside or close to the forest. 

Krishnan says, “Photography is not the only way you can appreciate nature. That’s why the sketching workshop. We want to explore different ways to engage with the public.”