What do the issues facing Asian elephants in the wild have to do with the city? Find out at this event

The Asian elephant is on the list of critically-endangered animals. Its estimated population, nationwide, is about 25,000-27,000 and in Karnataka, it might be about 2,000. And one of the pressing dangers these elephants are facing is the human-animal conflict. This, according to author, researcher, photographer Ramesh Belagare, also the managing trustee of Foundation for Ecology and Education Development (FEED), is more pressing and deadlier than poaching. And for the urban folks, who invariably think of it as a conflict between villagers and elephants, Belagare believes that the “so-called educated people” living far away are equally to blame.

So, in order to create awareness about the issues that elephants face, the informal group Friends of Elephant is hosting an evening called Elephant Women, in collaboration with Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre and Namma Metro. This event will focus entirely on elephants, from screening of documentary films, a photography show, dance, talks and a panel discussion on women’s contribution to wildlife science, culture, welfare, conservation and management.

Belagare begins with “resort tourism”. “Tell me, who hasn’t been to a resort in the forests to see wildlife ?” he asks. “Even though one may be doing everything right, think of how these resorts are disposing food waste and managing trash?” Food waste attracts elephants towards human settlements and so do disposed diapers, sanitary napkins, chips packets, beer bottles that people throw on the roadside as they travel through the national parks. “Elephants have a sensitive nose. It draws them to rubbish, which is laden with salt,” he rues, adding that 
he has even seen a condom stuck onto the tongue of an elephant.

These intrusions are as troublesome as the changing patterns of cropping. Cultivators are growing commercial crops such as paddy, sugarcane and bananas – all of which elephants like to forage. “Big cultivators, like coffee plantation estates, usually leave a buffer zone for the elephants with these crops so that the coffee plantations are left alone. Such local measures take care of the problems.”

But it is the depletion of forest cover that is alarming. Unlike African elephants, which are grazers, Asian elephants are browsers. Traditionally, they have roamed the Nilgiris Biosphere Reserve which spreads across the Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats. “The foliage varies from the dry lands of Andhra to the evergreen cover in Kerala; with over thousands of species of trees. This is ideal for Asian elephants whose diet consists of about 250 species of flora and 150 litres of water per day,” he expounds. “This is why elephants move around and forage extensively.”

About 50 years back, elephants moved across a corridor that included Bangalore-Tumkur-Magadi-Savandurga-Turahalli forests-Bannerghatta-Hosur-Krishnapuram-Dharampuri-Bangalore. “It was a dense cover,” Belagare notes.”But today, look at the traffic on Hosur Road.” As the forest cover fragmented, elephants are taking alternate routes that go through towns. He estimates that of the 2,000 elephants, about 90 are coming out into the open repeatedly, leading him to conclude that these pachyderms have got habituated to what is available in and around human settlements. So unsustainable development must be kept in check, he feels. 

With such pertinent issues to highlight, Friends of Elephants usually invite ministers, forest officials, bureaucrats, activists and captive elephant owners from Kerala for all their events along with the public. 

Attend Elephant Women – Women’s Nature, at 6.30pm, at Rangoli Metro Art Centre, on June 22