The&nbsp; elephant at the college festival          Albeit late in the month, the city’s premier RV College of Engineering celebrated Kannada Rajyotsava with fanfare at its Mysore Road campus on Thursday. And the cynosure of the students’ eyes was no Sandalwood celeb gyrating to blockbuster Kannada numbers. It was a jumbo specially loaned for the occasion by the Bannerghatta Biological Park — in flagrant violation of Central and state wildlife conservation rules.
 
 The incident has got animal activists, conservationists and even zoo officials hot under the collar. And the needle of suspicion has been pointed at home and transport minister R Ashoka, whose son studies in the college. It is alleged that the minister prevailed on forest department officials to depute an elephant for the college function.
 
 All through the day, the tusker’s mahout made it move around the campus, with students astride it waving the Kannada flag. The elephant was not spared a daubing either — it had ‘Theru’ (chariot) painted on one side and ‘Kannada Sangha’ on the other.
 
 The tusker, a 40-year-old named Vanaraja, was reportedly hired from the BBP for Rs 16,000. Sources in the forest department alleged that the unfortunate animal’s ‘deputation’ was at the behest of the home and transport minister. Sources in the BJP further alleged that it was done because his son is a student of RVCE.
 
 According to the official order, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) B K Singh directed BBP executive director Dr Raju to depute an elephant for the college celebrations. Thankfully, there were some caveats: that the BBP staff bring back the elephant the same evening, that it should be handled well, and that it should be examined by the BBP’s vets before and after its ‘deputation’.
 
 An animal rights activist, on the condition of anonymity, said, “The Central Zoo Authority and several government orders forbid the forest department from deputing zoo elephants or captive elephants for private functions. Even the recent report by the National Elephant Task Force, titled ‘Gaja’, has banned the use of elephants for private functions. It is a clear case of violation. If they are deputing an elephant today to a college, tomorrow somebody will come and ask for some other animal by paying money. The department should not have entertained the request.”
 
 M N Jayakumar, member-secretary, Zoo Authority of Karnataka, said, “Long back there was an order by the CZA banning private parties from riding zoo elephants or using them for functions. We have not given any elephant from any zoo for any private function. Sometimes, on a direct order from the government, the PCCF (wildlife) directs the zoo concerned to depute elephants, as government orders are supreme. But these orders do not come to the Zoo Authority of Karnataka.”
 A wildlife conservationist said, “In 1990, the government had, by an order, allowed the use of elephants for Dasara and other state functions. But no permission was given to depute elephants for private functions. In 2000, the government had directed that no elephants from Karnataka be given to private parties for private functions. This (the RV College incident) should not have happened. Zoo elephants are unaccustomed to seeing huge crowds. What if the jumbo had gone on a rampage?” 
 Ignorant netas
 An angered wildlife conservationist said, “Politicians will never understand what these poor animals undergo. All through the journey of four six hours, they have to stand still. The trucks that carry them are not designed for the purpose. All this is clearly laid out in the ‘March of the Elephant’ section of the forest manual. This apart, the animal has to endure crackers and loud band music for hours. They are not used to such phenomena and it has a deleterious effect on their behaviour.”
 
 
 ‘Yes, he recommended’
 Bangalore Mirror tried to get in touch with the minister on Friday evening but was told by his staff that he was busy electioneering in Bellary. However, when the issue was mentioned to his personal assistant, the latter got back after speaking to the minister and said, “It is nothing like that. The college authorities had given him the letter and like any other letter, for this also he had given his recommendation for sanction of the elephant for the celebrations.”