This renowned park in Dakshina Kannada has over 148 species of butterflies 

The Butterfly Park in Moodabidri is bustling with activities with the season commencing later this month. The private nature reserve, spread over 7 acres of semi-forest land, located in Belvai village near Moodabidiri of Dakshina Kannada district, has begun on a high note with the sighting of butterfly species Moore’s Ace (halpe porus), which is quite uncommon, for the first time in the park.

Sammilan Shetty, founder of the butterfly park, told Bangalore Mirror, “The butterfly season has begun with the Southern Birdwing, the state butterfly of Karnataka, laying eggs on Aristolochia indica climber. About two weeks ago, we recorded the 148th species for the park— Moore’s Ace (Halpe porus) on Leea indica the bandicoot berry shrub.” 

Sammilan, who had earlier spotted this species on the Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary in Udupi, said: “This species is not so common and is found between Western Ghats, parts of Karnataka, Uttaranchal to Northeast and Andamans. They are seen in forests ranging from mixed deciduous to wet evergreen. Moore’s Ace belongs to the family Hesperiidae of butterflies. Last year, we had conducted a workshop on, ‘Field Identification of skippers of Western Ghats’ by Dr Kalesh Sadashivan from Travancore Natural History Society (TNHS), an expert in the field.”

Read Also:
Bengaluru joins hands hands to respond to BBMP's pet restrictions suggestion with twitter trend #NotWithoutMyDog 

The peak season for butterflies is from August to September. With the commencement of the butterfly season, the park will be open from 8 am to 1 pm every day. Over 150 butterflies are spotted at the park every day. 

“To mark the fifth anniversary of official opening of the butterfly park, a documentary ‘Life of butterflies’ will be released on Aug 18. Since the park will be open on all days till November, visitors are first shown videos about butterflies in the park, egg laying, courtship display, eclosions and other interesting behaviour of butterflies before they are taken for a field walk. The idea is to enable them to relate to the creatures and the ambience during their actual encounter with butterflies out there in the wild,” said Sammilan.



      butter 1     
The park houses butterfly species like Malabar Banded Peacock (Papilio buddha), Southern Birdwing (Troides minos), Autumn leaf (Doleschallia bisaltide), Clipper (Parthenos sylvia), Tawny Rajah (Charaxes psaphon), Paris Peacock (Papilio paris), Redspot Duke (Dophla evelina), Blue Oakleaf (Kallima horsfieldii) and others. 

The park has also introduced native host plants such as Ochlandra travancorica also called as elephant grass endemic to the Western Ghats and others such as Adenia hondala and Crataeva religiosa to support more native species of butterflies in the park. 
London-based World Book of Records has proposed to honour Shetty in recognition for his conservation of butterflies.
 Photos: Rare species of butterfly sighted at park in Dakshina Kannada19The park at Dakshina Kannada is a home to stunning species of butterfliesThe butterfly park near Moodabidri is swarming with varieties of beautiful butterflies as the season begins in late June. The park is situated in Belvai village near Moodabidri of Dakshina Kannada. Tourists generally visit the park during its peak season so they can see these stunning butterflies. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park Moore's Ace- the rare butterfly sighted this yearThis year, a rare species, called Moore’s Ace (halpe porus) was sighted in the park for the first time. The butterfly has been recorded as the 148th species to call the park its home. It was first seen sitting on a Leela indica, the Bandicoot berry shrub planted in the park. The park is filled with trees connected to every butterfly’s nectar-sucking routine. Sammilan Shetty's home for the butterfliesSammilan Shetty, the founder of the butterfly park, had earlier spotted the species at the Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary in Udupi. Moore’s Ace is a very uncommon species that is found in parts of Karnataka, Uttaranchal, Northeast India and in the Andamans. The species has also been detected in areas of the Western Ghats. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park The butterfly is finally out of it's cocoonBelonging to the Hesperiidae family of butterflies, Moore’s Ace habituates itself in forests ranging from mixed deciduous to wet evergreen. The butterflies are a sight for sore eyes. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park Patch of blue on the Malabar Banded Peacock butterflyThe park houses a highly diverse range of butterflies such as Malabar Banded Peacock (Papilio Buddha), Southern Birdwing (Troides minos), Autumn leaf (Doleschallia bisaltide), Clipper (Parthenos Sylvia), Tawny Rajah (Charaxes psaphon), Paris Peacock (Papilio paris), Redspot Duke (Dophla evelina), Blue Oakleaf (Kallima horsfieldii) and many others. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly ParkThe park is a home to beautiful speciesHost plants like Ochlandra travancorica, also called the elephant grass, have also been added to the butterfly park along with other plants like Adenia hondala and Crataeva religiosa to support the golden species of butterflies in the park. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park Knowing about the butterfly parkThe ideal time for visiting the park is between July and November. Visitors are given information on the variety of butterfly species through a PowerPoint presentation before entering the park. In this way, the people won’t have much difficulty in identifying the species and will be educated about the rare species in the park. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park An Autumn Leaf butterfly spreads its wingsSammilan Shetty has been shortlisted for an honour by the London-based World Book of Records for his outstanding conservation of a colossal number of butterfly species. Photos courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly ParkButterfly Photographers on the goThe park is open to the visitors for a total of five hours everyday - from 8 am to 1 pm. So grab your cameras and click some gorgeous photos of the wondrous species on the go! Photo courtesy: Sammilan Shetty/ Butterfly Park