In what can be a lesson to wildlife sleuths and Bangalore University’s top brass, a volunteer has installed cameras to crack the mystery of the missing sandalwood trees in Jnana Bharati campus, Nagarbhavi.
 
 Deepak Reddy, an event manager and wildlife volunteer residing at Nagarbhavi, had recently noticed that over 25 sandalwood trees were missing from the campus. He then tipped off forest department officials. However, with three more trees going missing and forest officials taking no action, Deepak has started installing hidden cameras in sandalwood trees in the area.
 
 “It’s shocking as sandalwood trees are going missing every day from the campus,” said Deepak. “The worst part is that neither officials nor university authorities are in a mood to check it despite several pleas. So I have started installing cameras in sandalwood trees with the hope of getting leads on the thieves.”
 
 The problem became severe in the last week of August with over 25 trees going missing in a single night from near the Sports Authority of India (SAI) campus. Officials of the forest department and the university continue to be passive, allege wildlife volunteers.
 
 In future, Deepak plans to fix high-end cameras that can record throughout the night. He also wants a ban on private vehicular movement inside the campus in the evening and at night.
 
 Forest officials expressed their helplessness.“The university authorities should be held responsible for this. We have handed over the forest to them. It’s up to them to guard it. All we can do is lodge an FIR if trees are cut. Unfortunately, they have neither taken permission to cut trees nor registered a complaint about theft with us,” S Kumaraswamy, deputy conservator of forests, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Experts, on the other hand, feel a strict vigil is the need of hour and want the university officials to immediately pull up their socks to prevent major damage. 
 
 University officials said that measures are being taken to check theft of trees. “The campus is huge. Several measures are being taken to check theft of trees. The vice-chancellor had also conducted meetings in this regard,” said R M Ranganath, registrar of the university.