When Radhika Apte first emerged on the Bollywood scene, back in 2005, she was described as a "revelation" by critics. Now, after a 14-year-old tumultuous journey in showbiz across platforms like theatre, television, films and web-series alike, the actress has found her footing and is easily one of the most popular and recognizable faces in the industry, yet, she continues to surprise.

Mirror Online caught up with Apte at a suburban store launch to discuss her journey in Bollywood and how she navigates through stardom. The actress has been vocal about her initial dejection with the industry after a string of upheavals she was faced with when she just forayed into the business as a thespian from Pune. Apte expands on the subject saying, "In India, theatre has not yet become a business. I mean, of course it is a business, as you need to have money and make money to make plays, but a lot of people don't really get paid. It's a passion project whereas films are not. Everything changes when something is made like that." 

Clearly dramaturgy is an intrinsic function for the 33-year-old star. But if you take acting away from Apte, what's left? 

"For the longest time I thought I'd do mathematics because I studied it and I really loved it! But I also really love wildlife and I'd love to do something with wildlife, so who knows? Right now I'm very happy to be in this industry," she quips.

The actress was born in Vellore, Tamil Nadu, brought up in Pune, Maharashtra; has worked in Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Bengali, and Marathi-language films and when she isn't on film sets, (if her Instagram profile is any indication), spends a good portion of her time travelling across the globe. So, how does travelling across different continents and cultures influence her craft?

                    

"Everything that you do contributes to your profession in a way," shares Apte. "When you travel you meet different people, you see different cultures, hear different stories and all your experiences basically help you in the professional aspect of acting or film-making," she explains.

                   

Quiz her on who some of her favourite actors in showbiz are and she answers "Smita Patil!," without missing a beat. She goes on to add, "I also love Shabana Azmi, Naseeruddin Shah, Om Puri ji. I always feel that instead of loving actors, I love performances more. With a performance, you can always recall and say 'acha, that was such a great performance'".

Speaking of great performances, Apte, who has had a stellar year packed with great performances herself, shares which role has been the toughest one to portray on screen so far. "That's actually a very difficult question to answer as it's very difficult to watch yourself on screen- normally it doesn't happen. But I do have a favourite. The one that I did recently and was closest to my heart was 'Phobia' because it was just very interesting to do that detailed work. Very rarely do you get an opportunity where you have to carry the film on your shoulders and that does give you a lot of responsibility, a lot of work goes in. I really like that entire period- that feeling of 'Oh I want to do more'"

 Radhika Apte at the launch of Van Heusen’s store in Mumbai

So finally, does Radhika Apte enjoy watching herself perform on screen? "I haven't seen a lot of my films," she confesses. "The last couple of years, I've begun to pay a little more attention to the work that I've done, but before that, I've actually not seen most of my work. I was very... like, I could not watch myself perform. But then I realized that it's actually quite helpful to see and understand what's going on. What are the patterns, the obvious mistakes that we do. So its quite interesting. I think I've developed quite an objective way to critique myself," she adds with a grin, signing off.