A 56-year-old woman was trampled to death by an elephant when she went to her farm in Channapatna taluk on Tuesday morning.
 
In the last three years, 52 people have died due to elephant attacks in the state. As per the statistics provided by the centre, 29 people died due to elephant attacks in 2019-20 and 23 in 2021.
 
To prevent wild animals from straying into nearby farms, the forest department has deployed more personnel. According to Union Minister of State for Environment, Forest and Cimate Change Ashwini Kumar Choubey, the information received from Karnataka, in addition to the permanent frontline staff like forest gaurds, non-permanent watchers have been deployed at Anti-Depredation Camps (ADC).
 
“So far, five rapid response teams with 20 watchers and 21 anti-depredation camps with 84 watchers have been pressed into service. A total of 74 wild elephants have been captured and rehabilitated since 2000. In addition to the ongoing installation of barricades and solar fences, Karnataka has constructed a 9.50 km railway barricade and 14.0 km tentacle solar fence,” he said.


There has been an increase in deaths of wild animals especially elephants due to electrocution– A forest department official

Major reasons for elephant deaths
Karnataka has lost 29 elephants in the last three years. Electrocution seems to be the major cause of death for elephants in the State.
 
According to statistics, 26 elephants died of electrocution in the state. Railway crossing accidents was another prominent reason.A forest department official said, “There has been an increase in deaths of wild animals especially elephants due to electrocution. Most of the villagers, especially those who are staying closer to the forest, have been going for electrical fencing to keep wild animals at bay. However, when the animals come in contact with a live wire, they die on the spot.”
 
Poaching elephants for the smuggling of ivory is another big threat. There have been increasing cases of smuggling of ivory/tusk seizures. In the last three years, 90 such cases have been reported across the country. In a Lok Sabha reply, Union Minister Choubey said, “We are going for capacity building of frontline staff for investigation, forensics and successful prosecution of wildlife cases.”