Avid art show visitors will admit to a certain weariness when it comes to the shows currently on offer in the city. But there are some flashes of interest in what’s available. The newly-mounted show at Sublime Galleria is a mix and match of works by seven artists whose works are so dissimilar that they have been
 put together under a wide encompassing title, Art: India. The 25 works on display are artworks done by Indian artists. So, the cap will fit.
 
 Some of the works will delight a first-time art buyer. Artists such as K Hiremath, a water colourist based out of Pune, offer works of exceptional quality. His works are part of the series on temples and horse racing. Hiremath has childhood memories of the annual horse racing event that takes place in Belguam, where he is from. “The uniqueness of the ‘maidan’ (ground) makes jhaatre (local festival) time special. Horse racing is a much-awaited component of the event,” he says. Incidentally, Hiremath’s work was one of 25 works from all over the world at last year’s International Watercolor Society India Biennale 2015.
 
 Another artist whose works are sure crowd pleasers is MD Parashar. His super-realistic portraits of the tiger will have you checking if they are photos. Well, Parashar is an artist and a wildlife photographer, both. But close inspection reveals lampblack as the medium which he applies with a crumpled newspaper as the brush. Truly amazing.
 
 There are other artists who have done figurative works, a genre that the gallery has guessed is popular amongst first-time buyers. Amol Pawar, Siddharth Shingade, Anjali Ponni, Mark Rathinaraj and Kusiya Rani fit into a wide spectrum of expertise.
 
 Art: India, 11am – 8pm, till Mar 19, Sublime Galleria, Call 22221667
 
 Lessons on canvas
 
 
 
 Over 100 women; engineers, doctors, professors, filmmakers, scientists, writers, homemakers and students are bound by their common passion for art. Shyamala Ramanand, IT professional-turned-artist, who is the founder of Akanksha, curates a large show annually, giving the members a chance to exhibit their works. In its third outing, this group show features 61 artists. From an oncologist surgeon Aditi Bhat who calls painting “therapy”, to the oldest member Usha Rai, a Kannada writer, the works represent diverse thoughts. Last year, for the first time, a senior artist held monthly workshops for amateur artists. An evolving group which will spread the joy of art learning is to be encouraged.
 
 Akanksha, 11am – 7.30pm, Mar 8th – 13th, Rangoli Metro Art Centre, Call: 080 22969265
 
 
 
 
 Meet the stalwarts
 
 The works command attention. The signed names of artists even more. It isn’t often one gets to see a signed work by artist Yusuf Arakkal as ‘A Yusuf’. This show features 25 eminent artists such as SG Vasudev, Akbar Padamsee, Krishen Khanna, KG Subramanyan, Laxma Goud, A Raiba, KM Adimoolam, Badri Narayan, Yusuf Arakkal and many such stalwarts. The works have been sourced from art collectors who were willing to partake in this ‘second sale’. Silloo Daruwalla, founder of Crimson, informs that the only condition was that the works were originally bought from the gallery. “It is easier for us to authenticate them that way,” she says. For a serious art buyer, this show may help in adding value to their collection. For the rest, these are works worth a study.
 Nostalgia 2016, 11am – 7pm, till Mar 19th, Crimson, Call: 080 65379223?