Sacrificing the trees in Western Ghats to pave way for high tension power line will affect drinking water supply to Bangalore
 
 	Lighting up towns and villages in God’s own country, Kerala, is likely to cost Karnataka heavily: the state will have to axe more than 50,000 trees for the high tension power line, which would affect rainfall in Kodagu and the Cauvery’s water flow, ultimately affecting drinking water supply to major cities including Mysore and Bangalore. 

 Activists are up in arms against the high tension nuclear power transmission line from Kaiga to Kozhikode, which will pass through the thick evergreen forests of Brahmagiri and Pushpagiri wildlife sanctuaries. Trees all along the 55 kilometers stretch are set to face the axe. 

 Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL) has already allowed the chopping of about 10,000 trees. Now the fate of about 50,000 more hangs in balance amidst protests by local villagers and environmentalists of Save Cauvery movement in Kodagu, supported by the Karnataka Rajya Raitha Sangha. 

 	Activists have expressed concern that massive destruction of forest in this ecologically sensitive region of Western Ghats would not only affect the eco system but also have long-lasting impact on rainfall and river flow, particularly of the Lakshman Teertha—a major tributary of Cauvery. 

 “There has been a gradual decrease in the amount of rainfall that Kodagu was receiving. Clearing forests now would only add to the problem by affecting the rainfall pattern. Even the slightest imbalance will have a detrimental effect on a large population and the state has to wake up to the threat, rather than being a mute spectator to the catastrophic changes,” explained Sajan Aiyappa, a member of the Save Cauvery movement. What has added fuel to the fire is the illegal diversion of forest and large-scale felling of trees on areas other than the sections notified for the project. Villagers and activists have visited the forest site and trekked through the thick forests with GPS coordinates to establish the illegal diversion of forest land and large-scale cutting of trees, much more than the required number. Activists like K A Ravi Chengappa stayed in the forest for 38 days and protested. 

 	Inquiry into illegal felling 

 	A top forest official, who trekked on the stretch, observed large scale irregularities as cited by the villagers and activists. In his report to the state government submitted on Feb 22, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, he said, “….as per condition, only minimum number of trees shall be cut based on actual requirement of project. But contrarily it is seen during inspection that the entire 52-metre wide corridor has been cleared and felled in the Madikeri and Hunsur divisions which was unnecessary in view of the fact that there was no need for felling trees beyond total width of 27 metres.Even though PGCIL engineers explained that they need to clear about 46 metres, they have cleared about 52 metres.. With all the trees felled to the bottom, topography has exposed the soil for severe erosion as the gradient of the corridor is over 60 degree.’’ 

 The official said the Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCFs) of the respective regions should be held responsible for the violation. “As per the agreement, RCC pillars should have been erected at 20 metre spacement on the corridor boundaries, but without this being done, the trees have been felled in the Madikeri division, giving scope for felling of trees outside the leased area. This is sheer negligence on the part of DCF, Madikeri in discharging his duties and both Hunsur and Madikeri DCFs are hereby directed to submit their explanation for the above said serious lapses,” he has said. 

 	Alternatives available 

 Activists and the people of Kodagu have been urging both the state, centre and PGCIL to reconsider their proposal of laying a transmission line through the evergreen forests. “There is already an existing line between Mysore and Kozhikode passing through D B Kuppe and H D Kote. The PGCIL can consider the same stretch or they can consider the route suggested by Coorg Wildlife Society, which passes through a limited stretch of forest land. The PGCIL has in fact laid underground transmission lines in Navi Mumbai and Gujarat with an intention of not affecting migratory birds. They have executed an undersea high tension cable spanning 285 kms between India-Sri Lanka,” Chengappa suggested.