People say that marriage is like taking a leap...so this year Aditya and I decided to do that! Quite literally! We took the leap. We jumped off an airplane, free fell from heights and jumped into the sea - in the one place where adventure is not just an adrenalin rush; it’s a way of life - Australia. 

It all began when after a hectic six month work schedule, I decided I needed a break. I had been nagging Aditya about my desire to skydive for the last three years and so when he said I could organise a trip for both of us, I went into travel agent mode. 

Over a weekend, I had organised hotels, activities, itineraries and flight tickets — the internet really makes things easier! Now all I had to do was get a visa, which would take at least 10 days, I was told. That was disastrous..having made the other bookings and with an anniversary just over a week away, I could not afford for the visa to take so long. I wrote emails begging the Consulate in Delhi, called up the Gold Coast tourism office in Mumbai and begged some more; they smiled at my craziness and said if I had to be in Australia on my anniversary, even if just to jump off a plane, so be it! 

JETSETTING HOLIDAY
We arrived at Brisbane airport and took a private transfer to the Gold Coast Marriott Hotel on Surfers Paradise. Gold Coast was all I had imagined and more. Even during the cab ride through dewed windows, the golden sun on the coast made us realise why the Gold Coast had been so aptly named! The Marriott at Surfers Paradise had upgraded us to a suite so we’d be able to enjoy our anniversary in sublime luxury! Wine and chocolate covered strawberries greeted us and after a quick but fabulous bite, we were out of the room and off to explore.  

Steve, the concierge, quickly became my best friend. I wanted to try out every activity and he was just the man to arrange it all. Within minutes he told me the must-dos in the city and added a few more from his own list. Our hotel even had a pool where we could swim with fish, he informed us.   

The first day was spent exploring Surfers Paradise. With shopping to die for and food that kept our mouths watering, Surfers Paradise was a young couple’s dream. Walking around hand in hand, we knew that our anniversary was definitely going to be the best ever!

MOVIE MANIA
Day two began with a visit to the Warner Bros Movie World. As both Aditya and I are fans of Warner Bros films, having watched everything from Godfather to Batman (Dark Knight), this was a MUST DO on our list! 

Running in, we became children again as we waited impatiently to go on the fastest rollercoaster ride in the Southern Hemisphere — the Superman Escape. We sat right in the front. Suddenly, we were told that we were part of a mission and Superman was going to fly with us - and fly we did. I, like several others opened my mouth to scream..but no sound came out! True to its reputation, when we came to the end of the ride, we were all shaken and yet proud that we’d made it. 

The Bat Man ride was a dead-drop. I have to say here,  I was much braver than Aditya and enjoyed the drop more than he did - much to his amazement. After seeing a stunt car shoot, going through movie memorabilia and watching the new 4-D Shrek movie, it was time to leave. Thanks to Steve’s clever planning, we were packed in a car and sent to Zorb! 

HAVING A BALL
Zorbing is an activity where you get into a ball which is partly filled with water and you roll down a hill or try and climb up one. We got into zorb mode and squeezed ourselves into the tiny mouth! Aditya was explaining to me how to keep my balance, and mid-sentence we were thrown off the hill. Laughing we arrived at the bottom of the hill - wet, disheveled and yet incredibly happy and alive! 

Later, a short bus ride to Main beach and we found an incredible shopping paradise. Shops here close early though...so we settled for a cup of cappuccino with a warm chocolate cake and headed home. 

Our trip to Lady Elliott’s Island was cancelled, because of the terrible Cyclone Hamish. Disappointed, I was worried that we’d have nothing to do the following day. But Steve had taken care of everything. A trip to Currumbin Wildlife sanctuary was on the cards. There we got to do some pretty amazing things. I fed kangaroos and Aditya got a kiss from another girl without making me jealous!  Blinky, a koala hugged and kissed Aditya and I gleefully took photographs! At 2 pm we left to go on a Jet Ski safari. With the waves high because of the storm, I was worried about driving the Jet Ski, even though I’d driven one before. On a jet-ski safari, you follow an instructor and in a group you visit Islands and resorts off the coast! Amazing, fast and a complete adrenalin rush - I can proudly say that I didn’t fall off a jet ski and neither did Aditya. We rode like Pros! 

After meeting Blinky and the kangaroos, we missed our little baby girl Cookie (a cocker spaniel ) so we went back to shop at Main Beach at Posh Pets, a pet store and bought her a new bed, a water bottle, a bowl and pretty much everything we could lay our hands on. A romantic pizza dinner later, we slept to be up early to take a flight to Sydney where our skydiving journey began. Another day! Another story!