The bitter cold war between officials and employees of Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is all set for a happy ending, thanks to the initiative of the Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK). The ZAK decided to offer each staff member permanent or daily wager a Rs 1,000 gift voucher and a lavish lunch to forge cordial relations between the two sides in the interest of the animals. 
 
 The park has close to 200 employees working as animal attendants, mahuts, cage cleaners, feeders etc. Resentment between them and officials snowballed into a controversy whenever animals in the park died. On several occasions, BBP authorities had even filed police complaints against employees citing suspicious deaths of tigers and lions. Finally, ZAK decided to intervene.
 
 M Nanjundaswamy, chairman, ZAK, said, “It’s been many years since their efforts were recognised by us. They too were disappointed. They could not even recognise senior officials. This has widened the gap between them and led to misunderstandings. It is time for all concerned to forget the past and start afresh.”
 
 Asked about the timing of the move, Nanjundaswamy said, “We had been working on it for some time. The birth of some animals brought in a new ray of hope, especially after a series of deaths. It gave us the perfect opportunity to organise a celebration. I have given directions to officials to organise a function on May 3, Zoo Day.”
 
 A senior ZAK official said, “The lunch was fixed for Tuesday when the zoo is closed.”
 
 The differences between the two became public a few months ago after the death of Harrack, a Siberian tiger. 
 
 Rescuers ‘not paid’
 
 Wildlife rescuers of the BBMP, who made headlines by rescuing over 100 birds, mammals and reptiles of 20 species in three days during rains last week, need some urgent rescue themselves. “We have not been paid for the last one year,” said one of them.
 
 BBMP’s wildlife cell comprises an environment advisor and five rescuers. While the adviser draws a salary of Rs 13,000, the rescuers are paid salaries between Rs 5,000 and Rs 8,000.
 
 Last month alone, the cell rescued 696 creatures, including species such as barbet, barn owl, parakeet, brahminy kite, pangolin, rat snake, spectacle cobra and russels viper.
 
 BBMP deputy commissioner (administration) S L Manjunath, however, denied that the rescuers’ salary was pending. “Their salaries are paid every month. This month, the delay is due to some technical issues. They will be given their salaries in two to three days.”