The city tops the country for the highest number of adventure holidays planned, with techies travelling on weekends driving the trend 
 
 
 Shruthi Hosamane and her husband Harish Hosamane take off every few months on a holiday. Nothing new there. Except that this couple does things a little differently. They centre their holiday around adventure-activities – trekking, river rafting, rock climbing among others – instead of lazing or touring places of historical interest. Arnadi says these adventurous holidays not only give them some breathing space but also test their limits. They are among an increasing number of Bengalureans who are taking to adventure travel. It is the new favourite among couple travellers, who account for 52% per cent of adventure holiday travellers in India. Following them are larger groups (21%), family travellers (18%) and single travellers (9%).
 
 For Arnadi, adventure trips are a great way to bond. “Going to a touristy place like Goa or Mahabalipuram is just the usual. But these adventure trips give us a chance to be with nature. It’s a much needed stress-buster from our busy lives in the concrete jungle,” she says.
 
 She recalls an instance when she went to Kumara Parvatha with her husband. Finding it difficult to trek up to the peak, Arnadi suggested that he carry on. She realised that she needed several breaks and wouldn’t be able to keep pace with him. “But my husband insisted that since we had come together we had to reach the peak together even if it meant several stops along the way. These trips help us understand each other and our strengths and weaknesses,” says Arnadi, who goes on at least three treks a year.
 
 According to HolidayIQ, a travel community and holidays recommendation engine, 14 per cent of adventure trips are being planned from Bengaluru, followed by 11.5 per cent from Mumbaikars, 11 per cent from Delhites and 7 per cent by those from Kolkata among Tier-1 cities. The most popular adventure activities include mountaineering, trekking, wildlife safari, paragliding, skiing, rock climbing, snorkelling, jet skiing, kayaking, river rafting and surfing.
 Bengaluru’s couples certainly seem to love their thrills. Hemanth Anantharamu (37) and his wife ensure they go on an adventure holiday at least once a year. The couple prefers generally travels up north to Darjeeling and surrounding areas, and tries out everything from mountaineering to white river rafting. The business relationship manager, who does extensive online research while planning the trip, calls them a “bonding exercise”. “And it’s quite automatic since most time, the only person around is your partner. It’s at those times that you get to know them better and the love and affection grows,” he says.
 
 Like him, Raghavendra MP and Poojitha PA have made sure they go on an adventure trail every three months ever since they got married last year. After rafting in Dandeli and Rishikesh and trekking in Kodachadri, they are now
 planning to go to Dubai to skydive. Given the high-stress nature of their hectic jobs, Raghavendra finds adventure travel the ideal way to unwind. “After each of the adventure activities there is a sense of achievement. And there’s no better feeling than experiencing this with your better half,” says the 28-year-old software engineer.
 
 According to VS Sarma, a regular adventure traveller, the disposable income among the IT crowd in the city has led to this increase in adventure travel. That’s because these activities don’t come cheap. “There’s quite a bit of expenditure involved — take water sports. Sometimes, you also need a guide. On a regular trip to Ooty, you would only spend on a cab and a place to stay. But that’s not the case with adventure travel,” he says.
 
 Different people have different reasons. Suruchika Singh (32), finds that trekking in nature gives her peace of mind. Travelling and trekking across Karnataka, she mobilises other travellers through an online group. “We trek for the thrill of reaching the summit,” says Singh, who has trekked near Pune, and Tiger’s Nest in Bhutan, among other places. Adventure is also ideal for travelling during the weekends, which is what most working people do, she feels.
 
 “Two days is sufficient to trek in Karnataka. We often go on night treks as well. It’s a great way to go back to work refreshed on a Monday,” she says.
 
 Hari Nair, founder and CEO of HolidayIQ says Bengaluru’s travellers are looking at “experience-led holidays instead of destination-led holidays”. “A number of interesting adventure holidays — World Ski Championship, India Surf Festival, Ladakh Marathon and World Paragliding Festival are coming to India, something that has never happened before,” Nair says. At the same time, he explains that people here are realising that India has “a lot more to offer than just stunningly picturesque destinations steeped in heritage.”
 
 He also adds that the techies in the city, who are looking to head out of the city during the weekend, have fuelled the trend. “Bengaluru has always been a trendsetter. Even when it comes to booking of holidays, we notice that 72 per cent of them are done through the app in Bengaluru,” he says.
 
 Bengalureans would nod. If nothing, hiking in nature is a more appealing exercise than sweating it out in the gym. As Arnadi says, these short getaways improve fitness levels. “Work can get sedentary and this allows us to exercise amidst nature.” And get her thrills, while at it.
 
 
 
 Raghavendra MP and Poojitha PA after a trek
 to Dolphin’s Nose at Kodaikanal
 
 
 City’s fav adventure spots
 
 Goa: Windsurfing Leh: Trekking and white water rafting Andaman & Nicobar: Scuba Diving Coorg: Trekking Ooty: Hikes, treks and camping Kerala: Bamboo rafting, paragliding