The trade of exotic pets in Bengaluru goes on unabated.

A forest official told BM that the department cannot intervene as it has no jurisdiction over animals — birds, reptiles, even marsupials — not in the ambit of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.

“As per the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, forest department cannot do anything as such animals are foreign and not covered under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, which protects just the Indian species. There have been seizures by forest department where officials could not ascertain the identities of animals and they had to be returned to owners, even if animal cruelty was involved,” wildlife expert T Sharath Babu told Bangalore Mirror.

In cases where exotic pets escaped from captivity from houses in the city, the forest department or wildlife rescuers could do little to help.

Recently, a ball python was found on a scooter in Indiranagar. The snake is now with the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC). The ARRC is asking the forest department whether they can send it to Bannerghatta National Park Rescue Centre.
 
“An option for the owner is to register the pet at the central government’s Parivesh portal and claim custody,” Babu pointed out.

“The forest department can act on every wild animal or bird. However, they choose to hide their incompetence and laziness, and often their complicity, with smugglers behind the phrase, ‘this is an exotic animal’,” member of parliament and animal rights activist Maneka Gandhi told Mirror.

Aquariums and pet shops in Bengaluru deal with exotic pets - fish, reptiles and birds. They have snakes such as ball pythons, albino spider clown heads, OD spark clown pastel, SL clown pastel, sold between Rs 75,000 and Rs 90,000. A red iguana - 1.5 to 2-ft long - costs Rs 25,000 in one of the outlets in JP Nagar.

All kinds of exotic serpents including anacondas are available for sale in the city, a forest official said.
 
Just days ago, a woman who spent Rs 2 lakh on a Macaw telephoned rescuers and told them the bird had escaped from the cage and was sitting on a tree in the army campus. She requested to rescue or capture the Macaw, but rescue volunteers told her to ‘wait for the bird to become weak and fall down as it cannot survive in the wild’.

. 
“Macaws are a large parrot species,” said a rescuer.

“All these animals are smuggled into India. Most are kept in terrible conditions. The forest department could take action. Since pet shops have been illegal since 2018, they could take action. They choose to do nothing. No exotic animals are allowed into India without Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) certification. The forest department does not even know what that is because they have never asked for it. It would be difficult to find a more indifferent department to these animals that pay their salaries. Till today, they do not even have a rescue centre to keep animals. They are untrained on what each wild animal or bird eats or how they live. The government should take a look at the uselessness of this department and either repair or disband it,” Maneka Gandhi explained.

In Yelahanka, a man keeps a wallaby (a marsupial resembling the kangaroo) as a pet in a cage. The animal may be waiting for an opportunity to escape from captivity as it has been imported from Australia — where the terrain and climatic conditions are strikingly different from here.
 
It’s the same case with the red-eared slider turtles - which have now become an invasive species in the city. Every other pet shop is selling red-eared slider turtles that look like a five-rupee coin. What the untrained pet enthusiast does not know is the fact that at two to three years of age, the reptile could chew off one’s finger while one is cleaning the aquarium tank. As they grow ferocious, many pet owners dump these turtles in Bengaluru’s lakes.


No exotic animal is allowed in India without CITES certification. The forest department does not even know what that is…The government should take a hard look at the uselessness of this department…— Maneka Gandhi, Member of Parliament
 
“Now our lakes are full of red-eared slider turtles — an American species. They carry Salmonella as well as other germs and tiny bugs. They eat Indian species and infect wild turtles when released into ponds, streams and rivers,” Sharath Babu added.

Every exotic animal species in the city are distinct case studies. For example ostriches: many are rearing and selling ostriches for their eggs. There are other exotic animals like capuchin monkeys, emus, iguanas, colourful lizards and porcupines.

After the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 came into effect, only last year, the central government set up Parivesh, the online portal where pet owners can register and declare the exotic pets they keep. Prior to this, pet owners claimed the British brought these animals before 1972 and they were breeding in the country. So there is no question of any animal being imported where CITES doesn’t apply. They also claim the pets are shifted locally from cities like Kolkata where they are bred.

“It’s a disaster waiting to happen as this alters biodiversity,” Babu concluded.