Seven have died in 10 days; pesticide poisoning, human hand suspected

In Koppal, at least seven blackbucks have died in a span of 10 days. The exact cause of death is yet to be ascertained. While villagers suspect that more deaths could have taken place, forest officials maintain that the situation is being closely watched.

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Yashpal Kshirasagar, DCF, Koppal said last month the forest department had recovered the carcass of five blackbucks (two male and three female) from Alwandi village. “We suspect that the animals could have died because of lightning. There were burn marks too. The bodies were highly decomposed and after the post-mortems, samples were sent to the forensic experts. We are expecting reports in a day or two,” he said.

Meanwhile, on Friday, the department received a call that several blackbucks had died. However, the callers did not provide the department with many details. DCF Yashpal said, “A team of 15 forest officials started patrolling the area the moment we received the information. We combed the area from 9 pm to 3 am. The villagers were not willing to provide accurate information. The search continued on Saturday too and the department managed to recover the carcass of two more blackbucks. These bodies were also decomposed and after post-mortem, samples were sent to Bengaluru. While the cause of death will be known only after thorough investigation, the role of predators like wolves cannot be ignored.”

However, environmental and wildlife activists feel that there could be other reasons. Sadik KNK, a civil engineer and wildlife photographer from Yelburga, said “In the recent years, wolf population has decreased in several places of Koppal. This has led to an increase in the population of deer and black bucks. Poaching is also on the rise. Either the farmers could have sprayed pesticides in their farm or the deaths could be due to deliberate poisoning. The department needs to investigate the cause of death and take suitable measures to prevent such instances in the future. As we celebrate Wildlife Week, the need of the hour is to protect animals and curb poaching and hunting.”