Till then we had no idea where this place is! Masinagudi is a secluded place at the foothills of the Nilgiris on the way to Ooty from Mysore. In a way it’s good that Masinagudi is not as famous as its neighbour Bandipur, so that the nature as well as the wildlife has enough space to themselves. This wildlife hot spot promises good sightings of beasts and birds. Some even get to see tigers here. The pristine Moyar Falls is the cherry on the cake.

Though Masinagudi is dotted with resorts, cheap accommodation is difficult to find unless you know the local people. Again help came in the form of Joshua. He arranged accommodation for us at a secluded place right on the fringes of the forest. Just what we wanted!

June 20, 2008: Five of us left Bangalore rather late in the night with jarring notes ringing at all our homes for choosing to drive by car at night. But this was the best option for us as we could reach early in the morning and save precious morning time.

The route to Masinagudi is a pleasure to drive for wildlife enthusiasts. After the bad stretch after Gundlupet, the road smooths up and it’s a cruise right up to Theppakadu (via Mudumalai) through Bandipur. At Theppakadu we get two paths to Ooty, one via Gudalur, and the other through Masinagudi with the much talked about 36 hairpin bends.

Sadly, we spotted nothing till Theppakadu, partly due to our lack of knowledge of observing wildlife in the dark. As we turned left from the Theppakadu junction, our first sightings were in the form of two huge gaur bulls staring right into our faces while grazing on the roadside bunds. Forget 6 pack abs. These beasts had 12 pack abs. This road stretch is narrow but full of wildlife, as we realised later.

We reached Masinagudi on time and checked into our accommodation by 6 am. We were ready in a flash for our trek in the wild, organised by our hosts with guides. It was such a pleasure to step out of the backyard of our accommodation and land right in the wild. Almost all resorts and home stays here organise treks into the forests with local villagers as guides. With their uncanny knowledge of the wild, these guides can blindly take you through the terrain without getting lost in the wild. We were all charged up about the forest trek despite a sleepless night.

The forest patch was dry and quite bald. We spotted langurs, sambar deer and numerous birds. But the big beasts eluded us. We lost the trail of wild elephants.

Nevertheless our first wild trek was a learning experience. We learnt what to wear, what to carry and most importantly, that silence is golden.

We spent the afternoon making a quick dash to the reserve forest area at Anekatti, which is accessible only with prior permission. Later in the evening we went to Theppakadu hoping to get into the last safari. But our bad luck continued. 

There was already a long queue and we had to return back without any safari ride for the day. So we just drove along the Gudalur route. And this time luck favoured us. We spot quite a few huge bison and many peacocks along the way. After dinner at the rest house, we had the option of driving along again or retire for the day. With our young blood wanting more and willing to take chances, we set out for the night drives with the hope of catching something big and wild.

Wildlife can be spotted on all roads connecting to Masinagudi, including the roads to Theppakadu, Gudalur and Bandipur. However, Joshua recommended the Moyar road and the Singara road. His advice was perfect. We found these roads were drowned in eerie silence and absolutely cut off from human civilisation.

We took the Singara road first. This road leads to a private estate, with pristine forest all along the way. We drove slowly, our car headlight being the only source of light. We spotted a male tusker having dinner just beside the road. With no mood to confront him in the jungle, we moved ahead till we reached the fringes of the estate. We then turned back and passed by the same tusker, before reaching Masinagudi.

Next, we took the Moyar road. This road leads to Moyar village, about 10 kilometres away. Just when we thought we had run out of luck, we saw a hefty body with spots all over and a long tail. We instantly recognised it was a leopard. In a quick dash, it crossed the road and vanished into the bushes. Those few seconds of wow were all that we needed to keep us in high spirits for the rest of our trip.

June 22, 2008
Early morning we had two options. Another trek in the forests or a safari at Mudumalai National Park. We chose the latter as the forest trek the previous day was unfruitful. We could spot herds of deer and many birds all along the road from Masinagudi to Theppakadu. We learnt a less or two on how to cross roads from the deer. Two of them stand on either side of the road keeping guard until the herd crosses the road. When they sense a vehicle coming, these two deer back off into the bushes with the herd. Being a Sunday, the safari at Mudumalai was full of people. Still, we managed to see herds of deer, elephants, wild dogs, wild boar and many peacocks. On our way back to our resting place for some much-needed breakfast, we found a huge male elephant bringing down branches at the roadside. Fortunately, he was very quiet and went about munching his food. We gave him company for almost 15-20 minutes. Then came a van full of guys, who started shouting in excitement. We sensed trouble and moved ahead. Later we heard that a loud growl from the tusker sent these guys scampering for cover!

After our sumptuous breakfast, we went ahead to our next destination: Moyar Falls. It is located along the same stretch of Moyar Road where we had seen the big cat the previous evening. Permission is required to see the water falls as the viewpoint is in the reserve forest area. When we reached there, we found the place entirely empty. We had to walk for about 15 minutes till we reached a dead end. Phew! From there it was a majestic sight of the falls! Milky white water falling between the green cover. Surprisingly, the water fall was glowing though it had not started raining yet. We rested there for quite a long time, satisfied our appetites with “n” number of photographs and left with no mood at all to budge from there.

We came back to our nest, bid goodbye to the hosts and started our drive home only to realise we were running out of petrol! Ouch! The nearest bunk was some 30 kilometres away. We somehow managed to reach there with heavy rain accompanying us. Recently, I read a news article stating Masinagudi area will be declared a buffer zone as it is on the fringes of Mudumalai sanctuary. Well, that’s good news for wildlife because that implies less human interference. But what about Masinagudi people for whom wildlife tourism is the only source of livelihood?

Quick notes
Distance: Approximately 250 km from Bangalore
Route: Bangalore - Mysore - Gundlupet - Bandipur - Theppakadu - Masinagudi (via Mudumalai) - Ooty
Accommodation: Plenty of resorts available (details on internet)
Ideal time: All round the year except monsoon season
Food: Mostly included in your resort packages * Otherwise smaller hotels available at Masinagudi
Petrol: No bunks at Masinagudi (Essar bunk is now defunct) * Nearest is either Gundlupet or Thorappalli Tips: * Respect nature * Maintain silence in the forests * Don’t irritate wild animals * Conserve forests and leave no traces of your visit behind * Wear light coloured clothing during treks / safaris, avoid bright colours * Drive slowly through the wildlife zone from Gundlupet to Gudalur. Author Santosh B S works with an MNC, and escapes every possible weekend. He blogs at http://adventureanytime.blogspot.com