Conservationists alarmed as government forms committee without proper representation

The Government of Karnataka recently constituted the standing committee of the State Wildlife Board (SWLB), consisting of 11 members. As per a notification issued by the government on February 28, the committee has been formed by approval of the previous SWLB, whose tenure ended in October last year.

However, conservationists and wildlife activists have raised concerns about the process of constitution of this committee, saying it is not in line with the Wildlife (Protection) Act (WLPA), 1972.

They highlight that according to WLPA, while a standing committee is constituted for performing duties delegated to it by the SWLB, the committee should consist of members nominated from the board itself.

“The notification issued by the government on February 28 is illegal. As per the Act, SWLB should be in existence for the government to constitute its Standing Committee. However, not only has the committee been created, but its first meeting has also been held. This is a mockery of the process mandated under the Wildlife (Protection) Act (WLPA), 1972,” said a wildlife conservationist.

As per WLPA, the State Wildlife Board consists of the Chief Minister as chairperson, the Environment and Forest Minister as vice chairperson, three members of the state legislature, three persons representing non-government organisations dealing with wildlife, and ten eminent conservationists, ecologists, and environmentalists to be nominated by the state government, apart from others.

The Standing Committee should consist of a vice chairperson, a member secretary, and not more than ten members, to be nominated from amongst the members of SWLB.

“The committee formed has only official members. There is no representation of non-government organisations, conservationists, ecologists, and environmentalists. Given the situation, the functions of the Standing Committee come under scanner, especially in the absence of SWLB. The Board, moreover, is a statutory body and there should not be any delay in its formulation. This will only hamper conservation efforts,” said a city-based wildlife activist.

While the duty of the state wildlife board is to advise the government in the selection and management of areas to be declared as protected areas, formulate policies for the protection and conservation of wildlife, and tackle matters relating to the amendment of acts, the standing committee is supposed to perform duties delegated to it by the Board.

The committee formed has only official members. There is no representation of non-government organisations, environmentalists, etc–city-based wildlife activist
Experts say it is disheartening to see the process of constituting a Standing Committee getting diluted and SWLB yet to be reconstituted.

“While nomination for SWLB has already been made nearly four months ago, the file is yet to get clearance, leading to delay in the formation of SWLB,” said the activist.