Catching snakes and monkeys is profitable. Though volunteers must offer their services free, some demand steep fees. 

Snakes enter houses and gardens and cause fear and panic, while monkeys often raid apartment complexes and become a nuisance.

According to sources in the forest department, 25 men are going around claiming to be authorised snake-catchers. Similarly, 10 groups of monkey-catchers claim official approval.

“For every snake they catch, they demand Rs 2,000 to Rs 3,000. In the case of monkeys, the catchers demand between Rs 20,000 to Rs 30,000 from each apartment complex. We have been receiving complaints about such extortion,” explained B K Singh, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife).

Some volunteers allegedly let snakes and monkeys into apartment complexes and gardens and later pretend to be catchers.
Singh said, “Some animals caught by them are protected under the Indian Wildlife Act of 1972. Protection of these species is the duty of our department and if unauthorised people catch them and release them somewhere, we can’t keep track of them.”

The department has so far rejected 15 applications from people who want permission to catch snakes and monkeys.

“Animals taken out of their natural habitat and released elsewhwere find it difficult to survive,” said Singh. Bannerghatta has a wildlife park, and the numbers of predators depend on the prey they have access to. When unauthorised catchers release animals in the park, they disrupt the food chain and the balance.

“If you keep on adding rescued species into the Bannerghatta forest, it will eventually affect the life cycle of our species. That is why we have banned the release of rescued animals here,” explained Yatish Kumar, Deputy Conservator of Forest (Wildlife).

Got a problem?
The Bangalore Urban forest department has appealed to citizens to call 080-23343464 if they need help to catch snakes and monkeys.

“We send authorised volunteers who do the work free of cost. We neither pay them nor does anyone. They do it purely voluntarily as a service,” Singh said.

On call are 12 snake-catchers and six groups of monkey-catchers.

With more suburbs coming under the Bangalore civic administration, and real estate expanding, the problem of animals entering human habitats is higher than ever before.

“Several green areas have moved from local municipal council limits to the BBMP,” Singh explained.