Rescuers find 8-10 month-old leopard hiding out under BMTC bus after being struck by speeding vehicle near Turahalli forest

A female leopard aged between 8-10 months was hit by a car and was found hiding under a BMTC bus at Chikkegowda Palya, Kanakapura Main Road next to Turahalli state forest on Wednesday. A local reported the incident to the PfA wildlife rescue and the quick response team (QRT) of PfA in collaboration with the Karnataka Forest Department came to the spot and rescued the leopard.

The incident happened around 10.30 am and according to the local, a speeding car hit the leopard and the dazed leopard went and hid under a BMTC vehicle.

PfA’s Chief Veterinarian, Colonel Dr Nawaz Sharif, said, “It was hit by a car and it got dazed. There was a bus nearby and it went below the bus. We got information and reached the spot within 10 minutes. One of the curators went under the bus and pulled out the sub adult female. We rescued it without anaesthesia and rushed to the PfA wildlife hospital. We mildly sedated it and did all the clinical parameters. There were no fractures or any internal problems. She is perfectly fine.”

The rescue team included Rahul, Salman, Vasanth and Dr Madhav. “Upon getting the information, we informed the local team of the Karnataka forest department. The forest guards reached the spot and kept the crowd at bay. We reached the spot with all the safety equipment and were successful in rescuing the leopard.”

The rescue was done within 2-3 minutes and the leopard was taken to hospital. The scans and x-ray did not show any injuries and it was decided to release the leopard in its habitat.

Col Sharif said, “There has been a lot of human animal conflict. The leopard was in its habitat near the forest. And near the Turahalli forest, the road passes through the forest. We always say that the vehicles moving through the forest should go slowly. Luckily, the leopard was unharmed despite being hit by a car. A few weeks ago, we rescued a deer that was also hit by a vehicle.”