Committee probing Arjuna’s death should have members from outside government depts, say activists, who also seek better protection of camp elephants

After the state government ordered a probe into the elephant-capturing operation that led to the untimely death of Dasara fame elephant Arjuna, wildlife conservationists, and activists have demanded the constitution of an unbiased committee to look into the incident.

They say the current expert committee created to inquire about the happenings around Arjuna’s death has only members from the Karnataka Forest Department or other government agencies.

“The committee probing the incident should have representatives of the public, scientists, NGOs, and neutral veterinarians apart from KFD officials and policymakers. The current committee will not be able to conduct an unbiased probe,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
Wildlife conservationists also opine that the committee should also look at the death of camp elephants in the past. The outcomes of these investigations can be used to ensure the welfare of camp elephants in Karnataka.

“Karnataka Forest Department has gifted 57 elephants to other states since 2016. Moreover, as many as 106 elephants have been captured since 2013 in Karnataka. Out of these, 37 were translocated, 66 were sent to elephant camps and 3 died during capture operations. Out of the 66 elephants that were sent to camps, 15 have died. Six e;ephants died within one year of captivity, 7 passed away within two years of captivity and 2 died within three years of captivity. All these incidents must be investigated by the committee and the unbiased report should be handed over to the environment minister of the state,” added Hoover.

Follow SOP
Experts say while the Elephant Task Force has laid down SOPs for the use of camp elephants, many guidelines are not being followed by the department.

  As per the SOP by the Elephant Task Force, camp elephants should retire at the age of 60 and not be part of any operation ­–Ramesh Belagere, researcher
“As per the SOP put in place by the Elephant Task Force, camp elephants should retire at the age of 60 and not be part of any operation, let alone wild elephant capturing operation. Arjuna has repeatedly been roped into such operations apart from being made to carry Dasara Howdah despite being a senior elephant. A committee with unbiased representation should be formed to look into this aspect and ensure that these guidelines are followed in the future,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

“In the case of Arjuna, the retired elephant was not only in musht but also had injuries. He had a very severe crack under his foot. Moreover, no post-mortem was carried out citing Arjuna as a sacred elephant. If that was the case, why did the department deploy a sacred elephant in a high conflict situation, and was Arjuna’s tusk removed?” questioned Hoover.