It’s highly unlikely Jadugar Anand’s magic will save state principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF), B K Singh, who has drawn flak from various quarters for issuing an NOC to use a captive elephant for the magician’s show in the city.
 Not only has it violated the recommendations of National Task force for Wild and Captive Elephants, but wildlife enthusiasts in the city have written to animal rights activist Maneka Gandhi, which can only spell more trouble for Singh and Jadugar Anand.
 
 In a letter dated February 11, Singh had issued an NOC to Anand to bring 18-year-old Kanchi from Andhra Pradesh for his magic show in city from April 4 to May 22, which wildlife activists allege, violates the national task forces recommendations, besides the Indian Wildlife Act.
 
 “It’s shocking. It’s banned to use a captive animal for commercial purposes. I don’t understand how the PCCF issued an NOC to use an elephant for the magic show, which I’m sure is not a charity,” said Suparna Ganguly, member, National Task force for Wild and Captive Elephants.
 
 The elephant was brought from Andhra and has been kept chained at Town Hall in violation of laws to protect elephants.
 The 12-member National Task Force for Wild and Captive Elephants, which gave its recommendations to preserve captive elephants, had recommended a ban on using elephants for commercial purpose in August 2010. The Indian Wildlife Act, 1972, also restricts its use for commercial purpose in spirit, say experts.
 
 “Our recommendation to put a ban on using elephants for commercial purpose was accepted by the union environment and forest ministry. Besides an elephant being a Schedule I animal, there are issues of concern such as food, shelter and space. The elephant has been chained with a spike collar. This is intolerable. We have taken it seriously and the PCCF’s decision to give an NOC will be questioned. We will see to it that the elephant is released at the earliest,” Ganguly said.
 
 Meanwhile, wildlife activists have also written to MP Maneka Gandhi, asking her to intervene in the matter. 
 
 “We have written to Maneka Gandhi as PCCF himself has issued the NOC. We have mailed all relevant documents to her. Hope she will help,” said Adil Arif, a wildlife volunteer.
 
 When Bangalore Mirror contacted Singh, the PCCF failed to recall the case and said the use of elephants for commercial purpose was not permissible.
 
 “I don’t remember giving any such permission. However, elephants can’t be used for commercial purposes like magic shows,” B K Singh said.