Popular hotspots near Bannerghatta will be off limits for trekkers and wildlife enthusiasts with a wild tiger deciding to camp in the area since the last two days 
 
 Though its presence had been speculated for the past six months, the big cat finally made itself visible on Saturday. Bannerghatta Biological Park officials and the public spotted it from up close and even captured it on camera.
 
 	Ragihalli hill top as well as the Suvarnamukhi Valley on the periphery of Bannerghatta Biological and National Park are a favourite with trekkers and photographers. Every week, hundreds of them, mainly techies, flock to these places. They are often treated to a glimpse of wild animals crossing the forested borders. But with the tiger’s arrival now confirmed, forest department officials have warned that the area is not safe anymore for visitors.
 	  	A forest department official said Bannerghatta was one of the closest forest areas to Bengaluru. “There are many countryside roads that crisscross the forest which trekkers and photographers prefer for weekend outings. We have already seen several deaths caused by wild animals, especially elephants. A tiger spotting makes it especially dangerous. Hence, we are asking amateurs to stay away from these forests,” he said, advising people to opt for safaris conducted by the forest department.
 	  	Bannerghatta Biological Park director Range Gowda too said the encounters with wild elephants should be warning enough. He said they had even cautioned their staff to be careful. “When this is the case, imagine the risk to an amateur trekker or photographer venturing into these forests. We don’t want anyone to risk lives,” Gowda said.
 	  	Underlining the need for caution, forest officials cite the casualties in and around Bannerghatta . In June this year, two persons lost lives after they were trampled to death by elephants. In July 2012, a techie had lost his way in Bannerghatta and his body was found two days later. He too was suspected to have been a victim of wild elephants. In 2006, a 35-year old man was killed by an elephant near Gottigere while leopards were sighted at a school near Bannerghatta creating panic in the area.
 	  	The arrival of the big cat is being termed a positive sign. “The sighting of the tiger is the best positive indicator we have received in the last 40 years. If a tiger moves into a forest, it’s a sign the environment is healthy for its survival. We need to welcome these animals by allowing them to stay peacefully,” Range Gowda, said, calling upon Bengalureans to extend a welcome gesture by not venturing into the area.
 	  	Bannerghatta National Park DCF Sunil Panwar too warned the public to steer clear of the forests. “Please do not scare the animals, allowed them to stay in their habitat.”
 	  	Prashanth Kumar, an IT professional and one of the first to observe the pug marks of the tiger, said a tiger usually covers a territory of 25 km in a day. It’s best people avoid Ragihalli or Suvarnamukhi. “There is another reason to avoid these places. Unlike Bandipur and Nagarahole forests, which have a buffer zone of one kilometre, there is no such buffer zone in Bannerghatta.” Manjunath Krishnamurthy, an IT professional and an avid photographer, said Bannerghatta was a favourite spot but they were spreading the word among friends not to venture there.