I had dreamed of climbing the Kudremukh Peak (Kpeak) for almost four years. My attempts to pursue this dream were scuttled by frequent denials by the forest department to grant me permission. This time I was determined to realise my dream, come what may.

Numerous calls to forest officials in Kudremukh for permission yielded no result. They said I could not trek due to Naxal problem, rain etc. I came up with another strategy. I approached the forest department authorities through a local contact. And it worked. Though I did not get written permission, I had verbal permission.

I was a bit disappointed as my friend Suhas could not join me due to family commitments. At round 11 pm on a September night, I left Bangalore for Kalasa in a Rajahamsa bus. I reached Kalasa at 7.30 am the next day. The journey wasn’t smooth as the road was bad in patches.

Once I landed in Kalasa, I took a room in Yatri Nivas hotel and freshened up. I then took a local bus to a place called Barkal, which is just after Samse. My guide Satisha was waiting for me at Mullodi, which is 5 kilometres from Barkal, and is connected by a mud road. One look at the mud road made me decide it was not worth walking on it. It was all marshy due to rain. The tractors, which carry construction material for a power project coming up near by, had only worsened  it. I instead hired a jeep and was in Satisha’s house in about 25 minutes, catching a glimpse of the Kpeak en route.

CHASING A DREAM

My plan was to rest that day and climb Kpeak the next day. But Satisha suggested I trek the same day as it wasn’t raining that day. The past two days had seen heavy rain. I hesitated as I had travelled the whole night. But I decided to go with his advice and in the end it proved to be the right choice.

We set off at around 10.30 am with lunch packed. The initial trek was normal with the ground being rocky and a bit slippery. My eyes were fascinated by what I saw. I got busy clicking photographs but Satisha egged me to walk fast as there was more in store.

I lost track of the number of streams we crossed. As the rainy season was coming to an end the streams were full. Some were knee deep. The Kudremukh National Park consists of patches of shola forest separated by grassland. We ran through the patches of shola forest as they are home to leeches. Whenever the leeches stuck to my feet I used a pinch of salt to make them drop off. We trekked through some mind-blowing grasslands. The scenery I saw cannot be described in words.

After about two hours we reached a place called Lobo Mane (meaning Lobo’s house). The place actually has three houses built close to each other. Long ago, a man named Lobo lived there. Now the place is deserted.

TREKKING DANGEROUSLY

As we passed this place we saw some creatures moving in one of the houses. A closer look showed these creatures were about 6-7 trekkers from some software companies in Bangalore. I was astonished to know they had no permissions and no guide. Even more surprising was their question why one has to take permissions. My advice to trekkers is to obtain all the necessary permissions before they venture on a trek inside a forest area or national park. It’s not wise to break the rules no matter how experienced you are. And always take a guide along.

NO PAIN, NO GAIN

Next, was the most difficult part of the trek: Climbing the hill behind the third Lobo house. It turned out to be the most tiring climb I’ve had in recent times. But the reward of this gruelling trek was getting to see some mesmerising landscape from the bottom of the horse shaped summit. We then had to take a sort of U-turn and climb it from behind. This climb was relatively smooth. Finally after almost five hours of trekking I was on top of the Kpeak. I had fulfilled my four-year long desire. We gulped our lunch. I had a small photo session on the summit. The other side of the valley was not visible due to thick fog.

The 40 odd minutes I spent there seemed too little when my guide reminded me that we should head back. I reluctantly started to descend after kissing goodbye to the Kpeak.

The climb down was easier and fast. In no time we were near the third Lobo house. My guide pointed out the only wildlife I saw on this trek: a lonely bison grazing. Before I could capture it on my camera it disappeared into the thick shola forest. I managed to get a distant pic of the beast.

It was evening and the sky was getting dark. It was pitch dark when we entered the sholas. My light source - a little pen torch - refused to work. I had to depend on Satisha’s instincts to guide me home.

Finally at 7 pm we made it back to civilization i.e. Satisha’s house at Mullodi. Blood from leech bites was still oozing from my legs. I cleaned the wounds, had a hot bath and some excellent food prepared by Satisha’s mother. I woke up the next morning at 8 am after a good night’s sleep. It was raining cats and dogs but I felt so good that I had taken Satisha’s advice and trekked the previous day.

I spent the whole day lazing around doing nothing, thanks to the heavy rain. At around 6 pm, I headed back to Kalasa in a jeep. Around 10.30 pm I left Kalasa in a bus and reached Bangalore at 5 am the next day. I came home, crashed on my bed, reminisced those moments on Kpeak, and started to dream of my next trek!

(Anil S is based in Bangalore and loves trekking and travelling)

(Adventure just got itself a new name! The number of new and old places Bangalore’s resident techies have covered are seemingly endless. Have you been someplace lately? Write in and send us your experiences for our Tech Venture column. But if you made that trip on a sick leave, or if you like your anonymity, then give yourself a nom de plume. We won’t snitch on your real identity, we promise! Write in to bmtechventure@gmail.com)