A team of eight CID sleuths (forest cell) which reached the house of Prakash, a coffee planter in Attihalli near Sakleshpur, recently investigating a lead had a jolt when it was shown the family’s ‘pets’ – six wild animals, including an adult sambar and a young civet cat, all protected under various schedules of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, being reared in cattle sheds.    “We started the investigation on being informed that wild animals being held captive by the family,” said M K Murali, deputy superintendent of CID forest cell who led the team. “We were skeptical at first, as most such information turn to be a hoax. Also, rearing wild animals is something near impossible. However, in this case the information came out to be true.”   When the team first visited the house, a woman, taking them to be tourists, confirmed that they reared wild animals. She showed them place where two sambars, a civet cat and three wild cats were kept.   One of the sambars was an adult and was in captivity for over eight months while the second one was younger and was with the family for the past three months. The wild cats, especially the fully grown civet which looked like a young leopard, had also been with them for a few months, forest officials said. “The animals were kept in cattle sheds measuring 10x10 feet. The adult and young sambars were tied inside,” said Murali.   “The animals were rescued and handed over to the forest department, which will be sending them to Mysore zoo. The family claimed to be unaware of the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act. We told them about the seriousness of their actions and have sought an explanation,” Murali said.    “If any wild animal is rescued or found injured, the nearest range forest officer has to be informed within 24 hours. Keeping them in captivity is illegal. One may face imprisonment from three to seven years,” said Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert.   In case you find any protected animal kept in captivity, contact 9880108801.