By Shreyashi Mukherjee

Post-covid, life has returned to normal and incidents of birds getting stuck in manja is on the rise. According to data from People for Animals, a wildlife rescue and rehab centre, the total number of birds that have been entangled in manja and rescued till October is 615. Of these, August with 94 bird rescues, was the cruellest month as far as manja cases go.

Dr Nawaz Shariff, General Manager and Chief Veterinarian, PfA, said, “I have been rescuing birds who are getting entangled in manjas for the last two years and I have also written letters to the BBMP commissioners and even the chief minister. Rampant selling of manjas continues. It is important to stop manufacturing of the manjas and conduct raids on shops that sell them. Manjas collected from shops should be burned and the shops should be sealed off.”

PfA has been conducting environmental ecological programmes for school and college children and they have also conducted webinars to sensitise the people about the hazards of using these the deadly kite-flying threads.
 
“Through this, we have been able to sensitise a lot of people. Before covid, we used to get only one or two calls regarding the birds stuck in manjas. Now, we get around 6 to 7 calls a day about big birds that are stuck at a height of 80 to 100 feet,” added Dr Shariff.

He also said that initially rescuing such birds was a difficult task, but now they are using a specialised equipment that can reach high. However, unfortunately, the number of birds getting entangled too has gone up.

Ajay Shaji, a resident of Jalahalli, said he noticed an eagle stuck in a tree near his home recently. “At first, I did not understand, but later I realised it was entangled in a manja and was struggling to get out. I immediately called up the rescue centre.”

Chinese manja was banned by the government in 2017, but they are very much a part of the terrain.


Ashok Kumar, a bird activist, said, “These manjas are very harmful for the birds as the string cuts the birds due to the sharp glass coating and recovering from that becomes almost impossible. Manjas also take a lot of time to decompose. They are used rampantly because they are cheap.”