By Farheen Hussain
 
 
  Students from State pen award-winning ‘autobiographies’ as part of contest by Wipro
 
 
 
  The students from Karnataka being honoured by Wipro founder Azim Premji
 
 What if a Singapore cherry tree and a Honge Maraa (Millettia pinnata) decide to pen down their thoughts – one is an autobiography and the other, a novel -- to drive home the point on biodiversity and sustainability? It’s not a tale from an animated wildlife film, but they are award-winning projects created by two set of students from Karnataka who took part in Earthian 2016’, its sixth edition. The project, a part of the IT major’s sustainability education programme in schools across the country, had over 1,000 submissions from across the country. Of which, 10 schools took home the coveted prize. From Karnataka, the winners were Prakriya Green Wisdom School of Bengaluru and Sree Gurukul of Tumkur and it was their projects in the form of an ‘autobiography’ of trees and a ‘novel’ respectively.
 
 
 PRAKRIYA GREEN WISDOM SCHOOL
 
 The kids had to take up many tasks to complete the project -- from observing their surroundings to comparing them with different kind of environments and even interviewing people connected with their field. The final form of presentation -- novel or autobiography- was completely the team’s discretion. “Our school has always been inclined towards environment and when we found out we have to do a project based on bio-diversity, we were very excited. We basically learnt and observed everything we needed in our school,” said Kavvya S, a member of the team from Prakriya Green Wisdom School, whose project was titled ‘Jivavaividhya’. The team has documented biodiversity changes as well as the relationship between various organisms in the surroundings all through the perspective of the trees located on their school premises. They took two months to complete the project which won them a cash prize of Rs 1 lakh.
 
 “The project was basically about sustainable solutions to problems related to biodiversity. We researched about the relationship between plants and eco-system and the smallest and biggest part that they play,” she added. The team’s teacher acted as a guide. “I only guided them and left the rest to them. I did not alter the project much but guided them whenever they had doubts regarding species of tree,” said Hussain Ebrahim, the team’s environmental science teacher. “The cash prize will be donated to other schools in our surroundings which are in need of funds,” he added.
 
 
 SREE GURUKUL SCHOOL
 
 The team’s novel had members featuring as characters in the novel. Their project also focused on the sustainability of ecosystem and biodiversity. “We completed it in two months and it is more like sharing our experience through the project. This project has helped us a lot. We are beginning to take an initiative and more careful about our environment now,” Aditi, a student of the Sree Gurukul school of Tumkur said.
 
 
 When Premji knelt outside the class
 
 Azim Premji, one of the most successful business tycoons in the country, took a trip down memory lane during the award ceremony. When a kid asked “were you naughty as a kid”, the answer was rather quick. “Yes, I was very naughty as a kid. And in those days you got rapped on the knuckles, hit on the head and you had to kneel outside the classroom for a long time. At least some of those practices are no longer there, but I spent a lot of my time outside the class kneeling down,” he said.