Recent data shows Karnataka has second-highest area of forest land occupied illegally across country

With more than 76,000 hectares of forest land under encroachment, Karnataka has the second-highest amount of forest area illegally occupied across India, according to recent data from the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The only state with more forest area intruded is Assam, with encroachment of over 3.40 lakh hectares.

According to the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), the encroachment figure is dynamic and the current area under encroachment is much less than the figure projected by the Ministry of Environment. Moreover, the figure by MoEF&CC also includes over 14,000 hectares of forest land that was encroached on before 1978 and later regularized by the government of India.

“The encroachment figure is dynamic. Unfortunately, we are not adding and deleting encroached areas on a day-to-day basis. In the past three months, an eviction of the order of 1,400 acres in Srinivaspura taluk was done, but not updated with MoEF&CC. Moreover, this number by the Ministry also includes over 14,000 hectares of encroached land that was later regularised. Evictions are happening regularly and our approach has been to prioritise cases with encroached areas of over three acres. Over the last nine years, the department has carried out eviction on over 10,000 hectares of encroached forest land,” said Brijesh Kumar Dixit, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Head of Forest Force, KFD.

No action taken
However, experts say such a high amount of forest area under encroachment is due to a lack of action by KFD officials. While in many encroachment cases, officials have initiated actions and have followed the procedures mentioned under section 64(A) of the Forest Act and have filed FIRs, cases rarely meet their logical end. Eviction cases are not taken seriously by the department officials.

“In most of the cases filed, the officials have initiated actions and have followed the procedures mentioned under section 64(A) of the Forest Act and have filed FIRs. However, this is where it all ends. The department must come up with year-wise encroachment numbers and evictions conducted so far. Most of the time, appropriate legal action is not taken and on other occasions, officials crumble under political pressure,” said a wildlife conservationist.

Experts also highlight a judgment passed by the Supreme Court in 2002, stating that no fresh encroachments of forest land should be allowed. In case of violations, the official concerned, which is the Deputy Conservator of Forest (DCF) of the sub-division should be held liable. Any forest department officials giving the opportunity to encroachers can also be prosecuted.
Activists say while the primary duty of the department is to conserve the existing forest cover and ensure the eviction of illegal encroachments, the majority of the PCCFs, CCFs, CFs, DCFs, ACFs, and RFOs have failed to perform this duty.

The rule-book
“There are defined rules and regulations under the Forest Act to prevent encroachment of forest land and ensure eviction when needed. However, rarely does an eviction happen and the encroached area has piled up to this level. In many cases, KFD officials get influenced by political pressure, and more often than not, higher-level officials are seldom held responsible. Fresh encroachment cases are coming up regularly, but no action has been taken on ground,” said another city-based wildlife activist.

There are defined rules and regulations under the Forest Act to prevent encroachment of forest land and ensure eviction when needed. However, rarely does an eviction happen... In many cases, KFD officials get influenced by political pressure, and often,higher-level officials are not held responsible–City-based wildlife activist
According to MoEF&CC guidelines issued in 2002, state-level and circle-level encroachment monitoring committees should be constituted to look into encroachment cases. To add to that, a district-level committee consisting of the District Magistrate and Collector, Superintendent of Police, and the Divisional Forest Officer should also be created to ensure eviction. The guidelines further state that these evictions must be monitored by the state-level, circle-level, and district-level committees at quarterly intervals.

It also suggests that a committee should be constituted at the forest circle level under the chairmanship of the Conservator of Forests with the District Collector and Superintendent of Police as members to take effective steps to assist the Divisional Forest Officers or the Territorial Division/Wildlife Warden/ National Park and Sanctuary Director in evictions.