Don’t drink and drive — it’s an oft-quoted warning. Somebody should have told sandalwood thief Siddaraju not to drink and steal.    He made the mistake while he was out cutting a sandalwood tree with his accomplices on Tuesday night, and woke up on Wednesday morning to find himself surrounded by cops. He made a last-ditch attempt to flee, but residents of Jayanna Layout in Rajarajeshwari Nagar helped the police nab him.   The residents were aware on Tuesday night itself that thieves were after their beloved sandalwood tree, but dared not step out of their homes. They were in for a surprise at dawn. Near the stump of the axed sandalwood tree, they found one of the thieves fast asleep, with pieces of the trunk, a blade and an empty bottle of liquor lying around him.    Residents alerted the Rajarajeshwari Nagar police, who rushed to the spot. They woke up Siddaraju, a 28-year-old resident of Kadamballi near Channapatna, and made him collect all the pieces of the trunk. While gathering the pieces, Siddaraju attempted to slip away, but the police, with the help of alert residents, nabbed him after a one-km chase. A two-wheeler rider, too, had joined the chase.   Some of the residents told Bangalore Mirror that they had seen Siddaraju in their layout during the day, posing as a ragpicker. Nobody had suspected him of being after the sandalwood tree. Police believe that the power saw used by the culprits broke down. Siddaraju’s accomplices went to either repair the machine or get a replacement. Left alone, Siddaraju dozed off under the effect of alcohol.    Inspector K Ravi of Rajarajeshwari Nagar police station told Bangalore Mirror, “We have registered a case against Siddaraju under the Forest Act and various sections of the IPC. We are on the lookout for two of his accomplices.”    Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore (urban) told Bangalore Mirror, “This is a strange case. We have never heard of a sandalwood thief going off to sleep after the crime. Any crime pertaining to sandalwood is a serious offence. Even plucking leaves and cutting branches of a sandalwood tree is an offence, and is punishable under the Karnataka Tree Preservation Act. If the charges are proved, the culprit can be sentenced to up to seven years’ imprisonment.”   Vinay S, a resident of Jayanna Layout, said, “We have heard of sandalwood trees going missing, but never of a culprit cutting a tree and then falling asleep nearby.”