Architect starts mapping lanes to make intra-city traffic safe, eco-friendly 

The increasing traffic density even in two-tier cities and the absence of dedicated tracks has made cycling for regular commute next to impossible. Parents, too, don’t feel safe to send their children on a cycle to school. 

Taking all these factors into consideration, wildlife conservationist and architect Niren Jain has decided to make an intra-city motor vehicle-free safe bicycle lane map within Mangaluru City.

Niren Jain told BM, "About six months ago, I launched an experiment of mapping non-motorised lanes. I have realised that there are quite a few lanes that can be used as a dedicated cycling lane. There could be some crossovers along the main road, bridges or nalas. Some interventions might be needed from civic authorities.Cycling clubs often dedicate themselves to reaching milestones or means to stay fit and exercise during a holiday or early morning or late evenings. I want to use cycling for regular commute and have been wondering how to do it as road are totally unsafe in the absence of dedicated tracks. There is hardly anyone who uses cycle for regular commute.” 
I want to use cycling for regular commute and have been wondering how to do it as road are totally unsafe in the absence of dedicated tracks— Niren Jain, wildlife conservationist 
For Niren, the exercise looks really promising. “The initiative is still at its preliminary stage and we need to take it forward with the support from Mangaluru City Corporation. Launched six months ago, I have mapped lanes on and off whenever time allowed. Certain issues such as gradient slopes have to be examined as Mangaluru basically has a hilly terrain. We could probably cut off from one point where we need to go. The focus would be on high-density areas connecting work or education institutes to residential areas. 

The moment parents feel that the routes are safe for cyclists, we would probably see a rise in the use of cycles for daily commute. Whenever, I have gone on this exercise, I have realised that it is a totally different Mangaluru that I am exploring even though I have lived in Mangaluru for several years,” he said. Niren is already in discussion with Smart City officials to take this up as a full-fledged project for as part of smart city. If that happens, can come up with a comprehensive report at the earliest. “There is a need to look at several alternative routes to make it a permanent aspect of the city,“ he said.