Centre bans all forms of commercial activity in notified area around the park, calls it Eco Sensitive Zone
 
 
 
 In a major crackdown, the Union government has put an end to the booming real estate and other allied commercial activities varying from 100 metres to 4.5 km from the perimeter of the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) by declaring it an Eco Sensitive Zone (ESZ).
 
 The decision by the Union ministry of environment and forests (MoEF) has come at a time when encroachments and commercial activities are adversely affecting wildlife in the BNP, spread across 260.51 sq km.
 
 According to the notification issued by the government of India, large tract of land around the boundary of the BNP has been declared as ‘ecologically sensitive zone’.
 
 The notification directs the Karnataka state government to ban operations of stone quarries, saw mill industries and regulate air and noise pollution, besides addressing land use pattern and tourism activities in the notified area.
 
 The notification provides for two-year term for the state government to prepare a zonal master plan for the management of the ESZ.
 
 Dr Sunil Panwar, deputy conservator of forests, BNP, told Bangalore Mirror that the thickness of the ESZ varies from place to place considering the inhabitation. “At some places it would be just 100 metres and at other places it extends up to 4.5 Km, which is a good decision. Except for a few activities that have been notified in the gazette, all commercial activities will be banned within those areas,” he explained.
 
 Several quarries had thrived on the periphery of BNP, causing much damage to the wildlife corridors used by elephants and tigers over the years.
 
 “All new and existing quarries, mines and crushing units are prohibited except for the domestic needs of local residents,” the notification said. This apart, setting up of saw mills, industries, thermal and hydro-electric projects, commercial use of firewood and discharge of untreated effluents into the designated area are all prohibited. The notification also calls for regulation of certain activities like use of plastic bags, tourism activities, setting up of hotels and resorts, extraction of groundwater, noise and air pollution from vehicles, felling of trees, insulation of electric lines and construction.
 
 “No new commercial construction of any kind shall be permitted within 1 km of the boundary of BNP. Local people shall be permitted to undertake construction in their land,” the notification revealed. The MoEF notification said the BNP is a “Terminal point on the northern side of ‘Mysuru Elephant Reserve’ that inhabitates the large mammal – Asian elephants – that migrate from adjacent Thali Reserve in TN. The BNP has breeding population of elephants and supports leopard, wild dog, gaur, sambhar, chital, sloth bear, slender loris, oriental white humped vulture, long-billed vulture, yellow-throated bulbul and other important wildlife. The park is also an important watershed area for the Arkavathi, Suvarnamukhi, Muth­yalamadavu hole, Rayathamala hole, Hebbal­lahalla and Anthar­agange that joins the river Cauvery.”
 
 
 
 
 
 WHAT IS BANNED
 
 New and existing quarries, mines, crushing units are prohibited except for the domestic needs of local residents. Saw mills, industries, thermal and hydro-electric projects, commercial use of firewood and discharge of untreated effluents into the designated area are all prohibited.
 
 
 What’s REGULATed
 
 Notification allows, but calls for regulation of, activities like use of plastic bags, tourism activities, setting up of hotels and resorts, extraction of groundwater, noise and air pollution from vehicles, felling of trees, insulation of electric lines and construction.