By Garima Prasher

TN forest department, Bengaluru cops team up to nab inter-state gang

In a major operation, officials of the Karnataka Police Department and Tamil Nadu Forest Departments came together to arrest an inter-state gang in connection with a recent ivory smuggling case.

In what can only be described as a well-coordinated interdepartmental approach, both the accused were arrested by the officials for their involvement in transporting ivory across the state border on February 16.
 
The officials from Tamil Nadu Forest Department tied up the loose end for Hebbaguddi police officials by nabbing both the absconding men and handing them over to the officials for further interrogation.

Earlier, the Hebbaguddi police officials had arrested six men while they were transporting a pair of tusks weighing 14 kilograms. Officials say that all six arrested were only the middlemen.
 
“The main accused were at large. We have now arrested two men – Pavan Raj and Basavaraj,” informed Karthikeyani K, wildlife warden, Hosur forest division, Tamil Nadu Forest Department.
 
Karthikeyani said, “We were tipped off on their whereabouts through local intelligence. Once we had their addresses, we arrested one of the accused from his home, whereas the second accused was nabbed later from the neighborhood,” said.

 “So far, the accused have maintained that the tusks were not obtained from a live animal. As per the information they are divulging, they found the tusks in a rocky area around their village in Hosur. However, further interrogation is on,” said a police official.

A clear case of poaching, says wildlife expert
Wildlife experts say that this is a clear case of poaching and there should be comprehensive inquiry into the issue.

Sharath Babu, a wildlife enthusiast, said: “It is not a case of tusks collection after the animal has shed it naturally. The animal, in all probability, was shot and the tusks were harvested.

 Tusks that are shed naturally look different.”

He further stated, “One of the tusks is larger than the other. When an elephant is shot by an untrained hunter, the animal either falls on its left or its right. So, while the tusk facing the sky can be easily harvested, the one on the ground cannot be taken out completely because of the weight of the animal.”