In the wake of the near-complete shutdown of Bengaluru, we are republishing an old column on places that you can visit using your own conveyance. Please exercise discretion while choosing the destination

Biligiri Rangaiah, neene helaiah Sri Ranganayakiya Chandulli Chaluvaiah...” (O’ Lord of the Biligri Hills, you tell me, you the handsome charmer of Goddess
Ranganayaki), is the translation of the above lines from a famous Kannada movie song. Biligirirangana Hills, also known as BR Hills is situated in the Chamarajanagar district of Karnataka and it is a lofty range in the state which is known for its tiger reserve and diverse species of flora and fauna. The name Biligiri means white cliff, Ranganna means Lord Ranganatha and Betta means hill. You will feel the wilderness of this place right from the beginning of the cliff. You can either drive up or climb 150 steps to reach the picturesque temple cliff which is situated 5,000 feet above sea level. Take a stroll around the temple and you will get a breathtaking view of the hills and even see the connecting corridor of Eastern Ghats to the Western Ghats.

The major attraction is the Biligirirangana temple, which has been a place of pilgrimage for over 500 years. The temple is located at the edge of a rock-cliff.

In April, the temple celebrates the annual car festival, which is attended by a large number of devotees, pilgrims and tourists. According to Karnataka gazetteer, the temple of Venkatesha was described as of Ranganatha during a visit of Tipu to the place on a hunting expedition and thus became popular as Biligiri Ranga. The highest point of the hill is 5,091 feet above sea level. Inside the temple, the pillars of the navaranga have fine relief sculptures of Dashavatra and other Vaishanava images. There are many things to do in the vicinity, like visiting the wildlife sanctuary of BR hills, a nature-centric gateway that has the Cauvery River flowing through it.

The surroundings of the temple have a few viewpoints which are not to be missed. You will find a spot right behind the temple towards the Annadana hall, offering an expansive views of lush green mountains. Along with the chirping of birds, the ambiance will leave you speechless. Locals will demand absolute quietude from you, claiming you can hear tigers roar as they hunt, though we could not hear it, the thought of one lurking around was a thrilling one.
The best time to visit the BR hills and the wildlife sanctuary is between the months of October and May.


Getting there 

There are two routes to reach BR Hills. One can travel to BR Hills from Chamarajanagar via K Gudi, while the other route is via Yellandur. The K Gudi route passes through dense jungles while the ascent from the Yellandur is a comparatively easier one. BR Hills is 211 km from Bengaluru.