By Piyush Ranjan

Drop in temperatures has increased the number of snake sightings 

Snake sightings in the city have increased with the recent change in the weather and drop in temperatures. According to snake rescuers, they have been receiving multiple calls about snake sightings from different parts of the city each day since the first rains about two weeks ago. 

People are reporting of snakes in the backyards, vacant lands and sometimes in autos and cars as well. Snake rescuer Viveka Urs says another reason for this rise is the continual road development and construction projects in the city which disturb the habitat of the snakes compelling them to come out in the open.

The snakes rescued usually include Cobras, Russell’s Vipers and Rat snakes that are found mostly near garbage dumped openly around the city. According to Prasanna K, BBMP Wildlife Warden, “Snakes are shy and come in contact with humans when they move around in search of prey. Garbage dumps are home to rats which are common preys of snakes. Also, due to large tracts of land being converted into apartment complexes and tech parks, snakes move out in search of a new shelter resulting in human confrontation.” He added that most people are unaware that snakes come under Schedule 2 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and killing snakes can result in 3-7 years of prison time.

In the past week, over 50 snakes have been rescued from households, gardens, backyards and construction sites according to the snake rescuers. “Most of the recent rescues are of Cobras as this is their mating season and so they move around in search of partners. The sudden rainfall has made snakes to move out probably due to water flooding in their burrows and holes. People should be careful while walking around in their backyards and gardens especially after dark,” said Mohan K, another BBMP officer.

If you spot a snake

Upon sighting a snake, the best thing to do is to contact the BBMP Control Room on 080-22221188 and do not attempt to catch the snakes. Subhadra C, one of the few female snake rescuers in Bengaluru, said, “Snakes have been showing up in places you don’t expect. I have seen snakes found inside cars in the glove compartment and in the engine. Cattle sheds, construction sites and places where rubble and junk are left in the open are prone to snakes as well.” Prasanna K recalled an incident where he found a snake in the toilet on the sixteenth floor of an apartment complex a few months ago. Mohan K, another rescuer described an incident of a rat snake was rescued from the chassis of a car a month ago in Banaswadi and a cobra on MG Road last summer.

“The number of snake sightings will be on the rise till early winter as for the next month and a half, snakes will lay eggs and newborns would come out in the open to explore. During winter the snakes go into hibernation,” said Viveka Urs. 

A few important things to keep in mind when a snake is found is to inform the officials right away and keep an eye on it maintaining a safe distance from the snake. In the event of a snake bite, the victim should be rushed to the nearby hospital without wasting any time on home remedies or with quacks who claim to heal snake bites. One should also be vary of trying cinema inspired things such as attempting to suck the venom out or cut the bitten part as these things do not really work. The best way to evade confrontation with a snake is by keeping the surroundings clean and rodent-free.