To judge reserves based on performance and award them, apart from getting students on board too
 
 	Clicking a tiger against the scenic backdrop of a verdant landscape or painting the big cats on a wider canvas could be a profitable option for school students and college students! Taking conservation to new level and to sensitise youngsters to the cause of wildlife conservation, particularly big cats, the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) has rolled out several unique programmes that not only expose talent among youngsters but reward them considerably. 
 	  	Completing 10 years, the NTCA — the nodal agency that overlooks conservation of tigers across India, has constituted several awards on annual basis and directed all tiger states to conduct programmes and send entries to the national level. A decision, according to sources in NTCA, was taken last week and officially communicated to all chief wildlife wardens of the states and field directors of all tiger reserves across the country.
 	  	Giving details of the programme to Bangalore Mirror, PS Somashekar, inspector-general of Forests, NTCA, regional office, Bengaluru, said, “Coinciding with the 10 year completion of our existence, several events have been organised at New Delhi and all tiger states have been directed to send entries to the national level competitions. A committee has also been set up to oversee these programmes. Accordingly, we have directed all field directors and the chief wildlife warden to organise events and send in the best three entries to the national level.”
 	  	While the two events — painting and photography on ‘Tiger and Nature’ is open for students, the tiger reserves will be assessed for best conservational practices. While the painting competition offers cash rewards of up to Rs 10,000, the photography contest has prize money up to Rs 15,000. “Every school or college has to send in one entry to the nodal officer appointed by the state and out of all entries, the best three will be chosen for national competition.”
 	
 	
 	
 	Best Reserve award!
 	
 	 		Though all tiger reserves compete with each other to enforce best conservational practices in protecting tigers, this time NTCA will judge their performance vis-à-vis conservation of various flora and fauna species as well! “A tiger reserve does not mean only tigers. It would be a complete and balanced ecosystem. Focussing on this theme, the reserves will be assessed for their conservation programmes in protecting unique flora and faunal 	 		species. The best reserve will be rewarded a trophy and a citation at the national level,” another NTCA official explained.
 		 	 		The state officers have been directed to set up a screening committee to pick the best entries in each category and those nominations have to be sent to NTCA, New Delhi, by December 15.