Successfully attaches matriarch with tracking device in Chhattisgarh forest

When Dr Nithin K, a veterinarian at the Bengaluru based Wildlife SOS, thought he was in the middle of a rock fall, he didn’t know a greater danger awaited him. The rumble was not of boulders, but it was a herd of elephants heading his way. “We were in between two herds of elephants that had to be darted. We had no idea where to run. It was my first time in the real wilderness,” he recalled. 

Dr Nithin was part of an operation to radio collar elephants in Chhattisgarh. About 20 people had died in Chhattisgarh where a herd of 19 elephants came into a conflict with locals after their habitat was destroyed and they were displaced from the forests of Odisha.

 The herd, led by a matriarch raids farms that border the forest areas in Mahasamund to eat crops at night. Wildlife SOS, in collaboration with the Chhattisgarh Forest Department, launched an initiative to radio collar the elephants to help track their movement and create an early warning alert system to help save human lives. 

Dr S. Ilayaraja, Deputy Director Veterinary Services, Wildlife SOS, was also a part of the team and was guided by a team of experts and advisors including Chief Wildlife Warden of Chhattisgarh, senior forest officials like KK Bisen, Aravind PM along with. Ajay Desai, Dr A. Zachariah and Dr Kalaivanan.

Their first target was the matriarch. “Dr Arun and Dr Ilayaraja managed to tranquilise the animal. After the first shot, she travelled for another 2-3 kilometres. Other elephants would not leave her behind. Elephants climb mountains really well, but getting down is not easy for them. The matriarch was not able to move fast and the other elephants were keeping a watch on us from a distance. 

The trackers were keeping a watch on the herd,” recounted Dr Nithin. 

“Everything went well but when we were about to blindfold the elephant, it suddenly got up and removed the blindfold, turned right, leaving just me and the tracker, Bomma, near a tree. I can still hear Bomma telling me that I may not live. My life literally flashed before my eyes. I made the mistake of running in front of it. It chased me for about 10 metres. A huge medicine box fell in the way and the elephant trampled it instead. I ran towards the mountain and fell on a rock. But by then, the elephant had stopped moving and the team came forward, administered external tranquilisers and radio collared the elephant,” said Dr Nithin.

The challenge did not end there. The team had to look for other trouble makers. The next was a tusker. The team stumbled upon it in the forest, only to find it musth. “He was a ferocious guy. We stayed back and the trackers went inside the forest. We were told it might cross the road at 4 pm and suddenly, 10 metres away from our Isuzu was the tusker, which started chasing us. We decided to abort the mission since it is not advisable to undertake darting when an elephant is in musth,” said Dr Nithin. There will be another mission in December to collar two bull elephants. 

Dr Arun A Sha, Director-Research & Veterinary Operations, Wildlife SOS said, “The radio collaring operation was very challenging and risky. We darted the female elephant after tracking her for nearly six kilometres in deep forests and induced partial sedation with a tranquiliser. In a procedure called standing sedation, carried out with exceptional care and precision, we radio collared the matriarch of the herd. This will enable us to track the movements of the herd and see what ranging patterns emerge.”