With support from aircraft and fishing boat, Coast Guard nabs 16 night-diving experts with sea cucumber catch worth Rs 72.13 lakh off Lakshadweep
 	
 	​After a hot pursuit, the Coast Guard’s ICGS Rajdoot apprehended high seas tuna longliner Colombo Marine for poaching in India's exclusive economic zone at Chereapani Reef, off Lakshadweep Islands, about 188 nautical miles from New Mangalore, on April 7. Longliners are vessels which use longlines for fishing. 

 Commandant Anupam Rai, Commanding Officer of ICGS Rajdoot, capable of undertaking surveillance, interdiction, search and rescue, and medical evacuation, told reporters on Wednesday, "The operation was accomplished after four hours of hot pursuit in coordination with Coast Guard surveillance aircraft Dornier 776, and assistance from fishing boat St Antony. The Sri Lankan vessel was in possession of two tonnes of sea cucumbers whose international market rate is an approximate $120,000 (Rs 72.13 lakh approximately)." 

 	As per the Maritime Zones of India (Regulation of Fishing by Foreign Vessels) Act, 1981, as well as under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, sea cucumber is a prohibited species under Schedule I. Sea cucumbers are echinoderms with a leathery skin found on the seafloor. They are consumed by the Chinese and South-east Asians and have cosmetic and medicinal values. 

 

 	BOASTED HI-TECH GEAR 

 	The 16 poachers were found to be highly qualified in night diving. The Coast Guard also seized about 16 gas cylinders of 37 kgs each, connected to burners that they used for boiling and processing; fishing gear such as masks, fins; technical gear like two GPS, four hand-held GPS, and high frequency wireless sets; and two compressors. They confessed that they began their journey on March 25 from Colombo and had on board about 4,000 litres of diesel, fresh water, drinking water, and provisions for 25 days. All the Sri Lankan fishermen with bona fide identity cards issued by their government had mobile phones. 

 	Commandant Rai said that during night time, their divers would go to the sea bed. The sea cucumbers are stored in salt and ice, and dried and stacked after 48 hours. He said local fishermen had informed the Coast Guard about the vessel. 

 

 	SAILED AT 25 KNOTS 

 	The ICGS Rajdoot, which was on routine patrolling, received the message on April 6 at 11.15 pm when it was off Kundapur. ICGS Rajdoot was immediately diverted to the area. Sailing at the maximum speed of 25 knots, it reached Chereapani at about 11 am on April 7. 

 	"We immediately saw one fishing boat Annai Maria. The fishermen told us that they had spotted one white hull moving in the area. A fishing boat, St Antony, was also spotted close by. The Dornier aircraft was operating about two miles north-west of Chereapani. 

 	“Since the depth is less, and the rubber dinghy could not reach there, the Coast Guard took help from St Antony. Five Coast Guard sailors went in the wooden boat. It was a hot pursuit for nearly four hours. They were finally warned and asked to come out," the Commandant said. Rajmani Sharma, DIG, Indian Coast Guard, and Commander, Coast Guard Karnataka, said this is the first instance where Coast Guard has apprehended Sri Lankan fishermen along the west coast. 

 	It is also the first instance where foreign fishermen apprehended were brought here, after the Mangalore Port was notified on December 10, 2013, to handle cases under the Act. 

 	Rajender Singh Sapal, Commandant, District Operation, and Planning Officer, said the Coast Guard authorities handed over the Sri Lankan poachers and the vessel to the Mangalore Police. He said the onus of auctioning the sea cucumbers seized by the Coast Guard would be with the Fisheries Department.