Information obtained by Bangalore Mirror under the Right to Information Act from the forest department shows that six leopards were poached along the coastal belt in Kundapur, Karkala and other adjoining areas since January 2010. The remaining two were killed in North Karnataka after they allegedly ventured into human habitat.

The RTI information also reveals that since 2004, there has been a steady increase  in leopard deaths caused by crude methods such as cable wire traps, sticks and stones. A survey by the Wildlife Protection Society of India confirms this.

Statistics say only one leopard was poached every year between 2004 and 2008. The number rose to two in 2009. But that number has leaped to eight  in 2010 and the year has not yet ended.

K S N Chikkerur, additional director general of police, CID forest cell, said, “There have been a lot of complaints about leopard poaching recently. Earlier, it was otters and we realised the extent of otter poaching only after we recovered more than 40 pelts of otters. We are vigilant with regard to complaints of leopard deaths too.”

However, a senior official of the forest department said though they were taking measures to ensure that poachers did not go scot free, pinning them down was difficult. ""Investigation is on in several cases but sometimes, we cannot trace offenders due to lack of evidence,"" the official said. Leopards are flexible
“With Naxal activity gaining momentum in these forests, there is not much patrolling and vigilance. As a result, poachers roam scot free across these forest patches,” explained a wildlife activist requesting anonymity.

“What makes poachers eye leopards is their flexibility. Unlike tigers, leopards do not have restricted territory and are found in thick forests as well as hilly terrain and can go unaccounted. On the other hand, poaching tigers from reserves becomes difficult because of vigilant personnel,"" explains Sanjay Gubbi, widlife conservationist.

Leopards are included in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. Experts say there are about 11,000 leopards in India as against 1,411 tigers, but the rate of leopard poaching is much higher.