The forest department of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is battling a severe staff crunch. According to senior officials, the department is functioning with just 15 employees responsible for all 243 wards. This is less than 25% of the total sanctioned posts within the department.

“It is a challenge the department has been facing for some time now. The department has eight sanctioned posts for range forest officers, over 20 posts for deputy range forest officers and 28 posts for forest guards. Even these numbers are not good enough to manage an ever-growing city like Bengaluru; we are currently working with only 15 staffers managing all the wards,” said a senior official.

Officials at the department told BM that this acute shortage is not only impacting routine work but is also hampering the execution of special projects. The forest department is tasked with various activities such as motivating the citizen to plant saplings in their areas, conducting wildlife rescue, maintaining trees, conducting plantation drives and executing special projects such as tree census amongst other assignments.
 
“With just 15 staff for all 243 wards, we are neither able to inspect every area nor are capable of attending to all the complaints we receive from the public. This is the root cause behind a lot of work undone and projects not being initiated. Moreover, while on the ground, our workers face a lot of life-threatening situations; currently they are working round the clock,” an official told BM.

Under such circumstances, activists are now questioning BBMP’s recent decision to take up full responsibility and power to protect and manage all the trees in the city.
 
The responsibility was recently shifted to BBMP’s deputy conservator of forests from Bengaluru Urban’s deputy conservator of forests who reports to the Karnataka forest department.
 
Until then, as a tree officer, the BBMP DCF had jurisdiction only over avenue trees and parks managed by the civic body.

“They limited the power of Bengaluru Urban DCF and brought every responsibility to their department’s ambit knowing fully well that they do not have enough manpower. This was uncalled for under the given circumstances. I have raised this issue multiple times with the concerned authorities. It is not just that they do not have enough staff, no one wants to work there either. The forest cell must be strengthened immediately,” said Dattatreya Devare, trustee of Bangalore Environment Trust.


Though so many positions are lying vacant, salaries have been earmarked in the annual budget… the city is growing, but govt depts are short-staffed…— Srinivas Alavilli, Janaagraha Centre for Citizenship & Democracy

Experts are of the view that this is a common problem across all departments, and only highlights bad planning and poor governance.

“When you are facing an environment-related crisis in a city known for its green cover, a short-staffed forest department does not send the right message. We are living in the 21st century but it feels like the governance is still in the 19th. People often get the impression that the officials are not working well. The issue is shortage of manpower. This is a serious problem and there has to be a clear policy for municipal staffing and capacity enhancement. The current recruitment process should undergo reform,” said Srinivas Alavilli, head of civic participation at Janaagraha Centre for Citizenship & Democracy.
 
Alavilli further noted that the situation points to the corruption that has crept into the recruitment process.

“Though so many positions are lying vacant, the salaries have already been earmarked in the annual budget… The process of recruiting has not happened. What is the concerned minister doing? Moreover, strengthening the growth of any department should be commensurate with the growth of the city. While the city is growing, government departments are short-staffed,” he told BM.