Catch a glimpse of tradition or sway to new songs in the city today 

Different strokes
Coffee drinkers, did you know your favourite coffee can do more than keeping you awake or alert? Join Coffee Habba and find out how. Here, you will be taught the art of painting with 
coffee. Basically, make a little, calculated concoction of coffee powder and water, dip your paintbrush in the mix and let your creativity flow. You will get to carry your finished coffee artwork on canvas back home. At The Vintage Cafe, 3rd stage, Banashankari, from 11am to 2pm, on October 1, entry `1,100, call 26726666

Dash to dance
When DJ Hemanth is in the house, rest be assured that he’s going to spin the best of Bollywood club songs. So, girls, bring out your dancing heels and shoes and head out to this ‘Ladies Night’ party where DJ Hemanth will go behind the deck to do what he does best. And guess what? It’s got not one, but two dance floors. At Nolimmits Lounge and Club, opposite to Garuda mall, Ashok Nagar, from 7pm to 12.30pm, on October 1, call 49333000

One last time 
Bengaluru’s iconic live performance venue closes its doors tonight but not without sharing what it believes in – good music in an intimate setting. For the farewell gig, it’s hosting Thermal And A Quarter(TAAQ) and their show ‘Bad Case of Bangalore Blues’. The band will reminisce about their long association with the venue and present a set of original tunes peppered with a few covers. At The bFlat Bar, Indiranagar, from 9pm, on October 1, `499, bookmyshow.com & at the venue

It’s a small wonder 
Keeping up with the tradition, JV Vidyapeetha has set up festive dolls in their school premises. The Dasara Bombe Habba will display scenes from the Ramayana, Mahabharatha, Bhagavatha, Mysore Dasara procession, Indian culture, villages, wildlife and so on. At 6th cross, RK Layout, Padmanabhanagar, from 10am to 4pm, till October 4, free entry, call 26391509

A musical tribute to Gandhiji
Mahatma Gandhi’s love of handloom and handmade was well known. What’s perhaps not so well known is his love for music and respect for musicians.
A few months after India gained her independence, Carnatic music exponent MS Subbulakshmi received a request from Delhi to sing one of Gandhiji’s favourite bhajans Hari Tum Haro. Since she wasn’t familiar with the song, she declined the request. However Gandhiji called up the family and said he would rather have Subbulakshmi recite the bhajan than have anyone else sing it. “That’s how Subbulakshmi recorded the bhajan and sent it from Chennai to Delhi overnight,” says classical vocalist Manasi Prasad. As a tribute to Gandhiji’s love for music, Prasad is curating a music concert in the city to mark Mahatma Gandhi’s 150th birth centenary.
And musicians reciprocated the love. “For this show, we’ve reimagined a raga which Pt Ravi Shankar dedicated to Gandhiji, called Mohan Kauns – to evoke emotions of Dandi March and sounds of resistance.,” adds Prasad, who will be joined by her band of five and a 20-member Christ University Choir.
Taking turns, they will sing Gandhi’s much-loved songs and hymns, “which were relevant then and are still relevant.” From hymns such as Lead Kindly Light and its Kannada version, to Nearer My God To Thee, and even an Urdu nazm, the tribute will weave in many diverse songs. The musicians will close the evening by singing two of his favourite bhajans – Vaishnav Jan, and Raghupati Raghav – in choral format. 
The show ‘Eternal Gandhi’ is organised by Brigade Gateway Federation in association with the Brigade Group, Orion Mall and Bangalore Mirror.

 From 5.30pm, on October 2, at Orion Mall Lakeside, Brigade Gateway, free entry

East meets West
The multi-national band Bosque Magico is once again touring India, this time also featuring the legendary RA Ramamani. And you guessed it right, it will make a pit stop in Bengaluru too. 
What makes them special, you ask? The sounds from Ukraine, beautiful guitar from Germany and the energising rhythm from India come together to create Bosque Magico. Their influences range from jazz to folk, Indian, Latin and other forms of music. The sound of the oboe, silences, beautiful passages in music, high energy percussion solos, vocal percussion are all a part of this beautiful ensemble. 
As for Ramamani, she was born in Bengaluru and grew up learning and performing Carnatic music as a vocalist in India. She is the pioneering woman to present Carnatic music in fusion with Western music. Her speciality is in retaining the purity of Carnatic music while being accompanied by Western musicians on their instruments. She also happens to be the first and foremost woman to present konnakol in a concert, which is the art of performing percussion syllables vocally.

 WHERE: Goethe-Institut/Max Mueller Bhavan, 716 CMH Road, Indiranagar 1st Stage
 WHEN: 6.30pm, October 4 ENTRY: Free CALL: 22511300

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’