By Reya Mehrotra

Justice Saldanha terms it environmental ‘rape and murder’, calls for death penalty

Bannerghatta National Park is one of the state’s most important national parks. A portion of it is a biological reserve. But try explaining the significance to those running the illegal stone quarry in Bannerghatta. Between 6pm and 8pm, there are regular blasts, often shattering glass, damaging foundations of nearby buildings, and frightening the wildlife that include the migratory herds of elephants. 

The issue was addressed in a press conference on April 24, where environmentalists and social activists raised their concerns for the ongoing mining activities and road construction at Bannerghatta National Park, Justice Saldanha being one of the speakers. They have also filed a public interest litigation (PIL) raising the issues.

In the PIL, activist Mark Ulyseas alleged that villagers objecting to the illegal stone quarry have been threatened. “They also receive telephone calls in the dead of night warning of an ‘accident’ with a mining truck. A local woman was allegedly killed by flying rock from the rock blasting. Her next of kin were paid Rs eight lakh and the case was hushed up. A journalist who reported the goings on was beaten and his motorcycle taken away.” Ulyseas pointed out that mental and physical intimidation is the rule rather than the exception here. 

Justice Saldanha terms this ‘environmental rape and murder’. “The Forest Conservation Act in this country forbids any kind of activity in or near the forest belts and it is now an internationally accepted principle too. But here we have mines in Bannerghatta forests in its Eco Sensitive Zone. How can 170 trucks move to and fro every day in elephant corridors at BNP and how can they cut 50,000 trees in an important national park,” he asked. 

“When complaints are filed by the residents, they are not taken up because there is a land mining mafia that terrorises the people to withdraw their complaints,” claimed Justice Saldanha. “If there can be death penalties for rapes why not the same be awarded to those who are violating our nature?” he asked. Justice Saldanha had, on April 12, written an open letter to Harsh Vardhan, Union Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to stop devastation and ‘rape’ of the national park at Bannerghatta and its surrounding area. 

Incidentally, while environmentalists all over the nation have been fighting for 10 kilometres of eco-sensitive zonbes (ESZ) around forests, Karnataka sought a reduction of over 30% of the ESZ area around BNP, bringing it down to 181.57 sq km. 

“We are extremely distressed at the rampant quarrying in the periphery of BNP. The ESZs must be safeguarded by the government. Bannerghata National Park is too precious an ecological zone and a source of many important streams for us to lose to the greed of a few mining mafia companies,” said Sridhar Pabbishetty, CEO, Namma Bengaluru Foundation.