The substantial representation of state MPs in the Union cabinet seems to be doing wonders for the state. Minister of state for environment and forests Jairam Ramesh has promised ‘Tiger Reserve’ status for the Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Wildlife Sanctuary in Chamarajnagar district.

Union minister Mallikarjun Kharge had announced multi-speciality hospitals and Veerappa Moily an IIT for Karnataka.

POSITIVE INDICATORS

Ramesh, who held discussions with Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa on Tuesday along with senior officials from the forest, energy and irrigation departments, gave a positive reply to the CM’s request to grant Tiger Reserve status for the sanctuary.

“Once the proposal declaring BRT as a Tiger Reserve is ready, I will place the same before the next meeting of National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) for approval,” said Ramesh.

FIVE RESERVES

After the approval, Karnataka will have five tiger reserves, including Bandipur, Nagarhole, Bhadra and Anashi-Dandeli tiger reserves.
According to NTCE, the total number of tigers in Karnataka is 290, next only to Madhya Pradesh, which has 300. But the death of six tigers in MP has brought down the gap between the two states. Now, there’s competition between the states to score over each other in tiger conservation.

Ramesh will hold talks with the state forest department officials on Wednesday.

Sources in the forest department told Bangalore Mirror a proposal to declare BRT as a Tiger Reserve had been pending before the Centre for a long time. “The BRT has a population of 25-30 tigers,” said a senior officer.

MORE FUNDS FLOW

The BRT Wildlife Sanctuary, spread across 580 sqkm in Yelandur and Kollegal taluks of Chamarajanagar district, boasts of  unique flora and fauna. The sanctuary, which borders with Tamil Nadu, is a confluence of both Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats. Once BRT is declared a Tiger Reserve, it will bring in more funds and empower the department to combat poaching in the adjoining areas.

Praveen Bhargav, a city-based conservation biologist and trustee of Wildlife First Organisation, said, “The BRT is a combination of both protected and reserve forest and is well connected to the southern parts of Bandipur through Talamalai-Nilgiri (North) forest division. With a larger landscape, these areas can accommodate more big cats.”