Many Kannadigas may not be aware of Srikantadatta Wodeyar’s love for books of exquisite quality. Select Book House always knew him in the past as an ardent collector of books on wildlife and antiquarian texts on ethnicity, archaeology and anthropology.

Recently, I visited his palace to finalise sale of a unique lithoprint published during Krishnarajendra Wodeyar’s reign. It was his own work and not one that he had edited. This was the only copy available other than the one available in the palace. This copy was once sought after by the Library of Congress, Washington. It was decided not to export it. After consulting the late S K Ramachandra Rao, it was decided to retain the copy, and if time permitted, the book would be edited in two volumes, — one as a text and the other as an accompanying book of illustrations. Also Rao suggested editing chapters under the headings (i) Animals and weapons used during the Kurukshetra War and (ii) Description of Manasasarovar. However, the project did not see the light of day owing to Rao’s demise.  In any case, I felt that the lithoprint should be in the palace archives. Only recently, was this task completed.

During this period, I had a great opportunity to browse through Wodeyar’s private collection of books. It was a gold  mine of books on different subjects. His collection of portfolios, manuals and booklets relating to birds and entomology was mindboggling! As Wodeyar had wounded his leg recently, he had to squat on the carpet and his consultant has to likewise squat opposite. However, considering my age, he ordered a chair for me. 

Perhaps, this bibliophile’s characteristics are hereditary. Just like his father Jayachamaraja Wodeyar's (the erstwhile maharajah) thirst for collecting books , he had his representatives abroad, to inspect and despatch books of quality to to him. As a schoolboy, I had occasion to see his father at very close quarters, when he visited a neighbouring area next to Lalbagh main gate. 

My uncle, the late Vedavyasacharya, was a senior government official whom I had accompanied. What a glorious sight the maharaja made with such chiselled features. 

I then then recollect my grandmother's words: “Child. Never belittle the maharajas when you grow up as they are truly representatives of God on earth.""

I was never a hero-worshipper and Carlyle's Heroes and hero-worship never suited my temperament. Yet, a chance occurence when I was in college was at once surprising and amusing. 

It was an occasion when Jawaharlal Nehru visited the Indian Institute of Science along with the Prince of Wales. My friends did not want to miss this opportunity, but I was not prepared to accompany them. However, after some time, I was bored  and slowly started walking towards the IISc where what I saw was indeed glorious. No wonder, Nehru’s charisma could wield such personal power over millions of Indians!

In this context, I recollect more recent  events the chief among them concerning the late M Visvesvaraya. A friend, who was a retired RBI official, wanted my help to meet MV’s daughter-in-law  (wife of his adopted son the Late Krishnamurti who was my uncle's colleague in Bangalore.) I had met Mrs Krishnamurti and so could then take my friend to her residence on Museum Road. 

She was eloquent in explaining to us about the steps she had taken to improve MV’s birthplace in Muddenahalli, not far from Bangalore. She was proud at having maintained the place and its surroundings well.

However, I wasnonplussed to see the report about the present bad condition of MV's memorial at Muddenahalli in BM (Dec 27 last issue). 

It's an insult to MV’s memory that BESCOM often cuts off electricity to the museum; that the 10-acre memorial site is strewn with litter and human refuse; and that there is not a single flower on MV’s samadhi. It's heartening to know from newspaper reports, however, that Sri Satya Sai Baba's ashram is contemplating the establishment of a prestigious  institute of technology near Muddenahalli. Kannadigas should be proud of this project as we have been denied having any such institute in the south.