It was an unusual search and rescue operation at Rajajinagar Sixth Block spread over more than two days. The victim, all paws, claws and white fur, had jumped into a 50-foot deep well and couldn’t climb out. Its feeble cries for help went unnoticed, but when the victim was eventually spotted, the entire neighbourhood rallied around to get it back on terra firma.    Ironically, the cat wasn’t a pet — just a stray that had endeared itself only as cats can, to residents in the neighbourhood. When residents didn’t see the cat for two days, a frantic search, which spread by word of mouth, was mounted. With no sign of the cat after hours of search, some searchers gave up thinking the feline might have been killed by stray dogs or perhaps had left the neighbourhood.    Two days ago, A Kausalya, a I PU student, noticed something ‘strange’ in an open well nearby from her first floor home. She eventually realised it was a cat was making desperate attempts to get out of the well. But each time the cat attempted to climb out, it slipped back. Kausalya alerted her neighbours who went into a huddle around the well, discussing ways to rescue the cat. A call was immediately made to BBMP wildlife officials.    But when officials arrived, they found the well too deep and at suggested that the fire brigade would have to be called in. “I realised that it was difficult to rescue the cat,” said Sharath Babu R, an honorary wildlife warden and the BBMP's wildlife advisor. “A resident suggested dropping a bucket into the well, but the cat was too scared and refused to climb into the bucket. We even tried luring the cat into the bucket by attaching a bowl with a little milk to the handle of the bucket, but the cat refused to take the bait. It probably was too scared and stressed out. We then thought of calling the fire brigade, but since the well is located in a remote place it would have been difficult even for them. One resident even offered to get climb into the well, but it was too risky. We seemed to have hit a dead end.”   This was when Dayanand, an entrepreneur and resident of the area, hit on the idea of trying to rescue the feline with the help of a noose. The fear though, was if the noose caught the cat around its neck and it strangulated to death.    “Dayanand said he would pull the rope towards its belly so that it can be safely pulled up,” Babu said. “Meanwhile, we prepared to treat the cat if it sustained serious injury while being hauled up. Finally, the cat was pulled up safely after a 150-minute operation.”    When Babu checked the cat after its rescue, he was in for a surprise. “The cat's eyes were of different colours, one blue and the other brown,” Babu said. “I’ve never seen one like this before. I have seen pigeons with different coloured eyes, but this is the first time I am seeing a cat with such features.”   Babu was impressed with the efforts of the community to rescue the cat. “It is understandable when owners go to great lengths to rescue their pets,” he said. “But this was a cat that merely used to wander around the area. We see so many cases where cats are attacked when it enters a house. But here we have an example of people going to great lengths to rescue a stray cat.”