It may not have been as big as the mangas of Japan but Amar Chitra Kathas (ACK) have captivated generations with their stories and stylized illustrations. A brief lull in its popularity led ACK to go through a revamp. Reena Puri, Editor ACK, says that the stories are now about people and topics of contemporary interest. The latest ACK title is Jim Corbett – Friend of the Wild that will be launched ahead of the birth anniversary of the legendary hunter turned conservationist which falls on July 25.
   “The life of Jim Corbett is fascinating,” says Puri. “At a time when the whole world is waking up to the realities of climate change and conservation is the need of the hour, it is only fitting to have a book on the man who saw what would happen to our planet  if we did not start protecting and conserving it.”
   Jim Corbett, originally of British origin, was born and brought up in India. The comic traces his life from a six year old till his death in 1955. Researching into his life sprung up a few surprises both for the scriptwriter, Tripti Nainwal and illustrator, Ghanshyam Bhogcheri.  
   “I was amazed to read how much he loved my town,” says Nainwal who hails from Nainital as well. “As the transformation happened from a hunter to probably the first conservationist in India, Corbett dedicated his life to educate the children about preserving wildlife and environment.” Nainwal has previously written stories for children and felt that writing for a comic was a refreshing way to connect with children.
   Myths were dispelled for Bhogcheri as he had the impression that Corbett hunted wild animals. “But after reading his life story I realised that I was wrong, he killed man-eating tigers and leopards that were harassing people in nearby villages. To me, Jim Corbett is a real-life superhero.”
   The illustrations in the comic follow Puri’s brief of keeping a balance between the old and the new. “Readers expect ACK illustrations to be of high quality. The style of the older illustrators like Ram Waeerkar was inspired by the stylistic Raja Ravi Varma. I tell my young artists that they must find a balance between the old style and the new graphic novel style,” says Puri. The comic has a fluidity of panels unlike the structured panels of the old ACKs.
   New stories, new style but through a brand that has been a household name for years. But the magic of good comics may just work.
     Name of the comic: Jim Corbett – Friend of the Wild Publishers: Amar Chitra Katha  Price: Rs 50