Department drags its feet in encroachment removals, has been able to only clear out 13% of total intrusions

Over the last 10 years, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has been able to remove encroachments from just over 27,000 hectares of forest land.

According to the department’s latest encroachment eviction report, while 2,04,442.16 hectares of forest land under 1,10,626 cases were under encroachment (as of March 2014), eviction on just 27,667 hectares was performed between 2014 and now. This forms 13% of the total encroached forest land.

In Bengaluru, while the total encroached land was 15,046.77 hectares, eviction took place on 3,806.31 hectares over the last 10 years.

Conservationists and wildlife activists have raised concerns regarding the large number of encroachments and slow rate of evictions.

“As per the Karnataka Forest Act and the Forest (Conservation) Act, no fresh encroachments should happen. In case there are any, evictions must happen immediately and failure to do so would lead to disciplinary actions against concerned CCFs and DCFs of the divisions for dereliction of duty. However, none of these rules and guidelines is being followed. While fresh encroachments are taking place regularly, promotions and plum postings are also frequent. For instance, there are officials in Canara Circle posted for more than a decade,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

Experts also highlight the lack of data on extent of encroachment in the state post-2014. Interestingly, while the department gives out details on the number of encroachment cases, information regarding the extent of encroachment has been intermittent.

“Extent of encroachment is not mentioned even in the department’s annual reports. While in many encroachment cases, officials have initiated actions, cases rarely meet their logical end.
 
These encroachments are also taking place in tiger reserves and agencies such as NTCA prefer to look the other way,” said an activist.

New proposal for speedy disposal of cases
In December last year, KFD came up with a proposal to ensure speedy disposal of forest land encroachment cases. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Head of Forest Force had informed Bangalore Mirror that the proposal involved the appointment of a team of retired officials of KFD. This team would then not only file forest encroachment cases but would also take them to a logical end in an expeditious manner.

The proposal was tabled to the state government and it received approval a month ago. It also included the appointment of two special officers in every forest division, taking the total team strength to 80.

“The proposal was given a green signal by the state government and the process to constitute the committee has begun. However, appointments are yet to happen,” informed Dikshit.

Currently, forest encroachment cases are being handled by the Assistant Conservator of Forest (ACFs). As per the official data, 992 cases of fresh forest encroachment were registered between April 2022 and March 2023; overall, as many as 44,608 encroachment cases are still pending across Karnataka.

While fresh forest encroachments are taking place regularly, promotions and plum postings for officials are also frequent–Wildlife conservationist
In December last year, the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) highlighted in a report that Karnataka has the second-highest amount of forest area illegally occupied across India. As per MoEF&CC, more than 76,000 hectares of forest land in Karnataka was currently under encroachment.

The department had then clarified that the number highlighted by the Ministry might not be up-to-date as encroachment figure is dynamic since the areas being cleared are not added and deleted on a day-to-day basis.