The beauty of wildlife and nature comes alive in Rohan Chakravarty’s environment-friendly comic 
 When was the last time you thought seriously about global warming? Or poachers, for that matter? While you were celebrating technological advancement, did you take some time out to mourn environmental devastations? It’s never too late to start -- and Rohan Chakravarty’s webcomic Green Humour, is the perfect place to do it. Featuring panels about all things related to the environment -- but naturally-- this comic offers over “200 cartoons and counting”.  

 	Created by wildlife enthusiast Chakravarty, the webcomic is much more than crude lines and scribbles held together with slapstick humour or deviations from ’90s Bollywood. It does not talk about the trials and tribulations of a hungover cartoonist, neither does it rely on making fun of daily events to gather likes and followers. Instead, it talks about something rather serious and in many ways, life itself. And along with delightful illustrations, there is humour in abundance. 

 	Chakravarty, who hails from Nagpur, has a fascinating reason for why he started the comic. “The sight of a gorgeous tigress bathing in a waterhole in Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary lured me into it. I gave up my dentistry degree and took up animation and design as my day job to fund myself while I drew Green Humour in my free hours. After three years and 30-odd animation assignments for IT firms, I gave up that too and started drawing Green Humour full-time.” 

 	Ironically, the creator of this incredible webcomic doesn’t enjoy reading comics on a computer screen, and instead gets his teetotaller’s highs from seeing his works in print. Still online readers of his works know that he offers a mean, green comic. What are the secrets of making a great cartoon? Chakravarty says there are six. “Knowing about what you’re drawing (first and foremost), good art (no stick figures, please!), minding your grammar and punctuation, timing your punch lines aptly, simplicity, and the complete absence of Photoshop’s ‘drop shadow’,” he says with a laugh. 

 	The cartoonist offers his two bits on cartooning for those still hiding in the shadows, unsure about what to do with their unpublished webcomics, stashed safely away on their hard drives. “Get your work out, take your critics seriously and never ever trust your mom’s review. Write every second day, draw every single day and day-dream every single minute,” he says, followed quickly by, “Bah! I’m no Reuben winner so don’t take me too seriously!”  	We’d beg to differ -- considering he has won the ‘Cartoon Contest on Climate Change -- A People’s Perspective’ organised by the UNDP and the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs in February 2012 -- these words should be taken very, very seriously. 

 	While nature enthusiasts and others who’ve been initiated into a love of nature have been sufficiently convinced to keep tabs on his updates, for the uninitiated, Chakravarty has the perfect introduction: “Here you’ll find everything from penguins navigating the globe on floating ice to tigers tracking tigresses in heat on social media. And if you happen to spend sufficient time browsing through it, you will not remain ‘uninitiated’ with the wild for long.” 

 	The author is the co-founder of StripTease the Mag, a magazine about comics and graphic novels from all over the world.