By: Kalpana Sunder
 
 
 Craggy basalt cliffs, obsidian outcrops and sulphurous springs of Kenya’s Hell’s Gate National Park form formidable backdrop for a host of amicable animals roaming free
 
 
 	Monochromatic zebras surround us in the vast, open savannah grasslands. Through the windshield of our Land Rover, I see looming cliffs, gorges and basalt columns, whittled away by wind and rain over millennia. 
 	
 	  	I am at Hell’s Gate National Park, Kenya, just south of Lake Naivasha, one of the few East African reserves where it is permitted to walk or bicycle unguided, through herds of big game. The place, I am told, allegedly inspired the makers of Disney’s The Lion King to create Pride Rock and other locales in the movie. 
 	
 	  	 The National Park gets its name from the tall basaltic cliffs that guard its northern entrance. Once a prehistoric lake, the Park is now remarkable for its stark landscape and the diverse wildlife that calls this small park home. Though small, the park’s dramatic landscape of ancient lava plugs, sulphuric water vents, glossy black obsidian outcrops, and dormant volcanoes remind one of the violent tectonic forces that shaped the Great Rift Valley.
 	 

 	Into the jungle
 	
 	
 	  	Hell’s Gate stands out for the rare wildlife experience it provides visitors — the park has zebras, giraffes, buffalo, eland, hartebeest, gazelles, baboons and over a hundred species of birds. They all roam freely, but the park remains free of predators. This makes it safe for visitors to wander around the park without a guide or car. 
 	
 	  	 I choose to see the park from a Land Rover, conserving my energy for a trek in the gorge later, while my friends hire cycles and meet us ahead. Close to the entrance of the park is a free-standing pyramid shaped 75 feet tall, craggy, rock tower, which is actually a volcanic plug, called Fischer’s Tower, a popular attraction with rock-climbers looking to test their mettle. Legend has it that Fischer’s Tower was a Maasai girl who was turned to stone for disobeying her family, before her wedding.
 	
 	  	 As we drive through the Park we see herds of stocky Cape buffalo, lanky giraffe, zebra, wildebeest, impala and Thomson’s gazelle grazing the fields. High rock cliffs flank the road as we drive past. Our guide Kevin, tells us that during World War II, Kenyan soldiers climbed the rock cliffs as part of combat training: today, it is home to vultures and eagles and centuries of bird droppings form patches of ‘white washed’ limestone walls. Vultures soar across an azure blue sky that sharply contrasts with the golden cliffs. The cliffs of Hell’s Gate are the breeding ground for the rare bearded vulture, which has a wingspan second only to the Andean condor. Occasionally, we see scattered parts of the birds’ skull and skeleton on the ground.
 	
 	  	 From the ranger’s post we start walking, rather descending, down the narrow slippery gorge with steep rock walls. Cleft deep into the floor of the Rift Valley, it offers a volcanic landscape of basalt cliffs, rock towers, sultry steaming vents and belching plumes of steam. I panic a little as I go down hand-over-foot to keep my balance on the slippery rocks, while my sure-footed guide Kevin skips down with the agility of an impala, helping me patiently to get down slowly. The Ol Njorowa Gorge, a 24 km long deep ravine is endowed with hot water springs that feed a stream that meanders down the floor of the gorge as it cuts its way through the rugged and semi-arid surrounding landscape. Green patches of moss catch the glint of the sunlight and glisten. 
 	
 	  	“This gorge was one of the shooting locations in Tomb Raider which starred Hollywood actress Angelina Jolie,” says Kevin. The narrow serpentine gorge widens as it weaves its way down and out of the National Park. I enjoy the shade that the russet walls of the narrow sandstone gorge afford which was sculpted by water and light and I am fascinated by the layers of rust-coloured rocks that form the walls of the gorge.
 	
 	 

 	As hot as spring 
 	
 	  	We stop at one of the hot springs and gingerly feel the temperature of the scalding waters. “You can even boil an egg in the steaming pools; it’s so hot,” says Kevin. Our path is also littered with crumbling pumice and fragments of shiny glass-like obsidian, ancient remains of lava. “The Gorge is closed to the public during the rains due to the risk of flash floods.” says Kevin, adding that it can flood in just a minute. High up in the cliffs pockmarked with crevices, we see ledges, where pesky baboons lie asleep in the shade of acacia trees. 
 	
 	  	The park is also home to the Olkaria Geothermal Plant, the first geothermal installation in Africa. Here the underground water temperature is a boiling 304 ° C, a godsend to the Kenyan Electricity Board, which built the Olkaria Geothermal Power Station in 1981 to supply 20 per cent of the country’s energy. To its credit the station appears to have little environmental impact — a few silver pipes, but mostly invisible from the park. 
 	
 	  	We head to the recently-opened geothermal spa that has a large pool powered directly by the heat energy that emanates from the underground. The edge of the pool is terraced with three small steps for those who want to wallow in slightly shallower water, and to make it easier to get into the steaming hot water. We bask in the warm waters of the large pool leaning against the steps, feeling our muscles relax after the trek. We chat and reminisce about our day, with the huge white plumes of steam in the distance and lingering whiffs of sulphur. And that’s when it hits us — we may have just attained nirvana.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	FACT FILE
 	
 	
 	 		Getting There
 		 	 		Fly to Nairobi from Mumbai by South African Airways. From Nairobi, Hell’s Gate National Park is roughly a 2.5 hour drive, towards Lake Naivasha. 	 		If you want to opt for public transportation, take a bus to Naivasha city and transfer to any matatu (bus) circling Lake Naivasha. 	

 	 		Where to Stay
 		 	 		Stay at Enashipai Resorts which has a great location. http://www.enashipai.com. For a more luxurious experience, the beautifully designed Chui Lodge is highly recommended.If biking, aim to arrive as early as possible to avoid biking alongside cars, and to catch the animals at one of their most active times. Arriving at 7 am is ideal.