Serial killing of tuskers has forest officials alarmed
 
 The killings point to an organised gang working in the same area once lorded over by the forest brigand. Moreover, the modus operandi is the same as that employed by the bandit’s gang
 
 	Not since forest brigand Veerappan was killed by the Special Task Force in 2004 has the forest department been so jittery. Three young elephants have been killed for their tusks in the last six months — two of them in just a month in the ‘D’ (demarcation) line between Karnataka-Tamil Nadu. What has triggered alarm in forest department circles is the manner in which the elephants were killed. 

 	Forest department officials say the killings all follow a pattern and it has led them to believe that an organised gang is perhaps operating in the area. The modus operandi of the gang is the same as that employed by Veerappan’s gang of bandits and the killings have occurred in the same forest belt once lorded over by the brigand. 

 	The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau top brass confirmed the deaths. “I’m aware of it,” said Venkatesh Murthy, regional deputy director, South India, WCCB. “The killings have occurred in the last couple of months and the modus operandi is similar to that of Veerappan’s gang.” 

 	The three slain elephants were between 10-15 years. Elephants in the wild live to about 80 years. Forest department officials say the elephants were shot dead and the tusks removed by cutting the trunk to ensure they are whole. Officials say these cases are distinct from others where the tusks were removed after the elephants died of electrocution or other causes. Officials on both sides of the border are now planning a joint operation to rein in the poachers. 

 	“In all three cases, the modus operandi is similar to that of Veerappan’s gang,” a senior forest department official said. “While the first pachyderm was shot dead in Hosur range six months ago, two have been shot in the last one month, one each in Hosur and BRT tiger reserve. All the elephants have been killed on the borders of the two states, where Veerappan operated. What adds to the alarm is the gang’s presence in BRT.” The BRT reserve is heavily guarded and that the poachers appear to be acting with impunity is the worry for the department. 

 	Officials say the trunks of all three elephants were cut in an ‘L’ shape to remove the entire tusk. The elephants appear to have been killed with country-made guns. These were the key  	characters of organised poaching under Veerappan, but since his death, no such killings were reported. Until now. 

 	“These organised killings have some unique characteristics,” a forest department official said. “A gang initially studies the movement and presence of elephants and zeroes in on one pachyderm. They fire at it, but the elephant does not die instantly. It runs for some distance and dies. The gang, however, does not chase it, but camps in the vicinity. Members of the gang, after confirming that the elephant is dead and that there is no threat of them being found, follow the blood trail to the elephant. They then cut the trunk to retrieve the tusks undamaged. The tusks are then sold.” 

 	Forest department officials say discussions are on to launch a joint operation. “Once a team is formed, police and forest officials will work along the ‘D’ line to catch the gang. That is if there is such a gang operating along the border villages of Karnataka-Tamil Nadu,” an officer said. 

 	Not since Veerappan’s death…