Jodhpur Sessions Court has reserved its order on Salman Khan's bail plea in the 1998 BlackBuck Poaching Case till tomorrow which means Salman will spend another night in the Jodhpur Central Jail.

The Jodhpur Sessions Court today heard the bail plea and reserved the judgment till April 7. Salman is lodged in barrack Number 1, since Thursday following his conviction. Senior advocate Mahesh Boda represented Salman in the sessions court.

According to reports, Sohail Khan and Arbaaz Khan will be flying to Jodhpur today to be with their sisters Alvira and Arpita who had come to Jodhpur last morning before the verdict was announced.

Following the conviction of Salman, a host of industry friends dropped in at the superstar's residence to meet his family. Family members including brothers Sohail and Arbaaz, brother in law Aayush Sharma were at Salman's Galaxy Apartment in Bandra.

Soon after the judgment was announced Congress leader Baba Siddiqui rushed to the actor's house. Arbaaz's ex-wife Malaika and her sister Amrita Arora, Race 3 producer Ramesh Taurani, Sonakshi Sinha, along with her parents Shatrughan and Poonam Sinha, Sneha Ullal and Daisy Shah were seen visiting his residence. Filmmaker Sajid Nadiadwala, who is a close friend of the 52-year-old actor, cancelled the success party of his latest release, Baaghi 2 , and left for Jodhpur. 

Read Also:
1998 Black buck poaching case: The hunt returns to haunt

Fans anxious to see Salman, gathered outside the Jodhpur Court and also Sultan actor's house. Police constables were stationed outside the building, after the verdict was announced yesterday.

Salman was on Thursday convicted for poaching two black bucks — an endangered species — in October 1998 during the shooting of the film Hum Saath Saath Hain, sentenced to five years of imprisonment and fined Rs 10,000. The offence, under Section 9/51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, attracts a maximum punishment of six years in jail. The court acquitted the co-accused in the case — actors Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, Neelam and Sonali Bendre, and a local, Dushyant Singh — owing to lack of evidence and gave them the “benefit of doubt”.