Wildlife board clears JSW projects within forest area, says sloth bears will not be affected
 
 	The crackdown on illegal mining across Ballari district a few years ago had slackened the pace of several major industries. Stringent rules by the forest department too put the expansion plans of major industries on hold. However, of late, the trend seems to be changing.
 	  	The Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife (SCNBW), last week, cleared three major industrial proposals that had long been pending before the board for clearance as they had been planned within a forest and wildlife area. The board which met on August 18 in New Delhi resolved to recommend the major projects of Ballari for environmental clearance by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).
 	  	Interestingly, all the major proposals cleared by the board belonged to Mumbai-based JSW group. The board cleared the expansion plans of the existing integrated steel plant from 10 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) to 16 MTPA along with a captive power plant of 600 Mw at its Toranagallu complex in Sandur taluk of Ballari. Expansion of its thermal power generation unit from 860 Mw to 1520 Mw at the same premises and a proposed new DRI plant (sponge iron) of JSW with a capacity of 1.2 MTPA at Toranagallu were cleared. The company had submitted its proposal way back in 2012 and sought opinions of the board when concerns over the safety of wildlife were raised.
 	  	Sources in the state government revealed to Bangalore Mirror that all these plans were put on hold as the state government was required to submit fresh rules for marking the eco-sensitive zones (ESZ). “The proposed projects were located in close vicinity to Asia’s first sloth bear sanctuary at Daroji. Several concerns were raised in the interest of conservation and potential threat to wildlife in the sanctuary. Hence, the projects were put on hold until the state government made clear about the ESZ area around national parks and sanctuaries,” explained a senior official from forest, environment and ecology department of Karnataka.
 	  	A senior member in the National Board for Wildlife, requesting anonymity, said “The member secretary, during the meeting, informed the committee that the ESZ proposals of Karnataka including Daroji Bear Sanctuary and other areas were received and scrutinised in the Wildlife Division. These proposals are under process of notification and the SCNBW considered them accordingly. 
 	  	“While deliberating over the projects, the committee was convinced that the expansions and installations within the existing complex are located at a distance of 5.66 km from the sanctuary and outside the proposed ESZ.”
 	  	According to the copy of the SCNBW meeting proceedings, a copy of which is accessed by the Bangalore Mirror, the board agreed to clear the proposals. 
 	  	“Considering the distance from the sanctuary and activities located inside the existing steel complex, the committee agreed to recommend the proposal for environmental clearance,” the proceedings revealed.
 	  	Sources in the forest department opined that if the projects are cleared by SCNBW, then they would easily be given environmental clearance by MoEF too. As per the 2010 MoEF guidelines, clearance was mandatory for projects falling within 10 km radius from the boundary of sanctuaries and national parks. Further, the expansion area by the JSW group was also home to bears, leopards and other animals. Conservational experts from Daroji had argued that these projects would block the corridor used by animals affecting the genetic breeding and eventually leading to their death.
 	  	Following the success of two global investors meets, the state government had floated Vijayanagara Area Development Authority (VADA) promoting industries in the ore-rich, dry and backward areas of Ballari. 
 	  	Along with JSW (16MTPA), projects of Arcelor Mittal (6MTPA), Brahmani Steel (6MTPA), Essar Steel (6MTPA and NMDC (2MTPA) were also approved by the state government during GIM. All of these come within the 35-km radius of the sanctuary.