City wildlife sleuths got a strange call last week that left them flummoxed. “A local called in sharing the plight of bovines he had spotted that were struggling to sit or walk as their own nails jutted into their limbs. We found at least 15 bulls and non-lactating cows in the Farm Gate area, some with nails between 15 to 20 inches, that couldn’t even sit,” Harsha, a city wildlife volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror. The city wildlife team, which usually handles wildlife issues, has taken up the case.
 
 	“Usually nails are trimmed by owners or in case of stray cattle, they are naturally filed by the cattle on rough surfaces,” Harsha added. But for some strange reason this problem existed only in one part of Bengaluru connecting Konankunte-Kaggalipura in the stretch leading towards Bannerghatta Road.
 	  	Experts suggested trimming of the animals’ nails adding this could be done only by an expert cattle shoemaker. With bullock carts going sparse in city over the last decade, cattle shoemakers too have migrated to outer parts of city, and a search for one is on, they said.
 	  	“As the nails are overgrown, they can’t be cut in a single go. They will need four to five trimming sessions. We are getting permissions from the local veterinary department officials and also the police,” Harsha said. Sharath R Babu, wildlife warden, said the issue was already taken with the government officials and the animals would be shifted to cow shelters after their hooves were trimmed.
 	  	Veterinarian Dr Parviz Ahmed Piran, opined that if left unattended, this condition was not only painful for the animal but could result in lameness caused due to the dysfunction of the locomotor system. Abnormal hooves and feet were a result of deficiency in nutrients, he added.
 	
 	
 	 		Why is trimming a cow’s hooves important?
 		 	 		*  Any bovine is going to weigh several hundred pounds! All of that weight is carried by these four hooves. So, their very life and happiness depends on hoof care.
 		 	 		*  Preventing disease: Shallow heels or misshapened hooves can encourage growth of disease and encourage problems such as foot rot and hairy warts. An injured foot causes pain, obviously, and your cow will kick at you at milking time. She will probably limp, and she might not even want to get up much. This can cause a decrease in milk production and overall health if a cow is not wanting to exercise or work. Besides, if you’ve ever seen a hairy wart…you’ll do anything to keep from seeing one again!
 		
 		
 		 			Dairy cows are a primary concern
 			 		 			*  Depending on the breeding, some dairy cattle have a better hoof than others, so some need trimming more than others. 		 			* White toes tend to grow longer faster than black toes. 		 			*  Dairy cows are generally fed very high quality types of feed that may promote faster growth. 		 			*  Some feeds promote firmer hooves than others. 		 			*  Living on concrete day-to-day can cause hooves to grow faster. Living on natural surfaces promotes healthier hooves.