Over a thousand new species have been discovered in the Greater Mekong Region of Southeast Asia in just the last decade, according to a new report released by the World Wildlife Fund for Nature (WWF).

Titled First Contact in the Greater Mekong, the report states that among the 1,068 species newly identified by science between 1997 and 2007, were the world’s largest huntsman spider – that has a leg span of 30 centimetres – and the pink-coloured, cyanide-producing “dragon millipede”.

While most species were discovered in unexplored jungles and wetlands, some were first found in the most surprising places. 

The Laotian rock rat, for example, was thought to have become extinct 11 million years ago, till scientists first encountered it in a local food market. 

And the Siamese Peninsula pit viper was found slithering through a restaurant in Khao Yai National Park in Thailand.
“This region is like what I read about as a child in the stories of Charles Darwin,” said Dr Thomas Ziegler, curator at the Cologne Zoo in Germany. 

The region comprises the six countries through which the Mekong River flows including Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam and the southern Chinese province of Yunnan. 

“It is a great feeling being in an unexplored area and to document its biodiversity for the first time… both enigmatic and beautiful,” Ziegler said.

The findings, highlighted in this report, include 519 plants, 279 fish, 88 frogs, 88 spiders, 46 lizards, 22 snakes, 15 mammals, 4 birds, 4 turtles, 2 salamanders and a toad. 

The huntsman spider, named Heteropoda maxima, measured 30cm across and was found in caves in Laos. It was described as the “most remarkable” of the 88 new species of spider found. 

The Annamite striped rabbits – or Nesolagus timminsi – with black and brown fur, were discovered in Vietnam and Laos in 2000, and are only the second species of striped rabbit to be identified. 

Among the most bizarre animals to be discovered was a pink, spiny dragon millipede, called Desmoxytes purpurosea. Several were found in Thailand as they crawled over limestone rocks and palm leaves. To defend themselves from predators, the millipedes have glands that produce cyanide. 

It is estimated thousands of new invertebrate species were also discovered during this period, further highlighting the Mekong region’s immense biodiversity.

“It doesn’t get any better than this,” said Stuart Chapman, Director of WWF’s Greater Mekong Programme. “We thought discoveries of this scale were confined to history books. This reaffirms Mekong’s place on the world map of conservation priorities.”

The report stresses economic development and environmental protection must go hand-in-hand to provide for livelihoods and alleviate poverty, and ensure the survival of the Greater Mekong’s astonishing array of species and natural habitats.

“This poorly understood biodiversity is facing unprecedented pressure. For scientists, this means that almost every field survey yields new diversity, but documenting it is a race against time,” said Raoul Bain, Biodiversity Specialist from the American Museum of Natural History.

“Who knows what else is out there waiting to be discovered, but what is clear is that there is plenty more where this came from,” said Chapman. “The scientific world is only just realising what locals here have known for centuries.”