First photo guide on the mammals found in the jungle in our backyard is out

Where else in the world would you find a wild tiger and wild elephants living so close to a metropolis?’ Avinash Krishnan begins about the richness of Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) that is located 22 km south of Bengaluru. Still, it’s not as famous, the senior wildlife researcher complains. Really? “Yes, people and the media always confuse it with Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). The biological park is only a part of the national park. The BBP is a zoo for captive animals whereas in the BNP, wild animals roam free. Even their administrations are separate,” the research officer working with A Rocha India explains.

So, to give the BNP its due, Krishnan and five of his colleagues have co-authored a 121-page booklet, Mammals of Bannerghatta National Park, along with Karnataka Forest Department. They launched the book in the city on Sunday. It’s more of an inventory for public awareness and lists 21 species that were recorded on camera traps between 2012 and 2017, of which many had been sighted earlier, some were known by their footprints and through anecdotes, and a few were total surprises. It distinctly states their social organisation, habitat, diet, and sightings on this protected land of 260 sq km. 

With this book, the team wants to apprise the public that “there’s more to the BNP than human-elephant conflicts”. And, thus, mobilise them to save it from the growing clutches of real estate, quarrying, and urban apathy. Plus, it will lay a road for the future conservation and management activities of the wildlife in there. 

“Of all the seven national parks in the state, it is the least documented. We learnt this 16 years ago when we started working here, and were surprised. Why is that the case? We can’t be sure but maybe the biological park gets all the limelight because of its recreational activities (zoo, safari, butterfly zone, etc), that’s why. Two, unlike a Bandipur or Nagarhole, it is not open to tourists. It was declared a national park in 1970s, so it has been out of public reach for quite long,” the lead author reasons why the ‘wild part’ of Bannerghatta is lesser known.

But here’s why you should care for the BNP. In these five years, his team was able to record three animals which nobody knew existed in these forests. One was Honey Badger. Also called Ratel, it is an elusive animal that looks like sloth bear and likes honey. “It was some time in 2015. We had set up a camera trap near a water body. That evening, a wild tiger passed in front of camera trap at 7pm. At 8.30pm, a wild gaur crossed it. Half an hour later, a white and black creature turned up. After studying the grainy images, we could confirm it was the Honey Badger. The finding is significant because the Honey Badger is assumed to be found in dry and arid regions of Africa and Rajasthan, so that it was found near a water body makes us want to rethink what we know – maybe it can live around slightly wet regions as well”.

The other two were: The shy Four-Horned Antelope which can be seen in daytime but is often mistaken for a barking deer, and the Rusty Spotted Cat. “Around 2010, I did spot the Four-Horned Antelope on a field visit but wasn’t sure about it. That’s where photo-evidence becomes crucial,” the old-time Bengalurean remembers.

No surprise, but a bulk of the images were of sambar deer and elephants (who even trashed the camera traps). “We haven’t been able to estimate the population size of Honey Badger, Four-Horn Antelope, and Rusty Spotted Cat yet. But the fact that we found them can help us to predict the animals they prey on. Our camera trap study provides a baseline for further research.” The BNP could possibly be home to Asiatic Fox, Golden Jackal, Mouse-Deer and Indian Pangolin as well, “because it is contiguous to the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary in the state and the Cauvery-North Wildlife Sanctuary in Tamil Nadu.” So the movement of animals can’t be ruled out.

So, how can we help the BNP? “Tourism won’t be a good idea for sure because it has a lower density of animals from the sighting perspective. Plus, because of the urbanisation around it and human-animal conflicts which it has had, it won’t be wise to open it up for activities and disturb the wildlife further. What we need is genuine appreciation for the wildlife, and public-private partnership to save it,” he says. More so, because the BNP suffers from a strange problem. “It never had any folklores around the wildlife, unlike the Western Ghats. Folklores get the locals to revere and save the animals.” Here, the locals are a mix of agrarian, semi-urban and urban, who have become “lesser tolerant” to animals in their backyard because of the damage to crops, livelihoods, and in some cases, lives that they have incurred.

“Maybe we can consider renaming Bannerghatta Biological Park to Bangalore City Zoo, so people know the Bannerghatta National Park for what it is,” the 31-year-old signs off.