The government has made good on its promise to dismantle a disused power line in the Kudremukh National Park, completing a swap which would not only ensure more power for the city, but also conservation of forests in the Malnad belt. 
 
 In January, the Union ministry of environment and forests had approved a project which allowed the state government to instal a high-transmission power line from Nandikur in Udupi district to Shantigrama in Hassan district.
   However, about 8.3 km of the about 250-km line is aligned through the Balur forest area in Chikmagalur. As reported by BM (Let there be light: Axing 40,000 trees is small price for it, January 14), the line from the Udupi Power Corporation Limited (UPCL) plant in Nandikur will be at substantial cost to the ecology of the region. This had irked green activists.
   Although the MoEF had given the nod, the project hinged on the government dismantling an existing, but defunct line in the Kudremukh National Park. This line had once supplied power to the now closed Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited (KIOCL). Although the line is no longer in use, it poses a threat to wildlife.
   Since the Balur range is an evergreen forest, the MoEF’s Forest Advisory Committee (FAC), in 2010, had appointed a committee of experts to assess the ecological damage the new line would cause.
   M C Vinay Kumar, assistant director, Wildlife Conservation Society-India, told Bangalore Mirror, “The committee comprising conservation experts Dr Ullas Karanth, Dr A J T John Singh, retired dean of Wildlife Institute of India, proposed a conservation swap. They recommended that to compensate for the loss of 8.3 km of forest in Balur range, government must dismantle the existing 25 km transmission line passing through Kudremukh National Park.”
   But owing to delays caused by KIOCL, the government failed to implement the recommendation. In the meantime, the energy department began laying 400 kv cables from UPCL, thus violating the FAC’s terms. The government had sunk more than Rs 2,000 crore in the project.
   When environmental activists once again sought FAC’s intervention, the government realised its blunder and, so as not to precipitate the situation, gave an undertaking to the FAC that the Kudremukh line would be dismantled before the commissioning of the UPCL transmission line project. 
   On April 17, the government began work on dismantling the Kemmar-Kudremukh power line. The swap has paved the way for the restoration of 25km of the wildlife corridor.