Managing forests, natural resources and wildlife in Karnataka appears to have been made easy with the intervention of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). Enabling even the common man to keep a tab on what’s happening in our forests, the state forest department, in association with ISRO, has launched a mobile-based application called Karnataka Forest Department Point of Intersection (KFDPOI). The new software in tune with ISRO’s Bhuvan geo-mapping service, will give out real-time happenings within the state’s forests. Besides, people too can act as ‘conservators’ just by clicking pictures of irregularities and uploading them to the  	application. 

 	The Information Communication Technology (ICT) wing of the forest department has developed the unique android-based application in association with the National Informatics Centre (NIC) for use by common public and its officials to check real-time data and condition of forest areas across the state. Details of findings and pictures uploaded through the application will be streamed on Bhuvan application of ISRO with the help of the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC). The app, while ensuring transparency, would help common people don the role of forest officials by capturing and reporting forest violations, fires, encroachments and wildlife sightings irrespective of area. Giving details of the application, RK Srivastava, conservator of forests, headquarters, said the objective behind the launch of the app was to map all forests and resources in Karnataka. 

 	“For mapping, we are involving people so as to ensure transparency in management of forests and resources. With the application involving public participation, even people can upload any violations, findings with pictorial evidences which will be validated and put up in the public sphere. The only condition is that they will have to register with us. Last week, we launched the application among a group of volunteers from Bangalore to check for any bugs, which will be rectified,” he added.
 	
 	
 	HOW TO REGISTER
 	
 	 		Log into the forest department website aranya.gov.in/ and click on Intranet login and log into KFD softwares. In the list 	 		of softwares, click KFDPOI and download the same to your mobile. “The application will ask your IMEI number, name, mobile number and address for registration purpose. Once installed, users can upload any field data in the form of pictures and locations and save it in the app. They can instantly upload the same or give the command of upload later. If it is about sighting of wildlife, it will be reflected on the map immediately and issues like encroachment and degradation will be verified by the back-end office before uploading to the web,” briefed Srivastava.