By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 If there was a contest for the world’s most photogenic birds, then bee-eaters would surely feature somewhere in the top ten. Not individually, mind you. Striking as each bird is, with its slender body, bright feathers and long tail, the grandeur is in the group. When the day is done, these birds often roost in little clusters on branches or electric lines, feathers fluffed and bodies packed close to each other to ward off the cold. When viewed from afar, the greens and the yellows on each individual merge into a furry composite whole that resembles a giant woolly caterpillar. This photo-op has translated into numerous entries in wildlife photography competitions, each image strikingly capturing the joy of togetherness in these vibrant birds. 
 
 
 
 Green Bee-eater in Irunelveli
 
 Bee-eaters are richly coloured birds found extensively in Asia and Africa. As their name implies, they are insect-eaters, chasing and catching their prey on the wing. They feed on all kinds of flying insects, with a distinct preference for bees and wasps. They have incredible eyesight and are able to spot these tiny creatures from more than 60 metres away. They leave their perch in dramatic flying sorties, plucking their unsuspecting prey out of thin air with their forceps-like beak. Sometimes the prey is swallowed in a single motion, but if it happens to be large and venomous, the bee-eater holds it tightly until it gets back to its perch. A few hard blows against a solid surface breaks the exoskeleton of the insect, and discharges the venom in its stinger and poison glands, making it safe and easy to eat.
 
 Bengaluru has a resident population of the species known as green bee-eater. Birds of this species are predominantly green, with tinges of blue around the chin and throat. The crown and upper back of the Indian subspecies of these birds have shades of golden brown, unlike their counterparts elsewhere in Asia. In the light of the evening sun, as these birds flit around excitedly with their tree-tree-tree calls, they create a riot of colour against an otherwise dull backdrop. When perched, the green bee-eater’s elongated central tail feather is distinctive, extending around 2 cm beyond the rest of its body.
 
 Green bee-eaters normally prefer feeding spots that are close to water, as prey is plentiful in such places. I have spent hours watching these birds frolic on the fringes of Sankey Tank, and in the bamboo groves of the adjoining children’s park. However they are very adaptable, especially in urban areas where water spots are few and far between, and are quick to figure out places where insect density is high. Bengaluru offers many a happy hunting ground for bee-eaters – they are seen almost everywhere in the city as they pursue and gobble up flying insects especially around dusk.
 
 Another member of the species to be spotted in Bengaluru at this time of the year is the blue-tailed bee-eater. A summer resident of north India, it makes its way down south as the weather turns colder. Similar in size and general appearance to the green bee-eater, this bird has a distinct black eye stripe and prominent blue colouration under its tail feathers. Its insect-catching and feeding habits are very similar to the green bee-eater’s.
 
 Bee-eaters are communal birds and tend to live in small colonies. Even within the colonies, smaller groups, or clans, become evident. These clans always stick together while hunting, playing or resting. Nests are made in mud banks, by burrowing out a tunnel that can extend up to 5 feet. The nesting couple is often assisted by a “helper”, an unrelated bird that shares the burden of excavating the tunnel. 3-5 eggs are laid on the bare floor at the end of the tunnel, and are incubated by both male and female. Two weeks later, chicks emerge, ready to start the cycle all over again and brighten up our city’s skyline with their aerial acrobatics.