By Y Maheswara Reddy

Ten volunteers have not been paid for over three years; even basic amenities aren’t provided

Around 10 wildlife volunteers of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) are craving for the attention of authorities. The forest department of BBMP had appointed 32 wildlife volunteers in 2008. They were being paid Rs 13,500 each, per month till 2015 but since 2016, no payment has been made. With the BBMP’s failure in paying honorarium, the number of wildlife volunteers has come down to nine.

They have to attend many phone calls and visit various areas in BBMP’s 198 wards to rescue injured birds or catch monkeys and snakes that have become a nuisance for residents. “It has become very tough for us to attend phone calls and visit the spots in 198 wards. We are short staffed and lack equipment to catch or rescue animals and birds in the area,’’ says K Mohan, a wildlife volunteer.

The volunteers are demanding that the authorities provide snake rescue kits, head torches, wildlife safety shoes, bird transport cages, sky kennels and be paid their dues. “We have been demanding equipment for the past five years but it has all been in vain. There is an ambulance but we have no driver. On an average, two to three injured birds die due to lack of ambulance facility. Due to the lack of basic equipment we are unable to speedily rehabilitate these injured animals,’’ says A Prasanna, a wildlife volunteers and Bengaluru Rural Wildlife Warden.

   I am aware of the long-pending dues of the wildlife volunteers. We have already sent a proposal to clear their duesMK Cholarajappa, BBMP Deputy Conservator   
BBMP’s wildlife wing ambulance driver has been roped to work for the forest department. “I was appointed in 2002 for wildlife department. Later, they shifted me to the forest department. I am taking the injured birds in the ambulance vehicle to the wildlife rehabilitation centre at Bannerghatta whenever the authorities ask me to do so,’’ says Saravana, the driver.

Addressing the concerns, BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forests MK Cholarajappa said, “Yes, I am also aware there is an ambulance but has no driver. I am also aware of the long-pending dues. I hope the authorities concerned fix the problem soon. We have already sent a proposal to clear the dues of the wildlife volunteers,’’ said Cholarajappa.