Protests for environmental protection are not a passing fad                 This is, of course, a popular view: that the environment is a block and its protagonists are block-heads, opposed to every form of development; that environmental protection is some passing fad, antithetical to growth. 

The assertion about older industries being allowed to pollute freely is factually incorrect. The last 15 years have seen significant pollution control systems put in place: the moving of polluting units out of Agra and off the Ridge outside Delhi, the translocation of tanneries along the Ganga, new norms for air and water emission and more. It’s not complete, but it is being done. Closer home, the Patalganga river at Khopoli-Rasayani was once the recipient of enormous amounts of industrial effluent. Some industries shut down. Those that continued put in effluent treatment plants and filtration systems (today only the municipality continues to pump untreated sewage into the river). 

More troubling is the view that the environment is opposed to development. It is not. You simply cannot have the latter without the former. The law has a favoured phraseology for this — sustainable development, intergenerational equity, the precautionary principle — and it also explicitly recognises that without environmental protection there can be no meaningful development. Every intervention involves some amount of environmental destruction; you minimise the damage when you can. Sometimes you cannot always ‘strike a balance’. In that situation the Supreme Court says: “... If an activity is allowed to go ahead, there may be irreparable damage to the environment and if it is stopped, there may be irreparable damage to economic interest. In case of doubt, however, protection of environment would have precedence over the economic interest.”

In the 1970s a hydel project proposed in the Silent Valley region of Kerala threatened a vital rainforest, home to several endangered species including the lion-tailed macaque. The environmental movement saved the Silent Valley, and it was later notified as a National Park. What would have been gained by the project? What would have been lost? What was the correct “balance”? Similar are the horrific proposals for eight-lane expressways through the Kanha National Park. Nobody denies that we need good roads. Sometimes, though, the cost is just too high. Roads can go around. A tiger cannot. 

In a chapter of his riveting book Collapse, Jared Diamond contrasts the Dominican Republic and Haiti, two countries with a shared landmass and widely divergent histories. One protected its forests, the other did not. One was careful with its environment, the other was not. One developed and became rich, the other did not. It is a simple mantra, too often forgotten: pollution impoverishes. Poverty pollutes. 

In 1990, the Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund produced a chronicle of its work in shaping American environmental law and policy called Wild by Law. Each case history shows the environment trumping economic interests — a ski resort; timber logging; power plants. Each project was driven by an economic interest. Those interests were of far less value than the forests, wildlife and plateaus that were saved.

We now have the means to measure this loss. For the past two years, my friend Pavan Sukhdev has been on a sabbatical from his Deutsche Bank job heading an international team, TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity), that has developed sophisticated methods of valuing biodiversity. TEEB presented a two-year report at Nagoya, Japan, in October 2010 demonstrating the enormous economic value of biodiversity — forests, freshwater, soils, coral reefs — and measuring the socio-economic costs of their loss. Our financial mandarins would do well to spend a little time with Mr Sukhdev.

Stubborn, vociferous and tenacious — environmentalists are all these things and more. The one thing they are not is stupid.