By Murali K Menon

It would not be inaccurate to say that some of the finest observations in the history of cricket writing have been dedicated to the batting of David Gower. Here is a line from Wisden: “The sun scarcely graced the English cricket summer with its presence in 1978, but when it did it seemed to adorn the blond head of David Gower…” What Neville Cardus wrote of Frank Woolley, another graceful English left-hander — “One thinks of him as a butterfly in a city street on a summer’s day” — could have probably applied to Gower as well. In the 1980s English team, made up of gritty, workmanlike cricketers, Gower was the artist, a Baskerville Italic among Couriers. 
The former English team captain, who recently delivered the 2019 Tiger Pataudi Memorial Lecture in Kolkata, was in town briefly on Friday to promote a 191-year-old British tableware brand. Fine bone china is not exactly an area of interest for Gower, but he has other engaging pursuits, some of which he cultivated right through his playing career. 

He has an intimate knowledge of wine — the 62-year-old is an investor in an internet wine company in England — and while he has a penchant for Bordeaux, he thinks highly of the late Kanwal Grover’s wines. He has been a commentator with Sky Sports for two decades, but is candid enough to admit that his contract might not be renewed this year, as the British broadcaster sets about refreshing its line-up. (“I’ll be on the lookout for a gig. England, India, Australia, anywhere,” he says.) He works with several wildlife charities, is especially interested in wildlife art, and has co-written several books. One of them is titled David Gower: With Time to Spare. 

During his playing days, Gower was often castigated for his seemingly casual approach to the game. Wisden noted that he played “beautifully until he made a mistake. Sometimes, the mistake was put off long enough for him to play an innings of unforgettable brilliance.” His insouciance as captain and several acts of cheeky defiance — in 1991 he and teammate John Morris abandoned the cricket ground during a match against Queensland, hired two Tiger Moths and talked the pilots into flying low over the ground — riled up the mandarins at Lord’s. “I wouldn’t have described myself as the ultimate professional,” says Gower. “I always went with my instinct. There were good days and bad days. There were purple patches, and then some soul-destroying periods when you thought you had forgotten how to play. But if you look at the statistics, I did survive and battle on, and haven’t done too badly,” says Gower. 

His 8,000 runs from 117 matches is fourth highest by an English player, but Gower often wonders how he would have fitted in today. “Look at Virat (Kohli). He probably goes to the gym even on his off-days. On my off-days, I would go past the gym, into the swimming pool. I’ve never mastered distance running. I’m like a puppy. You throw a tennis ball and I’d happily chase it, but without something to chase, I give up,” he says. Gower was acutely aware that he was special and different from the rest of his teammates in the ’80s. “It took me about three seconds to realise that. (Michael) Gatting and I, for instance. We had such different ways of thinking. I could do the crossword, he tried.” 

The realisation that he had a responsibility beyond himself and his team came early to him. “You’d be at the pub after a game, and someone would go ‘I came all the way from Leeds to watch you bat, and you scored a nought’.” He also concedes, without any hint of conceit, that there never really has been another David Gower. “Sometimes, I get these flashbacks of some of my innings,” says Gower. “The 150-something at the Oval in 1985 against Australia, another similar score at Sabina Park in ’81… on those days I was as good as I ever was.” 

Most people wouldn’t choose Gower to bat for their life. Chances are that he might let you down after glowing briefly like a firefly. But even though I’m a lapsed cricket fan, I’d think bidding adieu after watching a flurry of nonchalant cover drives and late-cuts by one of the most graceful batsmen of all time might not be all that bad a way to go. 

The writer works on content strategy for Haymarket SAC