Had it not been for two alert Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) sub-inspectors at the Bangalore International Airport, an illegal consignment of rare red sandalwood would have landed in China by now.    The hawk-eyed personnel intercepted the consignment and succeeded in arresting four of the smugglers – all Chinese nationals -- in the wee hours on Friday. This is the first time that Chinese have been caught for smuggling at BIA.   The four, whose identities are yet to be disclosed, were to board an Air China flight at 1.20 am to Chengdu, China when they were detained by the CISF during the pre-embarkation security check process. One of the accused is a youngster, while the other three are middle-aged men.   During the security check, CISF sub-inspectors G V Pratheep and C V Sangeeth, who were manning the luggage scanners, noticed small wooden blocks in two handbags belonging to the quartet. Wondering why the Chinese were carrying wood in an aircraft, the CISF personnel began questioning them. Since the four could not speak English, the security personnel handed them over to customs officials for investigation. Subsequently, the officials retrieved the checked-in baggage of the Chinese and were shocked to find the bags packed with red sandalwood billets weighing 203 kgs.   “Red sandalwood is very unique to India and ranks high on the list of smugglers operating from China and Japan. Moreover this seizure is unique as it was not based on any tip-off from informants, but because of the sheer intelligence and alertness of the CISF personnel,” airport sources said.   Red sandalwood is one of seven plant species that is listed in Schedule VI of the Wildlife Protection Act and picking or uprooting from the wild is an offence. It is known for its medicinal properties and is also used to make musical instruments as well as decorative powder in sacred ceremonies.    In the past, authorities at BIA had intercepted consignments of ketamine and saffron and questions are now being asked if the airport is on the circuit of red sandalwood smugglers.   “We are probing how the Chinese nationals sourced red sandalwood, for how long have they been operating, what are the margins involved and if there are any locals involved,” sources said.