Books 

 	Fifteen books, by authors from India and abroad, that will give you food for thought even as they keep you engrossed 

 

 	The Ever After of Ashwin Rao 	by Padma Viswanathan (Westland) 

 	From internationally acclaimed author Padma Viswanathan, this is a stunning new work set among families of those who lost loved ones in the 1985 Air India bombing. In 2004, almost twenty years after the fatal bombing of an Air India flight from Vancouver, two suspects — finally — are on trial for the crime. Ashwin Rao, an Indian psychologist trained in Canada, comes back to do a “study of comparative grief,” interviewing people who lost loved ones in the attack. What he neglects to mention is that he, too, had family members who died on the plane. 

 

 	Bystanders 	by Vidya Madabushi (Westland) 

 	This book was shortlisted for the Tibor Jones South Asia Prize. It tells the story of a six-year-old-boy Hari from Sripuri who believes that his mother died from tuberculosis. It’s what his father, Vasan, has always told him. But when Hari seeks more answers from his distant yet affectionate father, who, between his meditation classes, dietary experiments and constant headaches, has little time for Hari, he soon realises that he is trespassing on forbidden territory. 

 

 	Private Vegas 	(exclusive India paperback edition) 	by James Patterson (Random House) 

 	Jack Morgan, head of Private Investigations, the global PI agency of the rich and famous, is being pushed to the limit. His car has been firebombed, his ex is dating someone, and his twin brother is still out to destroy him. But Private doesn’t rest, and nor do its clients: not the LAPD who need Private’s help catching two scumbags with diplomatic immunity, and not the client who has just confessed to murdering his wife. Add to that Jack’s best friend being held on a trumped-up charge that could see him locked away for a very long time, and it seems like all bets are off… 

 

 	The Tusk That Did the Damage 	by Tania James (Random House) 

 	When a young elephant is brutally orphaned by poachers and then captured, it is only a matter of time before he breaks his chains and begins terrorising the countryside, earning his malevolent name from the humans he kills and then tenderly buries with leaves. Manu, the studious son of a rice farmer, loses his cousin to the Gravedigger and is drawn, with his wayward brother Jayan, into the alluring world of ivory hunting, while his family relationships grow ever more complicated. Emma is working on a documentary set in a Kerala wildlife park with her best friend. Her work leads her to witness the porous boundary between conservation and corruption and she finds herself caught up in her own betrayal. 

 	Red Notice 	by Bill Browder (Random House) 

 	November 2009. An emaciated young lawyer, Sergei Magnitsky, is led to a freezing isolation cell in a Moscow prison, handcuffed to a bed rail, and beaten to death by eight police officers. His crime? To testify against the Russian Interior Ministry officials who were involved in a conspiracy to steal $230 million of taxes paid to the state by one of the world’s most successful hedge funds. Magnitsky’s brutal killing has remained uninvestigated and unpunished to this day. His farcical posthumous show-trial brought Putin’s regime to a new low in the eyes of the international community. Red Notice is a searing exposé of the wholesale whitewash by Russian authorities of Magnitsky’s imprisonment and murder, slicing deep into the shadowy heart of the Kremlin to uncover its sordid truths. 

 

 	The House of Hidden Mothers 	by Meera Syal (Random House) 

 	Welcome to Little India, East London, where Shyama has her own beauty salon, staffed by Desi friends and young girls from India who trim, polish and thread her London clients with proficiency. Now at the age of forty-four, Shyama has fallen for Toby, a farmer’s son, ten years her junior. They want a child together. When Shyama learns her older woman’s womb has become ‘inhospitable’, she heads for India, world centre of surrogate pregnancies, to visit Dr Renu Passi, who, has over the years, furnished many happy couples with the baby they could not have. 

 

 	The Seeker 	by Karan Bajaj (Penguin) 

 	From the bestselling author of 	Keep Off the Grass and Johnny Gone Down comes a modern-day Siddhartha…After a deep personal 	loss, Max, a Wall Street banker, sets out on a quest to find the cause of human pain and suffering. His journey takes him 	from New York to a hidden ashram in south India to a drought-stricken village to a freezing cave high in the Himalayas. 

 	Flood of Fire 	by Amitav Ghosh 

 	It is 1839. The British whose opium trade to China has been blockaded by Beijing the previous year are planning an invasion to force their hand. Their demands – an island base in the Pearl Delta from which to continue their trade and a princely sum in compensation for their losses. In Calcutta, Zachary Reid, an impoverished young sailor, dreams of his lost love and of a way to make his fortunes. His chance comes when the wealthy opium merchant Mr Burnham gives him a job of a lifetime even as his wife provides Zachary with other allures. 

 

 	Disclaimer 	by Renee Knight (Random House) 

 	When an intriguing novel appears on Catherine’s bedside table, she curls up in bed and begins to read. But as she turns the pages she is sickened to realise the story will reveal her darkest secret. A secret she thought no one else knew… 

 

 	Blood on Snow 	by Jo Nesbo (Random House) 

 	Olav lives the lonely life of a fixer. When you ‘fix’ people for a living – terminally – it’s hard to get close to anyone. Now he’s finally met the woman of his dreams. But there are two problems. She’s his boss’ wife. And Olav’s just been hired to kill her. 

 

 	Drowning Fish (Hachette) 

 	East Pakistan, 1950s. Nayantara flees riot-ridden Narayanbari with her two daughters, leaving behind her life as she knew it. The 	only link to her past is the legacy she is determined to leave her granddaughter, Neelanjana – the precious pieces of teakwood furniture that oppress the rooms of her tiny flat in Calcutta, where she arrives to take refuge. Decades later, Neelanjana leaves for the US, in a bid to forge an independent life. 

 

 	Traitors in the Shadow 	by Alex Rutherford (Hachette) 

 	A new emperor, Aurangzeb, sits on India’s glittering Peacock Throne - the throne he seized from his father while the old emperor still lived. He has paid for it with blood: during the brutal civil war he hunted down and killed his brothers. Now he must return the Moghul Empire to the true path and achieve new glory. But the exercise of great power is isolating. With enemies everywhere, who should he trust? 

 

 	The Amazing Racist 	by Chimmi Tenduf-La (Hachette) 

 	Eddie Trusted, an English schoolteacher in Colombo, wants to spend his life with Menaka Rupasinghe, a vibrant Sri Lankan beauty, but as with all matters of the heart, there’s an obstacle. If Eddie wants to wed Menaka, it is Thilak Rupasinghe, her orthodox terror of a father, whom he must woo and whose farts he must kiss – Thilak wants his daughter to marry someone of the same race, religion and caste, and if possible from the same locality. 

 

 	The Persecution of Madhav Tripathi 	by Aditya Sudarshan 

 	Bright, well liked and moving quickly up the ranks of officialdom, Madhav Tripathi is a success in every sense. But driving home one evening, a week before his thirtieth birthday, he is abducted by a group of mysterious assailants. Madhav escapes with his life, yet the murderous threat persists. Soon, everything and everyone close to him seem to be in mortal danger. 

 

 	Mumbai Avengers 	by S Hussain Zaidi 

 	Five years have passed since the 26/11 attacks and India still seeks justice for the countless innocents slaughtered by Pakistani terrorists. Frustrated by how slowly the clock of justice ticks, one man seeks to counter the enemies India’s resources cannot officially eliminate – fifty-eight-year-old retired lieutenant general, Sayed Ali Waris. This is a mission that will have to fly under the radar, one that aims to achieve incomparable success in a covert Indian war against terror. 

 

 	MUSIC 

 	We have compiled for you some best upcoming musical shows & concerts from across styles and genres. Mark your calendars to make sure that you don’t miss out on your favourite ones. 

 

 	January
 	  	 Dr. Balamuralikrishna’s Grand Classical Concert  	Chowdiah Memorial Hall, 	Sun 04 Jan, 06:30 PM 	A concert featuring one of the legends of Indian classical music, Padma Vibhushan recipient Dr. Balamuralikrishna. His gifted voice and his impeccable skills with musical instruments will for sure make the concert an unforgettable one.  

 	The Flute Rockz, Pt.Pravin Godkhindi concert 	Chowdiah Memorial Hall, 	Fri 09 Jan, 07:00 PM 	Catch the first Indian to perform on the 8-feet contrabass flute live, marvelous flautist Pt Pravin Godkhindi, as he puts you in a  	trance with his spellbinding  	performance. 

 	Echoes from Beneath 3 	January 10, 4.30 pm onwards at No Limmits 	For those who would like to headbang their way into 2015 (although a little late) Bangalore Doom Syndicate presents Echoes From Beneath where bands such as Defiler (Japan), Chu (Kazakhstan) along with local bands are scheduled to perform.  

 	Steve Aoki 	Jan 18, venue to be announced 	The cake throwing, champagne popping DJ Steve Aoki is back for a second time to enthrall the audience with his antics and electronic dance music. 

 	Vishal & Shekhar Live 	Sat 31 Jan, 06:30 PM, Football Ground IIM: Bengaluru 	A dose of some of the best Bolly-wood numbers by music directing duo Vishal & Shekhar at IIMB’s cultural festival Unmaad. 

 	February 

 	SPRING MUSIC FESTIVAL – 2015 	Concerts at Bengaluru Gayana Samaja Auditorium from 5.45 pm to 9.00 pm 	01-02-2015 – Dr Bombay Jayashri Concert 	Catch the Oscar nominated singer live as part of the spring music festival mesmerize you with some marvelous compositions. 

 	March 

 	Alive India with Arijit Singh 	Phoenix Market City: Whitefield, Sat 07 Mar, 06:00 PM 	Catch the singer of Tum Hi Ho fame Arijit Singh live as he belts out some renowned Bollywood numbers; this one is for all the Bollywood music lovers out there. 

 	June 

 	 Bangalore Open Air 2015  	Jayamahal Palace Hotel: Bengaluru, Sat 06 Jun, 04:00 PM 	The metal music festival Bangalore Open Air that propelled the metal scene to a whole new level is back again with a killer lineup that include Belphegor, Napalm Death and Inquisition. The Phase one early bird tickets for the event is already sold out, all the metal lovers get your tickets before it’s sold out. 

 	July 

 	Barkha Ritu 	Venue TBA 	The monsoon music festival that in the past have brought artistes such as Pt Hariprasad Chaurasia to Bengaluru promises to surprise us this time as well.  

 	December 

 	Ruhaniyat-Music Festival  	Venue TBA  	The ‘spiritual’ & surreal music festival that has been a hit year after year with artists from all over the world congregating at one venue to perform and spread the message of peace, is scheduled to be back with more astounding artistes and promises to showcase fading 	art forms to the masses. 

 

 	ART AND THEATRE 

 	Some must-see musicals, plays, art shows and movie screenings for classy entertainment  

 

 	WHAT WILL BE ON VIEW 

 	 Solo show by Mumbai-based artist Baiju Pathan displaying paintings and various digital media works, February 

 	 Group Sculpture Show by senior sculptors which include Gopinath S, G Reghu, Ravi Kumar Kashi and Karl Antao, June 

 	 Solo show by artist Ravi Kumar Kashi, September 

 	 Solo shows by young upcoming artists – Aishwaryan K, Naveen Kumar, Mohan Kumar T and Lokesh BH – artists from last year’s Crosstalk show 	(Gallery Sumukha; February onwards) 

 	 Solo show by Kerala-based artist Zakkir Hussain showing his recent works, Jan 17 – Feb 27 

 	 Solo show displaying the mixed media works by artist Sudarshan Shetty, March 7 – April 17 

 	 Artist Sheela Gowda, known for her avant garde installations and works, solo show, September 

 	 Artist Krishnaraj Chonat’s mixed media works solo show, November 	(Galleryske; January through April; September and November) 

 	 Contemporary artist Anand Panchal solo show, Lost Reveries, Jan 10 – Feb 10 

 	 On Valentine’s Day, go see the New Romantics, an annual group show 

 	 50 under 50, showcasing 50 artworks below Rs 50,000, an annual show, March 

 	 Small Format Works, an annual show featuring smaller works that will encourage new buyers, June 	(Kynkyny Art; January through March; June) 

 

 	 Video Art and Experimental Cinema from Israel, screening and lecture by Samantha Adler de Oliveria, Jan 8 

 	 International Photo Exhibition showing UNESCO heritage sites in India and abroad, Jan 9 – 11 

 	 TOTO Awards Night, annual awards presented to young Indian photographers, musicians, writers and filmmakers, Jan 10 

 	 Homage in Hybrid, dance by Ainesh Madan, Jan 16 

 	 InSpirit by Nivesaa, showcasing a multi fusion talent in Belly Dance, Latin dance, Contemporary, Jazz and Bollywood,  	Jan 18 

 	 5th Edition of My French Film Festival, Jan 19 – Feb 16 	(Alliance Francaise; January) 

 	 Ranga Ugadi, plays, story reading, poetry sessions, in memory of Dr UR Anantamurthy, March 22 

 	 Summer Express, summer workshops for children,  	Apr 7 – 30 

 	 Kannada Natakaotsava, celebrating Kannada theatre, 

 	May 1 – 9 	 AHA! International Theatre Festival for children, July 17-28 

 	 Ranga Shankara Theatre Festival, Oct 31 – Nov 8 

 	 Shankar Nag Theatre Award Ceremony, recognising and honouring a young theatre personality for his/her total contribution to Indian theatre, Nov 9 	(Ranga Shankara; March through May, July, October–November)