With recommendations ever increasing to let captive elephants for private events, a group of wildlife experts and enthusiasts are all set to drag forest minister C P Yogeshwar to court. The group, which also includes members of the Central Zoo Authority’s (CZA) committee for appraisal of zoo elephants, have decided to seek a ban on using elephants for displays and commercial purpose. They said such actions are blatant violation of Indian Wildlife (protection) Act, 1972.  
 “We will soon file a petition in this regard as the minister’s office is continuing to send letters to the forest department top brass asking them to permit usage of elephants by private people,” said Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert.  
 “Only the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) has the authority to issue grant permissions, but surprisingly, he is the last person to be contacted by the people,” Babu said. 
 The forest minister’s office had recently drawn flak for over 10 letters sent to Aranya Bhavan, the department’s headquarters, directing officials to send elephants from Bannerghatta to various functions and processions in city. Some MLAs and home minister R Ashoka had also made similar recommendations, sparking protests by wildlife enthusiasts. 
 Officials at PCCF office said they cannot refuse permission if the order comes from the forest minister’s office. “The process should actually begin at this office so that the PCCF can take a call after the applicant furnishes all supportive documents. Surprisingly, they get permission from ministers office first and finally come here only to complete formalities. We are left with no options,” a forest official said. 
 “We are shocked that such recommendations are given by officials. Elephants are not supposed to be stressed to this extent. We have instances where elephants used for processions have turned violent because of the abuse and unnatural condition it is subjected to. This has to be stopped,” said Suparna Ganguly, member, committee for appraisal of zoo elephants.  
 Yogeshwar said, “It’s an emotional issue. We were giving permission to use elephants under the impression that there are provisions for it. If there is no such provision, we won’t give such permissions in future.”