Consider risk to wildlife, say environmentalists to demand for lifting night traffic ban

Wayanad MP Rahul Gandhi has yet again stirred a hornet’s nest in Karnataka by sparking off a debate on the night traffic ban issue in Bandipur. 
On Sunday, the Congress leader tweeted that the nine-hour traffic ban on the national highway passing through the Bandipur reserve has caused hardship to lakhs of people in Kerala and Karnataka, and asked the Central and State Governments to safeguard the interests of local communities, while protecting the environment.
The movement of traffic through the tiger reserve is banned on this stretch from 9 pm to 6 am on the orders of the Supreme Court. 

The ban through the reserve forest was intended to reduce disturbance to wildlife.

 
Gandhi, who is an MP from Wayanad in Kerala, expressed solidarity with the youth who are on an indefinite hunger strike since September 25 protesting 
the ban.

“I stand in solidarity with the youth on an indefinite hunger strike since September 25 protesting against the daily 9-hour traffic ban on NH-766 that has caused immense hardship to lakhs of people in Kerala and Karnataka I urge the central and state governments to safeguard the interests of local communities, while upholding our collective responsibility to protect our environment,” the former Congress president said in a tweet.

This tweet has not gone down well with environmentalists in the city, who say that it is an irresponsible comment, considering the risk to the wildlife if the ban is lifted.
Environmentalist Joseph Hoover said, “For someone who has won an election from Wayanad, to say such a thing is insensitive and careless. We are very disappointed with his statement. We expect our leaders to have a straight thought process and not joke around important things like these. I feel the issue is taking a political turn.”
Leo Saldanha, coordinator of Environment Support Group said that some areas are just not meant for 24-hour traffic. 

“Recently an elephant died after being hit by a train. I have seen huge trucks being toppled when elephants come on to the highways, so this is disastrous both for the wildlife and for the humans travelling. If it means taking a few extra kilometres on an alternate route so be it. But Rahul Gandhi’s comment is not justified.”