Two leopards spotted in different parts of the city on Wednesday have kept Forest Department officials on their toes. According to the officials, while one of the big cats was spotted near Chikkajala on Kempegowda International Airport Road, the other one was seen near Turahalli forest in south Bengaluru.

The department has placed cages in both locations to trap the animals so they can be relocated to a safer environment. However, so far, both leopards are at large.

“We have placed cages in both locations. Our people are moving around and keeping a watch in these areas. If we spot the leopard, we will tranquilize and catch it before we relocate it to its natural habitat,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department. Officials say there is nothing to fear as the animals have not harmed any human beings, cattle, or pet animals so far.

“We have kept the cages with baits, and if the animal is still in the surrounding area, it will surely come looking for food. The cats must be scared themselves as they are not used to the city environment. There is no need to be scared,” added Pushkar. SS Ravishankar, Deputy Conservator of Forests (Bengaluru Urban), told Bangalore Mirror that the department is currently avoiding extensive search activity as it might disturb the animals that are already terrified.

“We are relying on the animals walking into the cages on their own so that they can be rescued. We cannot suddenly disturb a wild animal as it might behave erratically. Chances of the cats going back to nearby forest reserve areas on their own are also high,” said Ravishankar.

Reports of a chital deer hunted by a leopard have also been making rounds in the media. Experts say the location where the chital has been killed is part of the BM Kaval Reserved Forests, one of the areas where leopards are found. They are also naturally found in UM Kaval, Roerich Estate, TK Falls, Gollahalligudda, and adjoining areas.

 These forests are further connected to Bannerghatta National Park, which is why it is natural to find leopards in these areas.

“There is no need for people to panic if they take precautions. Do not walk inside or on the edges of these forests at night. If you are walking in these areas after dark, it is better to walk with an accomplice by talking or playing music. Leopards do not attack anyone and people are not their natural prey,” said Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife biologist.