With several eco-sensitive zones set to come around it, the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP), which has more than 180 species of endangered animals and birds and is one of the richest zoological reserves in the country, will soon be a safer home for the wildlife reserve.    The BNP currently has a 1km 'safe zone' (areas within 1km from its border) where activities like quarrying, mining, development activities like forming layouts -- the area being one of most sought after because of its proximity to IT hub -- are banned. Now the forest department has decided to regulate all human activities, especially quarrying and mining, which affect wildlife, in areas considered to be eco-sensitive. This also includes the elephant corridor.    The zones may extend from 100 meters to 10 km from the border of the safe zone. The committee set up to govern matters regarding to the safe zone took the decision at a recent meeting. “It’s an important move to conserve flora and fauna inside BNP. The first step on creating the new zones as per a Supreme Court directive was recently taken by a committee comprising the deputy conservator of forests, BNP and leading conservation scientist Sanjay Gubbi. The committee has already started working on demarking and extending the eco-sensitive zones,” said a source in the forest department.   The idea was actually mooted five years ago.   Activities like quarrying, mining and construction work have been proving threat to wildlife inside BNP and the elephant corridor which goes along B R hills and Sathyamangalam forests. Granite quarries have been mushrooming on rocky hills surrounding villages near BNP border like Shivanahalli, Raagihalli, Kallubalu, Bukkasagar, Jaipur Doddi and Haranahalli. Even court orders asking to maintain the existing (1km) safe zone were being violated.    Villagers won’t be affected Creation of the eco-sensitive zones, however, will not hinder lives of villagers. “It was decided not to disturb people already living in these areas. Activities like farming will not be affected. Though we have a safe zone now, the borders are not demarcated at all places. This will be done once the new zones are decided,” the source added, adding that the regulations will be enforced once they get approval from the Centre.   “A draft on revision of safe zones will soon be sent to the state government, which in turn will be taking a call after public consultation. If it sails through, the same will be sent to the Centre for final approval,” said the source.   Sanjay Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror: ""Eco-sensitive zones are extremely important tools to balance development and wildlife conservation. However, it's important to note that there will be no impact on local villagers or existing projects. Though according to supreme court order the eco sensitive zone is 10km area around the reserve forest. But in this case, it will be based on ecological sensitivity of the location.""