The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) was flooded with questions, doubts and suggestions during the first virtual conference organised with regard to the proposed peripheral ring road (PRR). While some wondered why the project is being delayed for so many years, others took objections to the plan of axing over 33,838 trees along the 65-km stretch. Many suggested the authorities to consider other mobility alternatives before going ahead with the 8-lane corridor.

The public consultation meeting -- organised jointly by the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) and the Bengaluru Urban district administration -- began with authorities making a presentation on the Rs 16,000 crore project by taking inputs from the environment impact assessment (EIA) report. 

Officials did not share either the full version of the EIA or the detailed project report (DPR) as requested by some.

Officials said the project would have 17 toll plazas along the stretch, meaning one toll plaza for every 3.8-km. Besides affecting thousands of trees and wildlife, the project will pass through Jarakabande reserve forest and six lakes (Chinnaganahalli, Chikkabanahalli, Gunjur, Tirumenahalli, Chikkthogaru and Jarakabande). The requirement of forest land has been reduced from 10.12 hectares to 7.2 hectares, an officer who made the presentation, said. The project requires a total of 733 hectares of land mainly belonging to the farmers. Additionally, 1,451 houses, commercial complexes will also be brought down.

Some participants requested the officials to take up the project without delay. “We have kept our plan to build a new house on hold anticipating the final alignment,” Bharath Ram, a resident of Soladevanahalli said. Many sought the authorities to publish the final alignment. Officials, however, brushed aside the query, stating reconsideration of alignments. Some suggested, the authorities to drop the project or re-align the project to avoid destruction of forest. Environmentalist Leo Saldanha wondered how KSPCB, being a regulatory body, was holding the meeting in BDA office. “It’s a mockery of SC judgements. The regulator should conduct with very high standards. The KSPCB is acting like the promoter of the project and not regulator. It shows complacent,” he said and added the authorities can hold public consultation only after finalising the alignment and publishing both the DPR and EIA.