Experts are alarmed by the latest trend of killing tigers using herbal poison. Authorities recently tracked down the remains of an adult tiger that had been poisoned to death in BRT tiger reserve just six months ago.    CID forest cell sleuths of Kollegal recovered the skin, claws and whiskers within hours of the decision to open three top tiger reserves – Bandipur, Nagarhole and BRT — for visitors.   The tiger was about four years old. It was killed with poisoned meat near Biligiri Ranganathaswamy temple, the sleuths told Bangalore Mirror. They learnt about the killing after arresting a gang of five poachers who were trying to sell the skin.   Four tigers have died in suspicious circumstances in the last one year, experts said. According to sources, in each case, they were killed with locally made herbal poison.   In July, sleuths of Kollegal Wildlife Range arrested six notorious poachers from Haryana and recovered traps they had laid. The latest recovery indicated that poachers are targeting animals in BRT, sleuths said.   “In the case of the tiger that was killed a month ago near a village at Biligiri Ranga hills, there were no signs of a fight, injuries, bullets or a trap.    “Another one had been poisoned near BRT six months ago. Locally made herbal poison is used as it does not leave any trace of poison, unlike chemical poisons. The local tribes prefer poisoning as they get a clear skin with no damage.    “Good skin means high price. As poisoning is rampant, we can’t rule out the involvement of a wider network. Hence, the problem has to be addressed immediately,” Sudheer K S, a wildlife expert said.     POACHERS LED TO TIGER REMAINS CID forest cell sleuths trapped the gang when they were trying to sell tiger parts at Katnawadi on the the Mysore-Kollegal road. Sources said that Ramesh, Rajashekar, Chandru, Abbas and Somanna had struck a deal to sell the skin for about Rs 40 lakh.   “One of them revealed that they had placed meat, which was poisoned, near BRT. After several days, a tiger ate the meat and died after walking a short distance. This happened six months ago. Further investigations will reveal what they have done with the teeth and bones,” sub-inspector Mahesh B, CID forest cell, who led the team, told Bangalore Mirror. The gang was booked under various sections of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, officials said.