Surprise inspection by a care trust led the company to build better living conditions for the animals
 
 Circuses continue to entertain crowds even to this day and animal activists are often on their toes whenever a circus troupe comes calling.
 
 On April 14, a team from Animal Care Trust (ACT) paid a surprise visit to the camp of a circus company which is currently in Mangaluru.
 
 Three members from ACT, Charles Paul, Daniel Tauro and Tauseef Ahmed visited the camp to check for documents and do a reality check.
 
 Licences, veterinary certificates, medical records, vaccinations and court orders were examined by the team which also asked that it be shown the animals at the camp.
 
 Tauseef Ahmed, volunteer and rescue in-charge, ACT, said “We had our eyes set on them even before the troupe entered Mangaluru, but once an anonymous message came in we decided to step in and do a fact check. Then we informed the deputy director of the animal husbandry department and the government vet was taken to the camp to conduct an inspection.”
 
 “Elephants, camels, dogs and birds were all checked one by one and as expected there were some lapses. Although the animals looked healthy, their living conditions were pretty bad. Cramped up cages for birds, small enclosures for dogs, elephants tied up using metal anklets on the legs were a few major offences. The food and water bowls of the birds were horrible. Every single detail was noted down. We were pretty rigid on what we had seen. Animals who earn them revenue should have been treated better, but sadly, they were deprived of that,” he said.
 
 There were further inspections and meetings with the forest department officials at the camp.
 
 ACT got the forest department involved due to the presence of elephants. “The only places where the circus was at default was the living conditions, “he said.
 
 The team demanded bigger, better enclosures, cleaner places, clean food and water. The metal anklets on the legs of the elephants were also replaced with normal ones.
 
 They also directed the circus troupe that camels will not be made to do any unnatural acts like going on their knees while parading and so on. The team demanded that they immediately stop the act involving elephants where kumkum had to be sucked and blown into the air via their trunks.
 
 Tauseef said that their demands were readily agreed upon. “There must be something really wrong with our law which places elephants under schedule 1 of the Wildlife Act but still gives licence to temples and circuses. We got two of the five dogs to permanently retire as they had problems with their eyes. The exotic birds and the elephants were examined by Dr Yashaswi, a wildlife expert,” Tauseef said. The ACT team said that they would monitor the activities of the circus company not just during their stay in Mangaluru, but also when they move to their next destination, Udupi.