By Ranadeep Chakraborty 
 
 Wildlife lovers feel meat bomb killed him; reject theory that he was mauled by wild boar
 
 The controversy surrounding the death of Prince, the tiger in Bandipur, has made headlines in the recent past, while some say the death is highly unnatural. The forest department argues that the tiger was further harmed by the wild boar after its death. Following the controversies, wildlife enthusiasts decided to ensure that justice be brought to Prince and protested in front of Aranya Bhavan on Saturday.
 
 Bangalore Mirror published a story on April 13 about the possibly unnatural death of Prince. It was believed that the animal died due to a meat-bomb, normally used to kill wild boar. It was also said that a part of Prince’s head was found near a bush close to the spot where he died, but the forest department denied the accusation saying a wild boar may have eaten that part of the head after the death of the tiger. 
 
 While activists have raised questions over the mysterious death of Prince saying it fell prey to a meat-bomb, forensic reports say the death was natural. But the problems that the citizens had were about the authenticity of the forensic report and hence, the protest. “The protest was arranged because the information that was provided to us was not credible. The death was not natural and the post-mortem report is not authentic,” said Rohini Ramadath, a techie.
 
 
 
 The one-hour protest that was held in front of Aranya Bhavan compelled forest officers to come out and meet the protestors. “Although it was a silent protest, we made sure our voices were heard by the authorities,” she said.
 
 
 
 
 
 The protestors were prepared with a memorandum that asked for justice for Prince as the animal was a prime reason that drew tourists and also has been a photographer’s delight for many years now. “We quietly asked for answers that would nullify all the questions that we have, but we don’t think they will be answered. So we had handed over the memorandum to the forest officer after he came out to see what the protest was all about,” she said. Along with the quest for answers, the protestors also asked for either a statue or a photo of Prince so that people visiting Bandipur would know what kind of aura the animal had. “In memory of Prince who ruled the place, we have asked the forest department to install either a statue or put a photo so that visitors know who Prince was,” Rohini said.
 
 “We stood there with a banner and placards that had messages for justice for Prince because we feel the death was caused by poachers. The reports of Prince dying due to dehydration are definitely false,” said Rohini.