Roopkumar and Sonali Rathod looked like they were having a ball rehearsing with daughter Reeva for a cultural extravaganza. The trio were full of laughs and fun — we bet the music sounded as sweet.
 
 A great start
 Stand-up comedian Praveen Kumar could not have asked for a better start to his solo innings as a comic — his first show of the year The Tickle Minded, performed at Jagriti Theatre, will be seen on NDTV’s new show NDTV Prime which is doing a series on India’s rising stars of stand-up comedy. The audience was surprised to see a TV crew while Kumar was performing. Turns out, he will be performing with some other comedians in February at two city pubs, which will also be part of the show.
 
 Assamese in spirit
 	The diarist spotted author Vikram Sampath sporting an Assamese hat with elan…He feels he might have been an “Ahomese” in his previous birth! This was at the North East Book Fair, to which Sampath was invited.  	
 	It seems the author flew in to India a couple of weeks ago from Queensland where he is pursuing a PhD. Sampath was quite impressed with the 250 plus book stalls at the fair, and is already thinking up some ideas for the Bangalore Literature Fest, where he wants due representation from the North East. While he was at it Assam, he paid a visit to the Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary in Guwahati as well. 	
 	As for his stint in Oz land, he is spreading his wings of cultural unity Down Under as well — he is setting up an India Studies Centre to facilitate cultural liasions between Australia and India.
 	
 	Budding friendships
 	 		Theatre artiste and film actor Adil Hussain came to Bangalore on Friday for an event, but didn’t leave without saying hello to his friend Saad Khan. The two met in Indiranagar over a cup of coffee, and talked about movies. Hussain, the diarist learns, is working with Danis Tanovic, who made the Oscar winning film No Man’s Land. Khan and Hussain talked nineteen to a dozen, but not before clicking this picture. No one can escape the selfie craze, it seems. 
 		
 		Tailpiece
 		 			When you pay an exorbitant amount of money for a party, you want your money’s worth, right? Clearly that wasn’t the case on New Year’s Eve when the cops had to intervene at a party being thrown at a popular five star hotel in the heart of the city. The diarist learnt that some guests in an inebriated state began creating a ruckus and breaking things as they weren’t happy with the arrangements made by the event organisers. The hotel management too pleaded ignorance and all fingers were pointed at the organisers. At another party at another plush hotel, the guests went out of order trying to grab as much chocolate as they could from a fountain that was made for the party. 		 			
 			So much so, the lobby was splattered with drops of gooey chocolate. Not the best way to ring in any new year.