By Garima Prasher

As many as 263 animals reportedly died at the Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) in a span of 12 months in what is a huge increase in mortality rate and in fact a worrying trend.
 
An inventory report released by the city zoo accessed by Bangalore Mirror revealed 263 animal deaths between April 2020 and March 2021. The total births recorded in the same period was 51.

The number of animals vanishing at the park has been swelling over the last five years. While 263 animal deaths have been recorded last year, the mortality rate was 143 in 2019-20, 123 in 2018-19, 71 in 2017-18 and 68 in 2016-17.

Birth rate at the facility is not encouraging either. While 74 births were recorded five years ago, there has been a steady decline after that.

“Every zoo has a basic mortality rate. But if the numbers are increasing like that at the BBP, as a vet, I would like to pull up my socks and do more,” said a veterinarian and a wildlife expert in the city.

The 263 animal deaths between April 2020 and March 2021 at BBP, according to experts, is a reason to worry. However, experts noted, the stress hormone levels in captive animals are directly proportional to the number of visitors.

“Higher mortality rate during the lockdown period is bizarre. This was the time when the number of visitors at the zoo or safari would be an all-time low. It should technically be a stress-free period for the animals. No honking, no vehicles; they should thrive. But, why are they dying? Was there a lack of funding to 
the zoo? Did they starve? Was there a disease outbreak? According to me, mortality rate should have either remained constant or gone down,” said another wildlife expert, adding that low natality rate is not reflective of the lockdown period and thus, peace and quiet.

Turtles, tortoises hit
Major fatalities recorded were of Tricarinate Hill Turtles (18 deaths) and Star Tortoises (68 deaths). According to the data from the BBP, greater part of these fatalities was due to health conditions such as pneumonia, enteritis, cold shock and traumatic shock.


 .

However, experts said such broad diagnoses cannot be used to ascertain the exact cause. “Till one looks at post-mortem reports, nothing can be said with certainty. Reasons given are based on broad diagnoses. It’s like saying ‘death due to fever’. There can be hundreds of reasons, and the exact cause can be deduced only after multiple tests,” said another city-based wildlife health expert.

Shoddy transport
According to wild- life enthusiasts, large scale mortality can also be due to poor handling, collection and transportation situations.

Most of the species of Chelonia (turtles, terrapins and tortoises) are seized by the forest and police departments and are brought into the park, generally stuffed in small bags and boxes with no air, space, food and water for days, or even months together, before they are rescued and sent to a zoo or an NGO. Majority of the animals die due to stress and infection en route.


 .

Once confiscated, the transportation and rehabilitation take months and the animals are kept in bathrooms, garages, boxes or stuffed inside sacks during this time. Lack of proper food and sunlight leads to the development of internal parasites.

“There can be a plethora of reasons. Whenever the authorities confiscate wildlife, they should try and repatriate the animals as soon as possible. If they are unable to do so, proper housing and care should be provided. However, most of our rescue centres and zoos have limited understanding of that,” said Dr Shailendra Singh, director, Turtle Survival Alliance.

Species biology
Experts are of the view that the majority of the wildlife are specialist creatures and seldom thrive in a captive environment of rehabilitation centres or biological parks.


Those who handle wildlife should be trained in triage of confiscated animals. They should try to mimic species-specific habitats in captivity—Dr Shailendra Singh, Turtle Survival Alliance
“If you take the case of Tricarinate Hill Turtles, they live in Sal forests and open grasslands that have unique ecology. There are large trees and moist forest floor with puddles and are heavily tied to tiger habitats. This turtle is a specialist creature that thrives on different kinds of mushrooms, arthropods and things that grow on forest floors. Once in captivity, the climate and habitat features are not in their favour. This is applicable to all wildlife,” added Dr Singh.

Limited husbandry, lack of knowledge on the species’ biology, subpar health assessment facilities are some other challenges.
 
“People who handle native wildlife should be trained in the triage of confiscated animals. They should learn more and try to mimic species-specific habitats in captivity,” Dr Singh explained.

When this correspondent tried to reach out to BBP authorities, they either refused to comment or remained unavailable.