By Harini Nagendra
 
 The planned steel flyover from Basaveshwara Circle to Hebbal Flyover and widening of Jayamahal Road will cause a far greater impact than what is being shown to us. A conservative estimate reveals at least 2,244 trees from 71 species will be affected by tree felling – far greater than official estimates of 812 or 1,668 trees from 45 species!
 
 
 If the Siddaramaiah government has its way, this green stretch between Raj Bhavan and Millers Road Junction could turn into a nightmare for motorists
 
 Various government reports list between 812 and 1,668 trees to be felled, belonging to 45 species of trees. Yet anyone who walks along these roads and looks at these gorgeous, green covered stretches may get a doubt. The number of trees to be impacted seems to be much higher than these official figures. This discrepancy is not a new feature. In the past, I have been involved with independent assessments of tree-felling on Nanda Road for the Metro project in 2009, and on Bellary and Jayamahal roads for a proposed road widening project in 2010 – in both instances, we found that an independent count on the ground was much higher than the official estimates.
 
 How many trees will we lose as a result of these two projects, and what will the impact be on Bengaluru – especially on the residents of North Bengaluru?
 My colleagues - Seema Mundoli from Azim Premji University and Vijay Nishanth from Project Vruksha – conducted a detailed mapping of the trees that would be impacted as a result of these two projects.
 
 Working from November 2016 to January 2017, they counted every tree, identifying the species, and taking rough estimates of the tree girth and height as well. A conservative estimation (which does not take into account trees from areas where felling may be likely but not certain) reveals that at least 2,244 trees from 71 species will be affected by tree-felling – far greater than official estimates of 1,668 trees from 45 species!
 
 THE TREE CENSUS
 
 For the tree census, the roads were divided into three sections and the tree species, girth and height were recorded for trees in each of the sections (See Map of sections). The first section consists of the stretch from Basaveshwara Circle till the base of the Guttahalli flyover as it descends onto Bellary Main Road. This includes the traffic islands on High Grounds and near the Windsor Manor, as well as four ramps and two underpasses leading to the elevated flyover. Some trees inside the Bangalore Golf Course to be affected also form part of this section, where we found 752 trees from 46 species, as well as an additional 204 saplings.
 
 Section II extends from the Guttahalli flyover to the Hebbal flyover, where we find 600 trees from 45 species in this section, plus one sapling.
 
 Section III extends from Mehkri Circle to Canto­nment Railway Station, including some trees marked within the palace grounds. There are 892 trees of 45 species in this section.
 
 Since the exact boundaries of the areas to be affected are unclear, we adopted a conservative approach. That is, wherever we were not able to confirm clearly that trees would be felled (such as areas within the Balabrooie campus, or in some inner areas of Palace Grounds which were not clearly marked), we did not count the trees. Thus our estimates are likely to be on the low side, and the actual number of trees to be sacrificed may be even higher.
 
 Some of the trees were veritable giants. A majestic raintree, with a girth of 6.2 metres and height of about 20 metres, is the largest in stretch 1, which also contained 15 trees – species of raintree, basari, cluster fig, peepal, banyan and large leaved mahogany – whose girth was more than 3 metres.
 
 In stretch 2, we found a mammoth peepal with a girth of 4.50 metres and height of 15 metres, and a raintree with a girth of 3.2 metres and height of 17 metres, as well as nine other trees with girths more than 3 metres.
 
 In section 3, we found another spectacular raintree with a girth of 6.2 metres, and 31 other trees with a girth greater than 3 metres.
 
 Especially memorable is a number of very large mango trees on Jayamahal Main Road, the widest having a girth of 4.5 metres.
 
 We found large sacred trees like the peepal (Ficus religiosa), keystone species with important biodiversity benefits like the fig, and economically important species like red sanders (Pterocarpus santalinus) and mango (Mangifera indica).
 
 Further, there are several massive raintrees (Albizia saman), African tulips (Spathodea campanulata) and copper pods (Peltophorum pterocarpum).
 
 Given their girth and height, we can safely conclude that many of these are several decades old. They have so far survived the massive onslaught of urban development – and seen much more of the city’s changes than have many of us today.
 
 Is this their time to go?
 
 
 
 
 
 WHY SHOULD WE CARE?
 
 Much has been written of the necessity to “sacrifice” trees to achieve our developmental aspirations. What would the ecological and environmental impact of losing these trees mean for Bengaluru? Our study offers at least six reasons to care.
 
 1. Air pollution: Air pollution has become a leading cause of debilitation and death in many Indian cities. The capital city of New Delhi was recently described as a ‘gas chamber’ owing to its very high levels of air pollution – other cities across the world, from Paris to Pretoria, struggle with the same issues. Bengaluru may soon have to suffer a fate similar to that of these cities.
 
 Green spaces are very important to act as lungs for the city, producing oxygen and removing carbon dioxide. Trees in Bengaluru help reduce levels of harmful air pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and suspended particulate matter substantially, bringing these within permissible limits.
 
 Trees mitigate the impact of dust pollution: A product of the incessant construction along these stretches. All stretches of the roads see continuous vehicular traffic, and the presence of the trees help keep pollution from vehicular exhaust in check. Suspended particulate matter and air quality of Bengaluru have been a cause for concern in recent years, and loss of tree cover as a result of the two proposed projects will severely compound the problem.
 
 Our previous research on the impact of trees in reducing air pollution in Bengaluru, has found that street trees play a major role in keeping air pollution in check in the city. In tree lined stretches of roads, suspended particulate matter levels reduce by as much as 75 per cent, coming within acceptable limits. Sulphur dioxide levels are also significantly reduced when there is tree cover on roads. This reduces the likelihood of asthma and other pollution related health disorders.
 
 Some estimates warn that children born in cities of today have a lowered life expectancy of as much as 5-7 years because of air pollution.
 
 What will be the impact of cutting 2,244 trees on people who commute on Bellary Road and Jayamahal Main Road daily? Of the residents and office-goers who live and work nearby? Of the birds and wildlife that live and breed in these habitats?
 
 2. Urban heat islands: Every summer, Bengaluru struggles with the reality of exacerbated, unbearable heat. Concreted patches in the heart of the city create urban heat islands, which absorb excess solar radiation during the day, and hold onto it at night, creating a vicious cycle of escalating temperatures. Trees help stabilize the city against urban heat island effects. They reduce the temperature on road surfaces and surrounding areas considerably. As shown in our previous research in Bengaluru, street trees reduced ambient air temperatures by as much as 5.6°C.
 
 Importantly, they also reduced the temperature of the road asphalt surface by as much as 27.5°C, making the difference between walking on a road surface that resembles a frying pan, and a road that is comfortable for walking, cycling and standing while waiting for a bus – regular uses of roads by lakhs of regular citizens, daily.
 Cutting trees on these roads for the proposed projects will mean an irreversible loss of this free temperature regulation provided by nature even as temperatures in Bengaluru are soaring every year.
 
 In April 2016, Bengaluru recorded its hottest summer in 85 years with the temperatures rising to 39.2°C. Is this really the time to be cutting trees?
 
 3. Loss of biodiversity: Trees even along congested roads, especially the fruiting varieties, provide food and nesting habitat for birds, insects, and other urban wildlife.
 
 The one-time loss of 2,244 trees will reduce the available habitat for several species of birds, not to mention insects and other mammals such as bats. We find a number of keystone species especially Ficus species which serve as habitats for a wide variety of biodiversity. Many trees such as the Ficus religiosa (peepal) and Ficus racemosa (cluster fig) are also sacred trees revered by many residents of the city.
 
 Naturalists who have observed the city for decades state that many of these trees act as important roosting sites. These wooded stretches are also very important for birds that move between the green patches of central Bengaluru, and the reserve forest patches to the north – acting as connectors that mitigate the impact of canopy fragmentation on bird and urban wildlife movement.
 
 4. Carbon sequestration: Trees act as sinks or reservoirs that sequester carbon for long periods thereby playing a critical role in addressing global warming and impacts of climate change. Trees store carbon that is referred to as biomass, and while roots, debris and litter all contribute to the biomass, the portion of the trees above the ground comprises the predominant portion of the carbon stock. While young trees are known to absorb carbon in their growing stage, recent research has also shown that older trees fix large amounts of carbon.
 
 In particular, old trees sequester much greater carbon above and below ground as compared to young saplings and trees. Many of the trees that are to be affected by the projects are several decades old. Felling them would drastically reduce the carbon sequestered in the city, and contribute to climate change. Our calculations estimate that the trees in this stretch sequester at least 98.5 metric tonnes of carbon. This is in line with research in other cities that indicate that trees in urban areas can play an important role in carbon sequestration. Given the urgency of global climate change, this is an important aspect of the role of street trees that needs to be stressed.
 
 5. Impact on lakes: In addition to the loss of the trees, there are two lakes that will also be impacted as a result of the steel flyover. The better known of these is Hebbal Lake, an ancient water body believed to have been built by Kempe Gowda I, the founder of Bengaluru city. A second lake is located within the palace grounds at a distance of 59 metres from the existing road over which the steel flyover is proposed.
 
 Hebbal Lake is a haven for migratory birds. Already impacted by the construction of the road to the airport, the construction of the steel flyover and the consequent movement of traffic will further disturb the quality of this unique ecological habitat. The lake situated within the palace grounds is a large water body that also supports a variety of bird life as well as other fauna such as snakes and frogs. This lake is relatively undisturbed as yet, but construction so close to it will harm the biodiversity that take refuge in it.
 
 Construction of the steel flyover adjacent to the palace lake would be in violation of the ruling by the National Green Tribunal in 2016, which states that a buffer zone of 75 metres is required to be kept around lakes, to protect them from the impacts of any construction.
 
 As the steel flyover is to be constructed at a distance of 59 metres from the edge of the lake in the palace property, it will be in violation of this ruling.
 
 6. The endangered slender loris: Recently a slender loris (Loris tardigradus), a nocturnal primate, was rescued from a road adjacent to the one where the steel flyover is proposed. This charismatic, yet secretive and shy nocturnal species has been reported from several parts of the city. Despite detailed research by the Urban Slender Loris Project in Bengaluru, very little is known about their distribution in the city.
 
 The slender loris is a threatened species. It is categorised as “Endangered” by the IUCN Red List, and is protected as a Schedule I species under the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972. Slender lorises are considered to be an important indicator species, and their presence indicates the health of a variety of other urban flora and fauna.
 
 Slender lorises have been reported from a number of areas adjacent to the locations of the proposed project. The slender loris requires areas of dense vegetation with continuous tree cover for survival, and is highly threatened by habitat fragmentation. The survival of these endangered species will be threatened significantly if the wooded patches where it is located are fragmented due to tree felling, and disturbed by road widening and construction of the steel flyover, with the associated noise, lights, dust, pollution and movement of traffic.
 
 
 
 Survey shows the lines on which the greenery stands to disappear
 
 
 WHAT DO WE DO NOW?
 
 Government reports identify 11 areas for replanting of 60,000 trees. Yet the city’s previous experience with compensatory plantation of trees does not give us much confidence that this replantation will be conducted with any success. If this were to be the case, the many tens of thousands of trees that have been cut in Bengaluru over the past decade or so should have been replaced with millions of trees, resulting in a substantially greened city by now! We are, instead, left with mythical ghosts of trees which were supposedly planted but are now nowhere to be found.
 
 We should also disabuse ourselves of the notion that the environmental and ecological benefits provided by a large mature tree can be quickly replaced by planning a number of small saplings.
 
 It takes years for a sapling to reach the size of a large mature tree, and provide similar ecological and environmental benefits. Also, the survival rates of saplings planted in the urban context is often quite poor, and many of these saplings may not survive to maturity in the first place. If it takes anywhere between 30-40 years for new trees to grow to provide the same ecological and environmental benefits – how is an entire generation of children supposed to grow up in a barren city? What air will they breathe, and how will their lungs cope with the pollution? What will happen to their minds and imaginations in a city starved of nature, as Bengaluru is fast becoming?
 
 Another problem is the proposed locations for replanting of saplings. These are planned in localities away from the site of this project. Such planning is extremely short-sighted. It fails to address the problem of air and noise pollution, heat islands, and biodiversity impact within this area of north Bengaluru. The existing trees on this stretch are large wooded trees that have been standing here for decades mitigating the impacts of pollution and high temperatures: Planting saplings in far off sites cannot replace this service. With the disappearance thousands of trees in the last two decades from the central areas of the city, the few remaining large wooded stretches of trees – of which the trees on Bellary Road and Jayamahal Main Road are a stellar example – are very important for Bengaluru.
 
 Trees help reduce air pollution, cool the city in summers and reduce the intensity of flash floods in the monsoon, increase ground water percolation, and harbour urban biodiversity.
 
 We have let many such green sites be denuded across the city. The time has come to draw a line in the sand. At stake is the future of 2,244 “giving trees”. We need to speak up.
 
 [The author is a Professor of Sustainability at Azim Premji University, and the author of “Nature in the City: Bengaluru in the Past, Present and Future”.]