They want DC to speed up Elephant Corridor survey, restore land rights to forest dept

With the recent reports of 232 acres of forestland being converted to revenue land near Bannerghatta National Park (BNP), the citizens appealed to Bangalore Urban Deputy Commissioner (DC) to speed up the 1,000-acre survey of the Elephant Corridor and to restore ownership rights of 232 acres of land to the forest department.

Namma Bengaluru Foundation and Vruksha Foundation met Bengaluru Urban DC J Manjunath and submitted a petition to quicken the survey .

On World Wildlife Day, the organisation requested the Government of Karnataka to look into the matter of Saving Bannerghatta Park.

The national park has been an important corridor for elephants migrating between the two Ghats. “We have increasingly come across man-animal conflicts in various parts of the State. The proliferation of these animals and the rapid urbanisation has brought them in conflict with humans in recent years. This move to convert forestland to revenue land will not only disturb the ecological balance of this area, but will also put humans and these animals at great risk,” a NBF member said.

Vinod Jacob, GM, Namma Bengaluru Foundation said, “Bengalureans are lucky to have a National Park in their city and this must be protected and conserved for future generations. The government should come up with a solution to restrain any further damage to the wildlife and ecology of Bannerghatta National Park. We look forward to the government coming out with a solution and restoring the park to its original self which is also the key objective of the UN Wildlife organisation theme this year”
 
Manjunath pointed out that the government has already started the survey. “The survey is underway, and the report will be shared shortly in the public domain. I have been personally involved in the process with the Revenue Department & Forest Department and will ensure that the right process will be applied. We will come up with a comprehensive plan to remove encroachers and rehabilitate farmers in the area and find a permanent solution to this crisis.”

Vijay Nishanth, Founder, Project Vruksha Foundation stated that the preservation of forests and parks is the need of the hour. With the DC pointing out for the survey to be conducted he stated that it was welcome news. “This national park is in our backyard and if we can have wildlife conserved and preserved for our future generations, this will be good,” said Nishanth.