CAG report tabled in the Legislative Assembly castigates the Karnataka government for doing almost nothing to protect the national animal. But the State’s estimates appear to be self-congratulatory
 
 
 Karnataka’s tiger reserves have been in the news for disturbing episodes in the recent past. Be it the high rate of tiger mortality, widespread forest fires or rising incidents of man-animal conflict, the national parks are at the centre of controversy. Continuous deaths of tigers in the last few months has turned out to be in stark contrast to the Karnataka Forest Department’s (KFD) tall claims of increased vigilance in national parks. Now, a performance audit on the administration of national parks by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India has revealed that not all is well with the KFD and its conservational programmes.
 
 The latest report by the CAG tabled by the Chief Minister in the Legislative Assembly on Wednesday revealed several irregularities in the management of national parks and wildlife sanctuaries across the state. In fact, both the KFD and the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) are found to be at loggerheads over poaching activities in tiger reserves. While the NTCA found that Karnataka accounted for 35 per cent of the tiger poaching in India in the last five-years, KFD argued that it had only witnessed one tiger poaching case! The CAG audit further discovered that several arms and communication gadgets distributed by KFD to its frontline staff were dysfunctional, reflecting the poor quality of vigilance that KFD officers actually engage in.

Read Also:
Grim wake-up call as tiger mortality rises  
 
 KFD locks horns with NTCA
 
 NTCA, the top agency of the Ministry of Environment and Forests which oversees the implementation of the Project Tiger programme, according to CAG, revealed that out of the 26 tiger poaching case between 2011 and 2016, as many as 9 cases were reported from Karnataka, contributing to 35 per cent of India’s tiger poaching cases. “While the two cases were from territorial divisions, seven cases were from tiger reserves including 5 from Bandipur and one each in Nagarahole and BRT tiger reserve. However, the details furnished by the KFD divisions indicate only one case of poaching!” the report said.
 
 Being one of the first states to raise and deploy a dedicated task force – Special Tiger Protection Force, Karnataka has hardly made any impact in tiger conservation, according to the CAG. “The figures indicate that poaching continues to be a serious threat to wildlife in Karnataka despite the deployment of the tiger protection force at Bandipur and Nagarahole,” the report said.
 
 
 Dysfunctional weapons
 
 Sprucing up its operations, the KFD had distributed arms, ammunition and communication gadgets to its field staff in almost all wildlife areas. Chucking the usual double barrel guns, KFD had even imported slide-action guns. The CAG found that out of the 401 weapons supplied to 10 protected areas, the majority 216 (54%) were distributed to personnel in three tiger reserves. “As many as 156 weapons are not functional. The BRT reserve had the highest number of dysfunctional weapons! While the Malai Mahadeshwara Sanctuary witnessed the maximum number of poaching cases, 27 per cent of weapons in the sanctuary were not functional,” according to the CAG report. Similarly, 156 wireless gadgets out of 1,187 were not functional.
 
 The anti-poaching camps (APCs) in the core areas of the tiger reserves often serve as a deterrent to poachers. But the CAG found that nearly 84 percent of temporary staff working at these APCs were not given any training in wildlife conservation.
 
Read Also:
Forest encroachment up 5 times in 19 years