Rama Rao placed fake gemstones under the skin of the hood afterdefanging the snakes. He sold the stones for upwards of Rs 1,000
 
 
 A 50-year-old man, who preyed on the superstitious beliefs of gullible customers by conning them into buying cobra pearls (naga mani), was himself stung by BBMP wildlife sleuths and the CID forest cell. Rama Rao is a resident of Anakanapally near Vishakapatnam, Andhra Pradesh and was caught red-handed passing off fake gemstones as snake pearls near Chikkajala on Tuesday. Three badly-injured cobras — found in his possession — were rescued. 

 	Cobras are a protected species under Schedule II of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act and Rao, who had fooled people into believing that they were, by buying the ‘pearl’, acquiring a great fortune, could now be jailed for up to three years. He sold the ‘pearl’ for anywhere upwards of Rs 1,000 depending on the customer. 

 Rao’s sleight of hand, centred on a wholly convincing act of extracting a pearl from the hood of a live cobra, was so mesmerising that even BBMP wildlife cell sleuths, who rushed to the area after being tipped off by a passer-by, were amazed at the man’s dexterity. But sleuths, under the guise of customers, found out that he first defanged the cobras, punctured the venom sacks and thrust fakes gemstones beneath the skin of the hood. It was these stones that he passed off as the snake pearl. 

 “After getting bitten by a defanged cobra, he slit the hood and took out a gem,” Mohan K, BBMP wildlife rescuer, told Bangalore Mirror. “He dramatically declared that it a cobra pearl, and placing it on his arm claimed it was a genuine one as it was absorbing the venom from the snake bite and preventing his death. But we learnt that is was all a trick to fool people. Depending on the looks of the customer he would sell the stone anywhere upwards of Rs 1,000 and going up to Rs 10,000.” 

 	“He was giving a live demonstration and was fooling people into believing that he was extracting a pearl from the snake,“ Lakshmi Narasimhaiah, sub-inspector, CID forest cell told Bangalore Mirror. “He had subjected the cobras to cruelty.” 

 	Occult treasures pertaining to wildlife, such as ‘double engine’ (red sand boa, so called because the tail looks like the head from a distance) are known as black budget items and any transaction pertaining to such products is illegal and a violation of the wildlife Act. The rescuers found that all three cobras in Rao’s possession had had their throats slit. Rao has been booked under various sections of the wildlife Act, including hunting and illegal possession of a wild animal. 

 	“Based on the complaint by the inspector, CID forest cell, a probe is being conducted to find out from where he got the snakes among other details,” C Muralidhar, inspector, Chikkajala police, said. 
 	
 	
 	WHAT IT’S SUPPOSED TO GIVE
 	 		IT IS believed that one who possesses a cobra pearl attains piety, rare good fortune, and eventually becomes an illustrious 	 		leader of men. However, renowned wildlife expert andherpetologist, Saleem Hamid, revealed that it is pure fiction. “People shouldn't believe in such things as nothing of this sort exists,” Hamid said. “It is just a way of making money at the expense of wildlife. Some superstitious people are behind these beliefs, but it only harms wildlife and is in gross violation of the Indian Wildlife Act