Not just to birds, nylon threads could be fatal for children too, warns wildlife rescuer

During the lockdown, and favourable weather conditions, many citizens are taking to flying kites from the comfort of their terraces to engage in an outdoor activity. However, this seemingly harmless activity is proving to be fatal for the birds around the City.

“Sports shops are shut due to the lockdown. Playing on the roads is difficult as they’re barricaded and movement of citizens is also banned except for essentials. The only way to play seems to be flying kites,” said Dinesh S, a second year undergraduate student. For Dinesh, flying kites has proven to be a fun, group sport which helps him strengthen his bond with his family.

For the birds in the City, the experience seems to be very different. As many are resorting to using nylon threads to fly kites, wildlife rescuers have been receiving many rescue calls to help birds stuck in the threads.

 .
 
A wildlife rescuer said, “Everyday, we receive about 10 to 15 phone calls about birds who are entangled in nylon threads. This needs to be dealt with. Someone’s fun should not be fatal for others.”
 
Rajesh Kumar, honorary wildlife rescuer from the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Forest Cell said that nylon threads are considered to be a silent killer. Kumar warns that parents need to be careful as their kids could also get hurt while flying kites with nylon threads. “We know that these voiceless creatures are in danger. But children can also get hurt. I advise people against using nylon threads. Use cloth threads instead,” he added.


 . 
Kumar said that the National Green Tribunal has already banned the usage of nylon thread in the country. The State Government too has banned its use since 2014. Yet, they continued to be used. According to Kumar, more than 120 people have died in the country due to cuts from nylon threads.
 

We know that these voiceless creatures are in danger. But children can also get hurt. I advise people against using nylon threads. Use cloth threads instead­–Rajesh Kumar, BBMP Forest Cell
Despite the ban, clearly, many people have access to it. In Bengaluru, many birds including mynas, owls, black kites and pigeons have become victims to the deadly thread.