Bowing to pressure from trekking groups, the forest department has decided to officially open Skandagiri to quench their adrenalin-pumping thirst on this hill located 60 km from the city. This will be the first official trekking trail to be opened near Bengaluru.
 
 	The forest department had kept Skandagiri off limits for trekkers because of frequent climbing mishaps which also included fatalities. Now, after forest officials received numerous representations from trekkers as to why a ban had been imposed at Skandagiri instead of providing adequate facilities and taking safety measures.
 	  	At a forest department meeting held two days ago, officials took a decision to officially open Skandagiri routes for trekkers through supervised and guided treks to preclude any mishaps.
 	  	Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra told Bangalore Mirror. “The department will identify experts who will organise guided treks. The trekkers need to register and then we will allow them for the guided trip so that we can ensure safe treks.” Forest officials said they are working on a plan to allow trekkers to directly reach the spot, fill the form, pay the entry-cum-instructor fee, and enjoy the trek.
 	  	The forest department has also decided to set up adequate amenities for the trekkers near the village at the base of the hill which will include parking facilities too. At present, there are no toilets and villagers exploit trekkers by arbitrarily putting up boards announcing vehicle parking for hefty rates to make a quick buck. Trekkers who chose to park their vehicles elsewhere to escape the steep parking fees inevitably used to discover their vehicle tyres punctured by irate villagers, trekkers have earlier reported.
 	
 	 		“We will provide all the amenities for the trekkers in the village which is at the foothills, including camps. There is a demand from trekkers to go to Skandagiri to witness the sunrise and we shall look into it. Trekking trails will be opened once the experts are trained,” Luthra said.
 		 	 		Trekkers have been facing embarrassment at the hands of forest and police departments for merely following their trekking passion so far in the background of a spate of trekking accidents there. Despite being part of expert trekking groups the climbing teams have been intercepted by forest or police personnel. The situation had turned so bad that they were made to sit by the roadsides or in police station for no apparent fault of theirs.
 		 	 		Meanwhile, Luthra said the department will also open trekking trails at 15 other places in and around Bengaluru, including Kunti Betta and Makalidurga.
 		
 		
 		 			FEW INCIDENTS LEADING TO BAN
 			
 			 		 			* On November 15, 2014, about 80 trekkers – mostly techies – were forcibly taken to Chikballapur police station and made to sit there for the whole night. The buses in which they had travelled there were seized and their drivers penalised. Because of that, the next morning the trekkers were asked to walk to Chikballapur to catch a bus to return to Bengaluru.
 			 		 			* On March 23, 2011, Bangalore Mirror had carried a story to highlight how night trekking had been banned at Skandagiri after a techie from west Bengal fell to his death while climbing.
 			 		 			* Skandagiri is one of the favourite spots and thousands opted for the trek for the “walk in the clouds” experience as the hillock often gets surrounded by thick clouds.
 			
 			
 			
 			WHY OPENING SKANDAGIRI IS SPECIAL?
 			
 			The trekking crowd in Bengaluru is losing places for adventure. Despite demands for 'safe trekking' with strict rules, they are not allowed to trek. Those who do get detained at police stations as in the case of Skandagiri. “I think this is definitely a great move. We always want to protect nature and ready to follow rules. We were wondering why the forest department was not taking the lead. Opening Skandagiri to trekkers is definitely a big boon for the city youth and techies as this is the nearest such location and an awesome place for trekking. The guided trails will ensure safe trekking even for girls,” said Srikant Rao, a techie who is a trekking enthusiast.
 			
 			
 			
 			Related Story: Another adventure goes awry