After Bandipur, night travel ban has been imposed in the eco-sensitive zone of Anshi National Park.
 
 	While the ban in Bandipur is restricted from 9 pm to 6 am, the Anshi ban extends for a full 12 hours from 6 pm to 6 am.
 	  	Confirming the ban, Uttara Kannada deputy commissioner Ujjwal Kumar Ghosh said, “The proposal to ban night traffic was mooted by conservator of forests from Belagavi and Uttara Kannada districts in the interest of wild animals and forest. The deputy commissioner of Belagavi has already imposed the ban from the Dandeli side and now, we have banned it from our jurisdiction."
 	  	The ban would mean no vehicle movement at Potoli-Ulavi (35 km) (which sees around 100 vehicles pass in the night), Anmod-Hemmadaga (10 km stretch which is part of state highway 30 and witnesses more than 500 vehicles passing through it every night) and Bhagavati-Kulgi (17 km stretch where the frequency is more than 100 vehicles per night).
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Bengaluru-based techie and wild life conservationist Giridhar Kulkarni said, “We are pressing for ban on more roads to protect wildlife. We want the government to ban vehicular movements during night on state highway 34 (Aurad-Sadashivgarh) which has high vehicular density in the night. We also want ban on state highway 31 (Belagavi-Chorla highway) which recently witnessed the death of a bison after it was hit by a vehicle.”
 	  	So why the ban?
 	  	In the last six years, the park has seen more than 50 mammal deaths, including nine leopards, scores of chital, sambar, sloth bear, barking deer and wild pig etc. 

 	Anshi National Park
 	  	Spread across 340 square kms, Anshi National Park and Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary (declared as project tiger reserve in 2007) is the youngest tiger reserve of the state with potential to hold more tigers. Currently, according to forest officials, the reserve has six tigers per 100 sq km of area against the 15 to 18 tigers per 100 sq km in Bandipur-Nagarahole Tiger Reserve. It is also an elephant reserve and home to Asiatic elephants aimed at reducing man-elephant conflict that has cropped up in the region in recent times. Forest region around Dandeli has a population of 50 to 60 elephants, which is a healthy population considering the different topography of the area compared to southern Karnataka.
 	
 	
 	 		Where is the ban?
 		 	 		Potoli-Ulavi : 35 km 	 		Anmod-Hemmadagada : 10 km 	 		Bhagavati-Kulagi : 17 km