Acute shortage of water has not only gripped the towns and cities in the state, but also the wildlife in the national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. While bigger animals manage to sustain themselves by straying out of forests for food and water, the phenomenon is taking a toll on smaller animals. Concerned over the worsening situation, the forest department is now planning to pump water from the rivers of neighbouring Tamil Nadu.   Sources in the department said the issue was raised by officials from Cauvery and Kudremukh and Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) wildlife sanctuaries, Nagarhole and Bandipur national parks and other ranges at a recent review meeting chaired by forest minister C P Yogeshwara. Acknowledging the situation, Yogeshwara told Bangalore Mirror that he has already directed officials to make special arrangements.   “While last year it was the wild fire, this year it is severe shortage of water and fodder due to scanty rainfall. While tigers and elephants are somehow coping with the problem, the worst affected are the gaurs and deer. Unlike other herbivores which can survive on dry grass and leaves, gaurs require green, fresh fodder, that too in large quantities. Adding to their woes is the fact that even the water holes have dried up. Our officers have reported that a majority of the animals are frail and weak,” Yogeshwara said.   Drought in Nagarahole The minister said the situation in Nagarhole, especially around Kabini backwaters, has reached alarming proportions. “As many as 96 tanks have dried up. There are around 1,000 to 1,500 gaurs and several hundred deer in this part of the forest. Kabini is completely dry. The only solace is the little water in Lakshmana Theertha river which we are thinking of diverting to the dried tanks,” Yogeshwara said.   At BRT, which received 73 per cent less rainfall than normal, officials have pinned their hopes on a small rivulet till the arrival of monsoon.   Anthrax scare  The situation is no different in Bandipur. “More than 50 tanks have dried up and only seven tanks have water. We are considering pumping water from Moyar river flowing through Mudumalai National Park in Tamil Nadu,” an official said.   Cauvery hit too The Cauvery wildlife sanctuary received 50 per cent less rainfall this year. According to officials, animals were seen migrating from one place another as water is found only some in pockets along the Cauvery river.   Yogeshwara said measures have been taken to prevent fires which could prove to be more disastrous than drought. “In Nagarahole, a total 1,800 km of fire line has been created, Bandipur now has a 2,100 km fire line and 350 watchers. In BRT limits, 573 km of fire line has been laid with 40 teams of personnel to man the area. Even in Sakrebailu and Shettyhalli reserves in Shimoga district, around 500 km of fire line has been set up with a 150-strong team of watchers,” he said.