By: Hari Somashekar 
 
 As an 11-member team treks across the Hemis High Altitude National Park looking for the elusive endangered cat, one intrepid traveller recounts their adventures
 
 In the northern parts of the Himalayas, at an elevation of 3,000-6,000 mts, is the home of the elusive snow leopards – the 4,400 km2 Hemis High Altitude National Park. Named after the famous Hemisgompa monastery situated 40 km southeast of Leh, the park incidentally, the largest national park in South Asia is also home to many endangered species such as the Himalayan blue sheep, Ladakhiurial, Tibetan wolf, brown bears, golden eagle, red fox and Lammergeier vulture, apart from around 200 snow leopards.
 
 Counting sheep
 
 My nine-day journey, with 11 wild life explorers (professionals, wildlife students and experts from across Karnataka as well as Australia and Hong Kong), started on a cold winter morning in January with temperatures down to -20°C to -30°C. Our first day was spent with a gentle walk around Leh, buying items for trekking and making plans for the next day. The next day morning we travelled to Lamayaru (The Land of the Moon) and spent the rest of the day visiting scenic destinations in and around Leh.
 
 Leaving Leh, we started for Zingchan the very next day. We trekked for an hour-and-a-half hour to Husing where our base camp was situated. We reached Husing just in time for a sumptuous lunch and spent the rest of the day scouting for blue sheep (Bharal) around the base camp and its nearby valley. The high mountain sheep, with short and dense grayish blue coloured hair, is the primary prey for snow leopards. Our sheep sightings also included the Ladakhi Urial (Shapu in Ladaki language), a reddish brown sheep with large curled horns.
 
 Trek to Husing Valley
 
 On the next day, we embarked on our five-km trek to Husing valley (at 13,000 ft) early in the morning. Dressed in three layers of thermals, a fleece jacket and a down jacket which can withstand -25 to -35°C and insulated shoes, we trudged through the mountain terrain.
 
 We climbed a mountain close by to scan for the snow leopard which remained elusive. Sadly, we couldn’t trace any marks and returned to the base camp for lunch. We tried our luck one again in the afternoon but to no avail.
 
 A feast at 13,287 feet
 
 Our search for the feline took us on a three-hour trek to Rumbak Village and Tri Junction. While we scoured the mountain ridges for the snow leopard, few members took the opportunity to shoot photographs of the Lammergeier (the bearded vulture) and the Golden Eagle near the Tri Junction area. By noon, a grand lunch organised by Dorjee (our camp guide) awaited us. Comprising veg and non-veg soup, vegetable pulao and more heartwarming food and served at 4,050 mts and -17 C, it was probably one of the best lunches I have ever had.
 
 Rumbak is a small hamlet with only landline telephones so a few members took the opportunity to speak to their families. The day ended with no traces of the snow leopard. With only two more days left, I was fervently praying for better luck soon.
 
 The big moment
 
 Day six began early as we climbed the elevated mountain near Husing. There were more spotters that day when we arrived at our destination. All of a sudden, Dorjee started running towards something he had spotted in the distance. As he shouted out loud, “Yes, yes! Oh God, it is a snow leopard’, he rushed back and hugged us in excitement.
 
 It was the moment we had been waiting for. It took us four-five minutes to identify where the snow leopard was sitting (about 1.5 to 2 km away) through the spotting scope. Of course, once we had it in sight, we quickly set up our tripod and cameras and proceeded to record the historical moment.
 
 As I peered through the viewfinder of my high-resolution digital SLR camera (fitted with prime lens of 700 mm focal length), I was surprised to see the snow leopard appearing as a tiny dot. We waited almost an hour to take the pictures of the elusive cat. It sat for an hour in the same place, then walked for 15 minutes before vanishing inside the gorge. A high altitude celebration took place as everyone started talking about their excitement all at once.
 
 Back to base
 
 On the seventh day, the last day of our trek, we spent the day on the same mountain range in search of Shan, as they call the snow leopard in Ladaki language. It was a sunny day, and we spent our time taking photographs of the beautiful ridges and the grazing blue sheep.
 
 Even though we didn’t spot any more snow leopards, I returned to Zingchan with a happy heart, going through the memorable pictures I took all through the trip. As we prepared to return to our respective homes, all I could think of was the majestic snow leopard basking on the snow-capped mountain. Truly, an unforgettable experience.
 
 Hari Somashekar works with WWF-India as State Director for Karnataka and works on awareness,education and wildlife conservation issues and has a passion for wildlife photography
 
 
 Snow Leopard