Operation to catch the big cat, which had prowled the periphery of the city scaring residents, was launched a month ago
 
 For the residents in the area hemmed in by Tumkur Road, Magadi Road and Nice Road on the periphery of the city, it was a curfew spanning more than a month. An adult leopard paid regular nocturnal visits to the area and had — from the time it was first spotted in early July — killed a calf, three goats, three dogs and a sheep. The wild carnivore had kept residents indoors after dark, a self-imposed curfew that was strictly obeyed.
 
 On Friday that curfew was lifted when the leopard, a magnificent animal in its prime, was finally trapped by forest officials. It ended more than a month of restless, fearful nights for residents and days of worrying for forest officials. The big cat was caught close to Dasanpura off Tumkur Road next to Jindal Nature in the wee hours of Friday.
 
 The operation to trap the animal had spanned 12 villages and had involved 16 camera traps. “We had been trying to catch the leopard for the last 30 days,” S Narasimhamurthy, range forest officer, Bangalore Urban told Bangalore Mirror. “We finally got a break this morning and it’s a big relief for us as well as residents in the vicinity. The big cat, which is about seven to eight years old, fell into the trap we had laid near Dasanapura. It was a joint operation by officials and residents of the areas it had prowled.”
 
 The leopard was frequently spotted in Dasanapura, Machohalli, Shivapura, Gidadakonenahalli, Averalli, Rahuthnalli, Gollarapalya, Kenganahalli, Gangondanahalli, Lakshmipura, K G Lakkenahalli and Narayappana Palya.
 
 Officials had first carried out combing operation and had burst firecrackers to chase it away into the wild, but those efforts failed and the big cat continued to prowl these areas which have several residential layouts and schools. Residents, however, were sensitised and cautioned not to venture out in the night. Officials say the leopard often strayed into these areas for easy prey — dogs.
 
 “We don’t bait animals unless the issue is very serious,” M Nagraj, range forest officer said. “We prefer to chase them back into their habitat through combing operations which usually goes on for a week. In this case though, the animal was frequently spotted and residents pressed us to take action. Fortunately, our efforts paid off.”
 
 The operation to trap the animal began on July 21. Besides combing operations by a team of 15 officials during the night, officials also placed bait — dogs — in places the animal was spotted. Residents too alerted the forest department every time they spotted the animal. “It was sighted mostly in the night,” MN Nagaraj, a resident of Dasanapura said. “I saw the same leopard a week ago when it killed our dog. We are thankful to forest officials for having finally trapped the animal before it could take a human life.”
 
 Officials admit that such operations are rarely successful and are especially thrilled when they found the animal trapped in a cage. The dog kept to bait the animal too was safe. “The leopard will be released in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary after a thorough medical checkup,” Narasimhamurthy said. “It is natural for people to be afraid, but they must remember that these residential areas on the outskirts of the city were once the habitat of these wild animals.”