Apparently unable to stomach an earlier complaint about his work, a range forest officer (RFO) assaulted his senior officer, a deputy conservator of forests (DCF). The shocking incident, in which the RFO is learnt to have hit his senior with his belt and punched him in the face, took place at the forest department’s guest house located near Aranya Bhavan, headquarters of the department, in Bangalore on Nov 26.

The DCF has lodged a police complaint against the RFO, who is in charge of the guest house, and has also informed the department’s top brass about the attack. The police are on the lookout for the RFO.

In his complaint, Dr Suryadeo Pathak, an Indian Forest Service officer and DCF of Virajpet forest division, said, “I was in Bangalore to take part in a meeting called by the chief minister to discuss issues pertaining to Kodagu district, along with the MLAs of the district, on Nov 25. I had booked a room at the forest department guest house located behind Aranya Bhavan.”

BELTED AND PUNCHED
“After the meeting, Anil Kumar Ratan, DCF of Virajpet wildlife division and myself, went to the guest house. We were allotted a room on a twin-sharing basis. The next morning at around 9.30 am, RFO Govinda Raj barged into the room without any provocation and started using unparliamentary language. He was angry with my earlier complaint to the top brass of the forest department about the poor house-keeping at the guest house. He took out his belt and hit me with it, and then punched me. Even though my colleague tried to intervene, the RFO continued to attack me. Hearing the noise, the other guests staying in the guest house came out and witnessed the attack on me.

BAD BEHAVIOUR
“The RFO asked me to vacate the room and threatened to kill me. After he left the place, I informed the entire top brass of the forest department about the incident. I am deeply hurt by the behaviour of a junior-ranking officer. Please take action against the RFO immediately.”

During an official trip to the city on Nov 21, DCF Pathak had made a written complaint to department higher-ups about the poor house-keeping at the guest house. This is thought to have provoked the assault on Pathak by the RFO, who is in charge of the guest house.