By Shayaree Chanda

After days of rain, slithering guests try to get warm inside homes

Citizens who were stuck at home due to the incessant rains had no idea that they were sharing the warm space with uninvited guests of the reptilian sort.
In the last few weeks, many homes in Bengaluru spotted snakes trying to find a refuge from the rain. Snakes were found in bathrooms, in cars, in garages, in kitchens, on top of two-wheelers, and even inside shoes. 

Snakes entering houses is not a new phenomenon in Bengaluru as the city is turning from a garden city to become an urban jungle. But the rain did make it a more common occurrence.
 
Recently snakes were caught in Benson Town, Jai Bharath Nagar, Kasturi Nagar. Rescuers also got calls from Marathahalli, Banaswadi, Hosur Road, Koramangala, Yelahanka, Vidyaranyapura, Kanakapura Road, RR Nagar, Bannerghatta Road and Electronics City. Any area where water logging happened, the chance of snakes entering households rose.
 
Snakes usually enter homes in monsoon, but in winter they are known to hibernate. Mohan Krish, popularly known as ‘Hiss Mohan’, a wildlife rescuer told Mirror, “Changes in the environment and climate are the reasons for the rise in such cases.” He adds that snakes need low temperatures to hibernate but when the temperature is around 21 to 25 degrees C, it is too warm for them to hibernate but not warm enough to digest food. 

“This is why they enter houses and vehicles looking for warm spaces.” Plus the heavy rains have caused water-logging in burrows where snakes live. And due to overflowing of lakes even aquatic snakes were forced to enter our homes through drains.

  .
Snakes entering our personal spaces may seem terrifying but it is not that unmanageable. It is common for people to think that every snake is venomous but that is not true. The most common snakes seen in the past couple of weeks in Bengaluru were Cobra, Russell’s Viper, Rat Snake and Water Snake. Only the first two of these are poisonous. In almost all of Asia only four out of 26 snakes are poisonous. Rescuers say people should refrain from trying to catch snakes or try to chase them away. Once we notice a snake, we should take 20 steps away, close all doors and windows and call the rescuers.
 
“There are more snake rescuers than snakes in Bengaluru. People should only call a government department to rescue a snake rather than calling some private pest control companies because snakes like any wildlife animal are protected by law (especially from poaching and smuggling),” said Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer. He added that when qualified persons handle snakes, they can use illegal methods like headpins, glue pad which harm the snake.
 
Both rescuers agreed that we have to learn how to co-exist with snakes whether we like it or not. They said snakes make sure rats and mice numbers are kept in check which controls spread of diseases.

.