By Reya Mehrotra

With just weeks left before migratory birds arrive, photography enthusiasts talk about species they spot, lakes they worry over and how newbies can prep

There’s but a few weeks left till the migratory birds start arriving at the city’s lakes. The Horticulture Department announced its plans to plant shrubbery along with new lotus plants in the small lake in Lalbagh to attract new bird species. Lake guardians round the city, like in Seegehalli Lake and Kowdhenahalli Lake, have been installing bird perches and planting trees around the water bodies. And shutterbugs are buffing their lenses up. 

Birds in B’luru

“On good years, the migratory birds start coming from October and stay on till March,” says IT professional Mihir, who’s been photographing migratory birds for a few years now. And there’s a great variety of species to look forward to.

Vineeth PV, an engineer and an amateur photographer, says, “I usually go to Hebbal Lake, Jakkur Lake and at the lake near JP Park to click these unseen and unique species of birds. I saw Pelicans, Great Egrets, Black Headed Ibis and Northern Harrier last year.”

Rakesh Surendran, another amateur photographer, prefers Hoskote Lake and Kaikondrahalli Lake. “In 2017, I clicked Black-Crowned Night-Herons, and indigenous birds like Purple Saron, Kingfisher, Cormorant and Darters.”

However, photographers say that some species are rarely to be seen these days. Ashwin Deshpande, a software engineer, has been into nature and wildlife photography for 10 years now. “Northern Shovelers and Garganeys were completely missing in 2017 at Jakkur Lake. From at least 50 and maximum 200, the numbers of birds in each species we get to see have gone down to three to four in most lakes. In 2016, there were a lot of ducks and around 50 Black Winged Stilts. In 2017, we could see only four to five of them. 

The number of ducks reduced too,” he says. “However, I saw Northern Pintails, Pelicans and New World Warblers among others,” he added. Even indigenous bird species have started dwindling, they feel.

State of the lakes

Most of the photographers feel that the pathetic state of the lakes is to blame. Ignored by the authorities and encroached heavily, most water bodies in Bengaluru are dying due to toxic inflow of sewage, garbage and lack of cleaning. Mihir, says, “The water level matters too. Some birds like Pelicans need three to four feet water in the lakes and others like Storks can survive in shallow water. Low water level in the Mahadevpura Lake, for instance, will affect migratory birds.”

“Water birds cannot survive in dirty toxic water and may even die. Lakes have become areas of garbage dumps and pollution just adds to it,” says Rakesh. Vineeth agrees, pointing to the state of Jakkur Lake to make his case. “At Jakkur, where waste is dumped regularly, we have been seeing progressively lesser number of birds each year,” he points out.

Tips for newbies

Jakkur Lake, Hebbal Lake, Kaikondrahalli Lake, Mahadevpura Lake, Chikkabanavara Lake and Hoskote Lake are some of the popular photography spots for wildlife photographers. With just a few weeks left to get into action, how do they prepare?

Ashwin reads up. “Be it through social media or books, I love reading about nature and wildlife, especially about different species of birds,” he says. And yes, they need to be morning people. “The best time to click pictures is between 6 am to 10 am,” he says.

Patience is the most important thing to cultivate, they say, as is the habit of taking pictures in silence without disturbing the birds.
People need to know their camera and camera angles before they start photographing birds. They need to brush up technical and practical knowledge. They need to know how to make use of available light or lack of it. And most of all, photographers need to be considerate so that they don’t intrude or frighten away the birds.

New to Bengaluru? Get the low-down here

* Want to watch birds? Try Kaikondrahalli Lake, Madiwala Lake, Lalbagh (pond), Hebbal Lake, Hadinaru Kere (near Nanjanagud), Hulimangala Lake and Muthanallur lake, Hoskote Lake or Hesaraghatta Lake

* Looking for other popular spots? Head for Nandi Hills, Turahalli forest and Bannerghatta National Park or Maidanahalli, Vulture 
Sanctuary in Ramanagara 

* Want to join a bird-watchers’ club? Look up Birdwatchers’ Field Club of Bangalore, India Birding Adventures, Bangalore Birding and Bird-watching in Bangalore

* Need to budget? It takes Rs3,000 to go bird watching with India Birding Adventures. You can opt for free bird watching outings on the second Sunday (morning) of every month at Lalbagh by Bird-watching in Bangalore. For personalised tours, get in touch with Bangalore Birding.