Steuart Henderson Britt, an American marketing guru, once made this awesome statement:  “Doing business without advertising is like winking at a girl in the dark. You know what you are doing, but nobody else does”. That was one hell of a profound statement to make because in Steuart Henderson Britt's days (mid-1900s), they used to don Victorian underwear that was thrice smaller than the regular size, and making profound statements wearing tighty-tights was a huge task. 

Anyway, going by the way some of our advertisements are shaping up, Steuart's words can easily be applied to how Indian marketing research bureaus are functioning — they’re winking in the dark, there’s no girl around, and they’re blind, and deaf as well. Y’see, market research typically gets distilled into advertisements and so, here’s what Indian market research departments are trying to convey: 

Indian teenagers and yuppies will buy mobikes when they see ads featuring people jumping 30-40 floors down from skyscrapers, landing bang on the mobike’s seat and then riding away in a blaze of glory —  perhaps, in a hurry to consult a mega-hernia specialist. It doesn't stop there — Indian market research tells us that we Indians are such morons that we will buy these same mobikes when we see them falling off helicopters and landing on roofs without a scratch on them, or when we see best pals nearly killing each other deploying Kung-Fu, because they want to be first to ride a bike!

Jeez, how about market research telling companies to focus on cost cuts and quality enhancements, now that commodity prices have fallen so very drastically? Skin care products take the cake — on the one hand we have cosmetic companies guaranteeing that brown skin will turn white in two weeks, and on the other, we have the government belting out ads saying such claims are false (Jago Grahak Jago)! What does this mean? —  That companies lure people with false claims and are permitted by the government to do so; That the government is now telling the people they are fools to buy such products, never mind the fact that Indian folk have been buying these for the last so many years; and that, the Indian common folk are inflicted with a Michael Jackson Syndrome. 

If men use a particular brand of toothpaste, will women fall for them enough to go out on dates and possibly copulate with them? Hey, market researcher folks, do you think Indian women are t-h-a-t dumb, and that men are crazy enough to believe you? Will a gaggle of women kiss a man when they find him attired in his undies? Or, will they giggle and mock him, and leave him with vivid images that will destruct his psyche? 

Well, according to all underwear market research departments, men should wear a particular brand of underwear because that's the only way to get into a woman's …heart.

Will you buy a brand of paint because a doped-out star, notorious for slaying endangered wildlife and leaving his wife and kids for someone younger, gets up one day bored stiff and decides it's time to make whoopee — by painting his walls!! Gawd, is there no other way to have fun aside from pretending to be a mason! Will you buy a brand of clothes because their ad says that they will help you climb the corporate ladder? It is precisely thinking and hiring on these lines — hire the bloke who looks smarter in the suit; kick the real worker with the boot — that has brought this great recession upon us! Will women stop their boyfriends from playing juvenile console games because they want them to set a ringtone on their mobiles, or will women prevent their men from playing console games because they wanna kootchie-koo with them? 
Most market research departments — independent or in-house — are staffed with a bunch of juveniles who ought to be straitjacketed and classified as dangerous. But the people governing Indian market research are nincompoops, so this crazy cycle of whim-n-fancies, also known as research, will continue. Will we ever get to see a day when market researchers tell their companies not to get greedy, cash out while the going’s good and focus on quality enhancements and lower costs instead of bullsh*tting right through the ozone layer? 

(Sunil Tinani is a professional writer, ideator and graphic designer)