Until a few years ago, many lakes in Bengaluru were home to multiple bird species. However, the waterbodies wear a deserted look today, thanks to the rampant use of fishing nets across the lakes revived by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP).

Black-winged stilt, whistling duck, little ringed plover, northern shoveler, garganey – these are a few birds that have been giving the Mahadevapura Lake a miss, for instance.
 
Birdwatchers and amateur wildlife photographers complained the avians are skipping the waterbodies even during migratory season.

An IT professional and amateur photographer who BM spoke to said he had documented over 70 bird species in and around the Mahadevapura Lake just a few years ago. “I started photographing birds in the area in 2016. I documented around 70 species. These were not just local bird populations, but even migratory birds that used to visit the lake up until 2017 and 2018. The lake was still being developed and construction of sewage treatment plants was going on. However, things were still good till fishing contracts were given,” Prabhat* recalled.

According to bird enthusiasts in the city, fishing nets and thermocol blocks floating on the water surface are proving dangerous for migratory as well as resident bird species.

“Once fishing began, it completely obstructed the movement of birds. There were a couple of cases of birds getting entangled in the nets. While the fishermen could free the birds, fewer birds visited the lake thereafter,” said LN Bhat, a resident.

   .

According to ecologists and bird enthusiasts, while there are some birds such as the cormorant that do not mind the nets and simply avoid them, there are a whole lot of other birds including the pelicans that get scared of the nets and floating thermocol pieces.

“While the fishing nets are invisible, the fishermen tie thermocol pieces to the nets to keep them afloat. These pieces are unusual sights for birds and they started avoiding the lakes,” said a city based bird enthusiast.

With STPs around, the water level in the lakes is always up to the brim. Many migratory birds that visit Bengaluru lakes during winter prefer lower water levels.

   While fishing nets are invisible, fishermen tie thermocol pieces to nets to keep them afloat…— City based birdwatcher
“For instance, whistling ducks and northern shovelers prefer shallow water. I photographed these birds at some lakes in Bengaluru in 2017 and 2018. This was the time when the waterbodies were at nature’s mercy. They got filled up during the monsoon and had shallow water levels during winter. However, with STPs, the lakes are always filled up to the brim, which is not suitable for many birds. Painted storks prefer wading in shallow water with their beaks foraging for food,” said Prabhat.

“There was a rich variety of fish available in the lakes before fisheries were commercialised. Now it is just the fish that can be sold. Different birds prefer different fish.
 
This might be yet another reason for fewer birds visiting the lakes,” the birder said.
 
(*name changed)