Palike says it does not have resources in place yet to effectively rescue and translocate monkeys from city even as several wildlife activists are against idea

If you’ve lived in the city long enough, monkey problem will not be a new one to you. But chances are slim that any solution will be reached by the authorities as the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) -- which was supposed to set up a system to effectively address this issue -- does not have the resources to do so.
 
The BBMP is expected to ensure scientific rescue of the animals without causing them harm during relocation. For the uninformed, the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) states that current practice of using the skills of the traditional knowledge/skill holders in capturing monkeys shall be continued till the department builds up capacity with alternative scientific techniques. It has also stated that the capturing process should be carried out using walk-in trap cages or nets. The decision on the type of equipment to be used for capture will depend on local conditions and the expertise available with the capturing team.
 
However, the BBMP Forest Department does not have the manpower or expertise to capture monkeys in the city. The BBMP merely washed off its hands by merely transferring phone calls to the Bengaluru Urban Forest Department. “We do not have the manpower to capture and release monkeys. We are also not authorised to catch monkeys as they come under ‘wild animals’ category,” said BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forests.
 
However, Bengaluru Urban Deputy Conservator of Forests said that capturing monkeys within the city limits was the responsibility of the BBMP. “They can refer or forward applications received from the public seeking to capture monkeys to us. We give permission to the BBMP to capture monkeys only after completing spot verification,’’ said the Bengaluru Urban Deputy Conservator of Forests.
 
He said that around 50 applications are received per year from the public on monkey menace. “Majority of applications are from residential apartments in Bengaluru South and North,’’ he said.
 
Animal rights activists are not happy. They oppose translocation of monkeys from Bengaluru as it would affect them. “BBMP has neither the expertise nor the authority to shift monkeys from the city to other places. Monkeys are known for living in groups. If some monkeys are separated from their group, they will become more vicious,’’ said Maneka Gandhi, BJP MP from Sultanpur and animal rights activist.
 
According to Arun Prasad, an animal rights activist, there are clear Supreme Court orders that territorial and pack animals that live in human habitation should not be relocated.
 
“We will file objections regarding the Monkey Relocation SOP with the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka so that man animal conflicts are resolved amicably without any cruelty to animals by making necessary changes in the SOP,’’ said Prasad. Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff of People for Animals Wild Life Conservation Centre said that the authorities concerned, including the BBMP authorities, should try to address the root cause for monkey menace in the city.

 Translocation of monkeys will not solve the problem. BBMP should develop more parks with fruit-bearing trees for their benefit– Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, People for Animals Wild Life Conservation Centre 
Translocation of monkeys will not solve the problem. BBMP should develop more parks with fruit-bearing trees for the benefit of monkeys. There should be a facility to make fruits and vegetables available for monkeys, he said.
 
Back in August 2021, the Karnataka High Court had directed the state government in the presence of Chief Wildlife Warden of Forest Department and the BBMP to come up with a system. However, the authorities concerned have not been able to do so after almost a year for reasons best known to them.
 
The SOP for capture and release of monkeys by the Forest Department, BBMP, and urban local bodies was prepared on August 8 under the guidance of Vijaykumar Gogi, the supervision of Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) & Chief Wildlife Warden Karnataka and Chairman of Expert Committee on monkey-related conflicts.