Eco group collects Rs.1.78 lakh over to the men who were mauled by sloth bears
 
 Two workers who helped officials of the forest department with chores on a daily-wage basis and were attacked by bears while doing so in August have got some much-needed help. Since they could not afford the resulting hospital expenses and loss of earning, an environment-friendly group collected Rs.1.78 lakh and presented it to the duo on Thursday, during the 61st Wildlife Week.
 	  	Manu KS, 25, and Nagesh, 21, were attacked by two sloth bears in Hebbe Range of Bhadra Tiger Reserve on August 21 while they were patrolling the forest on foot. Nagesh suffered severe injuries to his face, including a mangled nose and Manu suffered fractures to his left hand and leg. Despite the injuries, the two managed to walk to their camp two km away, from where they were taken to a private hospital. Since the daily-wage labourers were not in a position to pay the hospital expenses, the forest department had borne them.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Manu recalled the frightening experience, “We were on one of our regular rounds. Nagesh was just one month old in the profession, so he was asked me to take him on the route. Around 11.45 am on that day, I heard a weird sound. Even before I could react, a bear attacked me. As I put up my hand to defend myself, it grabbed my left hand even as I tried to kick the ferocious animal. It pushed me with a lot of strength, and I went tumbling on the ground. Nagesh was attacked in the face by another bear. We both screamed out for help while trying to push the bears away.”
 	  	“With Nagesh lying on the ground and me able to break free and move away from the animal that attacked me, the two bears calmed down and headed back to the bushes,” he said, going on to add, “We supported each other and started our way back to camp. Fear caused us to forget the route but after dragging ourselves for a kilometre or so, we stumbled upon the main road and from there on to the camp. The effort rendered us unconscious as soon as we got there.”
 	  	Save Tiger First, a group that works on environmental issues, took it upon itself to raise some money for the poor labourers. The group used social networking sites and spread the media reports of the attack, and requested people to donate as much money as they could.
 	  	Ashok Hallur, founder trustee of the group, said, “The two were unable to work after the incident, and also, they were not financially stable. So we decide to help and encourage them by making them stable until they could get back to work. We made a small video and posted it on Facebook and WhatsApp and public responded quickly and extended their support. We discussed the matter with like-minded people and raised money from more than 50 such. Even now, some people have been sending money to the account. We raised `1.78 lakh through our efforts, and guidance of forest officials.”
 	  	“We met Manu and Nagesh in Chikmagalur and handed over cheques to them in the presence of the officials present at the closing ceremony of Wildlife Week,” he added.