We have heard of humans spiralling into depression after the death of a loved one. We have heard of the options (both medical and psychological), to drag them out of it.
 
 
 But what happens when a three-month old puppy loses its sibling, and the life slowly slips out of it? What recourse does it have? Well, thankfully for this puppy, it had the love and care of the humans around it.
 
 	
 A stray dog recently had a litter of four puppies in Ramasandra near Kengeri. While some locals adopted a pair, the other two puppies remained with the mother and were inseparable in every aspect. They would play, fight, eat and sleep together, come what may. On Monday, one puppy suddenly died, and residents of the neighbourhood buried it. Its sibling, however, was inconsolable. It refused the food and water put out by residents and even refused to enter a resident’s house when invited — even though rain was lashing outside.
 	
 	  	It wandered around as if looking for its sibling, and would always return to the place where they slept and ate together, no matter how inclement the weather. By Tuesday evening, however, the puppy’s condition took a turn for the worse as it had not eaten in over 24 hours.
 	
 At a loss about what to do, one resident sent out an SOS on Facebook. Within minutes, advice came streaming in, along with words of support and avenues of hope. Some speculated that the puppy may have been infected with Canine Parvovirus (CPV), a highly contagious and often fatal illness, others suggested glucose water in a syringe or a feeding bottle. But all attempts to feed the puppy proved futile as it simply refused to eat and would often get aggressive when these attempts were made.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	(Left) The two puppies were inseparable in every aspect; after its sibling died, the puppy looked forlorn and depressed
 	
 On Wednesday morning, Rekha Prasad, a dog-rescuer based in Basavanagudi, sent across a message that one of her friends, based in Kengeri, would soon be arriving on the scene to salvage the situation: Sarath Lal (in pic), who volunteers with the Wildlife Control Bureau.
 	
 	  	“Sarath is a busy person and he used to rescue animals subjected to cruelty, but, this is a totally different case which is not his domain, but he is willing to go that extra mile to save the puppy,” Prasad posted.
 	
 When Sarath was contacted, he simply asked for directions, and travelled 12km to the place where the frail puppy was lying. With the help of residents he took the puppy into his possession just before it started to rain heavily. Sarath took the puppy to a veterinarian and was elated to find that the puppy was just dehydrated; it did, however, develop diarrhea last evening and will be tested for CPV today. We will keep you posted on the status of the puppy.
 	
 	
 	SPECIAL THANKS TO
 	
 	

 	 		Priya Rajagopal, Rekha Prasad, Gowri Yale, Mahmood Abbas, Pawan Kumar, Toni Freer, Mandhakini Vasudevan, Debadrita Ghosh Jadhav, Swaroop MN, Tanuja, The Cubbon Park Canines Group