They spent day and night resuscitating two trees in a corner of the city. They may not be recognised for their efforts. But, for us at Bangalore Mirror, they are heroes deserving of the city's gratitude. Nearly 10 days after the poisoning of two well-grown Kadamba (Neolamarckia cadamba) trees at Chamundeshwari Layout in Vidyaranyapura came to light, a team of volunteers has given them a new lease of life with their intense care and monitoring.
 
 The trio led by Vijay Nishanth, a budding tree conservationist, Arun Kumar C T, a green volunteer who runs an institute of scientology and dianetics and Mohan K, a citybased wildlife volunteer, who first took up the case, have managed to flush out the poisons and infuse the trees with a liquid salve. Their efforts have borne fruit with both the Kadamba trees showing signs of recovery.
 
 Their mentor Sharath R Babu, an honorary wildlife warden, meanwhile, has set the legal process in motion to ensure trees in the city are not violated.
 
 The trees had been drilled at 18 points and chemicals filled inside so that they died a slow death. This was done since permission to fell a healthy tree is hard to come by. The effects of the toxins became immediately apparent with carpenter bees boring into one of the trees, a sign that the tree was drying up.
 
 BM first reported the incident on Feb 19.
 
 After assessing the situation over two days on February 19 and 20 and sending the chemicals to a laboratory, the trio launched their rescue and revival mission.
 
 The second round of exercise, which started on Tuesday (February 24), involved flushing out the toxins. In a four-hour process, they cleaned all the 18 cavities. The kept their patients under observation for a day.
 
 On Thursday, upon finding there were no infections, they started applying a liquid bandage.
 
 “We created a layer using orange oil inside the holes.The oil prevents insects and checks infection. After this, we prepared a paste of plaster of Paris and covered up the crevices. We painted all these parts brown with water colour. Then we made a spacing around the trunk flair and put in mulch such as decaying leaves, bark, and compost spread which will nourish the trees,“ Vijay told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Arun and Mohan, who were part of the exercise, will water it every fifth day.
 
 While Nishanth carried out the exercise under the guidance of Dr R Ganesan, a Ph. D scholar and fellow scientist at Atree (Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment), Sharath R Babu led the team.
 
 “It's heartening that the trees are safe and on recovery mode,“ said Sharath Babu, calling for active participation from residents and constant sensitising initiatives to check such untoward incidents.
 
 
 
 Mohan , Age: 39
 
 A BBMP forest cell volunteer and tree doctor is into animal rescue efforts since 1996. He can be anointed the guardian angel of abandoned dogs and donkeys as he's taken up the task of giving them a decent burial. He is into green initiatives, planting over thousand saplings in the city.
 
 
 
 Arun Kumar CT, Age: 29
 
 Though he's trained in the US in scientology and dienetics, he took to conservation. This tree doctor played a key role in the revival mission. A BBMP forest cell volunteer since 2008 and also a wildlife rescue activist, he has been removing nails and posters from trees in various parts of the city.
 
 
 
 Vijay Nishanth, Age: 31
 
 A budding urban conservationist, he has a decade of volunteering expereince in BBMP's forest cell. He honed his passion for urban forestry at Atree, under the guidance of renowned activist Dr Harini Nagendra. Project Vruksha, a biodiversity portal for tree census is his baby.
 
 
 Read: The slow torture and murder of two longstanding city residents
 
 Read: Volunteers take up the task of reviving poisoned trees
 
 Read: Tree-poisoning: Forest officials lodge complaint