By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 As my train approached Bengaluru City railway station, I half-opened one sleepy eye to take in the bleak inner-city landscape that greeted us. What I saw made me almost jump out of my seat. “Did you see that”, I whispered, pointing to the mud embankment abutting an overflowing rubbish heap. But my neighbour had already left his seat to join the exit queue. If you thought I’d seen a ghost, you wouldn’t be far from the truth. The creature I sighted was rumoured to have left our city a long time ago. 
 
 
 	That small, slender body with a long, bushy tail; those lightning quick moves accompanied by a flash of grey-gold – it was the trademark of an old friend, the mongoose.
 	
 	
 This creature was a familiar sight throughout my growing years. It would dart in and out of the hedgerows near my childhood home in Kerala. It would saunter along the stormwater drains of the township in Andhra Pradesh where my father was posted during my late teens. And it would bless me with occasional sightings in the woods around Sankey Tank, during my engineering college days in Bengaluru. The mongoose was truly a common sight across the Indian subcontinent.
 	
 Sadly, its Bengaluru chapter is now almost closed. The mongoose is hardly ever seen in the central areas of the city, because these no longer offer it the combination of hiding places and plentiful prey that it so badly needs to survive. An extensive study on mongoose populations in and around Bengaluru, done by researchers from Bangalore University from 2012 to 2014, reported only one or two sightings from central areas like Majestic, Lalbagh and Cubbon Park. The scene was better in the outskirts and rural belts surrounding the city, with places like Bannerghatta National Park, Anekal and Hoskote registering a decent population of resident mongooses.
 	
 	  	The mongoose is not faring too well in the rest of the country, either. How this creature went from a familiar sight in the neighbourhood to an endangered animal listed under Schedule II of India’s wildlife protection act (eligible for maximum protection) is a heart-rending story. At the centre of this story is – would you believe it – art! For centuries, artists have coveted the mongoose-hair brush, renowned for its softness, shape and colour absorption. Sensing the growing demand, mass manufacturers of art supplies jumped into the fray, leading to indiscriminate hunting of the poor creature. More than 25 animals have to be killed to produce one kg of mongoose hair.
 	
 	
 	This hair is then used in the domestic market, or illegally exported to other countries. Legal protection has forced this industry to go underground, but it is still a long way from closing down completely.
 	
 	  	The word “mongoose” is derived from the creature’s Marathi name “mungus” (or Kannada “mungusi”). There are five different species in India, and by far the most widespread is the Indian grey mongoose. This creature is active during the day, very inquisitive but quick to seek cover when threatened. The mongoose is a carnivore, skilfully hunting its prey using its keen senses of sight and smell. Most common on the menu are small creatures likes rats and scorpions, as well as bird and reptile eggs. 
 	
 	  	Occasional encounters between mongoose and snake, however, hog all the limelight. Contrary to popular belief, the mongoose does not actively seek out snakes, but seizes opportunities to hunt them when they cross its path. It has partial immunity to snake venom thanks to special adaptations in its nervous system. Its strategy is to dance around the snake, avoiding its strike with agile leaps and inflicting small but painful wounds. The mongoose waits for the snake to tire before moving in for the kill.
 	
 	
 	It finishes the job with one lethal bite to the snake’s neck or spine. The epic battles of this fearless little creature will be sorely missed in the back alleys of Bengaluru.