Passenger and cargo movement between the state and northern parts of neighbouring Kerala was badly affected after the state government, concerned over the death of hundreds of wild animals in accidents, imposed a ban on traffic movement through Bandipur forest at night. Now, a city-based advocate has come up with a permanent solution for it.
     During the hearing of Public Interest Litigation (PIL) he filed seeking total ban on movement of trucks inside the forest, the advocate suggested realigning of the existing road through non-forest area. While this would add six extra kilometres to the route and require three kilometres of tunneling, the government will be able to permanently close three stretches of road passing through the forest which total to 30 km. He also presented maps to support his claim.   ""The existing Mysore-Mananthavady Road (NH 212), if realigned a little to go from Antharsanthe via Hosa Holalu-Karapur-Jaggalli-Gundathur-Machur-Dodda Byranakuppe to reach Bavali, the state border, it can avoid forest areas. This route does not fall under either the Bandipur or Nagarhole wild life sancutary limits,"" he told the court.   The Bavali-Mysore-Kunigal-Tumkur-Koratagere Road has been declared a state highway and if realigned with the proposal would add only an additional six kilometres but forest areas would be avoided. Similarly the Hassan-Mananthavady road could be upgraded to the national highway to avoid the forest areas. The submission also said that the proposed Mysore-Thalassery and Nilambur Railway lines can run parallel to this new road to avoid forest areas.   The advocate’s proposal says that though the proposed route between the two national parks is not forest area, wild animals travel between the two and there are wild animal corridors. The three-kilometre tunnel would mean that the animal corridor above would be undisturbed and seamless connectivity between the two forest areas would be sustained. These two forest areas are in turn connected to the Mudumalai National Park and Wyanad Wildlife Sanctuary in Tamil Nadu and Kerala to make the largest protected area in south India.   The division bench of the High Court headed by the chief justice Vikramajit Sen, however, said the state government asked the petitioner to submit the proposal to the government, which it said, was the competent authority to address this issue. The case was adjourned to December 10.