Environmentalists and animal lovers on Thursday demanded the state government order an inquiry by a retired High Court judge into the recent deaths of two elephants. They demanded the state government ensure a free and fair inquiry into the deaths of wild animals in the last 10 years. They appealed to the public to stage a non-violent protest by wearing black armbands to express their solidarity with the two elephants killed recently.

“We appeal to the public to stage a protest on December 30 by wearing black or blue armbands to express their solidarity with the wild animals killed in the state. We also appeal to the people of Karnataka to light a lamp in front of their homes on Saturday night as a mark of respect for the elephants killed. We do not want the public to come to the streets to stage the protest,’’ said Parisara secretary Eswara Prasad.

It may be recalled that a wild elephant died at Mudigere taluk in Chikkamagaluru district after being darted with a tranquiliser dose during a late-night rescue operation conducted by the forest department. In another tragic incident, Arjuna, the elephant that carried the golden howdah during the Dasara procession in Mysuru, allegedly died in a fight with a wild elephant during the elephant capture operation near Yeslur in Sakleshpur. It is said Arjun died of injuries suffered in the stomach.

“The problem with the forest department is that it has failed to conduct a thorough inquiry into the deaths of two elephants. Their apathetic attitude leads to suspicion. The forest department did not follow the required norms to clear air among the public,’’ said Prasad.

Speaking on the occasion, Dr MK Ramesh, retired professor, National Law College, said the forest department has failed to follow the norms while conducting elephant capture operations. “Conducting elephant capture operations at night is against the norm. As per the Supreme Court directive, elephants aged more than 60 years should not be used in the elephant capture operations. There was no wildlife veterinarian as part of the team engaged to capture elephants. Though human-wildlife conflicts have existed for ages, the number of human-wildlife conflict incidents has increased in recent years. The authorities concerned have to find out the reason for the increase in human-wildlife conflicts,’’ he said.

HK Gowdaiah, an environmentalist, added that many animals were killed by humans, but not many of those incidents came to light. “It is unfortunate that the authorities concerned are defending their acts against wild animals. They are not ready to rectify their mistakes,’’ Gowdaiah said.