By Garima Prasher

Karnataka Forest Department prepares to deal with fire incidents; officials say dry conditions might lead to accumulation of high biomass on forest floor

With the wildfire season fast approaching, the Karnataka Forest Department is bracing up to tackle forest fire incidents head-on. According to officials from the Forest Resource Management wing of the department, preparations to deal with fire incidents will begin earlier, taking note of dry conditions this year due to El Nino.

Officials say last year’s wet season, followed by this year’s dry conditions, might lead to high fuel availability and thus an increase in the intensity and incidents of forest fires.

“Although it is too early to comment, this year might be challenging due to the El Nino effect. We are undergoing yet another dry spell currently, and such conditions might lead to the accumulation of high biomass on the forest floor. Based on our learnings from the last year, we have already prepared our action schedule and plan to get started with fire prevention activities soon. While the vastness of the forest area makes our work challenging, we are conducting our activities in a structured and planned manner to achieve the best result,” said a senior official from the Forest Resource Management wing of the Karnataka Forest Department.

Karnataka, between November 2022 and March 2023, was featured among the top five states in the Forest Survey of India (FSI) reports about the number of fire alerts. As many as 11,088 fire incidents were recorded in the state using spatial information through SNPP.

The department has also zeroed in on certain forest patches with difficult terrain that are susceptible to fire.
 
“Our staff are equipped with blowers, sprayers, and other firefighting equipment. We also have three drones with thermal sensors to keep an eye on fire incidents. We will soon be starting fire drills and awareness camps. Fire watchers will be engaged during fire season, which starts in January. Looking at historical data, we will be focusing on areas that are difficult to access. Forest patches in Hassan, Sirsi, Shivamogga, and Bandipur will be on our radar. These areas are prone to fire incidents, and they also burn for long hours,” said the official.

However, experts say the department’s fire management efforts so far have been haphazard and inadequate and it has struggled with inadequate preparedness, monitoring, and lack of funds in the past, which has manifested in a higher number of fire incidents.

 Although it is too early to comment, this year might be challenging due to the El Nino effect. We are undergoing yet another dry spell currently­–a senior official, Forest Resource Mangagement
“Efforts to control and manage forest fire incidents have been irregular and chaotic so far. For instance, last year, the department was struggling to get adequate forest watchers. There are many cases of forest watchers not being paid or not paid on time. This is the reason many do not turn up during consecutive fire seasons. The most important aspect of efficient forest fire management is budgetary allocation. While the department gets a handful of forest watchers to keep an eye on protected areas, they hardly have funds to appoint watchers outside protected areas,” said DV Girish, a wildlife conservationist from Chikmagalur.

Furthermore, experts said that adequate and timely precautionary measures have to be taken to prevent fire incidents. “Forest biomass starts to dry up after February 15, and this is when forelines can be created. Moreover, only the firelines should be burned, not big forest patches, as has been the norm in the past. There should be adequate foot soldiers to fight fire incidents in case of any,” said an expert.