After having lent her voice to foot-tapping Bollywood numbers for more than a decade, Anushka Manchanda is back and how! The singer, who entered the limelight in the year 2002 as part of all-girl pop band Viva, is now ready with the first single she has independently created and produced. The work has given her a sense of satisfaction that is completely different from what she has done so far.

"I've always gone with the flow, I have done a lot of work for other people," she tells Mirror in a freewheeling chat at her Versova home. "If I look back at my body of work, there is nothing I am ashamed or embarrassed about. At the same time, there are a few things I would have done differently if I had had control over it. I wanted to make sure that I create a space for myself where I have complete creative control."

That desire is what sparked Nuka, Anushka's new brand. Under this, she has already created a photostory themed on wildlife and the need for environment conservation. Now, she is ready with her music video, which is titled Don't Be Afraid.

"It's really beautiful, it is visually stunning," she says as she describes the video that has been in the works for months. "What we are doing in the video is talking about the idea of how energy evolves and transforms and keeps moving and the idea that we shouldn't be afraid because no matter what happens, your energy never dies and it always keeps moving."

The video is set to release on June 20 on the eve of World Music Day. "We made it independently, so I didn't want to involve any label or a brand at this point because I feel our content is so pure in a way and I think it is important for people to see it the way we made it. You can't ignore the video, that's 100 percent sure, whether you like it or not, you can't ignore it," she insists.

      

Anushka admits that while she loved having creative control over the process, it was no easy task to be responsible for every aspect of the video. 

"I don't think I have worked like this in my entire life. It has been tough because trying to do everything on your own is hard, especially when I can't give 100 percent creative control to anyone else," she reveals. "Every minor detail has to be correct. If something is out, we are not going to let it go, we are going to fix it. My time management skills are bad, I can work super hard, I just need someone to tell me, 'come here and do this' and I'll do it, I'll do the best I can. But for me to make that plan has been really challenging. There are things I didn't even know. We have to think about distribution - store, online, Facebook page, YouTube page. I was like I want to pull my hair out, this is crazy!" she laughs. "But it has been an excellent learning curve and we can definitely open our own agency after this!" she quips.

She counts her parents and brother as among those who inspire her to create her art. "I am surrounded by amazing people. My mother is a crystal healer and we have all sorts of workshops in the house. My dad is super supportive and unlike many Indian men we meet. My brother creates really amazing music and I am inspired by that. It is how I have developed as a human being and it is also what has influenced the art that I am making today," she says.

Read Also:
South Filmfare Awards: Complete winners' list