These are bad times for the State. One after the other, tragedies are striking it. The fire at the Aero India show that gutted cars is shocking. But some people used it to troll the State Government, calling it a safety lapse on the part of the State Departments concerned. But the State said it is the responsibility of the Central government to arrange safety as the show itself is run by the Air Force. Now, some have pointed out that since the event is happening here, the State Government should have provided safety measures. Some are suspecting sabotage. That is another angle hard to prove.

The media coverage of cars on fire was very extensive. The insurance companies have declared that they would cover the loss.

However, the worst forest fires that are gutting down thousands of acres of rich, green forest at Bandipur National Park and surrounding areas are more dangerous and a bigger tragedy but the media is playing it down. The small fire that was started on Thursday soon spread wild to the Tiger Sanctuary. The Nagarahole National Park lost 35 acres. Several hills near 
Chamarajanagar lost 200 acres of greens. Gopalaswamy Hill, Jarkallu Gudda, Gummana Gudda, Baletarkore Gudda, Gaurikallu Hill were engulfed by the fire and it is reported that the staff of Forest Department were standing guard at the NH 66 near Ooty Road and poured water on the roads to prevent the fire from spreading to the other side of the highway and “a small spark flew in the wind and landed on the other side called Bolugudda and within seconds the entire area was on fire”. That side is a place called Hulikatte (Tiger place) with dense, huge trees. The Forest Department officials first announced that “there are chances of putting out the fire there” on Saturday but before that the entire area was burnt down and the fire spread beyond it. No statistics are available about the loss of wildlife.

The gates were closed at the Melukamanahalli National Park for just two hours that resulted in a long queue of vehicles going towards Tamil Nadu. It is reported that the Forest Department is struggling to put out the fire as it is ill equipped and is short of staff. 

Now, the point to be noted is, while the insurance companies have come forward to reimburse the car value to the owners whose cars were gutted at the Aero India Show who will do good the natural wealth of the State lost in the forest fire? The blame game continues even during this forest fire. The villagers and the environment activists blame the department officials for not taking precaution even as mercury soars and the dry grass and autumn leaves pose a danger of starting wildfire any second, every summer. Earlier public meetings were held to warn the villagers to take precautions but the department has stopped holding such meetings, it is alleged. Locals complain that the lower rank officials of the Forest Department do not take the villagers and Soligas, the forest dwellers, in to confidence and get into a combat mood for ever small issue. Hence, they wait to take revenge and set fire to the forest to teach the officials a lesson, they allege. But this allegation needs to be examined.

The department officials too accuse the locals of setting fire to the forest intentionally. If this is common knowledge can they not prevent it, by taking precautionary measures? The villagers have even accused that the fire that first started at Maguvinahalli near Gopalaswamy Hill was small and could have easily been put out but the officials neglected it, because of which it soon spread wild facilitated by the heat and wind. Villagers said that when the fire was brought to the notice of the forest officials, they are said to have replied that it does not come under their official jurisdiction. It is as cool as a waiter saying ‘not my table’!

Later the staff of the department and volunteers numbering 500 consisting college students and local youths were not able to control the blaze. The extensive wildfire was too strong to be tackled by so few people. It has destroyed precious forest wealth of considerable acres. Who will reimburse the loss? Is it as easy as reimbursing car cost? Or more importantly, who is at loss and who is at gain because of the fire? That is a question that needs to be answered. And if the wildfire is not contained, there is a danger of it spreading to forests in the neighbouring Kerala state. Then the question of loss and gain gets bigger, complicated and invariably politicised.