On Monday, Bengaluru witnessed the rarest wildlife rescue ever. A female blackbuck, over a year old, was found running around in the residential area of Vidyaranyapura. A commuter spotted the animal and called the police control room immediately. 

The call was transferred to the wildlife rescue team of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). Wildlife volunteers Rajesh Kumar and his colleague Vivek reached the spot within 10 minutes and shifted the animal to the wildlife hospital in Bannerghatta in a BBMP wildlife ambulance. “The person who called the police also chased the animal and it ran into the labourer’s shelter at a construction site in Singapura Layout. The police had reached the spot and we examined the animal. Some bruises were found on its body and a minor injury on its leg. We immediately shifted it to the wildlife hospital and the doctor is examining the cause of injury. After treatment, it will be released back into the wild.”

Blackbucks are protected species under Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. They are usually found in grasslands and slightly forested areas. They are categorised as endangered in India. The antelope population has reduced drastically due to illegal hunting, deforestation and habitat loss. Rajesh said that it had no chance of entering the city. “It must have been held captive and had managed to escape. There can be no other circumstances in which the animal could have been found in the city,” he said. Called Krishna Mrugam in Kannada, these animals roam around only in herds and not in isolation. “If a herd has travelled into the city, more animals would have been spotted. But there hasn’t been any other sighting yet,” he said.

In Karnataka, they are found in Ranibennur Blackbuck Sanctuary and Jayamangali Blackbuck Conservation Reserve. “A few people illegally keep spotted deer and blackbucks as pets. According to the Wildlife Protection Act, no individual can keep any wildlife as pets. They should only be in their natural habitat. This rescue was, therefore, sad and shocking,” he added.