A nine-year-old boy from Namma Bengaluru has won the “Highly Commended Award” in the 10 Years and Under category of Wildlife Photographer of the year 2020 organised by the Natural History Museum. Vidyun R Hebbar, is a Class four student of BGS National public school.

Hebbar told Bangalore Mirror that he was often curious about spiders and the way they build their web. He used to observe a signature spider build its web, then destroy it and then rebuild it with ‘multiple signatures’. “This signature spider hung above a roadside and I watched it every weekend for a month, noticing how it regularly rebuilt its web. These spiders are common in our area, so I set out to frame this one against the backdrop of an apartment block. I wanted to show how the spider was living among us in my big city,” he said.

He kept on capturing this on his DSLR camera and then applied for the award with his father’s help. 

The awards were announced on Wednesday night. If not for covid, he would have travelled to London to take part in the event but this year, the event was beamed live.

His father Raviprakash SS, a techie, said that it is a very prestigious wildlife photography award which was often referred to as ‘Oscars of Wildlife photography’. 

Untitled Carousel From photography walks to workshops, Bengaluru is a good place to get  behind the cameraNot just walks, they also organise workshops from time to time, where you can learn, among other things, the art of looking through the viewfinder without closing one eye – bye, bye to straining eyes. 

“As I have been a passionate photographer for the last 25 years, my son too started accompanying me since he was three years old. He has now developed so much interest in photography that he not only chooses his subject but also completes the flow chart of processing, editing and even uploading it. He is quite interested in macro photography.” 

Interestingly, Raviprakash too had won the category Winner Award under Amphibians and Reptiles category of Wildlife Photographer of the year 2014. His wife Namita said that there was always an atmosphere of art and photography at home, which inspired Vidyun to pursue photography. “With natural curiosity and encouragement, Vidyun has developed a keen eye towards small insects. So he is inclined towards macro photography. His other interests are Lego blocks building and Hotwheels racing,” she said.