Prized sniffer dog of State Forest Department reduced to skeleton due to neglect; poor diet and care, unhygienic quarters did him in
 
 Remember Rana, the state forest department’s first sniffer dog? Twhe canine that was heralded as the vanguard of a bright new dawn for canine sleuths? Nope? Well, guess what! The wildlife department seemingly doesn’t either.
 
 Rana, the German shepherd trained to crack wildlife crimes, is struggling to survive after allegedly being struck down by tick fever brought on by atrocious negligence and gross human apathy.
 
 Merely a year after he was inducted into service, Rana is a shadow of the strapping dog he once was, a source has told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Rana’s plight came to light last month when he stopped eating. Soon tremors were noticed in his legs and he was rushed to a Mysuru hospital on May 20, where it was found that he was stricken with tick fever, according to the source.
 
 “Rana’s sight is disturbing to anybody who has seen him hale and hearty. In May he stopped eating. He was rushed to Mysuru. The doctor there said hundreds of ticks were removed [the total weight of the ticks removed from Rana was a whopping 750 gm] and his fur had to be shaved. He was no more the mighty Rana, of which the force boasted. Though the ticks were removed, he is still in bad condition. He has lost weight. He wears the look of a starving stray dog, which is painful to see. He is just two-and-a-half years old. His growth should be robust but it’s not. He is getting weaker every day. We fear the worst if he is not given special care and medication immediately as tick fever can prove fatal,” the source told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 Appalling conditions
 
 Sources say Rana’s condition is worsening due to lack of infrastructure. The STPF (Special Tiger Protection Force) quarters, where he is stationed, is not well maintained and not cleaned on a daily basis, they said.
 
 “He is not given an exclusive set-up and is ferried from one place to other. He is not fed properly. He has to be given a bath regularly and kept in hygienic condition but this is not happening. He is not kept in a kennel; he is locked in an unhygienic room for days. This is what led to him falling prey to ticks. This happening to an elite dog is very unfortunate. Not being well fed makes him prone to diseases and that is what we are seeing,” the source added.
 
 “They have to be given baths and a proper diet. Ticks have to be removed on a routine basis. Ticks are so dangerous that they even start laying eggs when left unattended on the skin. As they carry diseases, this can prove fatal to an animal. Improper care in feeding worsens things. They have to be cared for on a daily basis,” V Jai Shankar, a wildlife expert told BM.  “What was once the terror of crooks in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve has even lost the ability to work efficiently,” a source told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 Department dozing
 
 Sources blame the forest department for Rana’s plight. Though the WWF (World Wide Fund) for Nature (India) had sent specifications on caring for dog squad canines, which includes kennel specs, the government has not built one for Rana. A vehicle has not been assigned to Rana. Not providing basic infrastructure is what is responsible for Rana’s plight, insiders say. This has also been brought to the brass’s notice, but in vain, they added.
 
 Handler Praksh says all is well
 
 Rana’s handler, Prakash S Honnakore, won laurels for Rana’s success admits that while Rana has got a tick infestation, he does not have tick fever. 
 
 “In the summer, as he has a thick coat and goes into the forest. He got infested by spotted deer and elephant ticks. He had to be rushed to the government veterinary hospital in Mysuru recently. As it could not be handled there, he had to be taken to a private hospital. They removed his fur and he was given a medicated bath. Now he has been shifted to a new place, which is being sanitised and cleaned every day. He is on medicine tablets and being checked once every 15 days. He is doing well now,” Prakash told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 The rise & fall of Rana
 
 Rana is currently stationed in the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. Rana, a German shepherd, trained at the 23rd Battalion of the Special Armed 
 
 Reserve Forces, in Bhopal, and was inducted into the state forest force last year after the passing out parade on June 20, 2015.
 
 Rana was a first-of-its-kind an experiment in the state. Trained to detect wildlife crimes -- which include smuggling wood, and wildlife products like ivory, deer meat, live bird species, red sand boa, blackbuck, hare, python, rat snake, porcupine and even weapons -- Rana’s induction not only aimed at cracking these crimes but also creating a major deterrent. 
 
 Besides cracking three cases, Rana made our state proud, when, in March, his services were sought by the forest department’s counterpart in Tamil Nadu. He had been pressed into a combing operation to trace a man-eating tiger that had spread fear in an around Gudalur forests in TN. While all were clueless, Rana to everyone’s surprise, proved his mettle by tracing the tiger’s territory. An operation based on Rana’s leads resulted in the hunting down of the man-eater