Just 7 rescuers have been attending to all pleas of help. And they haven’t been paid for a year and a half

Almost two years into the covid pandemic, BBMP wildlife rescuers are staring at empty bank balances. The seven wildlife rescuers in the city have been running pillar to post to get their due honorarium, which has been on hold for the one year and seven months.

The rescuers — all in charge of catching snakes, monkeys and birds — recently approached BBMP special commissioner B Reddy Shankar Babu who assumed the charge six months ago. Wildlife rescuer Mohan (aka Snake Mohan) told Bangalore Mirror, “The commissioner assured us that the dues will be cleared within 48 hours and it’s been a week since then, but we still didn’t receive any money. Hence, we’ll continue the dharna until the dues are cleared,” he said.

Only seven wildlife rescuers are in charge of rescue work in the entire city. They receive 45-50 calls per month and were paid Rs 13,000 until 2018. The BBMP had proposed to hike the honorarium to Rs 15,000. However, they allege that there has been no payment since 2018. BM on July 20 published a story — Honorarium on hold, rescue on hold too — that explained why the rescuers were forced to enter a strike. “We understand that our job ensures people’s safety. But, why do we risk our lives when we can’t even make ends meet? My mother is in hospital now and we are struggling to pay the bills. All of us have families to look after and not getting paid for 19 months is costing us a lot. During rescue operations, we have to pay fuel fare and due to the recent hike in prices, it’s not possible for us to function without the honorarium,” Snake Mohan said.

Perils of the job
Another rescuer Prasanna Kumar says, they also have accidents during rescue operations.
We understand that our job ensures people’s safety. But, how do we risk our lives when we can’t even make ends meet? ­All of us have families to look after–Snake Mohan

“A fellow rescuer’s kidney got affected due to snake bite and two of them got their legs fractured. The seven of us had to pitch in to bear the treatment cost. This apart, we don’t just take emergency calls, the seven of us are also assigned for VIP duties for ministers and other eminent personalities who sometimes put up at Kumara Krupa Guest House in Seshadripuram among other places. These areas are affected by snake menace. We are assigned for the VIPs’ protection. Now, if we don’t get our honorarium on time, how will we manage a living?”

However, Prasanna says that they don’t want people to face danger due to their strike. “Whenever we get calls of snakes entering houses, we attend the cases on humanitarian ground. The people pay us Rs 100-200 tip for the services, while some ask why they should pay us if we are also drawing salary from the BBMP. They obviously don’t know our problems,” he said.

Honorarium on hold, rescue on hold tooHowever, through her search for a wildlife rescue volunteer, she learnt something else. The rescue volunteers said that the BBMP had not paid them an honorarium for the last 30 months. They said that considering their financial situation, it was difficult for them to meet the expenses of commuting from one place to the other in the City.
 
The rescuers, till now, have been taking the issue up with the BBMP administrative office. “We have heard that the commissioner had signed the proposal for our honorarium but it got rejected at the administrative level. The office has been deferring the payment with covid-related excuses,” Mohan said.

Going by the proposed Rs 15,000 monthly honorarium, each wildlife rescuer should be getting Rs 2,85,000 towards their 19-month due.

BBMP special commissioner B Reddy Shankar Babu told Bangalore Mirror that he empathises with the rescuers and have taken this issue up on a warfooting basis. “I assumed the charge six months ago and the rescuers approached me now. They shouldn’t have taken a complex route through the administrative level. This has complicated the whole issue. They have my phone number; they could have at least dropped a text. However, I am personally looking into the matter now and the dues will be cleared within the end of the month,” he said.