By Garima Prasher

Residents of Saptagiri Layout near Turahalli Forest witnessed an unusual sight from their balconies on Saturday afternoon -- a spotted deer lying on the road, motionless. They swung into action immediately and informed a local wildlife NGO’s rescue team. However, by the time the team reached the hospital, the deer died due to injuries and a cardiac arrest.

“We noticed bite marks around its neck and reached out to the wildlife rescue team. The team arrived in no time and took the animal but we were informed it died due to a cardiac arrest. We were told the deer was attacked by street dogs from neighbouring villages,” said Lakshmi Suresh, a resident.

Forest department officials confirmed the death of two spotted deer on Saturday afternoon in the area.

According to wildlife activists and locals, spotted deers of Turahalli Forest have been facing attacks from feral dogs in the area. This has been resulting in deaths of many every year.

   The Turahalli forest is an amalgamation of multiple mini-forest patches in that regionSharath Babu, wildlife activist
“Many deers have fallen prey to the attack by village dogs in the past. While the animals are immediately rescued and taken to a hospital, despite all medical prowess, these attacks are far too severe and the animals fail to survive the traumatic experience caused by capture myopathy. We’ve written to the forest department many times about the issue but not much has been done,” said a wildlife activist.

Wildlife experts said intervention is crucial to ensure these deers live in safety. Restoration of the boundary walls of the forest is required as they have broken down over time, granting easy access to dogs.
 
“The compound walls are either low or damaged in many places, allowing the dogs to venture in. Residents have raised the issue but it has not been fixed,” said another resident.

According to wildlife experts, rapid urbanisation and encroachment are among other issues plaguing the urban forest area.

  Blackbuck calf rescued from Turahalli forest diesA blackbuck mother would abandon its baby only if it has a large-scale deformity, but in this case, the baby was a healthy one, Nair pointed out.​

“This is the fastest developing area of the city. The Turahalli forest is an amalgamation of multiple mini-forest patches in that region. There are many residential complexes almost attached to these patches and the forest is used by the people living on the periphery. While the compound wall will be a solace to the animals, the landscape of the area is different. It will be difficult to secure it completely due to the undulations. We will have casualties. The idea is to minimise these accidents,” said Sharath Babu, wildlife activist.

Many pointed at the importance of an effective liaison between BBMP and the forest department to ensure the dogs in and around Turahalli are neutered and vaccinated. This would ensure fewer territorial and aggressive dogs.

Dr Manjunath Shinde, assistant director (animal husbandry), RR Nagar Zone, BBMP, said while the Animal Birth Control (ABC) programme is in place, any positive impact on the dog population can be seen only if the programme is conducted continuously and consistently for 10 to 12 years.

“The best solution is tall and non-porous compound walls around the forest area. The forest department must put up chain-link compound walls so the dogs do not enter,” said Dr Shinde. According to Ravishankar SS, deputy conservator of forest, Bengaluru Urban division, the department is aware of the issue and work on it will begin soon.

“The compound walls are getting damaged during rains. They are also broken by miscreants. We plan to take up repair work this year to secure the forest area,”said Ravi shankar.

Operation quench thirst
People for Animals (PFA), will soon enter the woods to replenish the water resources of the area. The NGO, with permission from the forest department, will be sending tankers of water to help the animals survive the scorching heat.

“We started the initiative two years ago during summer. Dry months are here again. We plan to send water again in the coming week. Once summer arrives, the watering holes inside the forest dry up, forcing deers to go out looking for water during the evening and they fall prey to dogs. They also end up breaking their legs due to jumping out onto a concrete surface, mostly near BGS hospital,” said Dr Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA.