Conservation efforts in Jayamangali sanctuary in Tumakuru yield rich results 
 
 Basking in the limelight over the conservation success of tigers and elephants whose numbers have shot up considerably, Karnataka has done wonders in conserving the blackbuck. Ever since the IUCN Red List featured blackbucks as ‘near threatened’, their numbers began plummeting across the country. However, contrary to the national trend, their population has doubled compared to previous figures at the blackbuck sanctuary at Mydenahalli in Tumakuru district near Bengaluru.
 A detailed census spanning two days in August 2015 by various volunteers, NGOs and forest department officials at Jayamangali Blackbuck Sanctuary in Mydenahalli village of Madhugiri taluk in Tumakuru district has revealed a considerable increase in their population. Blackbuck population which stood at 257 during 2012 has now increased to 545 in 2015. Spread across 798 acres, the vast stretch of grassland interspersed with acacia and eucalyptus plantations is home to the largest population of blackbucks.
 	  	The once-in-three-year census of blackbucks at the reserve was conducted by Tumakuru-based Wildlife Aware Nature Club (WANC) in association with forest personnel and volunteers from various colleges. Giving details of the census to Bangalore Mirror, TVN Murthy, honorary wildlife warden, Tumakuru, said, “The census was based on the transect method. The entire sanctuary was divided into 30 transects. Places within a radius of 12 to 15 km were included in the census. The volunteers covered their transect blocks from 6 am to 3 pm on August 8 and 9.”
 	  	The detailed findings revealed a total of 545 blackbucks at the sanctuary. “The results were surprising and refreshing too. During the last census, there were only 257 blackbucks. But this time, their population has increased to 545. The census figures do detail the total number of males, females and also mentioned the number of calves at 41. Blackbucks that had been spread out have come back to the core area of the reserve due to green pastures,” Murthy explained.
 	  	Similarly, the volunteers also discovered that there has been a considerable shift in the movement of blackbucks. “What is worrying is the rise in number of vehicles and human activities within the reserve area. Besides, due to irrigation facilities, farmers have fenced their fields abutting the reserve, which is posing as an obstacle to the free movement of these antelopes. We have urged the forest department to post more personnel equipped with
 	communication devices and other modern amenities to ensure the species’ safety,” Murthy said.
 	  	Located at about 100 km from Bengaluru, Jayamangali Reserve shares its boundaries with Andhra Pradesh. The first ever report on the biodiversity of the area was published by WANC and Dr UV Singh back in 1997. Based on the scientific report, the area was declared as ‘Protected Reserve’ in 2005 for safeguarding the blackbuck population.