They are part of Clean and Green, an organisation started in 2006 to clean up picnic spots. The team collects the plastic waste and sends them back to the city for recycling.

                                  The Clean and Green team poses with volunteers from Oracle and the garbage they have collected at a picnic spot           DIRTY TO CLEAN
The campaign was started by Roopa Shankaran, an engineering manager with Motorola and an outdoors freak. The Eureka moment happened during one of her treks to the wild countryside when she saw a mountain of garbage eclipsing the original mountains. 

“During our trek to Mutthatthi, I saw a huge pile of trash and that’s when I thought we needed to do something about it. We made 15 trips to Mutthatthi to tackle this problem.” And on February 2006, Clean and Green was born.

They’ve never been short of people. “Companies like Sun Microsystems, Oracle, Wipro, HP and Honeywell have sign up drives for interested employees. Sometimes, 50 people sign up and on some days, the numbers would go up to 80. These companies also sponsor the transport and food. The clean-up drives usually take place over the weekend, with the team leaving early morning and returning at night,” said 40-year-old Roopa. 

  SEGREGATE AND INVIGORATE
Once the team reaches the spot, they break out into smaller groups, take different routes and collect garbage. The second step involves separating the plastic from the trash and putting it in gunny bags that the techies carry with them. They leave behind the wet waste, which can be mixed with the earth. Unfortunately, they also have to leave behind chemical wastes and glass bottles as there is no provision to get rid of them.

After segregation, they stitch the bags and send them to K K Plastic Waste in Bangalore which sometimes even provides the transport.

Once the cleaning up is done, it’s time to loosen up. “Garbage clearing and segregating is back-breaking. Once that is done, we relax and take nature walks in the jungle and then make our way back,” said Roopa.

BUSY FUTURE
Sandeep Chakrabarti, a core member of the group, said, “Clean and Green has focused its attention on tourist spots in the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary like Sangam, Mekadatu and Mutthatthi. Approximately, 3,000 kg of plastic has been removed from the sanctuary, which is not a plastic-free zone, and brought back to Bangalore for re-cycling.”

Their team is ably supported by Jungle Lodges and Resorts Ltd, which has offered to transport the waste collected to Bangalore.

Despite their track record, Chakrabarti claims there’s still a long way to go, “Proper infrastructure is required in these places as hundreds and, at times, thousands of people visit the sanctuary. Moreover, a joint effort between the tourism and forest departments would also help.

“Visitors should be charged for the use of this infrastructure. The money collected could be used to employ locals to collect and bag the plastic. This would keep the sanctuary clean. And most importantly, we are working towards a sustainable solution, with local involvement, that will help minimise our carbon footprint.”