In remembering great men, we sometimes forget the people who made their own sacrifices, however unwillingly
 
 One of the most touching tributes to Mandela (1918-2013) came, of all places, from a Woolworth’s food store in Johannesburg. The store asked members of t he Soweto Gospel Choir to come to the store in the guise of shoppers and attendants and to sing a song composed in Zulu during Mandela’s long incarceration. 

 	“Asimbonanga (We have not seen him) Asimbonang’ uMandela thines (We have not seen Mandela) Laph’ekhona (In the place where he is) Laph’ehleli khona (In the place where he is kept) Asimbonanga/Asimbonanga um fow thu thina (in the place where he is) kaph’wafela khone (in the place where he died)…. 

 	The exquisite song was composed by Johnny Clegg, born in England to an English father and Zimbabwean mother. He was brought up in Zimbabwe, and is said to be “a singer, songwriter, dancer, anthropologist, a musical activist in whose infectious crossover music, a vibrant blend of Western pop and African Zulu rhythms, has exploded on to the international scene…” 

 There are many renditions of the song. One is by Joan Baez, in the days when Mandela was still in prison. It contains references to other activists imprisoned at some time or the other: Steve Biko, the Black Consciousness leader (Dec 18, 1946-Sept 12, 1977) who was bludgeoned to death by drunken guards in prison. (I happened to see a play, “The Biko Inquest” starring Albert Finney in London when a number of productions from South Africa appeared on the London theatrical scene. And Athol Fugard’s “Master Harold and the Boys.” The “boys” are the two black servants, considerably older than Harold, who remember things in an entirely different way). 

 	In remembering the great men of history who have died, we sometimes forget the people who made their own sacrifices, however unwillingly. One account mentions the plight of Mandela’s two baby daughters, Zeni and Zindsi who were left in the care of friends, because their mother Winnie was in jail at the same time, but not for long periods. Mandela writes to them, “Gone are the days when, after having a warm bath in the evening, you would sit at the table with Mummy and enjoy her good and simple food.” 

 	And a message for our own grotty politicians. Mandela is described as : the rarest thing in African history, “a one-term President who chose not to run for office again…He could have been President for life, but he knew that for democracy to rule, he could not…” But in Tamilnadu, there was a cloth merchant who put up hoardings of Mandela, not aware that they were actually pics of an actor, Morgan Freeman who played the role of Mandela in the 2009 film “Invictus.” 

 	And another story, of a completely different kind, about South Africa, also sent to me by a friend. It’s called “How Did the Elephants Know,”about the death of Lawrence Anthony who is a legend in South Africa because he rescued wildlife and elephants from all over the world. He is known particularly for his rescue of animals from the Baghdad Zoo during the US invasion in 2003. He has written three books on the subject of wild animals. The best-seller is “The Elephant Whisperer.” 

 	It was recommended to me a long time ago, but I can no longer bear to read about the distress from which animals are rescued. (I immediately delete any e mails pertaining to this subject). 

 	The story is that separate herds of wild elephants, led by two large matriarchs walked over twelve miles to Lawrence Anthony’s home, which, according to his wife they had not visited for over three years. How did they know he had died? They stayed for two days and two nights without eating anything, and then began the long journey home. 

 	As the clip says at the end, “Something in the universe is greater and deeper than human intelligence.”