In his book, Joshua Mathew chronicles the racy life of Englishman Donald Anderson, who lived at a time in Bengaluru when people went duck hunting on Kanakapura Road and man-eaters prowled BR Hills

When most people reach the end of a book, they put it away, think about it for a while and move on to the next. Few like first-time author Joshua Mathew would actually visit the places mentioned in the book he read and loved. 
Mathew was so impressed by Kenneth Anderson’s books on wildlife and hunting in the jungles of South India, that he and a few friends made many trips into jungles to experience the locations mentioned in Anderson’s books. For Mathew, who grew up in Cochin, and then came to Bengaluru with a job, the fascination for the author and his works led to him trace the author’s whereabouts in the city. Online forums, where he found a thriving Kenneth Anderson fan club, gave him more information about where Anderson lived till he died in the 70s, first on Kasturba Road and later in Whitefield, where the present Butterfly Park is located.

Though Mathew could not meet Anderson, he had heard that his son Donald Anderson (Don) was alive. Although in his 70s at that time (2008), Don, Mathew realised, was a good source to learn more about Anderson. But as he started to mine him for information, Don, and his life as a hunter, became as fascinating as that of his father, Kenneth Anderson.

The conversations with Don became the book, The Last White Hunter, Reminiscences of a Colonial Shikari, where Mathew shares author credits with Don.

      He lived at a time in Bengaluru when people went duck hunting on Kanakapura Road and man-eaters prowled BR Hills    
The book is fascinating if you’re an old Bengalurean and even if you’re not. It sets you off on a sepia-tinted nostalgic trip of old Bengaluru, when MG Road was South Parade, when people would go duck hunting on Kanakapura Road and the social scene was dominated by 3 Aces and Bandstand.

This book does not glorify hunting as a sport, but captures Don’s reminiscences of hunting expeditions, the charming life of old Bengaluru and how British citizens had integrated with the locals. Don had promised his father that he would give up hunting, and he did, although it was Anderson who had started taking a young Don on hunting expeditions even as a four-year-old. Anderson did not hunt unless it was necessary, as an act of defense, but he was not happy that Don was enjoying hunting as a sport. Anderson was deeply into the study of occult and it rubbed off on Don in later years, says Mathew.
“Though he was rational, he started believing in ghosts and saw apparitions as a sign of things to come. He often saw his last few years as retribution for his youth,” says Mathew.

But while the book itself is like postcards from the past, what is interesting is the relationship that developed between Mathew and Don, “almost like a grandfather and grandson,” says Mathew. The author who came to own all of Don’s photos and memorabilia, says he initially intended it to be a coffee table book. But there was a book waiting to be written around those pictures. “Initially Don was reluctant to speak to us. He lived a lonely life, in a small outhouse on Serpentine Street, in a crumbling relic of a house. But unfortunately, he fell sick and when he was admitted to Santosh hospital, a friend, Kakarla Jayaraman paid a part of his bills. Soon Jayaraman had access to Don and slowly a few of us, hardcore fans of Anderson, got access to him,” says Mathew.
As Don spoke about his life in pre-and post-Independence India, his jungle expeditions, his flamboyant life, his daredevil persona and always choosing to live life on the edge and by his own rules, the book took shape. But as the note taking progressed Don’s health deteriorated.

The book alternates between the high points of Don’s past and his famous derring-do in the jungles and being circumspect about his last few years. Towards the end, Don found that most of his friends had left India or died and his only sister, June had moved away and was living in Australia. Though she offered to take him there, he refused, choosing to live in a city that he was familiar with, but which did not recognise that there was a living legend in their midst.
“Soon Don had developed an easy familiarity with me and would call me anytime during the day if he wanted something done. At that time I worked on Richmond Road, which was close to where he lived. I would be visiting him several times a day to run errands for him. Like a grandfather, he was particular about time. He was also petrified that the police would realise that he was a British passport holder and deport him. He appear before the police five years to have his passport ratified, but he still lived in fear,” says Mathew.

Though Don was living on savings from a job that he held at Binny Mills, he was dependent on the generosity of others. “He was too proud to ask for help but Don always had people who would help him. He grew up in a house on 12 acres of land near near Cubbon Park, which was a gift by Sir Mark Cubbon, Commissioner of the Mysore Kingdom during the British rule, to his grandmother’s grandfather. With a large retinue of staff, Don lived the good life as a young boy.”
Towards the end, Mathew and his friends, made sure that Don was looked after. “It was our friend Naveen who really looked after him. Don would like to go to the Only Place and talk to Haroon. But mostly he loved the outdoors. He was strangely adamant and got his own way, even when he was old. He wanted to be buried in the same grave as his father and he had his wish. His epitaph read: ‘Hero to many; friend to all’.

Though Don did not live to see his book published, Mathew arranged a small press conference for him in 2007 with TNA Perumal, pioneer of wildlife photography in India. “The press conference was held to give Don a sense of recognition that he should have rightfully had. It’s sad that so little of our history, immediate or old, is appreciated,” says Mathew.

The man who was invited by the Forest department to shoot maneaters and marauding elephants, the man who acted as a stunt double for Stewart Granger when the crew of Harry Black and the Tiger came to shoot in Bangalore, the man who rode into South Parade with a panther on his bike’s handle bar and a woman riding pillion (blasphemous in this day), the man who was known as a crack shot and went into the jungles alone with nothing but a weapon, the man who defied death many times, surely deserves to be remembered.