Borewell Road: There are snakes in the lane
 
 A fourteen-year-old boy, who was returning home from tuitions, had no idea of the danger that was lurking right outside his apartment complex at the Borewell Road area in Whitefield. He accidently stepped on a snake and was bit immediately. The boy was taken to the hospital and intense treatment was required to defeat the powerful venom. After days, he is on his way to recovery.
 
 But the incident has left residents of the area wondering about the negligence of the authorities. Whitefield residents feel the authorities did not bother to have the infrastructural requirements in place before letting an entire community of tax-payers to settle down and begin their lives in areas that were earlier forests.
 
 The Borewell Road area is a busy residential area. Bad roads and shoddy infrastructural work have never bogged its residents down; instead it has spurred them to demand from the authorities that they do their jobs.
 
 This latest problem, however, is of a different nature. Rain is driving snakes out of their safe hideouts and they are turning up on the roads and places otherwise frequented by humans. One wrong step can put a person’s life in grave danger.
 
 
 
 Aswin Subramanian, a resident of Borewell Road, took Bangalore Mirror through some of the major issues here. “We are already fighting for proper roads so you can imagine what happens when it rains here. The boy was bitten by a snake because of two things: the first is that the storm water drains are not maintained. They dig it out and clean it, but fail to put the mud back and seal it properly. Where are the snakes supposed to go? This was a forest before and we know there are snakes, which hide away underneath. But now, they are forced to come out and cross paths with humans. The second reason is this road which earlier used to be a shortcut for Whitefield residents to reach ITPL has now become a busy road. Despite this, there are no proper streetlights here. This was why the boy could not see the snake.”
 
 
 
 Shakespeare Dasarathan, another resident of the area was around when the boy was bitten. “We rushed to the place when we heard of it. The boy was walking into the apartment and had reacched the entry ramp. There are grills is laid over the drainage water here. The snake was lying on the grill, but half its body was inside.”
 
 Dasarathan said the boy gave the people who gathered his father’s number. “He had fainted before his father came. His father rushed him to Vydehi Hospital and doctors first said he is not breathing and had suffered a cardiac arrest. A team of doctors was put on the job of treating him,” he said.
 
 Dr. Sathyanarayana, cardiologist from Vyedehi Insitute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, who treated the boy, told Bangalore Mirror, “When the patient was brought to the emergency, he was not breathing and his body lacked oxygen. He also had a cardiac arrest. We gave CPR and intubated the child. His body had turned blue and he was frothing at the mouth so we put him on a mechanical ventilator.”
 
 
 
 “There are two types of snake venoms: neurotoxic and hemotoxic. Hemotoxic venoms start breaking down the red blood cells. We had to give the boy 45 doses of anti-snake venom. He was bleeding from his nose and mouth till 3am the next day. At 4am, we observed some movement in his body. He was in the ICU for six days and later shifted to the general ward. He had recovered by then and could recognise his parents,” he said.
 
 For residents of the area, the incident has come as a chilling reminder to watch where you step. Last Monday a woman too was bit near an apartment complex.
 
 “On Monday, we saw a Russell Viper that had laid eggs and saw other baby snakes too. Some people decide to kill it, as it is a dangerous snake. A woman was bitten and taken to the hospital, but her case was not serious,” Aswin said.
 
 With monsoon round the corner, residents of this area do not know which way to look. “We do not have proper roads to ride/drive on and now we do not have a safe place to walk either,” said Aswin.
 
 Once a palm field and a thick forest, Whitefield has now become an urban civilisation. But, the little creatures that lived in the anthills and under the bushes, have not been all disappeared. This is why Whitefielders are learning how to live with them. Pradeep Thakkar, a snake specialist, will take a class for the residents of the area on how to catch snakes. These kind of classes have been going on for many years here. A group of 20 enthusiastic residents undergo sessions on wildlife conservation with a focus on snakes. The session aims to help people co-exist with beings such as snakes. The session addresses aspects of man-animal conflict, what one can do when they encounter snakes and the best ways to avoid these encounters. Members of Whitefield Rising has been the only forum in the city that conducts classes on awareness for residents.