Every drop of goodwill counts here: In the drought-hit villages near Bandipur, relief work mobilised by resourceful individuals has become critical to sustenance
 
 Bandipur’s fodder figure
 
 A few hours’ drive south-west from the city will acclimatise you to the constant stillness and dejection that has consumed the drought-hit villages on the way. But, today, in Mangala village, near Bandipur Tiger Reserve, there is a flutter of excitement. A flash of green in this arid, orange-brown landscape gives a hint. A truckload of fresh fodder has arrived for free distribution and residents are gunning for it, snatching away bundles for their starving cattle.
 
 In the villages around Bandipur, including Mangala, Jakkahalli and Kaniyanapura, people depend on goodwill gestures such as this one to keep their cattle alive. With little water or vegetation, livestock is perishing. “I had 76 cows last year. Now I’m left with 42,” says Mahadevaiah from Mangala, who has no option but to risk taking his cattle into the protected forests nearby for grazing. There is no food, otherwise.
 
 
 
 Recently, when government tried distributing fodder in Sri Hangala village (17 km from Mangala), the demand turned so aggressive that police had to resort to lathi charge to control the crowd. “Last week, an official came and gave us tokens. There’s a waiting list now. I don’t know if my cattle will survive before we get the fodder. So far, we only have tokens,” said gram panchayat president Lingaraju. And this is dry fodder.
 
 
 The recent truckload of fresh fodder being distributed at Mangala had come from a Bengaluru-based businessman, Sharyar Khan. With a small landholding in the village, he spends some of his time here with his family. Seeing the severe drought in the area, he decided to mobile fresh fodder from Mysuru.
 
 
 
 “This village has become my second home. This year’s drought is the worst I’ve ever seen and I have decided to do my bit. I’ve been trying to get fresh fodder for the cattle at least once in 10 days,” said Khan, who had once contested, and lost, from the Chamarajpet assembly constituency with a Samajwadi party ticket.
 
 The cost of getting one mini-truckload of fodder from Mysuru is Rs 15,000. Khan says he’s trying to get people from his community to chip in and help with the cause.
 
 
 So far, even with his own efforts, there is some relief. He has dug two borewells near his land, which has become a watering hole not only for the area’s domesticated animals, but for wildlife as well. The water from the borewells is stored in a cemented pond, made so as to give easy access to animals. According to him, deer, sloth bear and even elephants are frequent visitors here, especially at night.
 
 The recent forest fires have reduced much of the reserve forests to ashes, as if the heat and the drought weren’t beating down upon the animals already. Under such harsh conditions, even the smallest effort make by Good Samaritans goes a long way in keeping these animals alive.
 
 The villagers tried their luck by digging 17 borewells, but got no water. According to them, the government’s water tankers come only when there is power. These villages typically don’t have power for 14-18 hours; so water is scarce even for human consumption.
 
 Panchayat president Lingaraju said that after their 17 failed attempts, when Khan spoke about digging two more borewells to create a water source for animals, they didn’t have much hope. “Luckily, we weren’t disappointed. The pond he has built provides water for our cattle and for wild animals too,” he said. Close to 40,000 liters were pumped out of the wells and into the pond, which stays crowded with cattle in the day and wild animals at night. There is also a small canal along the hillocks to collect and store rainwater, if and when it rains.
 
 Even as summer is yet to arrive in its full glory, government aid for humans and animals in and around these villages remains grossly inadequate. Perhaps, the only way to survive this season would be private parties working in tandem with state-run relief programmes. Even the smallest effort makes a big difference – the watering hole in Mangala is proof.