By: Nitindra Bandyopadhyay
 
 
 The state’s premier tiger reserve at Bandipur is suffering a new crisis as animals are falling prey to the garbage tourists discard on the highway passing through the national park. Animals like mongoose, jackal and chital have been reported to have died after consuming plastic trash.
 
 
 	T Heeralal, director of Bandipur National Park, said, “We have initiated strict measures to control littering inside the tiger reserve and along the safari tracks, but yes, despite the best efforts of the forest department, littering along the highway is still present. From time to time, we assign forest wardens to clean it up.”
 	
 	  	However, he said he was not aware of the exact amount being spent on the clean-up, as he had assumed charge a few days ago. He added that he would also look into the matter and see what could be done to stop the littering along the highway.
 	
 	  	Twice every week, three to four forest wardens are assigned to clear the litter thrown by people out of moving vehicles. Recently, during a clean-up drive, around 18 bags of garbage were collected along the highway consisting mainly of plastic bottles, gutka/pan wrappers, snack wrappers and polythene bags.
 	
 	  	During the drive, it has also come to the notice of the forest wardens that beer and liquor bottles are strewn some 10 to 15 feet away from the highway, which proves that there are people who visit the area, consume alcohol and leave the garbage behind, which later becomes a threat to animals. 	
 	
 	Every month, two to three animals are found dead after ingesting plastic. According to wildlife conservationists, plastic is consumed by animals like chital, wild boar, monkey and jackal as they feed on food leftovers. Plastic, once ingested, is hard to digest or excrete. 
 	
 	  	A senior forest official said that handling garbage in the area is becoming a major problem for the forest department. People refuse to understand the sensitivity of the matter and ignore all warning signs that have been put up to educate them about animal behaviour and how human behaviour impacts them.
 	
 	  	“On top of this, people also stop by the side of the highway and feed the animals. The main purpose is to click pictures with the animals. We have asked our workers and safari jeep drivers to reprimand people feeding animals, but they tend to ignore that,” the official said.
 	
 	  	“We keep a constant vigil inside the range, but tourists still litter. However, the reserve forest area is comparatively clean. The number of tourists in the area has swelled over the past five years and the tiger population in the area has gone up and frequent sightings attract more people,” he said.