For almost a decade Abhiram G Sankar, Deputy Commissioner (DC) Mysuru has been an avid birder, but not many are aware of his passion and hobby.
 
Work-wise, Mysuru is a vast — and hectic— district with lot of VIP movement. It has been close to seven months since his posting in the cultural capital. From India, he has recorded about 575 species and for Karnataka about 369 species, so far.

DC Abhiram told BM: “I have always been interested in nature and wildlife and when in college in the year 2007, I started going out with a birders group in Thiruvananthapuram, led by C Sushanth, a senior bird watcher in Kerala. Kerala has a good bird watching community. My interest towards birding only grew. I used to go the wetlands and Western Ghats regularly. Gradually, wherever I went, I maintained a list and made notes. Photography started much later and for the past 2-3 years, with eBird (an online database of bird observations) have been uploading my check list to it,” he said.

Mysuru DC Abhiram Sankar 

Birding is Abhiram’s passion. He took a small break from birding (may be a year or so) when he was preparing for IAS exams. “The best thing about birding is that one need not travel to an exotic location to document birds. Just step out of your home and we will see birds. Birds are there everywhere, one need to learn to recognise them. Even during training I did not stop birding. Since it was in Mussoorie, I recorded lot of Himalayan birds. The academy and surrounding area is quite wooded and used to enjoy birding during my treks,” he said.

Mysuru has a good number of bird watchers and Abhiram who tries his best to make at least one trip a month. His wife Ramya also joins him. “Mysuru is a good place with a good mix of agricultural habitat, garden, open space, wetland, forest. If you have time, it is even better as we have the Western Ghats nearby with places such as Coorg ,Salkeshpur, and Niligiris are near,” he said.

Abhiram says that his stint as the CEO Zilla Panchayat, Raichur for eight months was also good, where he spotted a lot of rare species. Some of the rare birds recorded by Abhiram so far include pied myna or pied starling in Raichur. In Karnataka, it is seen only in Bidar. It is common bird in central and northern India. 

DC has a message for birders: “One has to be ethical while birding. Birding is fine, but bird photography sometimes brings out a lot of unethical practises, like people trying to disturb nests while taking photographs, they chase birds till they get tried and when birds can’t fly, they go close so that they get good photographs.”