Observing the Earth Hour requires households and businesses in the city to switch off their non-essential lights and other electrical appliances for 60 minutes to create awareness about climate change. Bangalore Mirror finds out how the city is planning to observe this Hour.

SHUTTERS DOWN

                                 Sandalwood actress Ramya pledging support for Earth Hour 2010 in Bangalore on Friday          The pubs and clubs in the city won’t have any chance to do anything special during the Earth Hour as they will be shut down on Saturday due to BBMP elections scheduled on Sunday. Hard Rock Cafe manager Prem said, “Unfortunately, we won’t be able to do anything this year as we are shutting down for the BBMP elections.” Extreme Sports Bar manager Sanjay Bothra regretted that he “will miss the opportunity to do something for Earth Hour”.

SOME LIGHT

At the Taj Residency, lights will be turned off in the entire 50-acre campus for one hour. But there will be minimal lighting for senior citizens. Cafe Matteo on Church Street will observe the Earth Hour by shutting down its inner section, which is over 4000 sqft. Its store manager Girish Babu said, “The air-conditioning, lights and everything will be switched off completely.”
Last year, the Mocha on Lavelle Road, celebrated Earth Hour by completely switching off lights and lighting up the cafe with candles. Along with the aesthetic appeal, it created awareness among diners about the need to conserve the earth. Its MD Ritika said, “But this year due to the ongoing IPL season, we are not doing anything.”

Java City on Church street; Fireflies, lounge and restaurant on Lavelle Road; and Leela Kempinski have no special plans between 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm on Saturday.

NOT FEASIBLE FOR SOME

The Earth Hour is not in the scheme of things for some malls and multiplexes. Rex Theatre will not observe the Earth Hour as it is not feasible due to commercial purposes. A spokesman for Inox said, “We will not be able to do anything special as it is not feasible for cinemas to shut off everything during a movie.”

At the Forum Mall, lights will be dimmed. People will be given a chance to light candles at the entrance of the mall in an effort to raise awareness.

The Mall’s marketing official Preksha said, “At Forum Mall we have thousands of people walking in and out. So turning off the lights completely for one hour will not be possible.” Mantri Square Mall won’t turn off all lights as doing so will be a security hazard. However, it plans to turn off all unnecessary lighting and even reduce the intensity of the regular lights.

(Megha Bhaskar)

What is Earth Hour? Earth Hour is a global event organised by WWF (World Wildlife Fund) and is held on the last Saturday of March every year. As part of the Earth Hour households and businesses are asked to turn off their non-essential lights and other electrical appliances for one hour to raise awareness about  the need to take action on climate change. Earth Hour was conceived by WWF and The Sydney Morning Herald in 2007, when 2.2 million residents of Sydney participated by turning off all non-essential lights. Following Sydney’s lead, many other cities around the world adopted the event in 2008. Earth Hour 2010 will take place on March 27, 2010 from 8:30 pm to 9:30 pm, local time.

CELEBSPEAK:


I’m definitely going to observe the Earth Hour, like last year, by turning off lights from 8:30 pm to 9:30 pm. I believe that every one’s participation in this initiative will make a difference to the society. We have many days in a year dedicated to fathers, Valentines etc. Why not one day, or rather one hour, dedicated to Mother Earth?

Sharmila Mandre, actress 


Water and electricity are the essentials for my business and career. For me conservation of both these elements is very personal. Over the years, more awareness is being raised about the problems with respect to nature and global warming. So if it means turning off all lights for just one hour on one day, then I definitely support this movement

Nisha Millet, swimming champ and coach


I do believe this is a great movement, as there is a desperate need for conservation in our nation. All of us need to stand together to respect and nurture Mother Earth. If we turn off all lights and electronic devices just for one hour we will be able to go a long way

Harathi Rebello, entrepreneur 
I don’t believe the Earth Hour can be applicable to cities like Bangalore. As it is, we suffer a lot from load shedding. So Bangalore celebrates Earth Hour for two to three hours every day. This initiative is good for cities like Mumbai and Delhi, which have no power problems.

DJ Sasha