12-year-old Elizabeth and six other maimed macaques will have a new home at the People For Animals’ rehabilitation centre in Kengeri. They will be cared for a lifetime
 
 If you think unconditional love and kindness is the privilege of humans, meet this ‘lady’. She is 12-year-old Elizabeth, a Bonnet Macaque, and a victim of acid attack eight years ago. That attack rendered her completely blind.
 
 When People For Animals (PFA) activists rescued and treated her she bounced back to prime health within three months. But the loss of her vision led her to sharpen her other senses and instincts – among them notably being maternal instinct.
 
 Today, she is a mother par excellence with a kind heart. No, she has not borne any offspring of her own. But you ask any PFA activist tending to her at the rehabilitation centre in Kengeri. They will tell you that Elizabeth has emerged as the bearer of hope at the facility.
 
 How, you may ask. After Elizabeth’s recovery and until now, Elizabeth has fostered at least ten abandoned baby macaques, who the activists say would not have survived in the absence of their mothers.
 
 PFA activists realised it the first time when, just after she had recovered from her wounds, they had rescued a baby macaque. The young one was struggling without its mother and the PFA activists were sure it would not survive. Naveen Kumar, member of PFA’s rescue team said that just as an experiment they had tried to introduce Elizabeth to the young one.
 
 It worked! Elizabeth and the baby macaque got along like a house on fire. They were inseparable!
 
 That was just the beginning. The ‘blind-but-kind’ Elizabeth had found her calling.
 
 The kindhearted Elizabeth, with her supreme maternal instincts, is currently fostering one-year-old Arjun, another abandoned baby macaque who was recently rescued by PFA.
 
 Not just to the babies, it appears that Elizabeth’s benevolence has attracted and given solace even to much older macaques.
 
 Six-year-old macaque Nanny was in the prime of her youth when she was run over by a speeding car. The accident left her blind – just like Elizabeth. When Nanny was brought to the PFA rehab centre she was visibly in shock, disturbed, lonely and quiet.
 
 Upon her recovery from physical wounds Nanny was introduced to Elizabeth, who once again wove her magic around a troubled soul. Not only did Nanny recover from her shock, she also began lending a hand to Elizabeth raise the macaques.
 
 Obviously, with Elizabeth’s kind heart and skills rubbing off her, Nanny has herself fostered three young macaques – Leo, Neo and Bhoomi. All those three young ones have since been released into the wild upon reaching maturity.
 
 Nanny is now tending to her new brood, Misty and Siri – who too will one fine day return to their natural habitats.
 
 FOR A NEW BEGINNING
 
 Elizabeth and Nanny are among seven Bonnet Macaques, each living without limbs or sight due to human cruelty, negligence and technology.
 
 But now, they are set for a more comfortable life.
 
 The seven simians – Elizabeth, Nanny, Missi, Brandy, Rambo, Brucee and Buddy – will soon be getting a new house with a swimming pool, ladders, swings, a sand pit, and perches, with a lot of greenery around.
 
 People For Animals (PFA), Bengaluru, has rescued and rehabilitated close to 800 macaques as of December 2014. But these seven, although operated upon to ensure living their normal lifespans, have such severe injuries that releasing them into the wild may pose a risk to their own lives. Bonnet macaques live till around 35 years.
 
 Hence PFA decided to build a lifetime care for these macaques and make sure that this environment is as close to that in the forests to make them comfortable.
 
 The lifetime care facility is specially designed to meet the requirements of these blind and amputee macaques.
 
 The facility will have permanently-built perches and ladders keeping in mind the minimum amount of exercise that should be given to the macaques for a healthy living.
 
 Naveen Kumar, the member of PFA’s rescue team, said. “Macaques are social animals. Their survival is dependent on each other. Feeding, grooming each other and sharing the same space is an important part of their inherent behaviour.
 
 “This sense of loneliness may affect the mental well-being of the animal. These macaques are presently housed in separate enclosures. The new home will be ready within one month at the rehabilitation centre in Kengeri. Lifetime care cage measurement will be 24 feet in length, 18 feet in height and 18 feet broad.”
 
 
 THE OTHERS WITH LIZ AND NANNY
 
 MISSI
 
 Missi has been in PFA’s care for almost two years. She is restless yet quiet, loud yet receptive. Her behaviour is just as mysterious as her reason for being at PFA. Missi had wandered into a residential area and had stayed out without eating or drinking anything. It was only when she was brought to PFA hospital and examined, was it found that Missi was blind. Her blindness has created insecurity in her. But now she has begun to warm up to Elizabeth and Nanny.
 
 BRANDY
 
 Doddaballapur’s favourite liquor factory had a special visitor. Brandy, 6-years of age loved to hang around the liquor factory in Doddaballapur. Like every other customer of the factory, Brandy too was consumed by liquor. Literally. Brandy was caught in the middle of a fire which had engulfed the factory. She had suffered terrible burns. Brandy was brought to PFA and treated for her burns. Brandy survived her ordeal but had to pay a steep price for it. Brandy lost three of her limbs to necrosis. Brandy has been in PFA’s care for the past 4 years and will be one of the family members in the life time care being built.
 
 RAMBO
 
 Big, muscular, fierce and everything that an alpha male should be, Rambo is a 9-year-old male and can scare anyone who goes close to him. He would sit atop high buildings and watch the proceedings of human life keenly, only coming down for an occasional raid for food. It was on one of those raids that Rambo’s life changed. He came in contact with live wires of a transformer and lost three limbs. Rambo cannot be released into the wild with just one good limb.
 
 BRUCEE
 
 Brucee a three-year-old was brought to the centre a year ago. At an age where they should be leaping from tree to tree Brucee to leapt on a live wire. The lifetime care will bring this three- year-old closer to the likes of Elizabeth and Nanny.
 
 BUDDY
 
 Buddy is the youngest member of the new family. He is just two-years-old and came to PFA wildlife hospital about a year ago. Buddy had just started to learn to jump around, when a wrong jump onto live wires changed his life forever. Buddy too has lost three limbs and can never have the fun of jumping from one branch to the other again. The little one is scared and shocked. He needs love and help that his fellow mates can give him. The lifetime care is the last hope to bring the shy baby Buddy back to his normal self.