By Garima Prasher

Large pangolin scales seizure puts spotlight on poaching; KFD gets cracking

One of the largest ever pangolin scale seizures in November last year has put the Karnataka Forest Department officials on its toes. The Vigilance Wing of the department is planning to roll out an action plan and a project to check illegal trade of pangolins in the state.

“We have alerted all the wings of the department and have directed our staff to be highly vigilant. The department is cautious regarding this trade and is soon coming up with an action plan and a dedicated project to bring down the pangolin poaching cases in Karnataka,” said Seema Garg, additional principal chief conservator of forest (vigilance), Karnataka Forest Department.

Officials say that pangolins are small animals, thus hiding the scale and trafficking it becomes easy for poachers. “Pangolin poaching cases are difficult to track. They are small mammals, and their scales can be transported easily. Moreover, they are found in different kinds of habitats out of the forest area, for example, the eastern plain areas house a good number of pangolin population,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Recently, 67 kg pangolin scales were confiscated in the state and according to conservationists, this points to a worrisome trend. Experts say demand for pangolin scales is on the rise and many poachers are concentrating on pangolin trade. According to Sharath Babu, a wildlife enthusiast, the issue is something that has been occurring since a long time but still continues, largely unchecked.

“There have been seizures of pangolin scales before in Bengaluru and other cities, but those were at much smaller scale. The amount of scales retrieved this time is unheard of and indicates that the poaching cases are on the rise,” said Sharath.


Experts say officials should understand the magnitude of the situation and act upon it accordingly. “On an average, one can retrieve around 500 gm scales from an adult pangolin. To get 67.5 kg, you need over a 100 pangolins. Also, this is just one incident that came to the fore. Majority of pangolin poaching cases go unnoticed. This mammal is mostly found in the grasslands and dry rocky areas that border the villages. Villagers have stray dogs that are trained in sniffing pangolins out of their hiding places. The meat is consumed, and scales are collected. There is no organised market, so the culprits are not caught. But, most of the seizures happen from the Karnataka-Andhra border area,” said Sharath.

Heighten surveillance 
According to the wildlife conservationists and experts, the need of the hour is an improved surveillance system and a dedicated intelligence cell under the Karnataka Forest Department.
“Our surveillance system should improve. The forest cell of the Police Department in the state is more active compared to the Forest Department’s Vigilance wing. Moreover, the department also does not have an effective intelligence cell. They should have a dedicated intelligence cell that is exclusively working on gathering information on illegal wildlife trade. Since the majority of the seizures are happening in the border area, both the Karnataka Forest Department and Andhra Pradesh Forest departments should take up the responsibility and act on it,” said a conservationist working in the region.