By Amit Kumar

With increased water flow from Krishna Raja Sagar (KRS) Reservoir, bird watchers are worried that the surging Cauvery may affect Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary. After a flood warning was issued by Cauvery Neeravari Nigam Limited (CNNL), boating and tourist entry to the bird sanctuary were suspended. 

Officials of Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary are taking precautionary measures and they may shift some birds to a safer place. Also, to ensure there are no adverse effects on the birds’ health, more vets are being roped into service at the sanctuary. 

“The population of birds at Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary is lower than in peak season since it is not the season for mating and nesting. 

Also, migratory birds mainly visit the sanctuary during December. Right now, at Ranganathittu, we can find Little Cormorants and Egrets. 

However, we are taking every possible step to ensure that the birds are not affected,” said wildlife warden Naveen Kumar.

“Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary has check dams, which control the pressure of water flow and there is no panic situation for birds as these check dams decrease the speed of water flow. If the situation yurns serious, we fill sand in a gunny bags to be kept under the small islands (in Ranganathittu), so that soil erosion is controlled. No island would be flooded. If things are very bad, maybe there is a 10% chance of losing small birds. But 90% of the birds will be safe,” he added. 

The sanctuary will be open to tourists by the end of monsoon. And by December, the islands would be ready to welcome their seasonal guests as large flocks of migratory birds start to come in.

KRS OUTFLOW

The outflow from the KRS was increased on Sunday and around 65,000 cusecs of water was let into the river (the outflow was 20,000 cusecs on Saturday afternoon). Tourism advisories have been issued about restricted entry into several places in Karnataka, restrictions on boating and such places like Brindavan Gardens on Krishna Raja Sagar Dam.