The life and death of Hariprasad P, a 38-year-old mechanical engineer, is a warning to every aspiring wildlife enthusiast: He died last Wednesday after a cobra bit him on the stomach while he was photographing it. There’s more: When wildlife sleuths raided his studio at Begur, they found 13 snakes – a rat snake and 12 cobras, protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 – in captivity.   “It is unfortunate. The rescuer was bitten by a snake he kept. A case was registered, but closed after he died last week. This is a warning that people should not venture into such things unless authorised,” A G Appu Rao, DCF, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror.   Fatal attraction Hariprasad, who claimed to be a wildlife photographer, took wildlife enthusiasts on eco-tours, trained them in photography and publicised himself as a snake rescuer through his website. He had been doing it for the last year and had said, “It takes a lot to save an injured snake. Though they seem to be deadly, they are very fragile creatures.”   However, he was neither trained nor authorised by the BBMP to handle deadly snakes. But he attended snake rescue calls and took shots of the rescue operation (which BBMP volunteers don’t encourage). He also photographed the snakes he rescued, but luck ran out when a young cobra bit him. He had earlier been bitten by a Russell’s viper and by a cobra, but the third bite proved fatal.   “He was bitten on the stomach as he tried to take a top angle shot of a cobra. This is the height of amateur wildlife photography. In the name of wildlife rescue, he kept wildlife in captivity and used them for photography, which is illegal. Nowadays, it’s a fashion among some untrained amateurs to say ‘I will die for wildlife’. But if all enthusiasts die, who will work for wildlife? We have many like him, claiming affiliation to NGOs to get into snake rescue, which should not be encouraged. His life is a lesson to youth on how fatal one wrong move and the lack of training and equipment can be,” wildlife expert Sharath R Babu said.     “We got information about Hariprasad keeping snakes. The same was passed on to the wildlife sleuths, who took me to identify the species when they raided his place. We found 13 of them. This amounts to keeping protected wildlife illegally in captivity,” Deepak, a wildlife enthusiast said, adding that snake rescuers are supposed to release snakes immediately. The rescued reptiles were later taken to a rehab.   For authorised rescuers or to complain against unauthorised ones, call the BBMP wildlife helpline at 9880108801.