Wearing rubber gloves and masks, a group of residents from Hosakerehalli celebrated Independence Day collecting garbage in trash bags from around the Hosakerehalli Lake. Many lake enthusiasts, activists and community groups in association with the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) gathered and carried out a cleaning drive.
 
The idea was to declutter the waterbody and draw the attention of authorities concerned about its dilapidated condition. Locals say the 53-acre lake has turned into a garbage dump yard.
 
“The banks of the lake are filled with trash and the waterbody has turned into a black spot. The lake has a border issue too. Although it is called Hosekerahalli Lake, it falls under the Rajarajeshwari Nagar ward and is being littered by the residents of both the wards,” said Rachna Ravi Kiran, a resident of Hosekerahalli who participated in the event.
 
College students and community groups also participated.
 
Interestingly, the community also got together last month to clean the water body and spread awareness among the residents on solid waste management. Post the event, while the BBMP officials also imposed fines on the people who dumped garbage around the lake, the waterbody continues to be a black spot.


 . 
“However, it continues to stink due to the recent dumping and constant rain,” added Kiran.
 
According to the locals, the lake is choked with sewage flowing in from the nearby commercial and residential establishments. From discarded plastic items to mattresses and animal carcasses, the waterbody receives all kinds of trash. “We have also noticed rotting mushrooms discarded by nearby mushroom farms and hoteliers dumping food debris in and around the lake. There is hardly any oxygen for living organisms,” said Manjunath, a volunteer from Into the Wildlife trust.
 
The lake was recently handed over to BBMP by the Bengaluru Development Authority (BDA). Residents say the civic body has been promising to rejuvenate the lake; however, no work has started yet.