The Centre’s nod for a high-tension transmission line to bring power from Udupi to Bangalore and its adjoining areas via Hassan, has thrown up a huge ecological dilemma. While the extra power will mean an end, at least for the next few years, to load-shedding in the state capital and will be welcomed by residents and industries alike, it is a sobering, even depressing thought that it will come at the cost of an estimated 40,000 trees along the path of the power line. 
 From the viewpoint of the state government, it was caught in a pincer between the growing power needs of Bangalore and the high expenditure — and uncertainty — of purchasing electricity from outside. It thus had little choice but to wheel power from the private sector UPCL, located at Nandikur in Udupi, all the way to Shantigrama in Hassan district. Hitherto, UPCL, with two units and an installed capacity of 1,200 MW, was generating only 600 MW which was supplied to the local Mangalore Electricity Supply Company (Mescom) area. The remaining power could not be generated and supplied to other parts of Karnataka as there was no direct feeder line between the coastal and inland area of the state.  
 The new overhead transmission line through the western ghats will address this logistical problem. 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, senior minister Dr V S Acharya said, “The MoEF approved the project four days ago. We hope it will be completed by March. Through this transmission line we will be getting 12 million units everyday. The government will be getting power at a cheap rate of Rs 3.71 per unit. The project will cost Rs 200 crore and will be taken up by KPTCL.” 
 Power minister Shobha Karandlaje told this paper, “We had started work on private land and we got permission only a few days ago to carry on the work in forest land as well. We will hopefully finish the project before the commencement of the monsoon. The project will not only help Bangalore but the entire state as it will help draw 600 Mw at an affordable price.”
 
 However, the MoEF’s approval has come as a setback and disappointment to activists and conservation groups who were opposed to the high-tension line project. The Kudremukh Wildlife Foundation (KWF) had, in a letter written by its coordinator Niren Jain to power minister Shobha Karandlaje, urged the state government to drop the plan as it would entail axing thousands of trees and would affect the ecological balance in the biodiversity-rich western ghats. Instead of the overhead line, it had suggested laying underground cables along the road in the Charmadi ghat. The proposed alignment of the transmission line covers 76.37 acres of forest land in the Chikmagalur division and 89.29 acres of forest land in the Mangalore division. 
 The PPA with the company envisaged a 400 kv line, but KPTCL had set up a 220 kv power line at Kemar near Karkala in Dakshina Kannada, which could transmit only 220 kv power from the generating station to the national grid at Hassan. The 400 kv line was scheduled for completion  in April 2010.  
 According to an independent energy consultant, the guidelines for laying 400 kv lines stipulate a clearance of 6.5 metres on either side and 2.44 metres around the transmission towers.  
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Kishore Kumar, president of the Malnad Environment Awareness Committee, said, “The line is supposed to pass through both forest, non-forest and plantation land and the number of trees that could be affected is estimated at 40,000.  
 The larger impact on forest areas will be witnessed in Chikmagalur and Dakshina Kannada. In Hassan, it was only plantations which had borne the brunt.” 
 Niren Jain said, “The Centre’s condition was that the state government had to vacate the existing high-tension wire network in the Kudremukh mining township area as the mines have been closed. Though the MoEF had suggested the possibility of laying underground cables, the idea was dropped later.” He pointed out that the larger impact of the transmission line would be seen in the higher elevations of the western ghats. “Even though the line per se may not cause that large an impact, subsequent infrastructure like roads, etc., will affect several thousand trees.”  In an apparent balancing act between developmental and environmental needs, Acharya said UPCL had been directed to set up a desulphurisation plant as it uses imported coal with a higher sulphur content.