It was almost a ‘Tom Hanks in Castaway’ situation. A car, with three passengers got stuck on a dirt road in a jungle and was unable to call for help for hours. While driving back from BR Hills Temple, a Bengaluru-based businessman, along with his son and a driver, spent close to five hours in their car.

A city-based granite quarry businessman, Nara Rupesh Kumar Reddy said, “We left BR Hills temple at around 5.30 pm and were heading towards our guest house. It started drizzling and the roads were getting slippery. Around 6.30 pm, while negotiating a hump, the car tyre slipped and the right tyre got stuck to a nearby ditch. Initially, we tried every trick from accelerating to dumping stones near the tyre but nothing worked out. At 7.30 pm, we realised that we were stuck and needed help to get out of there. Our only option for us was to lock ourselves inside the car, till we get help. However, the vehicular movement in the jungle had completely stopped.” 

The trio were scared as there was no help and the area was known for the wildlife movement. “We didn’t have any mobile connectivity. We were told that tigers frequent the place. I was so scared that I had to remove my white shirt as it would catch the attention of the tiger if it comes nearby. I also kept a sanitiser in my hand to spray in case a wild animal attacks me. As it was raining heavily, we had to close all the windows and it was getting 
very suffocating. It was also pitch dark and we could hear elephant calls from a distance. We could see a lot of deer moving next to us and we maintained complete silence fearing for our lives,” he narrated the ordeal.

Luckily, at 2.30 am, they heard a police jeep on a recce and they immediately told them what has happened. The Chamarajanagar Inspector Mahadeva Shetty told Mirror, “We were going on a recce to check if there were any nefarious activities in the forest around and if there was any illegal ganja being sold. This was when we saw three people who had stopped our vehicle. After enquiring about their whereabouts, we took them in their vehicle and dropped them to a resort nearby K Gudi,” added the inspector.

Reddy said that they spent the rest of the wee hours in the resort thanking the cops for the timely help and saving their lives.