Get set to get some green lessons if you are among those who take a stroll every morning near one of the numerous lakes in the city. The wildlife wing of the BBMP’s forest cell is all set to start environment information cells (EIC), which will be a one-stop shop for all environment-related issues. They will give information pertaining to the environment, urban wildlife, lake conservation, trees and rain water harvesting, besides attending to complaints of encroachment and pollution of lakes, and illegal tree cutting.  
 These EICs will also train enthusiastic residents on issues pertaining to wildlife rescue and green conservation. The first one will come up in the forest cell’s office near Yediyur lake. 
 “Bangalore has nothing like these environment information cells, which are one-stop shops for all environment-related issues. We will fill that gap,” said R Sharath Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban. 
 Over 33 BBMP-recognised volunteers will work in these cells which are likely to come up near each of city’s 126 lakes. They will try to rope in local residents in conservation activities. Among others, they will focus on wildlife groups in IT companies. Interested citizens will be trained in handling sick birds and squirrels, and other mammals. 
 “These cells will prove helpful for all those people who often express an interest in joining efforts to handling urban wildlife and helping with issues pertaining to conservation. It will help bring about a change in the city,” said Deepak, a wildlife cell volunteer. 
 A N Yellappa Reddy, a renowned environmentalist, said, “Every ward has problems like illegal tree cutting, dumping of debris or industrial waste, encroachment of lakes and parks. Residents don’t know whom to report these problems to. We have been requesting officials to evolve a system to respond to such calls. Hence, we welcome these cells. The people who harm our environment and city will fear to do so if they know that somebody is watching.”