Our puerile reaction to the Digvijaya Singh- Amrita Rai-Anand Pradhan triangle proves we are a people who know little about love or grace
 	
 Journalists’ romantic involvements and sometimes, marriage to their high-profile sources have ceased to surprise Delhi. The tradition goes back to columnist Tavleen Singh’s much-publicised relationship with the late Pakistani politician Salman Taseer in the 1990s, which gave their love child Aatish Taseer the subject for his part memoir-part travelogue, Stranger to History. The punishing pace of television journalism didn’t stop television anchor Sonia Verma from marrying Union Minister of State for Home Affairs R P N Singh, and the channel’s glamorous Congress correspondent Neha Seth from following in her colleague’s footsteps — her choice was Union Minister of State for Human Resources Jitin Prasada.
 In between, Delhi’s down-at-heel Press Club of India was agog with news of a senior political journalist’s bygone affair with a late prime minister known for his scholarly inclinations, and yet another news anchor’s proximity to the dapper chief minister of a northern state. What has set apart previously unknown Rajya Sabha Television senior anchor Amrita Rai’s relationship with Congress General Secretary Digvijaya Singh is the virulent morality of social media trolls, who seem to have found in this publicly acknowledged fact a justification for Narendra Modi’s much-condemned (by the Congress, naturally) silence about his wife.
 Journalists who have known Rai from her days as a young reporter when a national channel’s team was being put together by Ravina Raj Kohli, find it upsetting to see her name and that of her estranged husband, Anand Pradhan of the Indian Institute of Mass Communications (IIMC), dragged into sanctimonious filth. 
 		 	 		These former colleagues say 43-year-old Rai, who is from Uttar Pradesh, worked her way up the television pecking order from BAG Films, a Delhi-based media firm started by Hindi anchor Anuradha Prasad and her husband, Union Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs Rajeev Shukla. They point out that she is a serious and ambitious journalist who combines good looks with a sharp grasp of politics. She had also successfully managed to stay out of radar, which is why her relationship with Singh took the social media by surprise. Until then, former colleagues say, people had little idea of their relationship, though rumours had been doing the rounds for years.
 		 	 		Singh, whose wife Asha succumbed to cancer last February, in contrast, has always been in the public domain. From a family that once ruled the old princely state of Raghogarh in Madhya Pradesh, Diggy Raja is a former university-level cricketer, who maintains his athletic frame thanks to a Spartan diet. The keen wildlife photographer and an engaging conversationalist is known to be popular among women journalists, even at the age 67. 
 Former colleagues say Rai’s relationship with Singh was being whispered about during her days with a national Hindi news channel, where she was covering the Congress. Some insist that she was eased out thanks to this very proximity. She has since then done two short stints at other Hindi channels, and finally, in 2011, landed at Rajya Sabha TV, not considered a sensible career choice for a mid-career journalist. Certainly not one whose sparse Linkedin profile has a telling quote from Pablo Picasso: “I am always doing that which I cannot do, in order that I may learn how to do it.”
 		 	 		Singh’s critics now ascribe her entry into Rajya Sabha TV to his influence. They are also the ones to circulate a video of the couple performing puja at a temple adjoining the samadhi of 13th-century Bhakti saint, Dnyaneshwar, at Alandi near Pune on July 19, 2013.
 		 	 		Rai comes across as a competent and articulate journalist in her well-produced magazine programmes. On Sarokaar, a talk show, she has got personalities to discuss issues as varied as the Street Vendors Act and the neglect of Ladakh. And it was on Tarkash that she first interviewed Singh two years ago, when he was overseeing the UP campaign of his party. She did it again after last year’s Jaipur chintan shivir of the Congress, where Rahul Gandhi was named AICC vice president. Observers say her shows are well-researched, slickly produced and she has managed to interview just about every political leader in the news, from Akhilesh Yadav to Sheila Dikshit.
 The news of her relationship with Singh, which he acknowledged on Twitter after intimate pictures were leaked online, also dragged Rai’s estranged husband Anand Pradhan (the couple who separated a couple of years ago has already filed for divorce by mutual consent) into the spotlight, with trolls forcing him to close down his Facebook page. It was here that he had set the record straight about the status of his marriage: “One gets to recognise one’s friends on such occasions. Or people who are not prepared to view the finer details of a man-woman relationship and also the woman's existence and personality from any mindset other than the feudal and patriarchal one.” A doctorate from Benaras Hindu University and an outspoken supporter of the Aam Aadmi Party, Pradhan is not a stranger to pro-Hindutva hooligans. In February, at the World Book Fair in New Delhi, right wingers hurled abuses at a group of IIMC and Delhi University teachers, including Pradhan, who were reading passages from American Indologist Wendy Doniger’s book, On Hinduism, in protest against Penguin India’s decision to withdraw it in the face of criticism.
 		 	 		Pradhan hasn’t shied away from criticising communal politics or campaigning against corruption since the time Anna Hazare and Arvind Kejriwal were one happy family. Today, he’s getting a taste of what he described in his Facebook post as the “lurid jokes, personal attacks and mudslinging” of those who do not consider women “as anything more than private property, or baby-making machines”.