By Melvin Mathew

Doddakallasandra Lake was revived in October 2021, but latest KSPCB report showing high total coliform levels indicates that sewage is again entering lake

Doddakallasandra Lake has fallen victim to high levels of total coliform content.
 
KSPCB reports from 2021-2022 are indicative of sewage entering the water body.
 
Lake activists complain that their repeated complaints to the BBMP and BWSSB have gone in vain. Allowing the entry of sewage into a rejuvenated lake can be detrimental to determining the overall health of the lake.

According to the Central Pollution Control Board’s water quality criteria, the lake was given a ‘class D’ grade, which is considered conducive for the propagation of wildlife and fisheries, but the most recent report in July 2022 shows that total coliform levels are at 35,000 MPN/100ml.
 
The permissible level is 5,000 MPN/100ml to secure ‘Class C’ for a lake. In April 2022, the total coliform levels were at 1,60,000, in May 2022 it dropped to 5400 MPN/100ml and shot up to 35,000 MPN/100ml in June 2022.

About the sewage entry, lake activist Raghavendra B Pachhapur from ActionAid Association said, “The lake was rejuvenated in October 2021. We had requested the Pollution Control Board to monitor the water quality every month, after which we have been receiving it regularly. I have been following the water quality of the lake for the last 7 months and we have noticed higher levels of total coliform up to 1,60,000, while it needs to be under 5,000 MPN/100ml.
 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand, which is supposed to be under 3 mg/L, has touched 8mg/L and is now around 5mg/L.”

He added that as the only major avenue for raising complaints are citizens, many complaints were raised on the BBMP Sahaaya app, but in vain.

“This is a definitive indication of raw sewage making an entry into the lake. Water with more than 1,000 total coliform MPN/100ml is not ideal for even agriculture as it could lead to farmers contracting diseases,” said Ram Prasad, Co-founder of Friends of Lakes.

On the impact of consuming water with high levels of total coliform on the body, Dr BS Ravindra, Director, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Fortis Hospitals, said, “Pathogenic coliform can cause diarrhoea, stomach upset, vomiting, and abdominal pain. With prolonged exposure, they can develop chronic diarrhoea, colitis, and irritable bowels.”

KSPCB had written to the Chief Engineer of the BBMP Lakes Division. The state pollution board also wrote to BBMP on July 15, apprising them of the public complaints and asking them to stop sewage entry into the lake.
 
They were also asked to file an action report within 15 days.

However, when BM contacted the Chief Engineer of the BBMP Lakes Division, they claimed that they were unaware of the issue and the letter.

Lake activists note that detecting sewage entry has become tricky.


   I have been following the water quality of the lake for the last 7 months and we have noticed higher levels of total coliform up to 1,60,000– Lake activist


“With more than one inlet to the lake, it involves a lot of work to determine the sewage entry. In the case of Doddakallasandra Lake, there is one major inlet and a minor inlet, and a stream coming from adjoining buildings,” added Pachhapur.

KSPCB Environmental Officer (Bommanahalli) said that currently there is no sewage entry and total coliform is essential to the survival of aquatic life as well.

Pachhapur also complained that while KSPCB performs monthly reports on lake quality, limited pre-emptive action is being taken.
 
The 25-acre lake was rejuvenated by BBMP in 2010 at the cost of Rs 6 crore. Activists worry that the rejuvenation might be going down the drain.