As study points to rise in crop, livestock damage around BNP, park officials say barricades are effective

Researchers from the Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM) in Madhya Pradesh have highlighted that incidences of crop damage, livestock loss, and loss of human life have increased in and around Bannerghatta National Park (BNP). BNP officials, on their part, maintained that no permission was sought by IIFM to carry out the study inside the park.

 A survey-based study conducted across 12 villages in and around the park, also indicates that human-wildlife conflict cases have not only forced farmers to change their cropping pattern but have also led to a drop in native cattle breeds in the area.

Researchers have linked these issues to an increase in forest area and quality as the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) is actively undertaking plantations and reclaiming encroached lands.

“When probed about trends in the status of the forests, 37% and 29% of the respondents from villages inside the park boundaries and eco-sensitive zone villages, respectively, indicated that human–wildlife conflict and incidences of crop damage, livestock loss, and loss of human life have increased,” said the report.

Farmers from over 100 villages in and around the park were interviewed and a majority of them underlined that there has been a shift in cropping patterns in the area mainly due to crop damage from wildlife.

While finger millet, red gram and maize, and coconut were the main crops that were harmed making them unpopular, farmers have now shifted to growing either mulberry or fruits and vegetables. Commercial viability, better water supply, road transport, and accessibility to the cocoon market in Ramanagara and other urban markets in Bengaluru are some other factors that nudged farmers to change their crops.

The study further highlights that total livestock ownership has also gone down in the villages mainly due to the lack of gomala land. Gomala lands have reduced in both area and access, owing to diversion for agriculture, housing, etc, or even inclusion in forest areas. Notably, KFD has declared livestock grazing along with forest encroachment, smuggling, fires, etc, as restricted activities to promote natural regeneration in forests.

“Local cattle breeds have become rare, as high-yielding hybrid cows are preferred to cater to the ever-increasing milk demands of Bengaluru. Exotic breeds reduce the burden of grazing as they can be comfortably stall-fed but are quite expensive to maintain and often face high disease risk. Losing hybrid cattle to wildlife depredation proves expensive, turning people hostile toward conservation efforts, which is an instance of conflict between urbanization and conservation,” noted the report.

BNP refutes
However, BNP officials have refused to acknowledge the research as the IIFM hadn’t sought its permission to carry out the study inside BNP.

“For anyone to conduct a study or research work inside the park, special permission has to be taken from the department. No such permission was sought for this research work. In the absence of a study, the claim of an increase in human-wildlife incidents in and around BNP holds no ground. IIFM should have taken permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden,” said an official from KFD.

According to Prabhakar Priyadarshi, Deputy Conservator of Forest, BNP, the on-ground staff has been on its toes to keep elephants away from agricultural fields. Moreover, various management techniques and fencing options are being implemented to alleviate unfavourable interactions between villagers and wildlife.

“Our strategy remains to establish effective barricades all around the park to prevent the elephants from coming out of the forest. In case they venture out, we ensure they are driven back inside as soon as possible. BNP is safeguarded with more than 30 km of railway barricade and over 100 km of various types of solar fencing. We also have elephant-proof trenches,” said Priyadarshi.