At least 10 snakes are rescued in Bangalore every day. But what made Friday different was that wildlife sleuths were looking at a rare shield-tailed snake that surfaces once a year in the city. 
   The non-venomous snake was rescued from a house in Kengeri and later released in nearby Turahalli forest.    A Good sign “This is a fast-disappearing species. Though we rescue hundreds of snakes, we don’t get to see this one often. But spotting the snake is an indicator that our biodiversity is still intact,” wildlife expert Sharath R Babu told Bangalore Mirror.   About eight to nine such snakes have been rescued in the last 10 years. Though rare, these snakes are harmless and their bite can only  cause irritation.    Said to be commonly found in Sri Lanka and southern parts of India, especially the Western Ghats, these snakes are known for their tiny length – between 20-70 cm – a unique tail with scales, and burrowing habit.   Unlike the Sand Boa, Red Sand Boa, and Common Sand Boas found in Bangalore, the shield-tailed snake is rarely found in the city’s biodiversity, thus falling in the category of other rare snakes like Dumeril’s Black Head snake which is found once in two-three years, Python, and Cat Snake.    “The snake was so tiny, about 20 cm, that it was difficult to trace it. These snakes are identified by their tails, which is yellowish and has scales. The body is chocolate brown in colour. As it is a burrowing snake and dwells within the soil all the time, it is very difficult to notice it outside,” wildlife volunteer Kumar N, who rescued it, told Bangalore Mirror.     An appeal to people Since the species are on the verge of extinction, and no sub-species are found in Bangalore’s biodiversity, wildlife sleuths appeal to people to ensure these snakes are safely rescued. “It is difficult to identify these snakes,” added Sharath Babu. “If these snakes go unnoticed by people who see them , then they may soon become extinct. Hence, those who notice them should ensure they call rescuers and release them in a  safe habitat.”   BBMP wildlife volunteers can be contacted on the BBMP wildlife helpline: 9880108801.