A Fruitful Expedition
 
 	It has been a while since the former hockey champion Ashish Kumar Ballal hit the field. He seems to be making up for that with some healthy food options. Shopping at an upmarket mall in the heart of the city with wife Sahana, the ex-goalkeeper did indulge in some guilty pleasures though as he lingered at the chips and snacks aisle before heading out.
 	
 	Milking It
 	
 	Celebrities are known for their indulgences and it comes as no surprise that several bigwigs— Sachin Tendulkar, Shilpa Shetty, Amitabh Bachchan, Lara Dutta and Hrithik Roshan—swear by a premium milk brand called Pride of Cows. Priced at Rs 75 per litre, it’s available exclusively through subscriptions but their selling point is the 3,800 Holstein Friesian cows that are treated quite royally. Pampered with music, showers and specially designed nutritional meals, the cows aren’t even to be touched without gloves. Apparently, their philosophy is that happy cows give better milk...and, collaterally, beefy actors.
 	
 	Chow on this 
 	
 	Rumour has it that this bunch of cricketers are likely to command the highest price at the upcoming Karnataka Premier League auction but the men in question – Abhimanyu Mithun, CM Gautam and Mayank Agarwal – had nothing but food on their mind as they dug into lunch at Chinnaswamy Stadium. With talks rife about featuring an all-star Celebrity Cricket League, it will be interesting to see a face-off between Mithun and veteran Tamil star Sarath Kumar, whose daughter is allegedly dating the pacer.
 	
 	Aloha Aloma
 	
 	Holidaying in Hawaii with her entire brood, Dr Aloma Lobo, former chairperson of CARA, was quite kicked about the fact that four of her grandchildren, all under four, met up in Hawaii for the first time. But what she’s still getting over is her meeting with a stranger, who turned out to be a classmate of her cousin in Nigeria. Small world indeed, she mused with your diarist.
 	
 	Wild encounters
 	
 	Acclaimed wildlife photographer and filmmaker Kalyan Varma, who is chasing the monsoon for an exciting project for BBC and Discovery channels, shared this charming anecdote with your diarist. This March, while shooting foxes in their habitat in Gujarat, he had set up a den-like tent with a small slit for the camera to record their activities. After being there from 6 am to 6 pm, the cubs got so comfortable that all he could see through the lens were their furry little noses. Varma, who has been filming this series for three years, also gushed about the footage of elephants enjoying the rains in Kerala and tigers in Madhya Pradesh waiting patiently for prey to make their way to the dry watering holes (the fallout of poor monsoons, Varma bemoaned).