The Goa government filed a brief summary of arguments before the Mahadayi Water Dispute Tribunal in Delhi over its dispute with Karnataka over the diversion of the river’s waters on Monday. The hearing on Goa’s arguments against Karnataka’s proposed dams on the river will be heard in the first week of February.
 
 Senior Counsel Atmaram Nadkarni, representing Goa before the tribunal, said a brief summary of arguments had been filed which runs into three volumes comprising 531 pages. “The summary of arguments have been prepared topic wise. The first volume contains the case and pleadings of the state of Goa along with excerpts of the evidence on hydrology placed by Goa through its witnesses.”
 
 “The second volume contains arguments and submissions on the environmental aspect and the evidence placed by Goa on marine wildlife, marine ecology and environmental flows. The third volume contains specific arguments on various legal issues such as non-compliance of Karnataka to various statutory provisions and the international law on river disputes and diversion of water,” Nadkarni explained.
 
 Nadkarni said Goa’s case was essentially to challenge the construction of 12 dams by Karnataka on the Mahadayi river and also oppose Karnataka’s proposal to divert Mahadayi waters to the Malaprabha reservoir. He said Goa opposed these moves as it would result in a complete aquatic, marine and terrestrial ecology disaster and also deprive Goa of water for drinking, irrigation and industrial needs.
 
 Patil visits Kanakumbi Dam
 
 Meanwhile, State Water Resources Minister MB Patil visited Kanakumbi Dam on Monday and said false and baseless allegations were being made by Goa government that Karnataka has resumed work on the Mahadayi project in violation of Supreme Court rules.
 
 “Goa Minister Vinod Palyekar, who visited Kanakumbi on Sunday, has alleged that we have started work on the Kalasa-Banduri Nala Project. But that is not true. He has seen the old work. We had built a wall and a small tunnel after the Union government allowed us to use seven TMC of water in 2007. We have not taken up any work after that project. Trying to divert Mahadayi water into Kalasa or Banduri nalas, we need dams and a pump house. Work on these units has not been initiated. Vinod Palyekar should apologise to people for using unparliamentary terms to describe the people of Karnataka,” Patil said.