BBMP plans to use drones for conducting much-awaited dog census, which is expected to begin in third week of April

The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is contemplating using drones to aid the upcoming dog census in the city. According to the officials, the technology is being actively considered as it will help cover a larger area in a short period and will give a better understanding of the stray population.

“Using drone technology to conduct dog surveys is one of the suggestions made by members of animal welfare groups in the city and BBMP is actively considering the option. We are looking at its feasibility but it is yet to be finalised. We will take a final call on that soon and work out the modalities,” said BBMP special commissioner (health) Dr KV Trilok Chandra.

The Palike is also considering designing a hybrid census process, keeping in mind the limitations of drone technology.

“We are looking at drone technology as it can cover a larger area and an aerial survey will also give us a better understanding of dog population demography. However, it has its challenges. For instance, we will not be able to capture data in places with dense tree canopies. We are currently looking at using this technology around the lakes, where there is a clear line of sight. Areas with dense canopy can be done on foot,” informed Dr Chandra.

The much-awaited dog census of the city is expected to start in the third week of April. Moreover, BBMP is looking at conducting the census over a short period and with the help of students from the Veterinary College, Hebbal.

City-based animal welfare activists say the drone technology clubbed with on-foot census will not only help in better implementation of BBMP’s ABC and ARV programme but will also provide more accurate data.

“Property surveys in the city are done using drone technology. Likewise, BBMP can invest in using drones while they do the dog census as it would help track a dog or a cluster of dogs to the exact geographic location making way for more accurate census data,” said Nandita Subba Rao, Citizens for Animal Birth Control.

Notably, the technology has been used in the past for various government-led projects in the country such as land reforms, wildlife conservation, anti-poaching, etc.

We are looking at drone technology as it can cover a larger area and an aerial survey will also give us a better under­standing of dog population demography. However, it has its challenge– KV Trilok Chandra, BBMP
According to the experts, BBMP contemplating using drones for stray dog management is a bold technology-led first-mover initiative and although the civic body has prior experience having done drone-based GIS mapping for collecting revenue and property tax, such a project would require the civic agency to work with an ecosystem of vendors, providers, consultants, legal experts, and policymakers to ensure there is a reasonable success.

“While BBMP has prior experience in drone-based GIS mapping for collecting revenue and property tax, they would need to create a task force within their organisation to manage this across departments,” said Srinivas Yelandur, a public policy advisor.