Survey finds robusta coffee plantations play host to high densities of sensitive avian populations
 
 A new study by Wildlife Conservation Society, Princeton University, and the University of Wisconsin-Madison published in the journal Scientific Reports answers the question-Which is more wildlife friendly: Arabica beans or Robusta beans?
 
 The researchers, led by WCS Associate Conservation Scientist Dr Krithi Karanth, surveyed for bird diversity in coffee agroforests in the Western Ghats region.
 
 Previous research has demonstrated that shade-grown coffee (typically Arabica) can harbour a substantial level of biodiversity. But coffee production is globally shifting toward Robusta, which uses a full-sun agricultural system. What the researchers found was surprising: Though Arabica avian assemblages were more species rich, Robusta offered substantial biodiversity benefits, and supported higher densities of sensitive avian populations such as frugivores.
 
 In addition, farmers use fewer pesticides in the more disease-resistant Robusta farmlands.
 
 The study has important implications as coffee production is an increasingly important driver of landscape transformation, and shifts between different coffee bean species are a major dimension of agroforestry trends. The authors say that coffee certification efforts should prioritise maintaining native canopy shade trees to ensure that coffee landscapes can continue providing biodiversity benefits.
 
 Karanth said, “Coffee farms already play a complementary role to protected areas in a country like India where less than four per cent of land is formally protected. Therefore, building partnerships with largely private individual and corporate land holders will provide much needed safe-passage and additional habitats for birds and other species.” Karanth has also co-founded a coffee company, Wild Kaapi, which sources wildlife friendly Indian coffee.
 
 Charlotte Chang, who analysed the data while a graduate student at Princeton University and is now a postdoctoral researcher said, “An encouraging result of the study is that coffee production in the Western Ghats, a global biodiversity hotspot, can be a win-win for birds and farmers.”
 
  Bird-watching
 
 The authors found 79 forest dependent species living in the coffee plantations they surveyed, including three IUCN Red-Listed species: Alexandrine parakeet, grey-headed bulbul and the Nilgiri wood pigeon