Wildlife volunteers are flooded with calls by confused residents on outskirts
 
 
 Incidents of leopards prowling in the outskirts of Bengaluru and other parts of the state have become common, and the people in the outskirts are particularly worried. While forest department officials have been trying their best to allay fears of people, officials and volunteers are bogged down by ‘fake’ leopard calls. Failing to distinguish between a leopard’s pugmark and that of a dog, panicky people have been frantically calling volunteers and field staff not making the job of rescue teams any easy.
 Panic calls of such confused people are turning out to be the big challenge for rescue teams of the forest department. In order to trend, volunteers and field staff team have embarked on a mission to educate people to tell between the pugmarks of a dog from that of a leopard. Equipped with pictures of pugmarks of dogs and leopards, and other significant features of the two mammals, volunteers have been visiting apartment complexes, structures on vast premises and villages from where such calls have come frequently in the recent past.
 	  	A source in the forest department confirmed to Bangalore Mirror that people have been getting confused over the ‘sighting’ of a dog for that of a leopard. “The fear is so much that even pugmarks of dogs have begun to scare people and many of them have been making frantic calls. In a month, on an average 10 to 15 such calls have been reported and when our team visits the spot it has turned out to be only a dog that has been there. Hence we have taken up this awareness drive among both urbanites and villagers,” explained the senior forest official.
 	  	The intensity of the confusion among people struck the volunteers and officials when they recently visited an apartment complex close to Bannerghatta.  	Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife conservation scientist with Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), who is spearheading a study on leopards across Karnataka has suggested some easy ways of identifying tell-tale marks of a leopard.
 	  	Giving details of the programme, Sanjay Gubbi told Mirror that claw marks are prominently visible in a dog’s pugmark while a leopard’s pugmark is devoid of them.