Diwali gift be like
Wildlife photographer Ashish Parmar could not have asked for a better Diwali gift. When he woke up on Diwali morning and checked his phone, he was surprised to see Tim Cook, CEO of Apple Inc. had sent out Diwali wishes using his photos and tagged him too. On Tuesday night, like so many photographers, Ashish had posted photos he had clicked of his mother’s hands holding a diya, and his wife Naina arranging diyas, and thought nothing of it. This is not the first time Ashish has been noticed by the phone maker. A couple of years ago when Apple was running its ‘shot on an iPhone’ campaign, Ashish’s photo of his wife appeared on Apple billboards across 85 cities and 36 countries. He became the first Indian resident to be chosen by Apple. Cook’s tweet got more than 7000 likes and more that 1,300 retweets. And Ashish’s phone has not stopped pinging. 

Prized story 
The £5,000 prize for this year’s Bridport Short Story Competition has been bagged by Sakshi Art Gallery’s director V Sanjay Kumar for his story, ‘The Fore Caddy’. The competition is organised every year by the Dorset-based Bridport Arts Centre. Kumar is the first Indian to win the top award in the long history of the Prize. Instituted in 1973, the creative writing competition is open to all nationalities and features four categories — poetry, short stories, flash fiction and novels. Over 12,000 writers from 79 countries competed this year. The Bridport Prize is known to have been the stepping stone for writers like Kate Atkinson and Tobias Hill. The Prize was judged this year by UK’s authors of South Asian origin — Monica Ali, Daljit Nagra and Kamila Shamsie. 

Match made in hit heaven
EVEN as Rohit Shetty gears up for his upcoming film’s release — ‘Simmba’, starring Ranveer Singh and Sara Ali Khan —he seems to be ready to announce his next venture. Sources tell us that Blockbuster Shetty’s next will be with Akshay Kumar, another big name behind mega-hits. This does seem to be a superhit combination. Shetty’s team is yet to make an announcement, 
and we hear that a leading lady is still not confirmed. Early days yes, but we are early birds at news-gathering too.

Tailpiece
THE ever-smiling former wife of a popular actor has long moved on from their break up. Even though the exes remain on good terms, the much talked about reconciliation between them has not materialised. We hear, the lady has now turned her attention to a younger actor-- he is better known for his achingly handsome looks and a certain high-profile romance rather than his acting abilities or hits. The duo has spent much time cosying up at two high-profile Diwali parties this year, and have set the chatterati talking.