Tweens wish...
 Jannat Zubair Rahmani, (10), Actor
 I wish to  enjoy shooting, studies and school. The artiste I will be shooting with according to the script of my new show Bandhan is an elephant, so I am looking forward to that. According to the script, I assume the brother to be a baby elephant. I love animals and elephants in particular. They’re so sweet, helpful and friendly. I’m not a big fan of cats and dogs. Oh, oh oh... I also wish to do a reality dance show this year.
 
 Natasha Jhaveri, (9), Student
 I wish to excel as an all rounder in studies and sports this year. I love to be involved in athletics and love studying all my subject. This I know I will achieve by working hard. 
 
 Aaryan Govinda Thakural, (10), Student
 I wish for a holiday to America in Vegas, Disney Land and New York. I wish to eventually pursure my higher studies there. I want to make it a fun and fruitful visit as I want to be a successful business man. This will be my first trip out of India. 
 
 Teens wish...
 Master Kishan, (16), Actor
 We have a youth ministry but no platform for the youth to discuss and work on cultural and educational programmes. Though the department focuses on sports and related activities, I wish they would also provide a platform for teens to discuss new courses in education and cultural exchange programmes. Only when teenagers are involved change can happen.
 
 Nishchay Bhargava, (18), Engineering student
 Iwant to be more responsible as a citizen, son and a student. As a citizen I don’t want to be part of the blame game and want to be part of the ‘change from within’ revolution that many from my age-group are experiencing. I want to be responsible for my routine work and not burden my parents, I have been playful all along. As a student, I want to be responsible for my time management skills — I will not panic in time for my exams. I wish to be more prepared to take life head-on.
 
 Shravni Ramkumar, (18), Student
 As a teenager, I want to prove myself and want to get the best of the education next year by getting into a good college. Apart from that, I wish my city gets new entertainment zones and we do not restrict to bowling alleys and multiplexes. But no matter where - if there are elections at any level - I will vote and will choose the right people.
 
 The 20s wish...
 Harish Kumar Sejekan, (29), Artist
 I want to help younger artists reach out to a larger audience. I wish to create awareness that art needs to be promoted by investing in newer and smaller artists and that's the only way to grow. I want to collaborate with big brands and corporates for art shows where young artists and their works will be promoted.
 
 Neema Thimmaiah, (23), Model I want to bring about awareness through my participation in protest. Whether it is online campaigns or protest marches in the city, I want to be there to show my total support.
 
 Karan Medappa, (26), Communications professional
 Every year, I wish I stay fit and so does everyone in my family. Only when you are fit can you contribute to the society. But I am also working on a project in congruence with law-makers and socially active citizens in Bangalore. Through this project we wish to bring about a change in political thought through campaigns.
 
 The 30s wish...
 Ricky Kej, (31), Music director
 Ihave two genuine wishes. First, I will be creating lot of non-film music in the coming year. There isn't an exclusive platform for such musicians and I want to work on this and have our own non-film music circle just like the rest of the world has. Then, I wish to continue with my work for stray dogs protection. I want to ensure more people adopt stray dogs and that we completely eliminate stray dogs from the city by adopting each one of them.
 
 Pawan Kumar, (30), Filmmaker
 This last month of the year has been really turbulent. But one thing I noticed is till we don't clean up the system ourselves, there can be no change and that's what I wish to do next year. I am seriously thinking of taking up leadership - not political neither any party. I have been researching and this will be community-based leadership, even if films take a backseat for now, I want to focus on bringing about this change.
 
 Shazia Khan, (35) Master Chef runner up 
 This year I want to focus on healthy cooking - that's really important. Then I will also focus on my project of starting a cooking project for rural women. I have been conducting workshops but this year it will be larger and better. Apart from that I want to be associated with any campaign that is associated with women's safety.  
 The 40s wish...
 Madhu Nataraj, Dancer
 My wish for 2012 is a tolerant, safe and peaceful world where the potency of love and creativity are acknowledged and celebrated. A space where each woman can live with dignity and what constitutes dignity for each of us.    Suchita DM, (40), Production and logistic manager
 (I wish to have a chef, maid, nanny and a couple of more zeroes in the bank account.) On a serious note, I wish to spend a whole load of quality time with  my family. 
 
 M.D. Ramaswami, (49), Entrepreneur
 I often visit wildlife sanctuaries in India but rarely get to see any wild cats. I hope that during the next year we start conserving our forests and wildlife better and personally, I wish I have many more tiger sightings.   The 50s wish...
 Ashish Khokar, (52), Historian and author
 Though I am clubbed with the fifty plus, let me clarify that I am literally 13 years old, having been born on Feb 29th. For this year, I wish I could drive a formula one car on Bangalore roads. Right now, going on fourth gear is also not possible with the roads being choked with traffic. And yes, I also wish that Mr Mallya will give me a formula one car.
 
 Tara Kini, (58), Educationist and singer
 Iwish we will have a garbage free city. But really, I wish that we find a sustainable solution for garbage and that every single Bagalorean will  cooperate.
   Kiran Permar, (52), Entrepreneur
 I have celebrated  the New Year  all over the world. So my wish is to celebrate the New Year in different parts of India, particularly Northern India. And yes, I wish for good health of my family, my children and the well being of people all over. 
 The 60 & above wish...
 Asha Vaswani, (62), Realtor
 I have a dream which is also my wish for this year. I have always wanted to go to Switzerland and see its snow capped mountains and beauty. Last year, everything was planned but it got shelved at the last minute. So, my wish is to go to Switzerland.
 
 D. Srinidhi, (74), Retiree and avid blogger 
 I wish that I could start every morning with a smile. I would like to see Indian top order batsmen firing, the Sensex zooming to 25 K and New Delhi being declared the safest city for women.
   B.N. Viswanath, (70), Consultant for Organic Farming
 Seeing what happened the end of last year, I wish that our country will be a rape free country. I  wish we will be able to leave the planet in a good shape for the future generations and there will be more greenery around us. I wish the people will help the planet be a friendly and safe place.