With the tiger census announced on Monday, it was believed that Karnataka would continue to remain top state of having the maximum number of big cats. However, when the results were announced, Karnataka lost to Madhya Pradesh. Though Karnataka recorded the second highest number of tigers at 524 and lost to Madhya Pradesh by only two tigers. Some scientific efforts and avoidance of road kills would have saved the day for Karnataka, believe experts. 

The tiger census of 2018-19 released on International Tiger Day on Monday put India on a pedestal with more than 70% of the world’s tiger population being in India, with 2967 tigers. 

Joseph Hoover, Wildlife Conservationist says, “Madhya Pradesh has a very scientific process of protection and the right officers appointed in place which has shown the result. Karnataka government needs to appoint more sincere officials in the forest department. Night traffic is currently banned in BTR, Nagarhole and a few other reserves but must also be regulated in other areas where tigers are sighted to avoid road kills. Speed breakers at short distances must be constructed to avoid speeding. Unfortunately poaching cases deprive tigers of their food. Gaurs and deer are hunted by the locals. There must be more awareness on this and the forest officials must have better coordination with locals. Cases of poisoning of tigers are also on the rise as locals try to protect their cattle. In cases of cattle attacks, the forest department must immediately compensate the locals without a delay. This is not being done currently. Dandeli as a good scope for tiger population and can hold more than 100 if maintained that way. If officials work more scientifically, Karnataka will have more than 750 tigers in the next census.”

The population of tigers has been computed state wise for now, the census of tiger population in each reserve will be out in August. Currently efforts are on for assessing the tiger population in each reserve by the authorities of respective national parks and reserves. T Balachandra, Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve says, “The assessment for reserves is on. For Bandipur, we are hoping to see a slight increase in the tiger population. The previous count was around 135 and we expect 140 tigers now. Several new cubs can also be seen in Bandipur but in the assessment tiger cubs below 1 year
of age are not considered.”

‘Intelligent measures reason for growth trend’

For the fourth cycle of national tiger status assessment, five landscapes were taken into account – the Shivalik-Gangetic landscape, the Western Ghats, Central Indian landscape and the Eastern Ghats, the North East hills and the Brahmaputra Plains Landscape and the Sundarbans. It was observed that the Central Indian landscape and the Eastern Ghats had the highest tiger population (1,033) with Madhya Pradesh being the state with the highest number of tigers in the country (526) followed by the Western Ghats with 981 tigers and Karnataka being the state with the second highest number of tigers (524). Officials believe that incidents of tiger deaths in 2018 could have been the reason that Karnataka lagged behind Madhya Pradesh by only two tigers.