On the eve of Valentine’s day, there was an unusual visitor to the Jnana Bharathi campus. The visitor created more panic among the young lovers of the college than even Sri Rama Sene chief Pramod Mutalik managed to do.

A call centre cabbie, while driving on National Law College road on Friday night at around 12.30 am, saw a leopard crossing the road. He wasted no time in calling the police control room and informing them about the animal at large. The news was immediately passed on to the Jnana Bharathi police station, the forest department and the BBMP forest cell. 
Officers from all the departments visited the place and searched for the leopard at night.

Meanwhile, the Vice Chancellor of Bangalore University and officials from the law college were alerted. As a precautionary measure, student roaming about in the area were also been warned about the leopard by the officials. Morning walkers in the area were sent back by the police.

Search

Along with the forest department and the BBMP forest cell officials, some wildlife volunteers were also involved in the search for the leopard. Pugmarks, which were believed to be of the same leopard that had attacked three people in Magadi road a few days back, were found.

“It is clear that the pugmarks are of a juvenile leopard. The animal may have had parted from its mother and was roaming to mark its territory, which is quite common in wild animals. A number of rabbits and peacocks found in the area must have attracted the leopard,” said Karthik, volunteer for the BBMP forest cell.

Other than the pugmarks, fresh animal fur has also been found in the area, indicating that the leopard has killed and eaten a smaller animal. “The leopard has had a heavy meal and it can survive up to three days without any food. So the animal will not come out from its hideout. It will move out only if it is very hungry,” said Karthik.

An iron cage had been brought from the Bannerghatta Biological Park and a bait has been laid to attract the leopard. “The police officials should also bring a sniffer dog which can smell out the animal and help in identifying its exact hideout,” said a volunteer. Jumbos visit Electronic City

Meanwhile, a few elephants strayed away from the Bannerghatta National Park and came close to Electronics City, off Hosur Road. The elephants raided some agricultural fields in Hulimangala and adjoining villages and destroyed standing crops. With news about their visit spreading, residents of Electronic City and the surrounding spent some tense moments on Saturday morning. However, forest department officials swung into action and took steps to chase the herd back into the forest.