The controversy over cow slaughter in India has now sent its ripples to the famous Sri Male Mahadeshwara Temple on the Karnataka-Tamil Nadu border. Devotees and residents living in the vicinity of the temple – located in Chamarajnagar district, 200 km from Bengaluru – have protested following rumours based on allegations that cows and calves auctioned by the temple are ending up in various slaughterhouses in Kerala.
 
 	The temple was thronged by the residents and devotees after news spread like wildfire that cows and calves were auctioned by the authorities. They staged a protest in front of the office of the Male Mahadeshwara Development Authority demanding that the auction be cancelled.
 	  	However, that the temple authorities auctioned the cows and calves is a fact. According to a temple official, around 50-60 cows are donated to the temple every month. Since there are no shelters for animals in the temple town, the cows and calves are usually auctioned. The revenue generated is used for the temple's development.
 	  	In the last seven months, the temple has earned around Rs 25 lakh through such auctions.
 	  	But the protestors have now demanded that the temple authorities set up shelters for the cows as these animals are the devotees’ gifts to the deity.
 	  	Now, here’s the dilemma facing the temple authorities: While they keep receiving the cows and calves every month, the temple authorities are prohibited from building shelters or goshalas as the temple falls under the jurisdiction of the Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. The provisions of the Forest Act and Wildlife Act prohibit building cow pens in the buffer zone of the sanctuary. Having such cow pens in the sanctuary’s buffer zone also raises fears of outbreak of diseases through livestock that may threaten the wildlife protected within the sanctuary.
 	  	Therefore, all construction and developmental activities are prohibited in the buffer zone around the national parks and sanctuaries under various provisions of the acts.
 	  	 		Chamarajnagar district in-charge minister and the chairman of Male Mahadeshwara Development Authority HS Mahadevaprasad said: “The temple area falls under the Male Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. We cannot afford to build goshalas, sheds or any other concrete structure to take care of the animals. The only option now is to ban the system of gifting animals to the temple.”
 		 	 		But the minister’s statement has not pacified the protestors. “Gifting cows is our way of thanksgiving to the deity. Why should the government decide on banning the practice? Instead they should find alternative solutions. They should ensure that these sacred cows are not sold to the butchers,” said N Mani, a devotee and a resident of Hanur in Chamarajnagar district.
 		 	 		Male Mahadeshwara temple is a Shaiva pilgrim centre and one of the most revered Shiva temple that draws thousands of devotees from both Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. It has been a practice here for the devotees to donate cows and calves as part of their vows — a practice that has been followed for several decades now.
 		 	 		“But news spread that the cows were being sent to slaughterhouses; and it hurt the religious sentiments of many,” an official said.
 		 	 		The official added: “Although the auctioning has been the usual practice, no one had raised any objections so far. But now that there is opposition to the practice, we will discuss in the board meeting and take a decision.”