The Red Sand Boa snake is a smuggler’s favourite as it is believed to bring good luck to those who worship it; the Peenya police and wildlife volunteers nabbed two in B’luru for trying to sell the snake for Rs 26 lakh

T he Peenya police, with the help of forest cell volunteers, on Thursday, arrested two men and seized a Red Sand Boa from them. The duo was trying to sell the snake for Rs 26 lakh.
 
The two have been identified as Mujahid Pasha (26), a resident of Chikkanayakanahalli in Tumakuru and Salman Khan (23), a resident of Padarayanapura near Gowripalya in Bengaluru.
 
A forest official posing as a customer confirmed that the snake was there with them in Jalahalli Cross. The two had told the officer that they had sourced the Red Sand Boa from small temples in the hills in Chikkanayakanahalli. The duo initially quoted the rate of the snake as Rs 30 lakh but after negotiating, the deal was fixed for Rs 26 lakh. The police have seized the snake along with a black bag containing clay and a two-wheeler from the accused. As the species are protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act 1972, they have been booked under appropriate sections and were interrogated.
 
They told the police that there was a demand of the Red Sand Boa in Hyderabad, Coimbatore, Tirupati and some towns in Kerala, where people even take the snake for rent for conducting pooja rituals to ‘become rich’. The snake is rented for an hour for lakhs of rupees, at least Rs 3 to 7 lakh per hour. One of the accused told the police that Red Sand Boa has Iridium, a rare chemical used for defence research purposes.
 
According to forest officials and wildlife conservationists, Red Sand Boa snakes are sold for lakhs of rupees to people who believe that the snake is auspicious for them. This trend has increased off late, especially during the pandemic.

There is also information that Red Sand Boa are captured, fed and the reptile is offered on rental basis for conducting pooja rituals at certain pockets of some villages in Bagepalli, Hiriyur, Kanakapura and Chitradurga.

Forest official sources say that gullible devotees believe that the snake has the power to bring riches to people from all walks of life including NRIs, senior and retired bureaucrats, senior politicians, and wealthy businessmen who travel all over the South Indian forest fringes in search of Red Sand Boa known by its code name ‘Double Engine’ as the snake has two heads (one fake) to escape from its predators.
 
Almost every household in villages around Bagepalli, Hiriyur, Kanakapura and Chitradurga have a huge clay pot filled with mixed soil and a Red Sand Boa. The snake is most of the time overfed or force-fed with edible and non-edible stuff to increase its weight and hiking its value,” said R Sharath Babu, wildlife advisor to Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP).

Villagers believe that one can hire these snakes for religious purposes, where after the ritual, they will become financially powerful.