There were two sisters, but people only rave about the younger one. Naturally, the older one sulked and merged into the background.
 	
 That’s what Hiremagalur would have told you if she could talk. The ‘older sister’ village, about three km from Chikamagalur or ‘younger sister’, is now part of the town known for coffee estates and treks.
 If pressed for time, three things are a must in Chikmaglur. Start with a trek in the morning, perhaps to the famed Baba Budan Giri. It was the peak where the 17th century Sufi Baba Budan noticed the extra frisky goats who had eaten coffee berries. At least, that’s how the legend goes but he is the one who is said to have introduced coffee plants to India. There is his shrine along the way to the hills. But if it is the tallest peak you want to conquer, opt for Mullayanagiri. At 1930 metres, it and offers breathtaking views. A stark white stone compound on the hillside leads up to an ancient Shiva Temple. A tiny hillock within the temple is said to be the highest point in Karnataka. Trekkers can take the routes (along with resplendent caves) that connect the hill ranges. It’s exciting when you hear that some of the pathways are used by wild elephants and bears.
 	  	Next, visit a coffee estate. Since they have been around for a bit, chances are you will also see some old houses within the estate, which have their own temples. Guides who take you around will show you the varieties of coffee plants and tell you how the town’s economy is intertwined with this brew. There is an old coffee planters club in proper Chikamagalur that was once a popular hangout for the British coffee planters of yore.
 Chikamagalur is also the place for relaxing drives and doing nothing in particular. Visit nearby wildlife sanctuaries, the Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary and Kudremukh National Park, or the many waterfalls. Go on a drive to the sister village and visit the Hoysala-styled Kondanda Rama Temple where Sita is standing to the right of Rama as they would have during their wedding procession. Hiremagalur, the place where Parshurama was said to live for a while, will be appeased.
 	
 	  	How to reach:  	Take the Bangalore-Mangalore highway and watch for the diversion for Chikamagalur. Drive time: approximately 4 hours.