Maasthi Gudi is a Gandhadagudi wannabe. It reminds you of films made by actor-producer MP Shankar under his Bharani Chitra banner.
 
 Enough has been invested in the film to make it look like a grand spectacle.
 
 But loss of focus in the narrative robs the film of being a compelling watch.
 
 Unnecessary romantic scenes and fights make the film go haywire in the second-half and a plot that was slowly building up crumbles.
 
 The film is watchable for the visual brilliance, the more-than-decent graphically designed animals and a few good scenes.
 
 The film’s plot, however, does not go easy on the audience. It revolves around the efforts of a forest guard (not really established) to save tigers from poachers.
 
 Villagers are convinced that forest ghosts are killing the poachers.
 
 But since the very first scene of the film shows Vijay as the saviour, there is no suspense at all for the audience. Whatever suspense that was thought up in the story has been undone in the screenplay. It only gets messier as the film progresses.
 
 What salvages the film, to some extent, are a few good scenes, a background score that does better than the visual narrative and the cinematography that captures the good locales.
 
 If only the editor had cut the unnecessary bits, the narrative would have had better focus.
 
 The plot is spooled and unravelled over and over again.
 
 Duniya Vijay’s supernatural suspense story and the romantic view of director Nagashekar do not gel.
 
 The film gained notoriety for the death of the two actors Uday and Anil during the shooting. Their characters in the film are caricatures and hastily done.
 
 The film had potential but falters in the uninspiring way it is narrated and ends up being an average venture.
 
 It deserves 2.5 stars. But the efforts of the few including the visual effects team and bringing back the almost forgotten genre of films on wildlife deserves an extra half.
 
 A sequel to Maasthi Gudi is announced at the end, but it seems unnecessary.