Of the 1,256 applications Shashi Kumar filed, 220 resulted in penalties 
 
 A feature that makes India’s Right to Information Act one of the most powerful transparency measures in the world is the penalty imposed on non-compliance. Officials who delay, fail or refuse to supply the information sought face a personal fine. But dodging the system appears to be a way of life. It has worked to AR Shashi Kumar’s advantage. 

 Shashi Kumar, or simply ARS Kumar to those who know him, has earned the nickname ‘RTI Man of Karnataka’. It is well earned. The engineer-turned-advocate has made the state government richer by about Rs 20 lakh through penalties and fines imposed on government officials who delayed, refused or gave him only partial information — the highest by an individual in the state. Of the Rs 2 crore that the state government earns through such penalties, Kumar contributes a hefty 10 per cent. 

 	Anti-corruption crusader 	Kumar sees himself as an anti-corruption crusader and has been an inspiration for fellow rights activists. His aim is to clean up the system by making full use of the RTI Act. His most recent case where a fine was levied came last week. Dr Rame Gowda, currently the PU board director, was fined Rs 10,000 for non-compliance in providing information on action taken against illegal mining in Belur. Gowda had earlier served at the home minister’s office. 

 	“My objective is to create awareness among ordinary people and officials on the importance of the RTI Act,” said Kumar. “I also hope to bring transparency and good governance through effective implementation of the RTI Act. My applications cover a wide range of issues and include human rights violations, wildlife, tourism, environment and the revenue department. My father, A Rudrappa, a freedom fighter, is my inspiration.” 

 	Kumar, from Arehalli in Hassan district, completed his BE in civil engineering from Siddaganga Institute of Technology, but later turned to law. He completed his LLB from Bangalore University. He has been a tenacious activist since 2006, but his first case where a penalty was levied came in 2007. Kumar had sought information on the maintenance of the Mysore Road flyover and the then BBMP chief engineer was fined Rs 10,000 for failing to reveal the information. 

 	Since then, Kumar has filed 1,256 RTI applications and has sought information from various departments including Raj Bhavan, Chief Electoral Office, Karnataka Lokayukta, High Court of Karnataka, City Civil Court, Bangalore Development Authority, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagar Palike, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Karnataka Industries and Agricultural Development Board, Bangalore Electricity Supply Company, Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation, Revenue Department and Karnataka State Pollution Control Board. 

 	IAS, IPS & IFS defaulters 	Of the 1,256 applications, about 220 applications have resulted in fines being imposed. Close to 225 officials from various ranks, including top IAS, IPS and IFS officers, have been ‘defaulters’. About 85 of these officials are from the BBMP alone. As far as Kumar’s applications go, the civic agency has also been penalised the most. Through Kumar’s applications, the civic agency has had to pay the state government Rs 7 lakh in fines. The police department (Rs 3 lakh) is second on the list while the BDA has ‘contributed’ Rs 1.5 lakh. In a few cases (about Rs 3 lakh worth), officials have moved the high court challenging the state information commission (SIC) decision. The fines are imposed by the SIC or the state CIC (chief information commissioner) and range from a minimum Rs 2,500 to a maximum Rs 25,000. 

 	“He is known for filing the maximum number of RTI applications against the BBMP and the police department,” said Veeresh Bellur, another RTI activist. “People rarely file applications against the police department, but ARS Kumar is very brave. He is also very thorough. He ensures that he gets even the minutest detail.” 

 	M R Pujar, state information commissioner, said, “I'm aware he (ARS Kumar) has been seeking information and has moved the information commission in several instances. In many cases, the PIOs (Public Information Officer) were penalised too."