Tourism is not allowed here so what is need for this restroom, ask conservationists

Wildlife activists and conservationists have yet again raised the issue of illegal construction and infrastructure development activities in the core areas of Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR). They allege that the officials of the reserve have constructed a restroom inside the Anshi National Park without approval from the authorities concerned.

“The structure is being constructed in the core area of the reserve and no permission has been sought from the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). A board has been put up by the Karnataka Forest Department, claiming it is a restroom. When tourism is not allowed inside the reserve, what is the requirement of a restroom?” asked a wildlife conservationist from the area.

Locals say the structure has come up over the last two weeks. They highlight that while no tourism activities are allowed in the core areas of a tiger Reserve, this development establishes that rules and guidelines are being violated.

As per Project Tiger Guideline 2012, no new tourism infrastructure development activities should be taken up in and around tiger reserves without due approvals. In case any such activity is desired, it has to be mentioned in the tiger conservation plan to be approved by NTCA.

“We have been raising the issue of illegal construction in the core area of the tiger reserve for a very long time and have also submitted photographic evidence along with complaints to the Principal Chief Conservator of Karnataka Forest Department. However, no action has been taken so far. Rules are openly being flouted by the officials,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

When BM reached out to NTCA officials, they said the authority had received complaints regarding the recent construction activity inside the tiger reserve.

“We have received a written complaint regarding a development activity inside KTR. However, NTCA per se cannot take any action unless the state government explains these activities through a report. We have written to them asking for a factual report on such activities in the past as well. We have sent a reminder too. However, we have not received any reply from them so far. Once we receive a report from them, we can issue an advisory on the next step,” said NS Murali, Inspector General of Forest (IGF), NTCA regional office.

  .
In the past, conservationists have alleged that various illegal construction activities have been taken up inside the reserve area without due approval. These include the construction of an orchidarium, jungle safaris, and canopy walks.

After receiving a series of complaints, NTCA, in May this year, wrote to the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka, appealing to him to take action against officials of the Kali Tiger Project and the NTCA southern zone for violating the Forest Conservation Act by allowing illegal construction activities.

The authority, in the letter, had made a serious request to take action against officials responsible for the canopy walk bridge tourism project in Dandeli Wildlife Reserve. The letter also sought a high-level probe about CSR funds and tiger foundation funds for the construction of an orchidarium in the core zone of Kali Tiger Reserve.

 We have been raising the issue of illegal construction in the core area of the tiger reserve for a long time and have also submitted photographic proof­–Wildlife conservationist
“NTCA is a statutory body and is supposed to take action against illegal activities. Just seeking factual reports will not prevent erring officials from taking these steps. NTCA has not conducted site inspections in response to these complaints,” said the conservationist.

When BM tried to call KTR officials, they remained unavailable to comment.