The department of mines and geology has finally woken up from its slumber. Thanks to a complaint lodged with the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB), it has passed an order halting all mining activity in and around Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) that threatened wildlife and disturbed the elephant corridor.
 	
 	  	The department has ordered a stay on operational permits until a report comes in from BNP authorities and the ACB completes its probe. Bangalore Mirror had written a series of articles on the issue, primarily how quarrying was resulting in encroachment of vast swathes of the park.
 	
 	  	“There has been a complaint lodged with the ACB and an inquiry is on into the charges of illegal mining within one kilometre of the BNP boundary. Further, it has been directed by the brass to get a report from the DCF of BNP on mining and boundaries issues, present it at a district task force meeting and decide on the status of mining activities. Till the time a report is obtained by the DCF and the ACB completes its investigation, operational permits are on hold,” deputy director, mines and geology, Ramanagar ordered. The department has directed one H S Sardar Ahmed in this regard.
 	
 	  	Dinesh K, in his complaint, also named three companies running stone quarries in the eco-sensitive zone threatening wildlife and the elephant corridor. Dinesh alleged that permissions had been given for quarrying, hiding the fact that survey number 205 (2, 3 and 4) at Varadappanahalli village was within a kilometre of the national park and hence not permitted.
 	
 	  	He alleged that three quarries mining granite were operating – one spread across 4.5 acres at a distance of 600 meters from the park, the second to an extent of three acres, at a distance of 650 meters from the park, and the third spread across 3.5 acres at a distance of 600 meters in the Kodihalli range in the same vicinity. He accused the Ramanagar deputy director of mines and geology department and environment secretary in his complaint, alleging that government officials were responsible for these illegal quarries.
 	
 	  	“The mines and geology order putting on hold all permits holds good for all mines or quarries in and around the park as the ACB probe would look into all aspects. So there is no question of allowing any quarrying around the park or in the reserve forest around,” a senior officer said.
 	
 	  	However, Dinesh called for stringent regulation as there were chances of the quarries continuing to operate despite the order.
 	
 	  	“These miners operate illegally at night and this not only threatens the elephant corridor and wildlife, but also causes a huge loss to the exchequer as no royalty is paid. Stringent action alone can stop this,” Dinesh told Bangalore Mirror.
 	
 	
 	
 	Related Story: Bannerghatta Notional Park
 	
 	
 	
 	Related Story: JUMBOS IN QUARRY STATE OF AFFAIRS