Forest department to limit visitors into the national park to 35 at a time
 
 
 	Over the years, trekking has caught the fancy of several youngsters and IT professionals. It is seen as a window to get away from the mundane life. Whether it is climbing a hill or a forest trail or even just camping in the wilderness, many youngsters are increasingly taking to getting away from the hustle and bustle of urban living.
 	
 	  	Kudremukh National Park is an important cluster for the avid trekker. Currently there is no regulation or cap on the number of people allowed to trek on a particular day. It is open for all. During weekends and summer holidays, visitor numbers reach as high as 150. Added to this is the number of vehicles involved to carry them to the start of the trek, number of other people that support them (drivers, tourist agents, guides, controlling staff from forest department), and resources (water, food). All of this adds to the disturbance in terms of pollution and the noise levels going high.
 	
 	  	In a bid to reduce the subsequent impact suffered by the local ecology, the forest department will soon limit the number of trekkers in the area on a given day. The department is in the process of framing relevant rules. “In general, the limit will be based on the number of beds available with Bhagavathi Nature Camp, which is about 35. Walk-in tourists will be accommodated only if the fixed numbers are not taken up. Bookings will then be completely shifted online. It will take a few months to finalise and implement this regulation systematically and smoothly. By the end of this monsoon, you can expect these rules to be in place,” said Maria Christu Raja D, IFS, deputy conservator of forests, Kudremukh Wildlife Division.
 	
 	  	At present there are two popular trails open for trekking at the Kudremukh National Park – Kurinjal Peak (8 km) and Kudremukh Peak (19 km). During the open season, trekkers come to the range office/ticket counter, pay entry fees, take guides and leave for the trek. The months between Jan-May, this is closed for protection from fire incidents and to keep the available manpower focused on fire protection. While the Kurinjal Peak is open all through the year. “Right now, orders for the closure of Kudremukh Peak trail are effective. Once we receive good showers, the trek route will be opened up for the public,” he said.
 	
 	  	Before Kudremukh could become a big centre of commercial tourism with the mushrooming of hotels and resorts, the forest department wants to regulate and limit the customer base here. “This will check excess tourism infrastructure. We have a duty to keep the sanctity of the park intact while also providing the best wilderness experience to trekkers. Commercial tourism strikes at the root of this experience,” said Raju.
 	
 	  	The primary purpose of a national park is for the protection of wildlife and their habitat and to keep the ecology of the region intact. KNP has a high chance of going the way other such parks and tiger reserves of India have gone. “If the number of visitors is not curtailed, we can’t check associated development. Even now a lot of homestays and resorts dot the landscape,” added Raju.
 	
 	
 	
 	 		How it works
 		
 		 	 		* Guidelines are being formulated, which will come into effect by the end of the 2016 monsoon.
 		
 		 	 		* Increased cost will be on time rather than money. Only those who stay overnight at Bagavathi Nature Camp will be allowed to trek. The cost per head will be Rs750-1,000 once a person reaches the park.
 		
 		 	 		* Commercial operators will have to plan ahead and book in advance since the seats will be limited. An online fully transparent system of registration will soon be in place. Prices will not be allowed to escalate. If the demand is high, other routes will be opened up.
 		
 		
 		
 		 			The world heritage site
 			
 			 		 			Kudremukh is a designated world heritage site. Surrounded on all sides by equally enchanting forests, coffee, cardamom and areca grove fields, the park truly offers endless pleasure to any trekker looking for nature at its best. It is a limitless mosaic of golden grasslands, studded in rims of dark green sholas, held aloft by verdant evergreen rainforests. It is also an important catchment area where three important rivers Tunga, Bhadra and Nethravathi originate.