A mother elephant was electrocuted by illegal fencing set up by farmers in Bannerghatta. Her calf was left suckling at her dead body – a scene that prompted Vallish V Kaushik to act. He was present at the post-mortem of the animal, the removal of tusks and then watched the culprits walk free. That was the exact moment of genesis of Watchers India Trust (WIT). WIT was set up in 2000 by  Kaushik and Venkatachala G. The duo was then joined by Srikanth SH. The group aims to bridge the gap  between tribals and the Forest Department who are constantly at loggerheads. “We hope to bring about a better system of habitat management for the wildlife that we have and be able to resolve man-animal conflicts in a less violent way,” says Kaushik. WIT also helps curbing illegal wildlife trading and hunting in non-seasons.    Blaze of gory! One of the main issues the forests of Karnataka face is that of fire lines. Fires are set up by poachers as well as timber smugglers more as a vindictive message to forest officials. This results in the destruction of flora and forces animals to venture out of their habitat in search of food. “Even the tribals tend to start fires in the forest in order to keep a clear line of vision for approaching elephants to ensure they have time to ward them away,” explains Kaushik. “What they don’t realize is that they are destroying an elephant’s source of food, forcing them to venture out when they shouldn’t.” WIT spend time with the tribals, in their own environs, explaining to them the dangers of their acts. They have been able to bring together, tribals, farmers and officials of the forest department and have them discuss their problems and find amicable solutions. 
   But, gaining the trust of the tribals was not easy. For the first three weeks when members of WIT were cataloguing in the forest, the tribals feared them. “They thought we were bandit Veerapan’s aides,” recalls Kaushik. WIT core areas of concentration are the BRT forest range, Nagarahole forest range, Bandipur forest range.     In poachers’ guise Kaushik and his team embark on risky ways to educate poachers and illegal buyers too.  They disguise themselves as poachers or snake charmers and take fake products to buyers. Once there, they explain to them the dangers of their indulgence. While the team has managed to convert many, who are now members of WIT, there are times, things have not gone too well. Once they were arrested by the police who mistook them for poachers. “Once we showed them proof-of-submission of documents to carry out the campaign the police were kind enough to drop us off where we had been picked up.”   Many miles to go WIT plans to work on encouraging the growth of bamboo, which is the primary requirement for elephants and helping elephants stay within their natural habitat. They also plan to create a system of social forestry in every village with specific areas being allotted for grazing and also educating villagers and tribals on the ways in which animal invasions can be handled and creating an awareness on endangered animals. 
 
 If you like to volunteer, call 080-2530 0677.
 
 
 ichange
 Names:  Vallish V Kaushik (33), dedicated to WIT Venkatachala G (35), TV cameramanSrikanth SH (40), runs a film production house   Mission: Habitat management for wildlife protection and conservation; curbing illegal wildlife trade; bridging the gap between tribals and forest officials.