By: Dushyant
 
 Gandhi has always been a convenient punching bag or a poster boy, depending on the way the political winds are blowing
 
 Ifor one, will not stay silent as Amit Shah is unfairly attacked left, left and centre. Amit Shah reportedly called MK Gandhi a ‘chatur-baniya’ (clever baniya). So far Shah has not felt the need to clarify what he meant or if he was misquoted but there is no need to do that.
 
 To see Shah’s utterances in their true perspective, one needs to be aware of one eternal truth - people in the BJP don’t mean the things they say. There is plenty of evidence which proves this. Take for instance, the promise that everyone will receive Rs 15 lakh once BJP comes to power or that demonetization will end all evils in the country and many more.
 
 People just don’t get this, which is why poor Nitin Gadkari recently lamented that the ache din slogan had become a ‘millstone’ around the BJP’s neck. I do suspect that ‘ache din aane waale hain’ is something the BJP will resolutely stick to for as long as it is in power. Even after ten years they will say “aane waale hain” (they are about to come) since the slogan never mentioned any date or period of time.
 
 On a serious note, diminishing Gandhi has been one of the pet projects of the right wing. Gandhi was the poster boy of religious harmony and rightly so. He believed India equally belongs to people from all religions. He had courage to walk into riot-infected areas and implore people to stop. Many a times, they did stop. All this does not go well with organisations which have ‘establishment of Hindu Rashtra’ as their final objective. Organisations which generously reward politicians who preside over riots.
 
 The idea of Gandhi continues to stand firmly in their path. Which is not to say they have not had any success.
 
 Many people believe Gandhi is responsible for independence being ‘delayed’. This doesn’t have any factual basis but we truly live in a post-fact age. Facts don’t matter anymore. Channeling economic/social resentment and directing it towards a man or a symbol is enough.
 
 Many people saw Shah’s statement as one reducing Gandhi to a caste and took offence. In an editorial titled - Does Gandhi have a caste? Ramchandra Guha wrote “Gandhi had the ability to be of all castes and no caste at all”.
 
 I respectfully disagree with Guha. That is, I disagree with the very idea that anyone can become ‘casteless’ so long as the caste system exists. The last time I heard an upper caste person being called ‘casteless’ was when this was said about none other than Ajay Mohan Bisht, popularly known as Yogi Adityanath, who besides being accused of running a Hindu militia and stirring up communal hatred, is a priest in a temple — an institution from which Dalits continue to be excluded.
 
 Like everyone else, Gandhi was born in a certain caste, because of which he did not suffer the oppression that Dalits suffered and continue to suffer. It is true that only people who belong to upper castes can be truly ‘free’ of caste. Freedom here means that the oppression inherent in the caste system does not affect them personally.
 No amount of academic knowledge or social awareness can ‘free’ people of caste. People from upper castes cannot understand much less internalize the cruelty that people of lower castes suffer. Yes, they can choose to write, speak, act, against it, but they can never think-away the privilege they always enjoyed and continue to enjoy.
 People from lower castes on the other hand, are never allowed to forget their caste. The demand that they ‘rise above’ caste is simply the demand that they accept the oppression that is and will be dealt to them as long as they live. It is equivalent to an elephant sitting on top of a man complaining that the man refuses to ‘rise above’ wildlife.
 
 No one has led a greater battle against caste, than Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar. Yet there can be nothing crueler than to ask ‘did Ambedkar have a caste?’ Yes, he did and yes, so did Gandhi. I don’t understand why liberals argue that we must ‘rid ourselves of Gandhi’.
 
 It is inevitable that all societies will have heroes. It is crucial that we keep re-examining our heroes, even when they are alive. Sushant Singh, an editor with a national daily, recently tweeted “All heroes are flawed. Corollary: those who get 70 per cent things right are once in a generation super heroes.” Gandhi, Nehru, Patel, Sarojini Naidu and Ambedkar certainly pass this 70 per cent test. All of them suffered from flaws. All of them would want nothing less than being continuously questioned and re-examined.
 
 Ambedkar waged a far greater battle against caste than Gandhi did. Gandhi did much more for religious harmony and the struggle for independence than Ambedkar did. Both made mistakes. Both were extraordinary. Both human. We don’t, however need to slot them in categories of heroes or villains. We don’t need to bully those who interpret history differently. That is best left to those who believe that the only kind of discourse is one which has binaries. We can do better than that.