With more people moving into urban areas, there has been an increase in the number of buildings and skyscrapers. While these buildings serve as a symbol of modernisation and progress, they also pose a significant threat to birds who often crash into the glass, suffering injuries and even dying in extreme cases.
 
To mitigate such issues, the People for Animal (PfA) wildlife rescue and rehabilitation team have forward to create awareness of helping birds avoid flying into windows by putting up tapes on the glass windows.
 
The large glass windows of the buildings reflect the sky and trees, confusing birds and causing them to fly directly into the windows. Additionally, the lights inside buildings attract birds, leading them to fly into the windows at high speeds. Many birds suffer from head trauma, internal injuries, and broken bones. Some are killed instantly, while others die slowly and painfully from their injuries. The mortality rate of these collisions is alarmingly high, with millions of birds dying each year.
 
Chief Veterinarian of PfA, Colonel Dr Nawaz Shariff said, “Over the course of one year, PfA received 55 cases of bird-window collision, with birds suffering from a range of head injuries, including concussions, brain hemorrhages, and other traumatic brain injuries. These injuries can have severe consequences for birds, impairing their vision, balance, and ability to fly or feed. Of the 55 birds treated, 43 were released back into a suitable habitat, where they could resume their normal activities and contribute to the ecosystem. The statistics from PfA highlight the seriousness of the issue and we have come out with simple and easy solution of putting tapes on windows which is simple yet effective way to reduce risk of bird window collision.”
 
By adding an adhesive tape or any other coloured tape to the window glasses can create a visible barrier that the birds can see and avoid. At the PfA, tapes are put across glass windows and while visitors come to visit the centre, they are educated about it and are asked to do it at their houses as well.
 
Some rare bird species that were treated by the PfA team that suffered head collisions include India pitta, red-whiskered bulbul, Indian golden oriole, blue-faced malkoha, black-headed ibis, scaly-breasted munia, orange-headed thrush, and rufous treepie. In addition to common bird species such as house crows, rose-ringed parakeets, barn owls, Asian koels, and many others also suffered injuries due to window collisions.

Other preventive measures

Use window decals: You can purchase decals that have designs that are visible to birds but will not obstruct your view.
 
Install screens: Screens on the outside of the windows can help prevent birds from flying into them.
 
Hang strings or strips: Hanging strings or strips of material in front of windows can help deter birds from flying into them.