Snake that was being smuggled escapes, spreads scare on Lalbagh Express

An 8-foot-long python left passengers in Lalbagh Express (arriving from Chennai) aghast by making a surprise appearance in the train on Sunday night. Passenger noticed this snake, which happens to belong to a rare species of python, crawling over the coaches and under the berths. 
 
There was a lot of running around after this, as panic-struck travellers tried to get away from the snake and some tried to inform the officials.

Wildlife activists allege that the snake was smuggled from Chennai to Bengaluru. Sharath Babu, a wildlife activist, said, “These days there is scheduled smuggling and any one species are targeted. In this case too, they might have taken a lot of snakes in a bag and this one managed to escape.”

“It was crawling all over the coaches and left the passengers panicked. A lot of them tried to jump out and a lot of them started running to other coaches. This was mostly crawling under the berths, so one could not place where it was exactly,” he added.

Usually other snakes are smuggled like this, but this is the first time we are seeing a python. People got scared to see this 8-foot-python that weighs around 10 kg­–Sharath Babu, animal activist 
When the train was almost reaching the KSR Bengaluru city station at Platform number 6, officials were alerted. Officials called up the rescuers who then rescued the snake. Babu said this snake was about 4-5 years old. “Usually other snakes are smuggled like this and this is the first time we are seeing a python like this. When people saw this 8-foot-python that weighs around 10 kg, they were alarmed.”

The activists also said that these kinds of activities gets unnoticed because it is being smuggled in bags which are usually used by passengers. 

Another activist said that these activities take place usually in the trains that reach the stations at night. “The trains which come in the mornings are avoided by smugglers because their bags can be frisked any time when they get down from the train,” said an wildlife activist.