After an adult female elephant was run over and killed by a speeding truck on National Highway 766 inside Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Tuesday night, experts have raised the demand to revise vehicular traffic ban timing in forest reserves.
 
Since the Supreme Court upheld the night traffic ban in 2019, the movement of traffic through the tiger reserve has been banned from 9 pm to 6 am. “The incident shows that the ban is not good enough. In 2009-10, a juvenile elephant had come under a truck in the same area. The government should revise the timings, especially during winter,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher.
 
Experts say the way the truck hit the animal shows that the vehicle was speeding and the driver could not see the elephant. “As per the SC ruling, there is a night traffic ban between 9 pm and 6 am and no vehicles are allowed to ply on roads inside forest reserves except emergency vehicles. The way the truck hit the animal shows that the driver could not see the elephant.

 The issue should be taken up by the government,” said Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Wildlife Boar.

According to Belagere, there should be a 12-hour ban on vehicular traffic in reserve forests. “We are losing tigers, leopards, bonnet macaques and many other wildlife in road accidents inside the reserve forests. If the current ban from 9 pm to 6 am is making people drive fast, we need to think about increasing the time duration. The incident in Bandipur happened due to the fog which is very dense during winter months. If the time duration is not increased, we should think about letting the local authorities take a call based on the weather,” added Belagere.
 
Controlling vehicular speed by instating scientifically designed speed breakers can also be fruitful, say the experts. “The frequency of speed breakers and height of humps can force heavy vehicles to decelerate. The humps inside the reserve forest should ensure that heavy vehicles are driving under a certain speed limit,” said a city-based conservationist.