121 cases filed this year with zero convictions; experts blame incompetence, lack of manpower 

Over the last five years, Karnataka Forest Department has logged a few hundred cases under various forest offences, albeit with a zero conviction rate. While as many as 661 forest offence cases were between 2018 and 2022, the number of convictions has remained nil.

As per the data of the legal cell of the department, while the number of cases filed under the forest offence has been on the rise, the conviction rate is a cause of concern. The department registered 88 cases under forest offence in 2018, 157 cases in 2019, 90 cases in 2020, and 205 cases in 2021 and has already filed 121 cases this year.

Experts say the conviction is possible only if the offences are proven. Many forest officials are not sure about how to file a case and go about prosecution. This results in poor and shoddy paperwork, leading to zero conviction.

“The officials are not well versed with the process of law enforcement. They do not know the procedure and how to go about the paperwork in case of forest or wildlife offence. They are not even trained in arresting people. Theoretically, many senior officials might know the rules and acts under various laws, however, these officials are mostly sitting in offices. The laws are enforced on-ground, mostly by forest guards,” said Sharat Babu, a wildlife activist.

While the Indian Forest Act of 1972 underwent some amendments a few years ago to make it easier for policemen to prevent crimes against forests and ensure convictions, experts say, even police officials are unaware of the nitty gritty.

According to Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development, although police officials are brought in to solve cases related to forest or wildlife offences, even they are ignorant.

“We have had police officials reaching out to us to get an antler certified as a tusk. They cannot identify animal or plant species. We have had cases of officials bringing in flying squirrels as palm squirrels. While flying squirrel is a Schedule I animal, palm squirrel is a schedule V animal. How can one expect such officials to book forest offence cases and ensure conviction?” questioned Belagere.

Conservationists opine that recognising endangered or critically endangered species is the first vital step in filing a case and ensuring conviction, which most on-ground workers do not know.

“There are around 34 different species of trees that are protected under the Karnataka Forest Act. In case of a tree felling offence, the department can slap multiple sections and get the punishment period incremented. However, they are mostly unaware of the rules. With a such low level of knowledge and information among the officers enforcing the law, the conviction rate is bound to be zero,” said a wildlife conservationist.

Underreported cases
Experts and conservationists point out that while on the one hand, the conviction rate is zero, on the other the number of cases filed under forest offences is far too low.
“661 cases in five years is a low number. The department should conduct formal training programs for its officials whereby they are given vital information such as the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) list and species of plants that are protected under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. They should be told about the most common sections that can be used to register forest offence cases and get the offenders convicted,” said wildlife activist Babu.


With a low level of knowledge among the officers enforcing the law, the conviction rate is bound to be zero–Wildlife conservationist
Lack of manpower and strategy behind the poor conviction
According to a forest department official, lack of training, coupled with the shortage of manpower and absence of a history sheeters list are some of the reasons that have led to zero conviction.

“While the forest department staff are professional and well-versed with the forest and wildlife acts, dealing with these cases on the ground requires more than the knowledge of the acts and rules. To add to that, the department is massively short of staff. Moreover, we do not follow any deterrent strategies. For instance, having a history sheeters list would surely come in handy,” said the official.

Officials say while the department conducts workshops and training sessions on tips and tricks to deal with forest and wildlife offences for its ground officials frequently, the sheer magnitude of the area that is expected to be manned is huge.

“While the police department has the job of detecting crime, filing cases, and securing convictions, the forest department is also responsible for and involved in various other developmental activities. For us, maintaining relationships with villagers and locals matters too. We are also falling short of technological aids. Having said that, we are working towards improving the conviction rate,” said a senior forest department official.