Adventure sports enthusiasts live for the adrenaline rush. The eight surfers who set out on a river-to-ocean kayak expedition in Dakshina Kannada on August 6 are no different.    They planned to start from Adyanadka, 50 km south-east of Mangalore, to Shiriya beach in Kerala, about 30 kilometers from Mangalore. They planned to cover a distance of 35 km from Shiriya River to the Arabian Sea.   Partha Varanshi, surfer, swimmer and director of Swimming Matters, Stoked India adventures, says, “This was probably the first ever river-to-ocean kayaking attempt in Dakshina Kannada district. We wanted to do this to popularise kayaking.”   Joining Partha were Gowri Varanashi, conservationist and wildlife photographer; Neeti Mahesh, conservationist on a tribord kayak; Paul Rosolie, an explorer, conservationist, author and founder director of Tamandua Expeditions on a packraft; Kishore Kumar, a professional surfer on a fibre kayak; Satyaraj Das, a surfer on fibre kayak; Shamanth Kumar, a surfer on a bodyboard; and Arjun Achar, a surfer on bodyboard.   The team was off the blocks at Adyanadka at 8.30 am. Following them on land in two SUVs was the team’s support crew.   Due to heavy rains, Shiriya River was flowing fast and carrying the team quickly. They reached Dharmatadka at 10.45 am. “We had travelled about 15 km of mostly calm and one or two fun rapids.”   As scheduled, the expedition team had a rendezvous with the support crew. “At this point, we had to come out of the river along with our kayaks to avoid a 10ft waterfall over the Shiriya dam.”The team took an hour’s breakand resumed the expedition at 11.45 am. Everyone on the team stuck to the plan except Paul. He could not resist the exhilarating sight of the red river dropping to the rocks. He ignored warnings from the team and headed into the fall on his raft.    Paul goes missing  Everyone on the team and the crew had a heart-stopping moment when they couldn’t sight Paul in the rushing water. His raft was stuck at the bottom side of the fall due to the curling waterfall effect. After a few seconds, they spotted him 40 feet away from the fall. He had travelled underwater and hit the rocks twice — on his head (thankfully he had a helmet on) and on the ribs (his life vest protected him).    Immediately, the rest joined Paul on the other side of the dam to continue their quest to Shiriya beach. Their destination was 13 km away.    Even as everyone was talking how cool it was to witness Paul’s ride through the fall, they heard Gowri yell that more rapids lay ahead.    Coming up 100 metres ahead was a 25 feet drop. “Paul went ahead to check as the rest slowed our kayaks,” says Varanashi.   Next, they saw Paul yelling and signalling to warn the team that the 30 feet drop was too dangerous to attempt. Immediately, everyone desperately tried to find a stopping place. Fortunately, most of them landed on a huge rock in the middle of the river.    Arjun loses control  But in his attempt to make it to safety, Arjun lost control of his kayak. The next moment his kayak was floating upside down and his paddle was drifting fast. Kishore and Satayaraj managed to save the kayak and paddle. More importantly Arjun managed to rescue himself.    Paul missing again  But a big surprise awaited them. Paul was missing again! They spotted him 100 meters down stream, clinging on to a tiny rock and a few feet away from the 25 feet water fall!    They did not see the river flowing. Instead, they saw a mist rising from water fall. The team feared they could have been hit by flash floods. At that moment they called off their expedition .    Partha said, “Our priority was to rescue Paul. Before we could call our support crew and share our location details through Google Maps and WhatsApp, Kishore and Satya decided to rescue Paul with a 20-metre rope.”   Villagers watched the drama from the river banks. Using the relay system, Satya and Kishore used the rope to reach Paul and brought him back to safety. Next, the three of them pulled the rest out of the rock to the shore.   Partha said, “Strangely, it was no shore. We had to climb about 50 metres of almost vertical forest land with our kayaks to emerge at the bottom of a rubber plantation near Dharmathadka. We were lost until a villager spotted us and guided to the nearest road — Dharmatadka School Road. Our support crew came to pick us up. It was 4.30 pm when we were on way back home.”   The eight adrenaline junkies had just been to hell and back. So, will they go kayaking again? Partha said, “Yes, we would rather be outdoors on our kayaks than stay at home and watch TV.”