2-hr operation to bring bear out from 40-foot deep well bordering forest area in Tumakuru

A sloth bear, which probably slipped while reaching out for honeycombs on the periphery of a 40-foot deep well in Thovinakere near Koratagere in Tumakuru, was rescued after a two-hour-long operation by a team from Wildlife SOS and the Forest Department.

On Wednesday morning, officials from Karnataka Forest Department made an emergency call to the Wildlife SOS team in Bannerghatta about a sloth bear that had fallen into a well. The well was located almost 700 mt from a neighbouring forest. On hearing the distressed cries of the animal, the land owner instantly reported the incident to the Forest Department.

A four-member rescue team led by Dr Nithin Gowda of Wildlife SOS along with forest department officials rushed to the location. After preliminary assessment, the sloth bear was tranquillised. A large safety net was lowered down the well and the animal was safely extricated. The sloth bear is aged about 15. Rescues like these can be exceptionally nerve-wracking as both the safety of the public and the animal needs to be kept in mind.
Dr. Gowda, Wildlife SOS Veterinarian, said, “We found the bear struggling at the bottom of the well. After following the necessary safety measures, our team was able to lift the bear from the well. A complete orthopaedic examination was carried out to assess any internal injuries the bear might have sustained owing to its fall. After mandatory observation, the sloth bear was released back into the wild.” People had gathered in large numbers and some wanted to touch the bear.

Dr. Arun. A Sha, Director-Wildlife Veterinary Operations, said, “There has been a significant increase in the number of such occurrences. The inhabited areas on the fringes of the forests usually have uncovered wells that pose a huge risk to the safety of wildlife and people. Wildlife SOS urges people to address the issue of open wells, to avoid any such accidents in the future.”

The Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre run by Wildlife SOS center currently holds 81 rescued Sloth Bears.