Rejects demand to revoke ban on night traffic through Bandipur l Surprisingly, Tamil Nadu backs the state’s stand
 
 Desperate to revoke the ban on night traffic through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve, Kerala suffered yet another setback on Tuesday with the Karnataka government refusing to change its current stand.
 
 Refusing to yield to any pressure from ‘powerful’ lobbies that have been trying hard to revoke the ban for the last few years, the Karnataka government made it clear that there was no change in its stand over closure of traffic which yielded better conservation results. Interestingly, Karnataka got support from Tamil Nadu which also opposed the Kerala’s move to allow vehicles through BTR.
 
 Kerala sought convoy system
 
 Hopeful of convincing Karnataka, a bureaucratic delegation, comprising top officials of transport and industries department from Kerala, held a high-level meeting with Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officials on Tuesday. Lending a patient hearing for over an hour, Karnataka officials subsequently made it clear that they would not go back on their stand and decided to have the status-quo. Though the Karnataka officials advised their Kerala counterparts to use alternative road that had been built by Karnataka after the closure of night traffic, the Kerala team did not show any interest.
 
 “It was second round of meeting as per the directions of the Supreme Court. Kerala has requested us to revoke the ban. They have been arguing that the ban caused severe economic loss to the state. In fact, they requested us to consider deploying a convoy system. However, we have told them that there is no change in our stand on the ban. Kerala is not ready to use the alternative route. But for us conservation of wildlife is the topmost priority. Tamil Nadu has also supported our stand. We will communicate the outcome of today’s meeting to the Supreme Court,” Punati Sridhar, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (HoFF), told media.
 
 KFD sources, who were privy to the meeting, told Bangalore Mirror that the Kerala team, besides demanding revoke of the ban, also wanted the road be widened, keeping in mind the rising traffic.“When there is stiff opposition to revoke the ban, they have been exerting pressure to widen the road as well. This clearly explains the commercial motive of Kerala lobby,” said a senior KFD official.
 
 Officials also decided to carry out a spot inspection on Wednesday in Bandipur about the impact of traffic on wildlife life.
 
 
  Kannada activist storms into meet
 
 Known to stand up for the cause of Kannada and Karnataka, former MLA and popular Kannada activist Vatal Nagaraj surprised officials by attending the review meeting. Barging into the meeting hall at Aranya Bhavan, Vatal cautioned Karnataka officials against heeding to powerful lobbying by Kerala. “Keralites have been intensely lobbying in Karnataka for the last few years. The government should not yield to their lobbying. Regardless of consequences, Karnataka should not revoke the ban on night traffic through Bandipur,” Vatal reportedly told state bureaucrats. The shouting of slogans amidst a peaceful meeting came as a shock to the Kerala delegation. Vatal also sat with protesting wildlife activists for some time in Malleshwaram showing his solidarity with the cause.