Seven cats found dead since Feb 14 in JP Nagar’s Elita Promenade Apartment; residents suspect they were poisoned

Animal loving residents of Elita Promenade Apartment in JP Nagar, 7th phase, are worried someone from their apartment has been poisoning and killing community cats lately.
 
Savitha Bhavsar, a resident, filed a complaint at the Puttenahalli Police Station as around seven cats in her community were found dead since February 14, due to mysterious circumstances. The first was found dead on Valentine’s Day. Residents thought it may have been a natural death, but subsequent discoveries of three dead cats in and around
 blocks B1 and B2 led to suspicion. Residents confirmed these deaths were unnatural.

“Around 16 cats reside here. We have 17 blocks, with 1,573 houses,” Bhavsar said. She recalled several complaints on Whatsapp groups in their community where residents complained about cats littering the premises, including the parking area.
 
Some residents had objected to others feeding cats and a few were scared of animals, including pets, in general.

Initially, animal loving residents suspected parvovirus or other viral outbreaks and decided to take a cat to a veterinarian as she was still breathing but unable to walk. The veterinarian told them the tests came negative, but the cat’s lungs and heart were filled with water, which looked like an infection from the stomach.
 
“The cat could have consumed poison...” Bhavsar said.
 
Even though residents knew the cats were being poisoned, they could not find what kind of poison was causing the cat deaths.


  Turahalli forest is four kilometres away from the apartment... wildlife scavenge on dead poisoned cats… they could get poisoned–Forest dept official
Bhavsar approached the estate manager and asked him to remove all rat poison cakes they had placed at the parking lots to get rid of rats entering cars. The estate manager told her they had not placed rat poison cakes for the last two weeks. Therefore, a group of residents approached the Puttenahalli police and filed a complaint, based on which an FIR was registered booking unknown people under IPC section 428 - committing mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any animals.

“Turahalli forest is just four kilometres away from the apartment and protected; scheduled wildlife such as owls, bats, kites, baldhead eagles and snakes also scavenge on dead poisoned cats… they could get poisoned,” an official of the forest department said and claimed to have taken a note of the issue and advised residents they should bury dead carcasses soon after post mortems are over.