Not yet summer, but Between Feb 5 and 11, state logs 35 major forest fires

According to the Forest Survey of India’s (FSI) latest reports, Karnataka is currently recording the highest number of large forest fire events across the country. Between February 5 and 11, the state has already logged 35 major forest fire incidents.

Other states following Karnataka are Andhra Pradesh with 21 such events, Madhya Pradesh with 14 large fire incidents, and Uttarakhand and Kerala with 12 such incidents each.

Karnataka has also recorded the highest number of fire alerts in the given period. Since February 5, the state has recorded as many as 626 fire alerts using spatial information through SNPP. In the given period, Andhra Pradesh had 298 fire alerts, followed by Madhya Pradesh recording 212 alerts, Maharashtra logged 195 fire alerts and Uttarakhand had 159 alerts through SNPP.

Experts say the high number of large fire incidents can be attributed to a combination of factors such as extreme weather conditions, and disgruntled villagers, along with better preparedness, monitoring, and accountability on the part of the department.

They opine since the state’s forests are prone to high forest fire incidents every year, the department has to be in a state of high alert with fire spotters posted in vulnerable areas.
 
Controlled burning of fire lines during winter is critical to fighting forest fires and has to be completed by mid-January, when there will be moisture in the vegetation. “Prevention of fires, vital for forest and wildlife conservation, is best achieved by reaching out to local communities and hiring sufficient numbers of people as fire watchers. Aside from clearing fire lines, the actual deployment of fire watchers with forest staff at strategic locations at watch towers, constituting response teams to put out fires is at the core of a preventive strategy. All civil works should be stopped during the fire season,” said a wildlife conservationist.
 
Conservationists and activists underline that long-term loss to wildlife and conservation efforts that stem from habitat degradation is immense. If the ground fire destroys vegetation, the forage for herbivores is destroyed, inedible weeds like lantana and eupatorium take over the forests and the population of prey animals dwindles, which impacts the carnivores.

“In addition, smaller mammals, ground-nesting birds, insects, slow-moving reptiles and other wildlife species are destroyed and valuable leaf litter accumulated on the forest floor that acts as natural manure for trees and plants are burnt, leading to fodder shortage in forests,” added the conservationist.

Prevention of fires is best achieved by reaching out to local communities and hiring sufficient numbers of fire watchers–Conservationist
According to Joseph Hoover, a former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust, since most of the forest fire incidents are deliberate, by disgruntled villagers, the department must beef up and improve its engagement activities at local levels.

 “A regular coordination with local panchayat and communities will go a long way. KFD should look at building better rapport with villagers and involve local youth in fire management. Some activities are being done by the department, they need to be increased,” said Hoover.