By Reya Mehrotra

Around 20 people have taken up the Save Birds Challenge and installed water bowls outside their homes

The challenging summer season has put Bengalureans to task as it is inspiring a number of challenges. First was the half bucket challenge, where Bengalureans used only half a bucket of water to have a bath. The latest one is the SaveBirdsChallenge, which is urging people to install water bowls outside their homes to quench the thirst of birds and animals on sunny afternoons. 

A number of people have taken up the challenge and posted pictures of their water bowls while some who have been doing so as a habit are urging others to take up the challenge. Pavan H, founder of Neravu Trust, that has started the challenge says, “This year it has been extremely hot. Though a number of people follow the practice of keeping water bowls, some are unaware. We thought this challenge could spread awareness through social media posts. All of our 11 members took up the challenge.” The group has also roped in Kannada stars like Shruthi Hariharan and Upendra and urged them to take up the challenge. Around 20 people have taken up the challenge till now.

Arun Menon, activist who has installed water bowls permanently in his yard, says, “We must not wait for such challenges to come up but must mandatorily install water bowls for birds and animals outside our homes especially in summers.”

Migratory birds gone?

Migratory birds that usually stay in city lakes till March-end, have moved away from Mahadevpura Lake already. This could have been due to the receding water level and rise in temperature, says wildlife photographer Mihir Patel. He says, “Migratory birds like Garganey, wood sandpiper, brahminy starling, rosy starling, chestnut tailed starling, white wagtail, grey wagtail and cinereous tit have already flown away from Mahadevpura Lake.” Birder Hemant Kumar too agrees that migratory birds move away for reasons like sudden increase in water levels, or sudden rise in temperature. But, he said that Hyderabad that is hotter than Bengaluru still has migratory birds in extreme temperatures.