Naga Panchami is held to honour the Serpent God. But instead of paying tribute to these fascinating reptiles, people torture them. Milk is not a part of their regular diet; they consume milk on this day only because they are starved and deprived of water. Milk consumption usually causes severe dehydration, allergic reactions or often dysentery, leading to death in most cases.

Preparations for the snake festival known as Naga Panchami by early August. Snakes are captured in boxes and bags that allow little air into them and taken to cities where they starved, have their teeth yanked out and many have their mouths sewn shut. That’s not all. The snakes’ venom ducts are often pierced with a hot needle, causing their glands to burst. Some snakes go blind because the toxic material used to apply ‘tikka’ to their hoods during pooja often trickles into their eyes.

Not a people creature

Snakes have long been revered by Hindus; serpents have been associated with many gods. The practice of snake charming originated with traditional healers who were approached for treatment for snake bites or with those who were called in to assist with removing snakes from homes. In Hindu mythology, it is believed that the patron saint of snakes Baba Gulabgir taught people to protect snakes and not to hurt them. But the practice of snake charming has evolved from revering snakes to brutally torturing and forcing them into tawdry spectacles on busy street corners and in festivals mainly designed to draw tourists. Most snakes shun human contact and would rather flee than fight. But the snakes used in these performances are forced to interact with noisy crowds and pushed to deal with excessive human contact.

Waiting to exhale

By the time a snake is ‘hypnotised’ out of its basket, the creature is confused, sluggish and dazed. Even though the Indian Wildlife Act of 1972 banned these cruel displays, many people continue to blatantly disregard the rules to make a profit out of these helpless creatures. Besides being forced to live a miserable life in cramped, dark boxes, the snakes are cruelly killed for their skins which are made into leather purses, belts and other items. Some snakes captured from the wild are sold to hospitals and colleges for dissection.

No music to their ears

A popular misconception is that snakes sway to music. Snakes are deaf and they actually spread their hood and sway in tandem to the movements of snake charmer to defend themselves - an action that terrifies and exhausts them. “Festivals don’t ask for torture, celebrations can do without forcing snakes to perform,” says renowned dancer Sandip Soparrkar. “Any performance should be by choice and not by force”, says actor and supermodel Jesse Randhawa. “Snakes may not cry out in suffering, but they suffer to entertain us. Hear their pain,” she says.

“Using snakes in roadside shows is cruel and disrespectful,” says PETA India Chief Functionary Anuradha Sawhney. 

“Festival-goers can celebrate and enjoy themselves without torturing snakes”. Are people listening?

About Naga Panchami

Naga Panchami falls on the fifth day of the Shravana month of the Hindu calendar, which is Aug 6 this year. It is one of the oldest festivals, which finds a mention in the puranas. Many women fast on this day. It is believed to be one of the most auspicious days of the entire year.

In South India, people sculpt images of snakes using cowdung, which are then placed on either side of the entrance of the house. This is done to welcome the snake god. In some other parts of southern India, figures of snakes are drawn with red sandalwood paste on wooden boards, or clay images of snakes coloured yellow or black are purchased. These are then worshipped and offered milk. Some go to worship real snakes.. Or else, a five-hooded snake is made by mixing “gandh” (a fragrant pigment), turmeric powder and kumkum, sandal paste and saffron and placed on a metal plate and worshipped.
Ten years ago, every Naga Panchami, the women of the house would set out with a plate full of sweets, fruits and milk to visit a nearby ‘Naga’ temple to offer the snake god milk and honey. Then, they would visit their brothers’ place for getting blessings and applying ‘tikka’ on their foreheads. Images of snakes were made out of cowdung and placed at the entrance of the house. Some people would draw the snakes on a wooden board with red sandalwood paste and some would just purchase clay images of snakes in bright yellow or black.

But all that seems to have changed with the years. The black and yellow clay images have been replaced by gold and silver metal images. “We do not make clay images anymore since there is no demand for them. People feel the metal ones are better than clay,” says Asoka, a shop-owner at Malleswaram. People now buy small snake images made out of silver or gold. They are delicate, but yet everyone prefers them to the clay images, which are not made anymore. People do not mind buying the small gold or silver idols of the snake god for they come for as cheap a Re 1 in few of the shops. The maximum that it can cost is Rs 51 for a much heavier ‘Panchaloha.’ With this, the shops also a sell a small set of ‘haldi’ and ‘kumkum’, which the brother gives to his sister as a gift along with his blessings. The set also includes a mirror and a comb, which completes the set, which the sister uses for adorning herself. This set costs Rs 10. Though it is not sold only for Naga Panchami but also for other occasions like Gowri Puja, the demand for this item is high during Naga Panchami, says Vishwa, who owns one such shop.