A BM report that shone the spotlight on unapproved development work being carried out in DATR was used to reprimand the KFD 
 
 Casting a blot on its conservation work in the five tiger reserves spread across the state, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has been rapped by the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) for causing damage to tiger habitats by taking up developmental work within Tiger Reserves without the permission of the Government of India.
 
 The NTCA, based on a report by Bangalore Mirror, has issued a notice to the KFD to stop illegal road and bridge work inside the Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) and submit an Action Taken report at the earliest.
 
 Bangalore Mirror earlier reported on the illegal development of a road between Bargadda and Goyar in its March 3 edition. The PWD had taken up road development work in February 2015 and work was on in full swing. Simultaneously, work on a new bridge across Sakali stream in Anshi Wildlife Range was also taken up at a cost of Rs 1.85 crore. The bridge connected DATR with the Karwar Territorial division.
 
 The report also revealed that these works were carried out in contravention of directions given to the KFD by top officials of the NTCA’s Southern Range in the wake of Supreme Court’s order on illegal widening of roads inside reserves. However, violating all norms and without prior approval by the Government of India, the executing agency, PWD, went ahead with the work by taking earthmovers into the protected area and digging up the habitat.
 
 Taking note of the BM report in the first week of March, the NTCA registered a case and sent its officials to DATR for a spot verification at the end of March.
 
 The officials visited the DATR and the disputed area. As per the inquiry report, a copy of it accessed by Bangalore Mirror from NTCA, even though the work on widening of roads and bridge had stopped when officials visited, there were signs that work had stopped only a few days prior to the inspection.
 
 Even though contractors tried to convince NTCA officials that the old bridge and roads were completely damaged and new ones were required, the NTCA officials directed the contractors and PWD engineers to submit a proposal before the National Board of Wildlife for approval, as the working area fell within a protected wildlife area.
 
 In their recommendation to the union government, P S Somashekar, Inspector General of forests, NTCA Regional Office, Bengaluru, said, “If the construction of a new bridge is unavoidable, then prior approval is to be taken for new construction. The agency should have taken all necessary approvals from the GoI before taking up work inside the wildlife area. It appears that presently there is not much traffic on the Gotagali-Goyar Road. The existing road passing through DATR is not a bituminous (BT) road but it is learnt that the entire road is to be upgraded into a BT Road. Converting this road into bituminous road is not required in the interest of habitat conservation in the Anshi national park [DATR].”
 
 The officials further claimed that works like these pose a threat to forests and wildlife. “In addition to delivery of services, roads and construction also bring a host of associated problems that affect natural ecosystems and rural tribal communities. Upgrading existing roads in the national park area will affect wildlife movement and act as ‘ecological traps’. Thus converting the portion of the road that is falling inside Anshi National park into a bituminous road is not appropriate in the interest of habitat conservation,” the official wrote in his report to the Government of India.
 
 The State government has been asked to adhere to the rules as laid down by the Supreme Court and union government and stop all illegal developmental activities within the protected areas and submit an Action Taken report in a month’s time.
 
 
 Related Story: Tigers be damned! Forest dept calls up bulldozers