Fun on stage
The Bengaluru School of Speech and Drama is presenting its 20th annual Summer Theatre Workshop for children. This workshop covers the basics of theatre and gives young actors a taste of that magic that the spotlight brings. Every child is encouraged to explore their voices, expressions, and imagination. They are also taught to deal with stage fright, build confidence, and channel their inner superstar. 

 WHERE: Plot No. 529, 16th A Cross, 3rd Main, Sector 6, HSR Layout 
 WHEN: 9am, 11am, and 1pm, April 2 onwards
 FEES: `6,800, bookmyshow.com 

Inspired by flowers
Fashion designer Kanika Jain is showcasing her new collection – Mystic Meadows – at this exhibition. The inspiration for the collection was sparked from the works of the Japanese florist and botanical sculptor, Artist Azuma Makoto. His noted works/projects are ‘Iced flowers’ where he created an installation with flowers in the freezing Notsuke region of Japan, ‘Back to earth’ and many more botanical sculptures. Capturing this fleeting beauty of flowers, delicate handwork techniques like block printing, 3D embroideries, stitch detailing and fabric manipulation floral motifs are encompassed in the collection. Light and airy textiles like linen cotton, chanderi, Kota linen, khadi, silk organza manufactured in India’s textile rich regions are used to give a relaxed, playful and romantic vibe to the silhouettes. 


 WHERE: Collage Shop India, Wood Street, Ashok Nagar 
 WHEN: 10am-7pm, on till April 30 
CALL: 2556 6819

 Sign up for this yoga class
Facilitated by Meghna Nambiar, a yoga practitioner and teacher, this workshop focuses on a dynamic vinyasa practice. Vinyasa is breath synchronised with movement and through the class we will flow from one asana to the another. The class will include strengthening and flexibility drills to be able to further enhance your practice. 

 WHERE: Shoonya - Centre For Art And Somatic Practices, 
 WHEN: 7pm-8.30pm, April 2-30 (every Tuesday and Friday)
 FEES: `2,800, eventshigh.com (you can also attend a single session for `400)

 When kids get creative 
Combining all forms of expression – pottery, theatre, arts, music and dance, Lahe Lahe invites kids between eight and 12 years of age to an exciting four-day long creative summer camp experience where they can make new friends and explore new hobbies. From pottery sessions to theatre workshops – there are loads to explore. 

 WHERE: 80 Feet Road, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 10am-1pm, April 2-5
 FEES: `2,500, eventshigh.com 

 The responsible photographer
One of Asia’s most sought after nature and wildlife festivals, the Nature inFocus Photography Awards, is calling all photo enthusiasts for entries. The idea behind this award is to acknowledge those who document unique natural history moments and critical conservation issues. 

 WHEN: Registration is open till May 31
 REGISTER: awards.natureinfocus.in