Fewer elephant deaths in state this year; experts attribute lower mortality to rain that ensured they didn’t have to venture far from forests for food and vigilance efforts

Overall, the elephant mortality rate in Karnataka has dropped considerably this year, according to a report by the Karnataka Forest Department. As per the official data, while 58 elephants were reported dead due to natural and various unnatural causes between January and August last year, only 22 deaths were marked by the department in the same time period this year.

Deaths owing to unnatural causes such as electrocution, gunshot, snaring and train accidents have gone down too. While 12 unnatural deaths were recorded in 2021, only four such incidents have been observed between January and August 2022.

According to the officials from the forest department, this improvement in elephant mortality can be attributed to better vigilance and above-average monsoon this year.

“We have been collaborating with DISCOMs regularly and requesting them to increase patrolling especially during the monsoon season for any electricity theft incidents. However, increased rainfall this year might be yet another reason behind this drop. The majority of the deaths happen when elephants move out of the forest area in search of food and water. Above average monsoon has ensured food and water availability inside the forest,” said Saswati Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Agreed Daniel Sukumar Das, director, Wildlife Conservation Foundation, while cautioning that the mortality data must be substantiated with the number of conflicts and encounter cases to get a clearer picture.

“There has been more than average rainfall this year, which might have made it easier for the elephants to get adequate food inside the forest. However, this data should be corroborated by the number of conflicts and encounter cases such as crop raids and other similar incidents. If the elephants are still venturing out in comparable numbers but still the mortality due to unnatural causes is low, it implies that the mitigation measures are in place and working,” said Das.

Experts also point at sizable ex-gratia amounts paid by the department which might have transpired into a lesser number of deadly conflicts. Notably, over the last five years, the department has paid Rs 9,815.85 lakh in compensation to those affected.

The data further shows that the majority of the deaths (both natural and unnatural) in the given time period in 2021 happened in Chamrajnagar circle. While eight elephants were found dead in the Cauvery wildlife area, ten mortalities were reported from Male Mahadeshwara Hills Wildlife Sanctuary and seven elephants were found dead in Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple Tiger Reserve. This forms 45% of the total deaths in 2021.
 
“MM Hills, the Cauvery wildlife area and Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple Tiger reserve are considered as high conflict zones. The region has a very poor barrier system due to landscape challenges and the department has not been able to secure the area so far. This circle consists of two wildlife sanctuaries and one tiger reserve. Moreover, MM Hills might soon get the status of a tiger reserve, which will bring elephant protection into the picture,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist at Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

The majority of the deaths happen when elephants move out of the forest area in search of food and water– Saswati Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Forest Department 
Experts say to bring down the human-elephant conflict cases and thus the elephant mortality further down, the department must beef up the patrolling process and install early warning systems across all the circles.
 
“Patrolling and early warning systems play important roles in human-elephant conflict situations. For instance, an early warning system based on phone SIM cards has been developed in the Hassan area. If a person gets to know there is an elephant in the estate, a mass SMS is sent to all the people available on that network. While it has been proved effective, no system can replace proactive and round-the-clock patrolling,” said Belagere.