From photo classes to carving soap – check out these workshops

Snap, chat, learn
Camp Monk and award winning wildlife photographer Phillip Ross bring you a photography workshop like no other. Spend a weekend at a beautiful campsite near Bengaluru while you get a masterclass from the man himself. The workshop includes an array of lessons - ranging from exposure, focussing, depth of field, low-light photography and fun photography-based games, you are sure to gain an understanding and mastery of photography. The specifics of the camp include: Comprehensive understanding of the art and science of photography; practice sessions in the outdoors; camera maintenance. The workshop will include not only theory-based learning, but a lot of practical learning too. 

 Where: Kanakapura, Basavanagudi 
WHEN: 9am, March 23-24 
 FEES: `9,000 (includes all fees except transportation and extra meals and beverages ordered), insider.in

Toying with sugar
Sign up for this beginner’s course that will take you through the process of using fondant and how to get that neat finish to your cakes. During this two-day workshop, you will learn how to ganache the cake to achieve those sharp edges, draping the cake with fondant and various other fondant decorations like frills, bows, ruffles, figurines and more. By the end of the workshop, you will get to take your creation home. 

 Where: Flourish, School Of Baking Cake Decor 123-125, Brigade Road, Ashok Nagar
 WHEN: 10.30am on March 19 and 3.30pm on March 20
 FEES: `6,600, eventshigh.com

Dance dance
Have you been looking for a great way to get fit? Learn dance from some of the most skilled instructors. You can dive in without any experience, or continue your dance journey from any level. This is a contemporary class module led by some of the best performers in the city, and will comprise four consistent months of training and thrice a week. The sessions are led by Diya Naidu, Parth Bhardwaj, Nihal Pasha and Pia Bunglowala over the course of four months. You could just sign up for a month as well. 

 Where: Shoonya, Lalbagh 
WHEN: 7.15pm onwards, Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays
 FEES: `3,900 per month, instamojo.com

Drawn right
If you want to master charcoal sketching, this 16-hour programme is ideal. Here, you will be introduced to the basics of using willow charcoal sticks as well as charcoal pencils. You will understand light and shadow, and learn one-, two-, and three-point perspective, and use your imagination to create a final sketch. You will also be taught to do a self-portrait using the techniques from the previous classes. Each student has to bring a mirror and they will sketch themselves. All material required during classes will be provided.

 Where: The Circular Square, 24, Doddakalansandra Gubbalala gate, next to Lakshmi Vilas bank 
WHEN: 10.30am-1pm, every Monday and Thursday
 FEES: `3,700, insider.in

A session of poetry
Join 22-year-old poet, Vibhanshu Doshi, who writes in English and Hindi, and on topics that connect with our everyday lives. Doshi is currently in love with spoken word because he believes that it is the spoken word that truly blends poetry and theatrics.

 WHERE: Urban Solace, Ulsoor
 WHEN: 8pm, March 19
 CALL: 9945022177

A busy mind
From acrylic painting for beginners, to making cake jars, or even learn the Lippan art form (mud and mirror), there are loads of workshops lined up for you to choose from at this workshop. If you want to dabble with landscape oil painting, there’s a session for beginners, or you could even learn how to do soap carving to calm your mind. 

 WHERE: Bloom&Grow, F 84, 17 D Main, Koramangala 6th Block 
 WHEN: Multiple timings, on till the end of March 
 CALL: 7259280949

Music from the soul
WhaThe band Nizami Bandhu has a 700-year-old rich legacy of Qawwali, contributing to the growth of this soulful genre of Sufism—taking it to greater heights and securing firm ground in the forum of world music. The band comes from the legendary and lustrous “Sikandra Gharana” which has produced some of the finest gems of Qawwali singers over the ages, best known for their versatility and serenity that have reflected in their songs. The responsibility of carrying the legacy forward is presently being shouldered by Ustad Chand Nizami, Shadab Faridi Nizami and Sohrab Faridi Nizami – who are also known as the Nizami Brothers. To them, the essence of sufiyana kalaam is oneness, while qawwali is about ruhaniyat (appeal to the soul). “We believe God resides in our hearts, neither in structures nor in rituals,” say the members. Now here’s something interesting about them. Their ancestors came to the Delhi dargah Hazrat Nizamuddin and asked the permission from the Sajjada Nasheen to sing qawwali in the courtyard of the Dargah Sharif. Before Chand Nizami, Shadab and Sohrab, the group was led by Mahmood Nizami and Ghulam Farid Nizami, father and elder brother of Chand. This evening of sufi music is being presented by the India Foundation for the Arts. 

 WHERE: Chowdiah Memorial Hall, Malleswaram
 WHEN: 7.30pm, March 22 
 DONOR PASSES: `1,000, `750, `500 and `300, on www.bookmyshow.com