Activists say due to depleting green cover, many snake species are going extinct
 
 With rapid cutting of trees and disappearance of green cover, tree snake species seem to have started taking shelter in dickeys of scooters.
 One such tree snake species, a cat snake also known as cat-eyed snake, was found and rescued in the city, in what activists termed a rare sighting of one of 32 land, tree and water snake species listed to be existing in the city. 
 	  	The last time a cat snake was rescued was four years ago in Rajajinagar. This one – a few months old – was rescued on Wednesday in Malleshwaram from the scooter parked near Halli Mane restaurant.
 26-year-old Rajesh Kumar M, who has been rescuing snakes for the last 5 years, said it was the first time he had rescued a cat snake.
 	  	“Due to severe habitat loss, many species of tree and water snakes are going locally extinct. Spotting them is a rare thing. We usually rescue land snakes like russell’s viper, cobra, rat and checkered keelback, but tree and water snakes are going extinct. This is the first time I’m rescuing a cat snake. This is a rare rescue and we suspect it must have come from the green patches in and around IISc campus that has rare species inside,” Rajesh told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	The cat snake is so called as it has large brown eyes with vertical pupils, similar to a cat’s. It grows up to a length of 125 cm and is thin unlike vipers or rat snakes. The reptile is active only during the night and is known for its camouflaging capacity. They are mildly venomous and their bite can be deadly to some small mammals, insects and birds, but not humans, volunteers say.
 	  	“These animals feed on small birds, rodents, lizards and frogs. They are not often seen in Bengaluru as they are always on trees and their activities comes to stand still during the day time when they rest,” Sharath 
 	  	R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	The snake was released back in a conducive habitat.
 	  	“The snake which was rescued was released in IISc campus which is one of its habitats on the same day,” Rajesh added.