London: Just when you thought it was safe to go back into the water... it turns out there’s no need to. A subaqua variation of Google Street View will soon provide the most awesome of sea views as part of a scientific survey of Australia’s Great Barrier Reef. With 360-degree panoramic underwater views, the Catlin Seaview Survey is a joint venture between Google, the University of Queensland and insurance firm the Catlin Group, who are sponsoring the project.
   The project hopes to gather data to improve understanding of the impact of climate change on the oceans and deep water corals by studying the reef and its wildlife from sea level to more than 300ft below the surface.
   University of Queensland Professor Ove Hoegh-Guldberg said, “The Catlin Seaview Survey comprises a series of studies which will reveal to the public one of the last frontiers on Earth – the oceans. For the first time in history, we have the technology available to broadcast the findings and expedition through Google. Millions of people will be able to experience the life, the science and the magic that exists under the surface of our oceans.”
   Underwater cameras equipped with extreme fish eye lenses shooting simultaneously will be instrumental in capturing the wide-ranging vista, along with a camera-mounted scooter pointing directly downwards, snapping the surface that the reef is growing from as it travels along.
   Image recognition software will be utilised alongside the underwater cameras to make a swift poll of fish, corals and other creatures at 20 sites along shallow reefs off Australia’s east coast.
   While deeper reefs will also be covered, they will be mapped in less detail, due to the lack of light.
   Tiger sharks, green turtles and manta rays are also set to be fitted with satellite-tracked tags to help monitor their temperature, depth, migration and breeding patterns.
   Tens of thousands of survey panoramas will be accessible to users on Google Earth and Google Maps, with a special YouTube channel also available for sub-sea live webstreams.
   The demo currently available includes views of the barnacle-caked bow and stern of the HMAS Protector, a large gunboat used in both World Wars.