By Iffath Fathima

The elephant corridor in Bengaluru near the Bannerghatta National Park, one of the core areas of jumbo movement, also helping in securing a future for elephants, has been neglected time and again — first, encroachments were identified in the elephant corridor and now it is noticed that a lot of trash is being discarded and left unattended near the Tataguni estate along Kanakapura Road which is a part of the elephant corridor, that could pose an existential threat to the wild animals.
 
Garbage has been dumped across the stretch; many passersby have noticed the trash thrown in the corners of the road; they even said the stretch has been in this dire state for over two years. The authorities have not done anything to get it cleared, according to local residents.

Waste materials such as plastic bags, discarded fruits from nearby fruit shops, meat, bottles, food packets and cloth material have been dumped on the stretch.
 
Conservationists pointed out that spots like these should be maintained well, in order to create a clean space and luscious green environment for the animals to move about in a healthy habitat. Moreover, dumping of garbage, especially discarded food materials, like fruit, would attract tuskers in search of food.
 
Recently, an incident of an elephant hit by a BMTC bus near Devika Rani Roerich Estate along Kanakapura road was reported. As the elephant was crossing the road, the driver of the bus couldn’t apply brakes as he failed to see the approaching animal; only when the jumbo got closer the driver realised, but it was too late.
 
“Over 10 km of Kanakapura stretch is strewn with garbage on either side of the road. Parts of it come under the elephant corridor. Although the garbage is not dumped in the forest area, it is frequently spotted on the road; many elephants tend to move here.


.
 
There have been several sightings of elephants on this stretch. The jumbos can even come in search of food. The dump yard may have broken glass or plastic which could pose a threat to the animals. Once they come near the road and try to cross to the other side, it poses danger as vehicles keep moving frequently on the stretch.

Even though boards are installed explaining it is an elephant corridor, not to overspeed and so forth, many still continue to. Despite the fact that there are two to three protected forest patches close by, there is a lot of urbanisation around the place,” Abdul Aleem, president of Changemakers of Kanakpura said.


When elephants eat plants, they disperse the seeds. They help create and sustain green spaces. It is important to protect and save our wildlife– Nishanth
Vinod Jacob, general manager of Namma Bengaluru Foundation pointed out that Kanakapura Road once had lush green landscapes and lakes, but is now littered with heaps of garbage. “Cities cannot use buffer zones of forests as garbage dumps. Local residents alleged that trash trucks regularly empty the waste on either side of the road. Today, the whole stretch looks like a trash dumping site. We often stress upon the need to protect this unique region which holds great ecological importance as this is also an elephant corridor; elephants have been using this stretch to move from Bannerghatta National Park to Savandurga Reserve Forest. We need to protect this place and take immediate action to stop littering in the wildlife area,” he noted.

The area of dumping is right outside BBMP’s Hemmigepura, which is ward no. 198. Some citizens alleged that as the last ward, to transport waste to the disposal centres would require time and travel. Hence the BBMP vehicles have been dumping the garbage on road sides, they said.

Elephants have been using this stretch to move from Bannerghatta National Park to Savandurga Reserve Forest. We need to protect this place.— Vinod Jacob, Namma Bengaluru Foundation 
Environmentalist Vijay Nishanth had brought the issue to the notice of the former BBMP special commissioner for Solid Waste Management Sarfaraz Khan. As Khan began to check upon the issue, he was transferred from the post.

“The place is an important elephant corridor and we should not disturb it. The habitat needs to be clean and clear for the jumbos. When elephants eat plants, they disperse the seeds. They help create and sustain green spaces. It is important to protect and save our wildlife,” said Nishanth.
 
However, Aleem pointed out that as the locality comes under the gram panchayat, the officials have left the garbage unattended.