Duo held with the antique trophy claim ownership, police say no documents with them
 
 	The city police thought it was just another illegal tiger skin they seized on Tuesday, until they saw that the trophy (protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act) bore the hallmark seal of legendary taxidermists Van Ingens, who are known for having supplied priceless antiques to Mysore Royals and other kings in decades past.
 	  	They are now investigating whether the trophy was stolen.
 	  	The K R Market police who seized the trophy on March 3 have come across a communique with Van Ingens during the seizure from accused.
 	  	The police in a release had claimed the value of the skin to be Rs 50 lakh.
 	  	With the Van Ingens trademark tiger and other antique taxidermy trophies being part of priceless assets of the erstwhile kingdom of Mysore and the royals, sources said, the seizure will have further ramifications.
 	  	The police on Tuesday had arrested two persons while they were reportedly trying to sell the tiger trophy. The arrested are 37-year-old Jagadeesh, a resident of RMV 2nd stage and 58-year-old Iftikar from Mysuru.
 	  	Jagadeesh, police said, ran a furniture business and was in possession of the skin; he was trying to sell it through Iftikar. “Based on a tip-off, we went as decoy and the duo was arrested with the tiger trophy,” Narayanaswamy V, police inspector, K R Market police, told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	 

 	The Van Ingens art
 	  	 However, sources maintained that communication pertaining to Van Ingens was found with the accused, which makes the case more complicated as the probe will focus on that part.
 	  	Police will be probing if the seized trophy was one from Van Ingen & Van Ingen; if it was illegally bought or whether it belonged to Mysore Royals; the channel and people through whom it reached the accused if it belonged to the royals, sources said.
 	  	Though the accused has claimed that it was bought at a trophies’ outlet on MG Road, no documents have been produced, officials said.  	Police said the accused have claimed that the trophy was their ancestral property and had been in their possession even before the Indian Wildlife Protection Act was enacted in 1972.
 	  	However, officials made it clear that the accused have not furnished any documentation, importantly a declaration made before the Chief Wildlife Warden, to support their claim.
 	  	“Hence, they were booked %under various sections of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act,” Narayanaswamy added.
 	
 	
 	
 	THE VAN INGENS  	
 	
 	 		»The taxidermy firm was started in 1912 by Eugene Van Ingen in Mysore and was continued by his sons.
 		 	 		»It was internationally known for the fine quality of its products and was especially well known for its tiger and leopard trophies.
 		 	 		»They served the highest in international nobility as well as the Maharajas of India, preserving their hunting trophies in the most lifelike poses and in the utmost beauty.
 		 	 		»Around 500 tigers were processed by firm every year from the 20s to the 60s.
 		
 		»Many valuable Van Ingen trophies are currently held by museums and in private collections