By Reya Mehrotra

More reserves and sanctuaries will be notified soon by the government

Karnataka now has four new sanctuaries added to its list of already existing sanctuaries.

On May 16th, the government notified Kappatagudda Wildlife Sanctuary, Kammasandra Wildlife sanctuary, Bukkaptana wildlife sanctuary and also the extension of Guddekote wildlife sanctuary to be taken up this year.

In the State Wildlife Board meeting held in January, several wildlife sanctuaries and reserves were approved and were awaiting notification by the government.

Punati Sridhar, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests says, “Many reserves and sanctuaries have been cleared in the last State Wildlife Board meeting and the notification is out for some. We are awaiting notification for the others as well.”

Wildlife conservationists say that these sanctuaries and reserves will help in securing some of the endangered species like bats and macaques. Ajay Desai, State Wildlife Board (SWB) adds, “These areas are of ecological importance and if brought under the forest department as reserves or sanctuaries, they will be empowered under the Wildlife Protection Act. Protected areas have several benefits which forest areas don’t possess. Compared to reserve forests, sanctuaries are better protected.”

Kammasandra Wildlife Sanctuary: Around 78.62 sq. kms of Kammasandra forest in Kolar district have been proposed for this sanctuary. Sanjay Gubbi, a member of SWB says, “Kammasandra needs to be converted into a sanctuary as it has a rich habitat and it connects to other forests in Andhra Pradesh.”

Kapppatagudda Wildlife Sanctuary: There have been sightings of leopards, Indian stripped hyenas, wolves, jackals, Indian fox, pangolins, porcupines and many other important animals in this sanctuary spread over 244.14 sq kms in Gadag district. These hills also have deposits of gold and diamonds and a sanctuary status will protect it from illegal miners.

Bukkapattana Chinkara Wildlife Sanctuary : Chinkaras have been sighted in this 136.11 sq km sanctuary in Tumakuru. Due to sand mining and stone quarrying activities here, Gubbi proposed this to be secured as a Chinkara reserve.

Extension of Guddekote Sloth Bear Sanctuary: This 120.02 sq km sanctuary located in Ballari district, will be the second wildlife sanctuary to be notified. It is home to sloth bears, the Indian leopard, wild boars, rusty spotted cats, civets and other animals.