A Jodhpur court has today convicted actor Salman Khan in the blackbuck poaching case, and acquitted other actors Saif Ali Khan, Neelam, Tabu and Sonali Bendre in the 1998 black buck poaching case.

The 52-year-old actor is sentenced to five years jail with a fine of Rs 10,000. If he was convicted for less than three years, Salman could get get bail today from the Jodhpur court itself, but as it’s beyond three years, now the actor will directly go to jail. He can now file an appeal and seek bail from the session’s court.

Salman was tried under Section 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act and the other actors have been charged under Section 51 read with Section 149 (unlawful assembly) of the Indian Penal Code. Maximum punishment under Section 51 is six years.

The actors faced trial for hunting down two black bucks in Bhagoda ki Dhani in Kankani village near Jodhpur on the intervening night of October 1 and 2, 1998. The actors were in the city for the shooting of the film Hum Saath Saath Hain.

Elaborate security arrangements have been made in and outside the court premises ahead of the verdict involving the actors announced today in Jodhpur . All the actors including Saif Ali Khan, Sonali Bendre with husband Goldie Behl, Tabu and Neelam were present in court during pronouncement of the verdict. Salman Khan's sister Alvira Khan and Arpita Khan also arrived in the city today morning.

Here's a timeline of the many run-ins Salman has had in different cases of alleged poaching of animals: 

September –October 1998: 
The Bishnoi community filed complaint against Hum Saath Saath Hain actors Salman Khan along with Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, and Sonali Bendre, for allegedly killing two blackbucks in the Kankani village of Rajasthan. Salman Khan was accused of killing two black bucks on October 2, 1998 in Kankani village in Jodhpur. 

In all, three cases related to poaching were filed against Salman Khan. He was also charged under the Arms Act for allegedly using weapons for which the licence had expired.

CASE 1:
February 2006: He is convicted under the Wildlife Act and given a one-year jail term, for killing two chinkaras at Bhavad village in September 1998. This is overturned after an appeal. 

CASE 2:
In April 2006, a Jodhpur Sessions court convicted Salman Khan in the blackbuck hunting case. He was sentenced to five years of jail. He spent a few days in jail in Jodhpur after which he was granted bail. Later, the Rajasthan High Court suspended the sentence given in April 2006. The actor was not allowed to leave the country without formal permission. In 2015, the Supreme Court set aside Rajasthan High Court's stay on the sentence. 

Read Also:
Black buck Poaching Case Live Updates

CASE 3:
Arms Act Case:
January 2017: Jodhpur court acquitted Salman in the Arms Act Case, where he was accused of possessing and using weapons with an expired licence during the hunt for the endangered chinkaras and blackbucks. The court said there wasn't enough evidence against the actor.

CASE 4:
June 2006: 
This was the third poaching case against actor Salman Khan. Charges were framed against him, along with other actors, namely, Saif Ali Khan, Neelam, Tabu and Sonali Bendre. The charges were framed against Salman Khan under Section 51 (hunting) of the Wildlife Protection Act and against actors Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, Sonali Bendre, Neelam and local resident Dushyant Singh under Section 52 (abetment) of the Act. 
 
March 2018:
Local Jodhpur court fixes the date for verdict

April 5, 2018: A Jodhpur Court convicts Salman Khan in 1998 blackbuck poaching case and acquitted Saif Ali Khan, Sonali Bendre, Tabu and Neelam. The court, while convicting Salman Khan said he is a 'habitual offender' and gave the benefit of doubt to the other stars since they had no previous convictions against their name.