Monday night saw a turf clash between two sub-species in the Rajiv Gandhi National Park at Nagarhole. No, it wasn't tigers versus tuskers, but a face-off between forest officials and police officers over the latter 'trespassing' into 'their' territory. 
 
   According to sources in the forest department, a team of 15 persons travelling in two vehicles was stopped at the Dammana Katte checkpost, near Sunkada Katte in the Antharasanthe range, between 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm on Monday. While one vehicle (KA 55 G 73) belonged to the state government, the other (KA 04 MJ 1320) was a private vehicle. The team, headed by K S N Chikkerur, ADGP (directorate of civil rights enforcement), claimed it was returning to Mysore after visiting a tribal temple in the forest. “They shouted at us for stopping them, even after we said the entry of private vehicles was not permitted following a High Court order,” a forest official who was at the checkpost said.   According to the forest guards present, Chikkerur said, “I know everybody here and you all must be new to the place. Now allow us to go and I will speak to your officials later.” But the forest staff closed the gates and asked them to wait till the arrival of senior forest officials, including PCCF (wildlife) Deepak Sarmah and Project Tiger director B J Hosmath.   “They were leaving after a safari inside the forest in private vehicles. We asked them to identify themselves, upon which they said they were cops and spoke threateningly. But we did not react and made them wait till the arrival of our seniors,” a forest staffer told Bangalore Mirror.   Sources in the directorate of civil rights enforcement told this paper that a joint legislative committee on SC-ST welfare was scheduled to visit the tribal areas in the forest, and ADGP Chikkerur and other officials had gone on an advance visit. Acknowledging the confusion surrounding the incident, Chikkerur said, “There is an old temple of the Kaadu-Kuruba tribe in the forest at Kaimara. There were reports that forest officials were not allowing the tribals to visit the temple. We wanted to check it out. As we were short of vehicles, we hired a private car from the tribal corporation to ferry the officials. They (the forest officials) were insisting that they should have been informed of our visit.” Chikkerur justified his team's entry into the forest, citing section 20 of the Wildlife Protection Act which says any government servant above the rank of sub-inspector (DCRE) can enter a forest area in the discharge of his duties.   On the forest staff's contention that the team was returning after a safari in the forest and was therefore stopped, Chikkerur said, “I have worked in the forest cell of the police department and have visited every corner of Nagarhole as part of my duties. I did not need to go on a safari, that too at night.”   The face-off between the two sides got worse with the arrival of Project Tiger director Hosmath and PCCF (wildlife) Deepak Sarmah, with the offi-cials wanting to know what kind of inquiry needed to be conducted late at night in the forest. “I told the PCCF and the Project Tiger director that I had come on official duty. But they insisted they should have been informed. I said I had no problem with that and would do so on a future visit,” Chikkerur said.   Fortunately, the dust-up ended without any blows being exchanged. But the forest department isn't quite happy over the incident and is thinking of writing to the state government over the 'trespass'.