By: Niranjan Kaggere & Gautam C
 	
 Threat emanates from Bear Rescue Centre on the premises, but officials say they can’t shift it out since the previous PCCF had unilaterally extended the lease agreement by 20 years
 	
 With natural habitats fast disappearing, the aim of good animal parks, argue scientists, is conservation. Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) would consider itself a good park, but its attempts at preserving wildlife could be wiped out. A scourge threatens about 1,500 species, but zoo authorities say the ball is in the state government’s court. 

 The threat emanates from a wave of tuberculosis (TB) that has hit bears at the park. There are 79 bears (39 males and 40 females). Of the 79 bears, 25 belong to the BBP and are used for the bear safari. About 20 to 25 of the bears have been infected with TB. As many as 20 bears died in 2012 and another 15 died in 2013 due to TB. 

 The infected bears are housed at the Bear Rescue Centre (BRC) in a small apportioned area of the bear safari (15 hectares) within BBP. The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) of India, while perusing the master plan BBP authorities had submitted for approval in a bid to expand its wings, stumbled on the problem. The CZA, realising the distinct possibility of the disease spreading to other inmates, directed BBP to shift the BRC from its premises. 

 	 		BBP officials, however, say their hands are tied. Only two days prior to his retirement in November last year, the previous Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF, Wildlife) had extended the lease of the BRC for another 20 years. BBP officials, worried that their expansion plans could be stuck in limbo, have now urged the state government to review the extension of the lease. 	

 	 		UNILATERAL DECISION 	

 	 		BBP top brass had submitted its master plan for expansion to the CZA on February 28 for approval. However, the CZA’s expert group on zoo design objected to the presence of the BRC inside the premises. It also found fault with the ‘unilateral decision’ to extend the lease granted to Delhi-based Wildlife SoS to run the BRC. It claimed neither CZA nor Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) was consulted before the lease was extended. 	

 	 		According to sources at ZAK, Wildlife SoS was invited in 2005 by the then Member Secretary of ZAK to run the BRC. The agreement signed on November 28, 2005, (for 10 years) was to expire only in November 2015. ZAK sources say that although there were two years still to go before the contract expired, G S Prabhu, PCCF (Wildlife), who was also the chairman of ZAK, signed an agreement extending the lease period by another 20 years. 	

 	 		‘Agreement illeal’ 	

 	 		Shocked ZAK officials, in a letter to the government, say they were never a party to the fresh agreement. 	

 	 		In the letter (a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror), ZAK claims the PCCF (Wildlife) does not have powers to sign such agreements. “The PCCF who is also the chairman of ZAK, has no scope to sign any documents pertaining to ZAK and only the Member Secretary is the authorised signatory in all matters,” the letter states. 	

 	 		“Further, the agreement signed before his retirement involves financial loss to ZAK as well as violation of the Wildlife and Forest Act. The Wildlife SoS stands to gain both financially and physically from this agreement. The government may please be requested to probe and prosecute the people behind creation and signing of this legally untenable agreement in such a hurried manner.” 	

 	 		SERIAL LAPSES 	

 	 		ZAK officials also claimed there were several lapses at the BRC and have expressed concern over TB spreading among bears and possibly to other animals in the park. 	

 	 		“The working of the Wildlife SoS organisation was reviewed in the 123rd Governing Council meeting held on January 8, 2013, revealing serious lapses in running the BRC,” the letter states. “Previously, during the 118th Governing Council meeting, the organisation had tried to push forward a proposal for a leopard safari or rescue centre at Bannerghatta itself. However, the same was deferred.” 	

 	 		Acknowledging the communication between ZAK and state government, R S Suresh, ZAK Member Secretary, said, “It is true that the lease was extended by another 20 years and CZA has also objected to the continuation of BRC within BBP. In fact as per our master plan, it has to be shifted out of BBP premises. We have requested the government to reconsider its decision to extend the lease period to Wildlife SoS.”
 		
 		‘I HAVE THE AUTHORITY’
 		
 		 			I signed the MoU as the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife). I have all the rights to sign all the documents related to the department as the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state till I remit charge. In fact everything was transparent and signed only after bringing the matter to the notice of the government. The MoU I had signed was different and included a number of other activities to be taken up by the NGO. It is not a business venture. The government does not fund the NGO. The previous MoU will automatically expire in 2015. There is no connection between the two. If they say that as per the master plan BRC has to be shifted out, then they can change the plan as well. 		 			 —G S Prabhu, former PCCF (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden