By: Shravan K Iyer
 
 In a major boost for conservation of forests and wildlife, the Bandipur Tiger Reserve has received 300 camera traps from an IT company based in the city as part of its Corporate Social Responsibility programme. Director of the reserve Dr. BB Mallesh during the handover of the traps on Friday said that Bandipur, the first Tiger reserve in the country which is spread over 874 sq.km (core forest area) and over 1,000 sqkm (total area), with this initiative, was several steps closer towards achieving a more scientific, evidence-based analysis of its rich biodiversity.
 
 While the park already has 160 such camera traps procured through its own efforts, the 300 now handed over will further help image and document several animals in its territory, apart from identifying poachers, who are the bane of any conservation enterprise. He said the Western Ghats, in which Bandipur Tiger Reserve is situated, has 58 rivers originating from the region itself. He also added that ideally, 33 per cent of the landmass should be under forest cover. 
 
 	Outgoing director of the park HC Kantharaju said that while the National Tiger Conservation Authority has made it mandatory for camera traps to be installed, the funds allocated by it are not yet sufficient to meet requirements. He believed that CSR initiatives such as these by CSS Corp would act as a morale booster for the forest department and its staff, and thereby incentivise them to protect their domain. He also said that Bharat Electronics Limited has offered to build 50 toilets in aid of anti-poaching infrastructure. 
 	  	‘Tiger’ Ramesh, CEO of CSS Corp and a wildlife enthusiast, told Mirror that forests are important owing to the need to protect and preserve water bodies. He felt that a strong presence of tigers was indicative of a healthy wildlife ecosystem. His next project is to ensure camera traps in BR Hills. The firm has donated a total of 800 camera traps so far. In the first phase, 200 were given to the Nagarhole wildlife sanctuary, in the second another 200 were given to the same apart from 100 camera traps to the Dandeli-Anshi reserve. 
 	  	On being asked whether the forest department is planning public toilets, officials said the idea was being discussed with NTCA as rules do not permit construction in forest areas. An official, however, regretted that the government’s poor budgetary allocation of only 1% for forest activities and the problem of 60% of staff vacancies were crippling the administrative potential of the department.
 	
 	Picture this
 	
 	 		The camera, which comprises a 12-megapixel lens, is encased in order to prevent damage. 	 		
 		The camera runs on 8 batteries and also has an SD card which acts as memory storage. Forest staff will be able to ascertain details such as location, time and date of photos taken. The camera has a passive infrared sensor which can beam focus up to 80 feet and is also equipped to take videos. However, it cannot capture sounds. 	 		
 		Before installation, forest staff can programme the picture requirements at 5, 8, or 12 megapixels. 
 		 	 		It is also HD video-enabled. However, real time monitoring is not yet possible owing to lack of infrastructure related to connectivity. 
 		 	 		The batteries are rechargeable and can run up to 15 days, 24 hours. 	 		
 		Only volunteers trained by the forest department are allowed to manage the camera operations.
 		
 		The devices, after installation, are opened every 45 days for removal of data for the purposes of study and analysis. 	 		
 		Data received from the cameras is sent to the Wildlife Institute of India for deconstruction and any overlap between animals with respect to jurisdiction is sorted out therein.
 		
 		The perfect image of a tiger is had at a distance of 21 feet. 	 		
 		The camera is priced anywhere between Rs 18,000 to Rs 20,000 per piece