The Darshan starrer is before the Censor board today, but Animal Welfare Board says white pigeons are protected species and cannot be used in films 
 
 Darshan’s latest film Jaggu Dada is before the regional office of the Central Board of Film Certification for a certificate. Sources say it may be watched by the board members on Monday itself. If it gets a certificate, the film will release the coming Friday itself. The date of release is not announced till the certificate from the board is received. However, the film is facing a problem from the skies literally. A scene in the film in which a pigeon is seen has been spotted by the Animal Welfare Board of India. In their meeting on May 30, the board has “not approved” the scene saying “they used white pigeons which is protected under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.” 
 
 	
 	The CBFC does not give a certificate to a movie till it gets a no-objection certificate from the AWBI. The next meeting of AWBI is slated for Tuesday. The only option left for the film makers would be to cut out the shots where the ‘white pigeons’ are used. 
 	
 	  	This could however prove to be difficult as the scene in question is the climax of the film. The AWBI describes the “nature of preformance done by animals” as “climax scene, marriage secne with character on a horse, crackers burst behind the horse (to be created in CG), horse will run away from the scene, hero will stop the horse and will come back riding to the marriage hall. Hero and villian in fight sequence. Pigeons in background flying and sits on a bench behind the artist.”
 	
 	  	A similar problem cropped up for Ram Gopal Varma’s Kannada film Killing Veerappan earlier this year. The no-objection certificate was supplied and the censor certificate issued to the film late on a Thursday night before it released in screens the following Friday morning. 
 	
 	  	The same day Jaggu Dada was denied approval, Malayalam film Bhoomiyude Uppu was also denied approval for a scene. The board in this case said, “Not approved as they used white pigeons which is protected under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and moreover, the applicant to explain that why white pigeon were used when it was mentioned as Columbia Livia (Blue Rock Pigeon) in the application submitted to the Board.”
 	
 	  	“Pigeons (Columbidae) except the Blue Rock Pigeon (Columba Livia)” is mentioned as a protected species under Schedule IV of the Act. The blue rock pigeon are the  	common pigeons that are kept as pets and also seen in feral flocks which are exempted in the Act. It is not uncommon to find domesticated blue  	rock pigeons that have white plumage.
 	
 	  	Tamil film Meendum Oru Kaadhal Kadhai faced a similar problem last month with the AWBI saying “the scenes of white pigeons (other than Blue Rock) cannot be approved.”