In recent years, Kaggadasapura Lake has undergone a remarkable transformation, shifting from its worst condition to becoming a thriving ecosystem that welcomes over 52 bird species and more than 20 species of butterflies. The lake, which was in an utter state of neglect, was taken up for restoration two years ago and is almost close to completion. However, the enriched biodiversity at the lake has helped it attract many bird species.

Sujith Nair, an IT professional who has been photographing birds at Kaggadasapura Lake for a long time, revealed that the enriched biodiversity of the lake has given the birds a place to thrive. Over 52 species of birds and 20 types of butterflies were captured. “The ecosystem around the lake has a lot of rare birds, rare insects, and reptiles. I have been carrying out photography at the lake to bring the authorities’ attention, as this lake has the potential to attract many birds and insects, and we need to save it.”

The journey of Kaggadasapura Lake from a degraded state to a biodiverse haven began with an ambitious restoration effort. According to the residents, sewage from the nearby apartments was let into the lake. Just like how Bellandur and Varthur Lakes had seen huge frothing at the lake years ago, Kaggadaspura Lake was also one of the victims of lake frothing.

However, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) had taken up restoration of the lake, including the pathway, fencing, and desilting of the lake. Residents disclosed that the work has been extremely slow this year. “Initially, we saw the work happening at a fast pace and were hoping for the rejuvenation to be done in a couple of months. But this year, with elections, the workroom is a step back, and since they are carried out very slowly,” a resident informed.

Several of these bird species had vanished from the area back in 2019, raising concerns among wildlife enthusiasts. However, the gradual return of these feathered friends is a testament to the improving ecological conditions at the lake.

Some of the bird species that have been found are the painted stork, Indian grey hornbill, the elusive ashy drongo, the vibrant green bee-eater, the majestic brahminy kite, the distinctive lineated barbet, the melodious Asian koel, the elegant egrets, bulbul, shikra, scaly-breasted munia, yellow warbler, grey wagtail, swallow, rosy starling, and many others.

The butterflies that have been captured are the blue tiger butterfly, common castor butterfly, crimson red butterfly, Indian pioneer, neptis nata, peacock pansy, plain tiger butterfly, small salmon Arab, and more.