Ace photographers don't really seek validation. Their work speaks for them. Still, when recognition comes from the finest of their peers, it becomes a matter of honour. Like it was for India's very own photographer Raghu Rai. As the sole representative of India in the finest club of photographers, Rai actually took time to respond to Magnum's invitation to join them as a nominee member way back in 1972.    He recounts,""At that time, I was working with The Statesman so I didn't think much of the invite letter that was sent by Henri Cartier-Bresson. When I quit my job in 1976, I was clearing my desk and found the letter. I pondered for a bit and wrote to the then director of Magnum, Jimmy Fox. I was soon aboard Magnum as an associate member (as I had wanted to stay only in India) and did several assignments for them. The most memorable assignment has to be the Human Management of Wildlife which got the cover for National Geographic and ran into several pages.""    Today, Rai’s work with Magnum is being featured at Tasveer in the delightful exhibition Magnum Ke Tasveer. This is the second edition, the first exhibition was held a couple of years back.   Abhishek Poddar who has curated both the exhibitions feels that the more he looked closely at Magnum, he realised the unparalleled contribution to photojournalism it has made in the 20th century. He recounts the reactions to the first Magnum show in India: “Our first show with Magnum At the Movies - Magnum Ke Tasveer was received very well, especially by the older generation who had grown up seeing the Hollywood stars in the photographs, as well as by photography enthusiasts for whom this show was the first occasion photographers such as Robert Capa, Eilliot Erwitt, William Eugene Smith had been seen in India.”   This show, Magnum's Vision of India – The Last 50 years, showcases eight Magnum photographers that include: Werner Bischof, Marilyn Silverstone, Bruno Barbey, Scianna, Abbas, Olivia Arthur, and Steve McCurry.   Poddar gives the rationale behind the selection. “We wanted to select photographers who spanned Magnum's entire history - from Werner Bischof's photographs from the 50s, to Olivia Arthur's photographs taken today,” he explains. “The selection includes some of Magnum's more iconic work in India (such as those by McCurry) as well as lesser known, but equally strong work (such as those by Barbey).”   The body of work is rich and diverse. Olivia, who is the youngest Magnum associate, is represented by a series of portraits of the Ramani sect, a group of untouchables whose unique tattoos are a form of protest against the caste system. Marilyn documents her journey as a Buddhist monk and included in her collection is a photograph of the Dalai Lama. Of significance is Swedish photographer Bischof's work which entails his journey to India two years after the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi in 1948.    As the curator, Poddar refuses to pick a favourite in this scintillating array of photographs. Instead, he expresses excitement over the Magnum brand. “They have built their brand on absolute integrity to the medium of photography and visual story telling and it is for this reason that they are still revered by many as the most important photo agency in the world.” But the work by Olivia enthuses him the most “as it shows Magnum is still a relevant and exciting force in the photography world.”   Magnum's Vision of India - The Last 50 years will be on at Cinnamon till March 1.