For the last eight months, the frontline staff of Antarsante range of Nagarhole National Park have been working extensively to mitigate the human-elephant conflict in their range. Deputy Conservator of Forests A K Singh and Range Forest Officer Satish Kumar lead these efforts along with a brigade of 25 guards. Together they patrol an area of over 10 square kilometres everyday to ensure elephants do not enter human habitats.

G V Srinivas of Asian Nature Conservation Foundation (ANCF), Bangalore, who has been part of the patrols every weekend for a few months now, explained the effort and its results. “Every evening starting from 6 pm, the RFO and guards begin to cover the 30-35 breach points in that range. The objective is to ensure elephants are restricted within the forest area. There is a narrow patch between the reserve forest boundary and villages, where they patrol to send back any elephants that try to enter human habitat.”

The patrollers are equipped with firecrackers and firewood that they sometimes light to chase away elephants. Srinivas said these foresters risk their lives and limbs to keep the pachyderms at bay. 

Interestingly, cotton is cultivated in most parts along the perimeter of this range. And cotton does not interest elephants. “Sugarcane is grown around here but at a distance from the fringes. This space where cotton is grown acts as a buffer zone and gives the guards some time to chase the elephants back into the forests before they can enter the sugarcane fields,” he said.

It’s not an easy task. Sometimes elephants still manage to enter sugarcane fields. However, the patrolling has brought down human-elephant conflict to a great extent, said Srinivas, who works towards designing technology that can support conservation. “By involving farmers it has become a community level programme leading to some compatibility between farmers and foresters. Sometimes farmers, whose land borders a breach point, will work with the guard, creating a better understanding of the issue,” said Srinivas.

It was a commendable effort by the forest guards and farmers, he said. He added that it was just a matter of taking responsibility and bringing in innovative measures that could help create a workable solution to resolve conflict, and in-turn conserve wildlife.