Birdwatcher Kini uses his car to clean up birding spots of trash in coastal Karnataka
 
 
 ​Prasad B Kini, 24, a medical student of Yenepoya University, has become a role model for birders of Coastal Karnataka. Plastic water bottles and unfinished alcohol bottles he noticed lying around, especially in the countryside during his birding expeditions, not only disturbed him but also prompted him to act: he picked them up, transported them in his car and disposed of them in a safe place. Members of Coastal Karnataka Birdwatchers Network, who saw Kini do this, have turned his act into a campaign for birdwatchers of the region.
 
 	Kini who hails from Karkala in Udupi district, said, “My hobby includes aquarium and terrarium keeping. A planted aquarium looks beautiful. Of course, we need to be accurate with its light, fertiliser, carbon dioxide, soil ratio and so on. A slight difference in any of these factors could ruin the whole planted aquarium in no time.
 	
 	
 	Similarly, whenever, I go into a forest, I have observed a lot of empty plastic bottles, biscuit wrappers, glass bottles containing small quantities of alcohol and what not strewn around, left there by careless people. This will have an adverse impact on our forests and wildlife. One spark is sufficient to destroy an entire forest.”
 	  	This realisation along with lessons learnt from videos he watched prompted him to clean natural expanses. “I have watched a lot of videos from across the world. One shows a plastic fishing net being extracted from a turtle, another, a snake going into trauma after it swallowed an empty coke tin and so on,” he said of his inspiration to keep animal habitats clean.
 	
 	  	Gopal Krishna Baliga, who manufactures inverters, has been Kini’s birding, adventure and photography friend since December 2014. Baliga took him to different birding locations and that strengthened their bond.
 	
 	  	“I believed there was no point in blaming anyone and started clearing the trash. It hardly takes five minutes to clean a 500sqft area littered with bottles. We could make a big difference if all of us did our bit. This appeal, I hosted on Facebook, to which there was good response, and its impact is there for everyone to see. Now, Durga Reserve Forest located in Karkala is cleaner when compared to other birding places like Manjalpade and Polali in Mangaluru,” Kini said.
 	
 	  	Baliga believes what they have started will go a long way in maintaining nature in its pristine form. “The municipality does not conduct regular cleaning in these places.
 	
 	Since more birders have decided to take this up, we have dedicated a team comprising of Sai Giridhar Kamat, Vinod Prabhu and Karthik Bhat who engage regularly in cleanliness drives. We are sure to make a big impact,” he said.