Most of us would do a double take if we were told elephants are livestock! But chief minister Jagadish Shettar and animal husbandry minister Revunaik Belamagi have apparently no problems with that definition. They have signed off on a state government advertisement about the ongoing all-India livestock census which (dodgy English apart) lumps the biggest land animal on earth with cattle and poultry.    The advertisement rather ludicrously states that enumerators will visit all households/enterprises/institutions to collect information on various species of animals, including elephants.    Needless to say, wildlife activists are frothing at the gills. “Nothing could be more ridiculous and misleading than this, and the CM endorses it,” said an activist who takes part in elephant censuses. “Just a little common sense could have prevented the bloomer,” he added.    The 19th all-India livestock census is being conducted statewide from September 15 to October 15. According to the state government advertisement, the enumerators will collect information on livestock as well as socio-economic details of the owners. The information thus collected will be used for planning livestock development activities in the state and at the national level.    The ‘elephantine’ bloomer is all the more surprising, considering that the advertisement would have been vetted by top officials before being cleared for release. It’s unfathomable that none of them was aware of the fact that elephants are a protected species under the country’s Wildlife Protection Act.    Wildlife activists have drawn the attention of the state forest department to the bloomer, but the fact of the matter is that the confusion stems from an entry in the manual for field staff issued by the Union ministry of animal husbandry. The manual describes livestock rearing as “one of the most important economic activities in the rural areas of the country, providing supplementary income for most of the families dependent on agriculture”, and then goes on to mention elephants in the context of a livestock census.    “This entry should have been clarified by the state department of  animal husbandry instead of blindly following the Centre’s manual,” said sources, adding, “Where would one possibly find elephants reared by households?”   However, officials have forwarded some facetious explanations for the mention of elephants in the livestock census advertisement. “Some temples and cultural organisations have elephants. This could be a reason for the inclusion of elephants in the advertisement,” said an official.   Suparna Ganguly, member, appraisal committee for zoo elephants, and ex-member, elephant taskforce, has decided to take up the issue with the Union ministry of environment and forests (MoEF) to ensure that the word ‘elephant’ is deleted from the instruction manual. “By no stretch of the imagination can elephants be considered livestock. Elephants, captive or wild, are schedule I animals under the Wildlife Protection Act.    “I can only hope it is an error of the state animal husbandry department. The elephant taskforce had in 2010 made recommendations to the MoEF for a census of captive elephants  every four years, to be done by the Project Elephant Directorate. It should only be done by wildlife volunteers and forest sleuths, as the Central Zoo Authority does it for zoo elephants,” Ganguly told Bangalore Mirror. “Besides, when private ownership of elephants is registered by the state forest department, how does the animal husbandry department come into the picture?” she added.    “It’s a mockery and misleading as the elephant is a protected animal under schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act. It sends out a misleading message that elephants can be reared and kept in households and traded like poultry and cattle and domestic animals,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror.   When contacted, animal husbandry minister Revunaik Belamagi said he was not aware of the issue. “I will check and initiate action against those responsible,” he said.