April 12 marks the third death anniversary of Kannada film icon Rajkumar. The actor died six years after being held captive in the forests by brigand Veerappan for 108 days between July 30 and November 15, 2000. The speculation about the money paid to secure his release had remained a mystery till date. 

There have been allegations in the past that many unspecified crore of rupees were paid either by the government and private individuals or both to Veerappan. But no one from either the government or the family members of Rajkumar had ever spoken a word about it.

Now for the first time, Shiva Rajkumar, the eldest son of Rajkumar, has admitted that money was paid for Rajkumar’s release. “It is an open secret. But I cannot say who or how much was paid. It was a big amount and when Appaji came to know after his release he used to ask, ‘Was so much money paid to get me released?’ It perpetuated his ill health and led to his early demise,” said Shiva Rajkumar during the 7th Amruta Mathu Manthana, a weekly interaction between film scribes and film personalities.

But Shiva Rajkumar says there is no point in revisiting the question. “People know that a ransom deal was struck. But when you go on digging the past, it is an unpleasant experience. Now Appaji is not with us and even Veerappan is dead. There is no point in raking up the issue all over again. It has troubled everyone before. The abduction episode was painful for the family members and all his fans,” he said.

Rajkumar’s health declined rapidly post the abduction. “Appaji was just then recovering from his knee problem and it aggravated after that,” Shiva Rajkumar said. Rajkumar was treated for unstable angina and died on April 12, 2006 following a cardiac arrest. Rs 25 crore
The amount allegedly paid to Veerappan to secure Rajkumar’s release is between Rs 20 and Rs 25 crore. The amount is alleged to have come from the state government, Rajkumar’s family and money collected from members of the film industry. Veerappan utilised many emissaries for negotiations with the government. S M Krishna was the chief minister during the event.

Kidnappings by Veerappan
Forest brigand Veerappan was alleged to be involved in the killings of more than 180 people including scores of police personnel. Even the Border Security Force failed to nab him in its operations. He was the most notorious sandalwood and ivory smuggler estimated to have killed over 200 elephants. During the more than three decades as a smuggler, he abducted and killed many forest officials. In 1997, he abducted Krupakar and Senani, two well-known wildlife photographers. They were released unharmed. In 2000, he abducted Rajkumar for 108 days and released him after the alleged ransom was paid. In 2002, he kidnapped H Nagappa, a former Karnataka minister who was found dead.