By Garima Prasher

Researchers from IISc will evaluate steel rope barricades at Nagarhole and Bandipur Tiger Reserves on the basis of cost and strength 

The steel rope barricades installed on a pilot basis in Nagarhole and Bandipur Tiger Reserves will soon be inspected by IISc researchers, according to the Karnataka Forest Department.
 
Currently, the steel rope barricades have been put in place across 1.5 km in Bandipur Tiger Reserve and 4.5 km in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. The IISc team recently visited the Bandipur site to take stock of the situation.
 
“We have done preliminary visits to the Bandipur site but instrumenting and evaluation of the ropes have not begun yet. These modalities still need to be discussed.

 The idea is to see if the mechanism is both safe for the animal and effective in saving the crops. It also has to be cost-effective,” said Dr Ananth Ramaswamy, HoD, Civil Engineering Department, IISc.
 
The team will soon instrument the system and will try to calibrate what kind of forces are generated when the jumbos put pressure on the ropes.
 
The researchers will analyse the strength of the system and will also look into ways to strengthen it without going overboard.
 
Officials say that the idea is to understand how much force the steel barriers can withstand and compare it to the strength parameters of the rail barricade.
 
“The steel rope barricades are much more affordable compared to the rail barricades. While the rail barricade would cost us roughly about Rs 1.3 to 1.5 crore per kilometre, the steel rope barricade will be only around Rs 60 lakh per kilometre. The IISc team will conduct the technical feasibility report, which will help us understand the locations of the steel rope barricades,” said Mahesh Kumar, director of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve.
 
The currently installed barricades are being monitored using camera traps to record their performance under real-world conditions. Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department said that structural changes might be made depending on the outcome of the analysis taken up by the IISc team.
 
 “The spot inspection has already happened and now the researchers will evaluate the structure and its strength. Depending on their comments and feedback, structural changes might be made. We have installed the steel rope barricade across 1.5 km in Bandipur Tiger Reserve and 4.5 km in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. We are monitoring it through the camera traps,” said Pushkar.

Time to rope in jumbo controlAfter elephant-proof trenches, railway barricades, solar power tentacle fences, it’s time for the department to test steel wire ropes to contain the jumbos.
 
The Forest Department has come up with this ploy after trying out elephant-proof trenches, railway barricades, and solar power tentacle fences, to mention some of the techniques to keep the jumbos out of the farmlands.
 
The steel rope fencing method has already been tried and tested by the Hosur forest division in Tamil Nadu. The model, which includes steel The Veeranahosalli range in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve is a high conflict zone and has witnessed intense human-elephant conflict situations in the past.
 
The feedback from the IISc team is expected to optimise the cost, quality and life of the fence.