Diseases which plagued zoos across Karnataka a year ago appear to be back again, with several animals dying in the last few days. The latest is a 13-year-old male sloth bear which died of tuberculosis on Sunday morning at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). The bear, named Mich, was rescued from West Bengal around three years ago and was under treatment for the past three months. It is the fourth bear to die of tuberculosis at BBP. Recently, another bear was run over by a speeding Safari vehicle. 
   Dr K Raju, executive director of BBP, told Bangalore Mirror on Sunday, “The enclosure of sloth bears is maintained by a New Delhi-based NGO named Wildlife SOS. They informed us today that a male bear died of tuberculosis. I have asked the NGO officials for more details.” 
   The death of so many bears due to tuberculosis has raised questions about the hygiene and sanitation facilities at the sloth bear enclosure inside the BBP, which houses nearly 100 rescued bears. 
   “It is sad to see the bears housed in small enclosures at the safari. Despite the free space, aging bears choose to remain inside these dingy sheds and become vulnerable to contagious diseases,” said Srinivas Murthy who visited the biological park recently. 
   Forest minister C P Yogishwar is also of the same opinion. “I feel pity for these animals. The condition of the park is such that you never know when they are going to die,” Yogishwar said at a workshop on man-animal conflict, held at the department headquarters in Malleswaram on Saturday.
   On Saturday, the Mysore zoo which was rejoicing over the arrival of several new species of animals, received a rude shock when one of the anacondas brought from Sri Lanka a month ago died. “The snake was injured while drawing blood samples from the heart region,” a senior zoo official confirmed. 
   A senior member of the Zoo Authority of Karnataka, however, said, “There is no sign of outbreak of any disease. Except for the snake, all animals which died were aged. Still, we have put our staff on alert to avert any more such incidents.”