By: Disha Dinesh
 
 This World Animal Day, take a moment to think about the plight of animals caught in the crosshairs of our development, with photographer Amit Chand
 
 ​Park rangers by his side, and a cheetah two feet away from his face, on the hood of their jeep. It’s Amit Chand’s most vivid memory of shooting pictures of wildlife in the African grasslands. Naturally, he was “thrilled”, even as the big cat tried to “get a better vantage for its hunt”. But for the locals of Masai Maran (a 1,700 sqkm land home to cheetahs, zebras, giraffes, hippos and more), it’s par for the course – “very normal”. “They don’t really harm humans unless provoked, and guidelines set by wildlife sanctuaries are designed to ensure no untoward incident,” says the passionate wildlife enthusiast. Chand, who quit his corporate job last year to finally follow his passion, has compiled a collection of eight photographs called Am I Human?.
 
 The photos – taken at national parks and sanctuaries across India, from Kabini to Kaziranga, Bandipur and Africa, among others, over four years – enumerate his purpose to create awareness about wildlife conservation. And they do that by some clever photo editing, appearing to blow up, almost, the animal in question. A majestic cheetah seems to vanish, while the only thing visible of the elephant is its trunk, even as the rest of the body is shattered. One photo has a woman in a chair, disappearing into the air in small chunks – his way of showing what will happen to humanity if we don’t show empathy for wildlife and nature.
 Having shot animals and birds across Africa, Sri Lanka and India, Chand is troubled by how the existence of these creatures has taken a back seat to civilisation and the development of the human race. “If nothing is done, the black-horned rhinos will disappear soon,” he says, as will the other animals he has featured in his campaign – from the Indian Kabini tiger to the African Marshall Eagle, the Jim Corbett elephant, and the African Cheetahs.
 It all began four years ago at a vacation in Kabini, when he ended up reconnecting with his childhood love – photography.“The sense of calm and peace that I found in the wild pulled me away from my corporate career forever,” says Chand. Ever since, he has been frequenting wildlife hotspots to observe these majestic creatures and capture them on film.
 Up to three weeks ago, Chand was busy at work on his personal wildlife collection – save two pictures published in Sanctuary Asia magazine. Coming across the image of the black rhino, it struck him that exposing the collection to the public might be a great idea, especially with World Animal Day around the corner. The two horned black rhino is critically endangered in Africa. Vehemently poached for its horns, the species’ numbers have dwindled. He also describes the Marshall eagle’s beauty. “With it large wings and massive size it can make away with a small lamb,” says Chand. The collection, therefore, hopes to capture the plight of both, animals that are endangered, and those that may not be but still deserve respect and protection. As he puts it, “Endangered or not, each of these animals need to be protected”.
 The problems are many. Conversations with staff and foot patrol at wildlife conservation areas in India has revealed to Chand a lapse in protection measures. The government has men who move on foot tracking and keeping count of the populations of species. This strategy may not be enough to save animals from the hands of poachers, who often possess powerful AK47s, that surpass the capabilities of the park security’s 303 rifles. “Air surveillance technology (drones) that has been in Indian markets for three-four years now are not being leveraged to facilitate better protection,” he says.
 Closer home, it concerns him that “sparrows have long disappeared from Bengaluru”. And while tigers’ numbers may have improved in India after the attention the cause has received, there are many animals still in danger of going extinct. “We need to maintain a balanced ecosystem,” he implores. And that is what he hopes the photographs – of each animaAl with its habitat, the habitat that will someday be a testimony of what once existed if we don’t make changes down the road – will do for wildlife conservation.