Gang of twelve selling ivory ends up meeting ‘buyers’ who were cops in disguise
 
 
 	Cops have arrested a gang that was impersonating a full staff of a police station, including inspector, sub-inspector, head constable and constables, to sell elephant tusks.
 	  	In a nice little touch, the fake policemen were caught while selling the tusks to real policemen, who played decoys as buyers.
 	  	While seven out of twelve, who put up the show, were arrested, the rest fled the spot after realising that their ‘prospective buyers’ were real cops, said police. 	The tusks are said to be of a tusker suspected to be shot within two years and weigh 35 kgs.
 	  	The arrested who staged a ‘cops selling recovered goods drama’ have been identified as residents of Gummalapur in neighbouring Anekal taluk and Anekal.
 	  	The arrested have been identified as Viji alias Vijay Kumar, Akram alias Chotu, Chikkanna, Ramanjaneya, Nagesh, Raju and Sreenivas.
 	
 	
 	 		Extra drama
 		 	 		The case was on a different path for cops due to the ‘extra drama’ unlike the regular traps where those in the trade negotiate with buyers. Chikkanna in the gang played the lead role of an inspector. Other teammates played roles of sub-inspector, assistant sub-inspector and constables. They had also hired a Tata Sumo to give the realistic touch of a police vehicle to their drama. On meeting the decoy cops, Chikkanna introduced himself as an inspector and the others as his staff in mufti. “They said that they had seized the rusks from poachers and had not regularised it. They wanted to sell it and distribute the money among themselves,” a source told Bangalore Mirror. The sellers quoted a price, and the cops agreed after a bit of negotiation. “Then they took us to a place in Marsur gate and handed over the tusks. After confirming that they were genuine, we alerted our team, who were waiting for our orders. They swung into action and seven were arrested,” a source told Bangalore Mirror.
 		
 		
 		 			Will be booked for impersonation
 			 		 			Anekal police, who have booked them under the wildlife protection act, will also book the accused for impersonation.”We have filed a complaint with police they would take up a case under various wildlife act sections for illegally possessing and trading wildlife products, tusks, besides IPC section 379 (for theft). The police in their probe will also book them for impersonation,” K M Ramesh, inspector CID forest cell told Bangalore Mirror.
 			
 			
 			 				Hunt on for others
 				 			 				With the seizure happening at Marsur gate one of the villages of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka border, the state forest department has launched a hunt for the rest, started collating details on the source of the elephant, place of hunting and searching weapon alongwith Tamil Nadu forest sleuths.Tamil Nadu sleuths too have swung into action to crack the case with the interstate border villages and youths into poaching turning out to be a serious threat to elephants in the elephant corridor touching Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.