Experts advise long-sleeved tops, vaccination and use of tick repellents if you are entering forests
 
 Heading for Bandipur forest area this holiday season? Do not forget to pick up repellants for ticks (bloodsucking, disease-spreading parasites) before you hit the wild trail.
 
 Wildlife experts have been advising trekkers and researchers venturing into the Bandipur forest to take adequate precautions (tick repellant being the major one) against the recurrence of the Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD), categorised as one the ‘neglected diseases’ in the world.
 The outbreak of Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD), a tick-borne hemorrhagic fever, in November-December last year had many forest staff affected. The disease can strike both animals, particularly monkeys, and humans. Suspecting an outbreak this year, experts and doctors have increased surveillance in Bandipur area.
 
 KFD has a unique existence in five districts of Karnataka. In November 2012, experts across the state received information from Bandipur National Park in Chamarajanagar district about the unusual death of monkeys and suspected cases of KFD among forest watchers. The symptoms include sudden onset of fever and headache. Dr Kasabi Gudadappa, who has actively been involved in research, diagnosis and treatment of the disease, said, “The outbreak happens during this time and we have decided to be cautious by increasing surveillance in the Bandipur area. We have supplied tick repellants to make sure that trek and research groups do not enter the forest without applying them on exposed area.”
 
 Some research teams have got vaccinated as a precautionary measure. “Health workers conduct door-to-door search to identify suspected patients during the season in a radius of five kilometres around the area. Blood samples will be collected from all these and tested as per the procedure. Around 50,000 doses of vaccine were dispatched till October. We have placed the order for more doses of vaccine as per requirement,” Dr Kasabi said.
 
 Vaccinations are given mostly in Chikmagalur, Udupi, Dakshina Kannada, Shimoga and Bangalore. Last year, there were 21 suspected cases and 12 were confirmed. This was the first report of KFD outside the endemic area. The period up to June is considered crucial for the disease.
 
 Monkeys, which come in contact with infected ticks in the forest, get the virus and act as the host. Some small mammals are also known to act as hosts for the virus. Campers or others passing through the forest get the disease from the bites of infected tick or through contact with the infected monkey or a monkey which died recently from the infection.
 
 Tiger conservationist Ullas Karanth, who has got himself vaccinated for the disease, said, “It is prevalent in forests in Chikmagalur and Bandipur areas, which are full of ticks. It is better for research teams and trekkers to take precautionary measures. ”
 
 OTHER NEGLECTED DISEASES
 
 KFD is categorised as one of the most neglected disease in the world along with several other diseases that were discussed recently at a colloquium of neglected diseases. Others discussed were: 
 
 1. Meningococcal disease (MD) in Gaza strip in 2012: This is a serious life-threatening infection with a high case-fatality rate especially in infants in Gaza strip. 
 2. Soil-transmitted Helminth infection among school children in South India: This is a major public health problem in tropical and sub-tropical countries affecting the physical growth and cognitive development in school-age children.
 3. Neglected Brucellosis: Brucellosis is considered to be a silent killer causing a great loss to livestock sector as well as humans in developing countries. 
 4. Scrub typhus: This is a re-emerging and neglected disease in Alwar in Rajasthan, caused by the bite of an infected mite. 
 5. Lympahtic Filarsis in India: This is a parasitic infectious tropical disease caused by thread-like round worms.