Draft notification on eco-sensitive zone: State’s objections overlooked
 
 
 
 
 The Centre’s draft notification on Eco-Sensitive Zone (ESZ) along the Western Ghats came out last week, but without considering Karnataka’s objections – objections that were sent three times to the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) since 2014. Nobody seems to know why they were sent out three times, or if that was the reason our objections were not accepted. But already, the political blame game has begun.
 
 Forest Minister B Ramanatha Rai, on Tuesday, accepted that the state submitted its objections thrice to the Centre, which may have led to the confusion on Karnataka’s stand on the ESZ issue. “The state government had sent its set of objections to MoEF in May 2014, April 2015 and then again in September 2015,” he said.
 
 In the draft notification, of all the five states through which the Western Ghats pass, Karnataka has been marked with the highest area under Ecologically Sensitive Area, or ESA, (20,668 sq km). Karnataka wanted 1,571 sq km to be dropped out.
 
 Now, if the state does not submit its objections in the next 50 days, the draft notification will become final, bringing 1,576 villages in Karnataka under ESA where there will be complete ban on activities such as mining, generation of power, building townships, setting up of industries. This will deprive its residents of any development.
 
 Karnataka wants denotification of 726 villages.
 
 Rai blamed the previous BJP government for the delay in initial response, claiming that the current government had acted on time. “The previous government should have prepared the objections. By the time we took charge, it was already late as the Centre kept on sending reminders that it would go ahead with the publication of the interim report. However, in May 2014, we had sent our objections over the interim notification. Subsequently, the same objections, after being ratified by the village panchayats and local forest committees, were sent to the MoEF twice,” said Rai.
 
 But was there a confusion because the state government sent out different sets of objections every time? Not really. “All three times, we expressed the same concerns and there was no change in our stand,” clarified Rai. However, the minister had no answer when asked why the objections were sent three times even though there was no change of stance.
 
 An environmental activist from Dakshina Kannada argued that the government bungled it up not only by submitting late but also sending it multiple times.
 
 “When Karnataka repeatedly filed its objections with no clear stand, what would the Centre be left to understand? Sending the objections thrice would only reflect confusion in the mind of the state government, forcing the Centre to ignore any such conflicting interests. At least now the state government must wake up and submit a proper set of objections once by consulting with all stakeholders and opposition parties. It must not delay the process again and then resort to blame game,” said the activist.
 
 
  Officials caught in cross-forest-fire?
 
 Failing to prevent forest fires in tiger reserves, the state government has courted a controversy by ordering the transfer of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), who had only two months left for retirement. Interestingly, the transfer orders were issued a few hours after CM’s meeting with IFS officers over the forest fires, and the CM was reportedly upset. While the department, which is suffering from a shortage of staff, pooled in all its resources to contain the wildfires, officials were caught in a blame game. Reacting to the development though, Minister Ramanatha Rai said, “There is no connection between the transfers and the forest fire. The decision was taken by the CM.”