Elections to 14 Lok Sabha seats in Karnataka in the third phase of elections registered a voter turn out of 66.38 per cent while the total voter turn out in all the 28 Lok Sabha seats is 67.59 per cent. The revised per cent could go up by a few per centage points after the final count. 

Shivamogga Lok Sabha Constituency witnessed highest turnover with 74.23 electorate getting marked on their left index fingers while Kalaburagi was the lowest at 56.86 per cent voter turnout on Tuesday.

Among the Assembly Constituenices Jagalur in Davanagere Lok Sabha registered 81.97 per cent while Jeevargi was the lowest at 50.85 per cent. 
With this, elections to all the 28 seats in Karnataka ended. The first leg of elections had registed 68.81 per cent voting. Results will be announced on May 23.

     ...   

Polling on Tuesday was peaceful barring a few incidents of heated arguments between rival party workers at the booths. A few EVM hiccups and missing names were also reported. 

Despite the scorching heat, the electorate turned out early in the morning. In Uttara Kannada rains in a few areas affected voting for a while but still managed to register a 74.05 per cent voter turnout. Senior leaders including Congress Mallikarjun Kharge, Union Ministers Ramesh Jigajinagi and Ananth Kumar Hegde are among the 237 candidates who were in the fray. 

Village assistant Suresh Bhimappa Sanadi who was on an election duty died of heart attack in Yamakanmaradi in Chikkodi Lok Sabha seat. 
Two voters Mallaiah Desai Matt in Bagalkot and Mahadevi Mahadevappa Sindakheda too died of heart attack after casting their votes and returning home.

Ramesh Jarkiholi does it again

     Ramesh Jarkiholi   

The State government’s stability came to the fore on Tuesday when 14 Lok Sabha Constituencies were going to polls. Soon after casting his vote former minister and Congress MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi in Gokak, Belagavi, said that he will soon take a call to resign from his legislator’s seat besides quitting the party. 

This statement set tongues wagging as the Opposition BJP made an attempt to bank on senior Jarkiholi’s comments on the poll day. 
In Shivamogga, former chief minister BS Yeddyurappa said that several Congress and the JD(S) MLAs were in touch with him indicating uncertainty of the HD Kumaraswamy led coalition government to continue after the Lok Sabha poll results on May 23. 

Congress leaders, meanwhile, objected to this and said that it was diversion tactics by the BJP. “Is this a topic to discuss. The government is safe and the BJP is day dreaming,’’ senior Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge said.

Minister and senior Jarkiholi’s younger brother Satish Jarkiholi condemened the former’s statement on a poll day and reiterated that his elder brother was throwing a stone in the dark. “If he is confident, he should quit and openly work for the BJP instead of doing it secretively,’’ Satish said adding that he was ready to take on his brother in Gokak by fielding younger sibling Lakkan Jarkiholi. 

Satish said that he would be happy to make way for younger brother Lakkan. “I have several other Constituencies to contest from. I will be happy to make way for Lakkan in Gokak,’’ he said, while stating that his other brother Satish had lost his mental balance.

Protests and boycotts during the election

A group of youths in Shaktinagar in Raichur voted with black arm bands demanding action against those responsible for killing a 23-year-old engineering student. The half burnt body of the civil engineering student from Navodaya Institute of Technology was found hanging from a tree about six km from her college in Raichur. 

About 1,900 electorate in the villages that fall in Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary boycotted voting to voice their protest against the forest department applying brakes on development. 

Villagers in Chapoli, Chirekhani, Kapoli, Mudugai, Gavvali, Pastoli, Kongla, Krishnapur, Holda, Degaon and Talewadi had given a memorandum to local tahasildar in advance about boycotting the polls. Sultapura (J) voters initially boycotted for dumping Bidar garbage in their village. Later they exercised their franchise.