By: Vishakha Chanchani
 
 What do we know about people who rescue wild life? Would we rather get our understanding from an attractive National Geographic channel than from actual surrounds? But where will we find wildlife rescuers, just in case we discover a snake or a wounded bird in our house?
 
 Unlike some foreign countries we have little know-how of wildlife care; it’s different from caring for pets. My neighbour, deeply involved in this work, tells me that there are not many who can administer wildlife medicine. 
 	  	Such people are scarce. Rare universities offer this course in India.
 	  	We do not have sufficient persons to attend to and nurse wild animals. Growing numbers of veterinary colleges and vets deal majorly with the health of pets. Does wildlife care seem like a lesser occupation? Stalwarts wonder how long they can keep rescuing animals in the face of such rapid urbanization. We take over wild areas, usurp forests, water body regions, then think of setting up sanctuaries or eco tourist spots for conservation, to safeguard ‘species’.
 	  	The small number of people who rescue animals and the rare NGOs that have space for rehab seem to become dumping grounds for injured animals, both of them in real distress! Those involved feel tremendous compassion for the wild in overfilling cities, and are in genuine dilemma. Not many attempt to understand their frustrations. Where is the space to deal with increasing numbers of injured wildlife that end up in these centres? Where can one release them? When more patients arrive that need shelter, where will older inhabitants requiring life-time support go?
 	  	Those groups that still brave the odds, will they sustain themselves in harsher times to come? Receive adequate moral and monetary support? Encourage and train earnest youngsters to join them in this work; will such options get highlighted by agendas of developing nations? 
 	  	Wildlife care is not just about rescues, an ability to handle snakes!
 	  	It might mean acknowledging the presence of a bee hive in our verandah, the fruit bat in a dark corner; acting with consideration and not mere panic to discover leopards in the neighbourhood, monkeys amidst a colony of trees in our very compounds.
 	  	In the hue and cry of protecting habitats, do we recognize the individual grief and suffering of an animal? Be it a blind monkey, a lost turtle, an infected kite? When we talk about protecting habitats, do we seriously consider why we are losing them? After understanding the reasons, will we think of adopting more earth-sensitive lifestyles? What if it is in direct contrast with growing urban desires? 
 	  	Countless people migrate to this ‘ooru’ for its climate, job opportunities and for further studies. As the city expands vertically and horizontally, more wildlife gets disturbed, displaced; searching desperately for suitable food, clean source of water, foliage for shelter. Emerging from ambitious residential layouts, scavenging for food from over-flowing dustbins...
 	  	The wildlife protection act of India is considered to be pretty good. But we do learn to live with strange paradoxes. Large and small animals are smuggled and sold; they get caged, starved, electrocuted and infected with tumours. And sometimes get run over on nice roads. Bangalore joins the list, Nagarvasi.
 	  	Take care, till then.