By Melvin Mathew

Environmentalists warn Neelakurinji flowers would be destroyed if proper regulations are not put in place at tourist spot

Chikkamagalur has adorned purple attire as the shorter Neelakurinji-which blooms every 16 years blooming in all its glory. It has been attracting a large number of visitors from all parts of Karnataka. But environmentalists warn that without proper regulations, the flowers could be destroyed by tourists’ presence.

Hundreds of tourists can be seen swarming to Mullayyanagiri peak in Chikkamagaluru to witness the blossoming Neelakurinji flowers. The flowers are slightly shorter than their Niilgiri counterparts and blossom only every 16 years. But the inconsiderate actions of tourists have the environmentalists concerned and are asking for authorities to regulate the area to prevent its destruction.
 
The place seeing heavy footfalls, especially on weekends is leading to plucking and stepping on the rare flowers. Visitors can be seen taking selfies and making videos without any care for the precious biodiversity. Dr Geetha, Founder of NGO Swacha Charitable Trust told Bangalore Mirror that it is quite unfortunate to witness the decimation of the rare flowers. “People are simply plucking the flowers and stamping on them while passing. Tourists should use the pathway provided and avoid getting inside the flower bed area,” she added.
 
She added that it’s the failure of the district administration to regulate the prevention of such destruction.
 
“There should be a complete stoppage of private vehicles and administration should provide for transport. Eatables and other consumables should not be allowed inside. Bathing inside the nearby waterfalls also should be strictly prohibited,” she said.

Efforts for preservation
Raising alarm over the impact of tourists’ presence, member of the State Wildlife Board, Girija Shankar said that signages prohibiting ‘plucking of flowers’ should be erected.
 
“These flowers are different from the Neelakurinji flowers growing in Nilgiri hills. Regional to Chikkamagalur, they are shorter than Neelakurinji and bloom every 16 years. The flowers bloomed in 1990, then in 2006, and now in 2022. This year, the whole hill has been enveloped with the flowers,” added Shankar.

He added that people are standing on the flowers to take pictures.
 
“A large portion of the flowers bloom in Mullayyanagiri peak area and is seeing heavy footfalls. We have been asking the district administration to erect signages prohibiting flower plucking and awareness about the significance of the flowers. Most of the tourists are unaware of the significance of the flowers,” he added.

Experts highlighted that early erection of these signages could have prevented this treatment of the rare flowers. The unique flowers are expected to bloom for another 15-20 days and then again will bloom after a long wait of 16 years. The Neelakurinji flowers are a unique feature of Western Ghats and must be protected, urge environmentalists.

  We have been asking administration to erect signages prohibiting plucking the flowers–Girija Shankar, State Wildlife Board
 
Environmentalists highlighted that without proper regulations, plastic pollution is also a major concern.
 
“There are several vendors on top generating huge quantities of trash. Estimated 1000 plastic bottles are sold every day. Even after Neelakurinji flowers season, trash management is a hurdle. Every year, we clean close to 10-15 tons of plastic waste but within 15 days of cleaning, the trash returns,” said Karthik Aditya Belgodu from Namma Chikkamagalur Foundation.

Dr Sunil Panwar, Conservator of Forest, said there is a need to control the access. “Only specific areas should be thrown open to the public for exit from vehicles. The nuisance can be regulated by erecting boards,” he said.