Learn about wildlife

In this outing, the Friends of Elephants group will not only spread awareness about elephants but tigers and lions too. The 
evening will start with a talk on ‘Managing elephants and tigers’ by C Jayaram IFS (retried), former chief wildlife warden of Karnataka. Then, wildlife expert Dr Ravi Chellam will talk about the Gir lion. This will be followed by screening of short films and lastly, a panel discussion about big mammals. 

 WHERE: Rangoli Metro Art 
Centre, MG Road 
 WHEN: 6.30pm, October 27 
 CALL: 2296 9265

 15 and running strong

Ranga Shankara, one of 
India’s coveted destinations for theatre, turns 15. 
To mark the milestone, it will be hosting a year-long celebration, starting today, with its most successful production Bikhre Bimb. Written by late thespian Girish Karnad, the play features Arundhati Nag in the lead. 

 WHERE: Ranga Shankara, 2nd Phase, JP Nagar
 WHEN: 3.30pm& 7.30pm, October 27
 ENTRY: `200, bookmyshow.com

 Not one, two tribute gigs

Sound Awake is back with another tribute to the Mozart of Madras AR Rahman as well as another famous music composer, Pritam. The special gig will be led by Tatkal, a band of many instruments and harmonies. But before they come on stage, Most of Us, an acoustic pop/rock duo from Bengaluru, and DJ Shaa from Kochi, who’s known for mixing progressive music, will play the opening sets. 

 WHERE: Fandom, 1st floor of Gilly’s Redefined, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 8.30pm,October 27 
 ENTRY: `400
 CALL: 9606443393

 Travel and tell

An evening full of travel stories awaits you at this rooftop cafe, thanks to Untold Tales. It is an intimate gathering to share memories of and learnings from your favourite trips. Don’t fret, if you don’t have any travel stories to share; you can listen to others’ love for 
travel and the knack of discovering various cultures.

 WHERE: Dialogues, 4th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 5pm-7pm, October 27 ENTRY: `250, dialogues.space.com

 Women, reclaim your space

She Stands Tall Project is hosting a public women’s gathering, with the intention of reclaiming public spaces for women to gather, connect, celebrate, engage, explore, share skills and resources, and exchange power with each other. So come with women in your life – grandmothers, mothers, daughters, sisters, friends and partners, and bring along, if you can, vegan and vegetarian food, your own cutlery, and a mat to sit on. 

 WHERE: Cubbon Park 
 WHEN: 11.30am-2.30pm, October 27

 Get the décor

It’s Deepavali already and you haven’t shopped for anything decorative? Don’t worry. Make a quick trip to this studio today, which is selling lamps and lights made from earthen elements by over 60 rural and tribal artisans. In stock are Gond paintings from Dindori forests, hand-crafted wooden lamps and elephants from Jodhpur, earthen dolls from Panruti, copper bells from Kutch and more.

 WHERE: Studio Tamaala, 7th phase, JP Nagar 
WHEN: 11am-9pm, October 27 
 CALL: 8884816333