Of 214 elephants that died due to various reasons in 2 years, almost 60% were bulls; wildlife experts stress on need for sex ratio monitoring and protection of males

Between January 2021 and December 2023, Karnataka lost 214 elephants. Out of these, 41 died due to unnatural causes such as electrocution, train or road accidents, gunshots, and snares. As many as 33 of them (80 per cent) were males. Even when looking at the total deaths (214), nearly 60 per cent of them were bulls.
 
Elephant experts say that Asian elephants exhibit polygamous mating, and the demography of their population shows that males constitute only around 20 per cent of the population.
 
Thus, more males being killed or captured would leave a dent in the population status, and measures must be taken to protect the bulls to ensure a healthy sex ratio.

“If more males are dying, the sex ratio will invariably tend to skew. In Asian elephants, adult males constitute nearly 20 per cent of the total population. While they gain sexual maturity roughly after the age of 18, social maturity, an important criterion to mate, develops only after the age of 25. Thus, if by and large, the elephants that are getting killed or captured are mostly socially mature males, it can lead to a population collapse. Although Asian elephants are a polygamous species, more males dying will have a detrimental impact on the demography,” said Avinash Krishnan, a wildlife conservationist and director of science and conservation at A Rocha India.

There is a need to keep a constant check on the sex ratio at a population or sub-population level, say wildlife conservationists. They opine that while the operational sex ratio in the elephant population can vary, the degree of difference between operational and observed sex ratio is a vital piece of information, given the rising conflict scenarios.

“Every protected area should have a database on the sex ratio of its elephant population. Currently, there is no consistent database across all populations. While we know Bannerghatta has a healthy sex ratio of elephants, there is no data available on other reserves and protected areas. We do not know the total sample size of males in Karnataka. The degree of difference between operational and observed sex ratio should be made available for a better understanding of the situation,” added Krishnan.

Experts say that since it is the bulls that have a higher propensity for conflict, decisions to capture them should be based on the consequences of such actions on the elephant population. They assert that male elephants need more protection and a monitoring protocol.

“Monitoring can be done through technologies such as radio telemetry or by mapping the distribution patterns of individuals. It will enable us to come up with better conservation guidelines for male elephants. We are losing a lot of male elephants not only in Karnataka but across the country,” said a city-based conservationist.

  If more males are dying, the sex ratio will invariably tend to skew. In Asian elephants, adult males constitute nearly 20 per cent of the total population ­– Avinash Krishnan,  wildlife conservationist & director, A Rocha India
According to Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development, installing effective physical barriers on hard boundaries will help prevent the influx of elephants into human habitation, leading to a reduction in conflict cases and thus fewer bulls getting captured or killed.

“High-conflict areas should have physical barriers. While a change in crop patterns in farmlands abutting reserves and protected areas is suggested by some experts, it is neither viable nor long-term. It will not be financially operable to incentivise every farmer to move away from cash crops. Implementation of such schemes will also be difficult. Elephants are not venturing out due to a shortage of food inside the forests, and thus, the installation of barricades and their proper maintenance is the only long-term solution,” said Belagere.