While Nature In Focus, the festival that ends today, puts a spotlight on conservation through films and photographs, we look into the impact wildlife photographers cause to natural habitats and wildlife 

What happens when you put up your picture on social media? Of course, you will check every few minutes to see how many ‘likes’ it will get. But then, what happens when you put up the picture of a tiger lounging in its habitat? ‘Likes’ still matter, but you invariably end up mentioning where you took that picture. “You will have literally served that tiger on a platter to the poachers,” says Indrajit Ghorpade, founder of the Deccan Conservation Foundation which is actively involved in the conservation and protection of wildlife habitats of Koppal district in Karnataka. “This is true for any other wild animal sought by the illegal wildlife trade.” He recalls a film shoot done in hardly two acres of jungle, where there were two breeding foxes and jungle cats. “When we went back just three months later, the dens were burnt out. Intentionally or unintentionally, the location gets broadcast and poachers arrive.”

The darker side of wildlife photography is the growing legion of amateur photographers who will go to any lengths to take a ‘pic’, says Ramesh Belagare, founder of Foundation for Ecology and Education Development, a nonprofit organisation working towards conservation of natural ecosystems. “If you ask me, every Tom, Dick and Harry is a wildlife photographer today.” 

What Ghorpade and Belagare are trying to say echo the misgivings and fears of the entire community of wildlife conservationists who fear that the unethical and irresponsible behaviour displayed by wildlife photographers will destroy wildlife habitats.

Habitat destruction

At the Jayamangali Blackbuck Conservation Reserve in Tumkur, blackbucks are the attraction for weekend photographers, the distance from Bengaluru being an added draw. “This is a reserve but the blackbucks have literally no protection,” Belagare says. “Photographers with their 600-mm lenses chase the blackbucks in cars for pictures.” The grasslands, which are important for these blackbucks, are therefore getting destroyed. “Grass won’t grow when cars go around like that.” Those unprotected areas where wildlife is still struggling to survive, where wildlife photographers can go without any permission, Belagare says, “these areas are under threat.”

   Photograph by Ramesh Belagare   

Sometimes, photographers struggle to take pictures of birds and their nests because these are hidden through natural camouflage. Sanjay Gubbi, noted award-winning wildlife conservator, says certain photographers are known to disturb the habitats for better pictures. For instance, kingfishers have their nests in the walls of waterholes and sit on twigs in the water waiting for a good hunt. The birds are highly territorial and do not allow other birds to sit on their perch. Belagare has seen “unethical photographers moving the perch so that they have a better background, not realising that the confused bird will not have a view of its prey. The bird struggles and if not successful, will not have food for its hatchlings. The photographer would have long left the scene with a picture.” The impact of such behaviour may not be immediate but over a period of time, it becomes evident.

Disturbing nature’s rhythm

If not habitats, enthusiastic photographers disturb wildlife going about complex and sensitive acts of survival. Every year, Olive Ridley turtles swim all the way from Australia to the beaches in Odisha, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu for laying eggs. Belagare notes, “I have seen photographers digging the nests to take a picture of the eggs and worse, go near the mother turtle while she is laying eggs. Such ignorance is not an excusable offence.”

Then there is the unethical practice of baiting. Using bait to ‘capture’ wildlife is a wildlife offence. Photographers are known to use bait like dead snakes to get birds of prey to dive towards their camera. 

The new photographer

Award-winning wildlife photographer, Kalyan Varma, who is one of the founders of the Nature in Focus Festival, notes that six to seven years back itself there were more than 10,000 registered photographers from India alone on the online community India Nature Watch. “With the advent of Instagram and so on, the number has gone up even more.”

Wildlife photographer Shaaz Jung discusses the profile of today’s wildlife photographer. “Today, digital cameras and social media can bring you instant fame. You do not need to be a naturalist, avid wildlife enthusiast, conservationist or a scientist. All you need is a budget DSLR and a social media platform to share your work. This may have its benefits, but it also attracts a huge number of wildlife photographers with the wrong intentions,” he says. With no wildlife corridors and species imbalance, among other things, how do you expect wildlife to survive, Ghorpade asks. “It is like propping up a dying man and taking pictures. It is inhuman.”


   Photographs (here and on top) taken by Kalyan Varma   


Meanwhile, this tribe goes across the country in search of wildlife either for self-gratification or to submit pictures to competitions. Ghorpade comments wryly, “One day, they will be chasing snow leopards in Ladakh, then they will be behind the migratory oriental dwarf kingfishers, and if nothing else, they will be flocking to take pictures of geese in Magadi.” Unethical practices, like bribing the local guides to take them closer and closer to the wildlife, will open out other issues. “If ethical photography is practised, it does not disturb nature or wildlife,” Gubbi says. 

Escalating wildlife photography tourism

Fuelling the madness for pictures are the numerous wildlife photography tours, which have sprung up over the last couple of years. These tours advertise photo opportunities of tigers, wolves, migratory birds, and much more. “It is like a mafia,” Belagare comments. “Within India itself, there is so much money involved.” Trips range from thousands to a few lakh rupees.

But isn’t it better that the amateur photographers go with a more experienced tour operator? “They are all the same,” Belagare laughs. “I will compare them with a board inside a national park ‘Speed limit 30 kms. Who listens? They are all in chase of that perfect picture.” And to achieve that, there are tricks of the trade. Gubbi lists out a few: Crowding around animals and blocking their movement leading to stress in individual animals, chasing animals and causing immense stress and loss of energy, handling reptiles or amphibians leading to infectious diseases…” The harm these activities cause have no statistics to give as evidence.

Taking action

The interest in wildlife photography is like a double-edged sword. How can there be a win-win situation? One, as Gubbi says, photographers should use the pictures for conservation measures. “For instance, they could highlight destruction to habitats through their pictures,” he says. Also, wildlife photographers could support conservation measures. “Go back to the place you belong to and help support the wildlife there by preserving their habitats,” Ghorpade urges. Appoint a local wildlife guardian or else support a local conservation NGO. “If for every photo you put up on Facebook, you pay `100 to a local NGO or to a village making the effort to conserve wildlife, there will be wildlife left for you to photograph.”

  Today, digital cameras and social media can bring you instant fame. You do not need to be a naturalist, avid wildlife enthusiast, conservationist or a scientist. All you need is a budget DSLR and a social media platform–Shaaz Jung  
He advocates the creation of micro habitats, a concept which has been around from the time of King Ashoka. “Don’t reinvent the wheel,” he says. His foundation has created mini reserves in Koppal, Magadi and other places. Animals and birds native to that region have flourished in such habitats. “All we need to do is to give them the space. If every village devotes 5-10 acres of land to wildlife, nature will replenish, revive and bounce back.” Study your wildlife of choice deeply so that you can create awareness, says Belagare, who started off into conservation after his “weekend interest” of macro photography of butterflies led him to be aware of its value as eco-indicators. He eventually went on to the field of conservation of elephants. “How many photographers are willing to have this kind of long-term dedication?”

But for those who can’t do any of the above, Jung urges a degree of self-regulation. “We as humans are obsessed with competing and creating a social hierarchy amongst our society,” he says. “I have never submitted an image for a photo competition. I’m afraid that if I start competing, it may alter my perception of nature, and ultimately my actions as a wildlife photographer.” 

This would require a radical shift. “We don’t work for awards or for ‘likes’, we work for the animals itself. This should be every photographer’s motto,” Belagare sums it up.