Villagers claim it was their man who killed the tiger
 
 A day after gunning down the ‘man-eater’ of Bheemghad in Khanapur taluk of Belagavi reserve forest, the forest department is now facing the unsettling question of who actually shot the tiger. Leaving forest officials in a quandry, Khanapur MLA Arvind Patil claimed that it was a local villager who shot the elusive tiger in the later hours of Sunday. But officials who were overseeing the operations maintained that it was their field staff that killed the tiger.
 
 Trying their best to capture the tiger after it mauled a pregnant woman to death, forest officials had been trying in vain to capture or kill the tiger. When all modern means including a radio collar failed to locate the tiger, the department fell back on the traditional knowledge of Soliga tribals to locate the tiger’s lair deep in the dense forest.
 
 Angered over the forest department’s futile efforts, local villagers demanded permission to track and shoot the tiger on their own. Even though the officials pacified them from taking the extreme step, a few were prepared to shoot the tiger on their own around their village.
 According to villagers, even though forest officials achieved a breakthrough in locating the tiger using Soliga tribals, the tiger was already dead and officials only fired at the already slain tiger!
 
 Speaking to the media, Khanapur MLA Arvind Patil claimed that it was the villagers who killed the tiger. “It was a local villager, Taanaji Patil, who shot the tiger in the head resulting in its death,” Patil clarified.
 
 The MLA and Taanaji were soon pictured with the carcass of the tiger. According to Patil, Taanaji was dressed in camouflage during the hunt. Though there was no clarity on Taanaji’s antecedents, many claim that he is a tractor driver and known for his wrestling skills.
 
 In the meantime, forest officials who took possession of the tiger carcass for cremation recovered the bullets for further examination.
 BM’s repeated efforts to get confirmation on the shooter from the Chief Wildlife Warden and Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra were in vain as he was inaccessible over the phone.