What is really going on? On the one hand a terrible situation is boiling over in Manipur. On the other, an ambitious mission is heading towards the moon. Something is amiss however.

The level of dissonance at play in the world’s most populous nation should turn some heads and help the people pose some relevant questions about the direction in which we are headed.

The latest in the Manipur turmoil was instances of social life turned completely upside down: pure chaos. A return to normalcy seems a distant mirage. What are we doing to a people?

It took almost over a month for the prime minister to speak publicly of the deteriorating situation. When he did, it made international headlines. The national press did not consider it so newsworthy.

As opposition uproar adjourned the houses of parliament demanding a discussion over the lawlessness and social upheaval in the northeastern state, one is left to wonder what are our priorities in 2023.

The situation in Manipur could have been reined in - that social division was allowed to fester under state watch is not only appalling but one of the most horrific crimes. When all control is lost on the ground as communities kill each other - brandish severed heads, rape and parade tribal women on the streets - what good is a journey to explore space?

Recognising the pattern is immensely important at this juncture if we as a collective have to get a grip on the situation and indeed salvage it from the brink. At a time when the world is thrown from the aftermath of one catastrophe to another festering social division is policy. Social inequity in the time of the climate emergency is deadly.

The terrifying news agenda that pushes hard for social division could not be more timely than at present - for the opportunist coteries that are at work around the world. The one thing that is overlooked in this melee is compassion for the disenfranchised caught in the frontlines of all that is in disarray in the world at the moment. Surely, the subcontinent is one of the most vulnerable places to be when the resultant chaos unfurls.

But here we are: lost in the rehabilitation of cheetahs and a mission to the moon. In total, eight cheetahs have died in what is an absolute failure of a project that in the first place should not have been pursued as suggested by many experts in the field at the outset. But still we went ahead and made a spectacle of the cheetahs too just as though it was one of those Vande Bharat trains that were being flagged off.

The media jumping up and down while the cats were being introduced were nowhere to be seen when one by one the cats succumbed in unfamiliar territory and terrain perhaps of sheer exhaustion or stress if you like. That you do not have the minimal amount of care for the most vulnerable millions in a pluralistic and diverse society like ours is one thing. You bring wildlife from another geography and grandstand that you have mastered even evolution of fauna is at the most laughable. And when it all crumbles, the losers are the hapless creatures that journeyed from another continent.

So when would we see certain measures for the people in this geography? Surely we have not seen such measures in several years now. The pattern is of social division after division.

 Perhaps the country would have been in a better place to deal with the challenges put forth by the invasion of tech, aftermath of the climate crisis or the bleak economic outlook amid rising joblessness and inflation if we had managed to stay away from policies that perpetuate social disharmony.

Now what could be done to bring about a much needed transformation in this approach that is not only seemingly incompetent but shall set us back to the dark ages when a forward looking, compassionate, humane and honest way of looking at the modern day challenges is called for.

Perhaps a regime change, which is what democracy is for, This in fact turns our gaze to the most recent formation of an alliance of opposition parties namely INDIA - Indian National Developmental Inclusive Alliance. Now that an alliance has come forth ironing out long standing differences, perhaps the constituents should have a closer look at the recent thumping victory of the Congress in Karnataka that managed to win against money, muscle and the arrogant othering of peoples that has become a favourite pastime of the current dispensation.

How far such a frail gathering could hold forth against a powerful incumbent is to be seen - but yes, we are a country that was birthed by non-violence and compassion for the other, not by othering of the other.