Facebook begins to minus likes from manually deactivated and memorialised accounts 	
 	
 	 		You might soon see a drop in the number of likes on your Facebook pages: Not because the people have started to hate your work or product, but because Facebook (FB) has begun to subtract accounts that have either been manually deactivated or memorialised.
 		 	 		The impact: If the product or video that you displayed on FB had got 1,000 likes in the last one year, the count would now reduce as FB would minus the likes from two categories of users: One, those who have deactivated their FB accounts in recent months; and two, those that have been memorialised after the owners died. In other words, the total likes will not include accounts that have been deactivated.
 		 	 		Memorialised accounts are accounts of people who have passed away. However, the account is kept active by friends or family members in memory of the person.
 		 	 		This will soon be applicable and hence, it is time to keep track of the likes on your page.
 		 	 		Some feel this is a good move by Facebook. For instance Nitin Bhardwaj, a wildlife photographer, has created a Facebook page called The Wild Side of Me.
 		 	 		Nitin uses this page to display and get feedback on wildlife photography. He feels that this new counting system will give him a better idea of the people who follow his work.
 		 	 		He said, “For me, it is not about the number but the genuine interest in my work. The new system is very practical and can give me a better idea.”
 		 	 		But not everyone agrees with him. Prajeet Nair has a page called Storyteller on Facebook. Prajeet however, feels that the dip in the number of likes can make a huge difference.
 		 	 		Prajeet, 27, said, “My page is a place where people can send me stories or their work and I post it online. If the number of likes go down, people might not want to give me their work, they might even feel that the page is being disliked by the audience and hence the numbers are reducing.” On its part, Facebook aims at achieving two advantages out of the new system -- one on the business front and the other in consistency of the data. In a communication, Facebook for Business said, “We announced that deactivated and memorialised accounts will be removed from Pages’ like counts in order to help businesses more accurately understand their audience data. Businesses use Page audience data to understand what their followers care about. This change will help make the audience data even more meaningful and up to date for businesses.”
 		 	 		It went on to add, “Removing inactive Facebook accounts from Page audience data gives businesses up-to-date insights on the people who actively follow their Page and makes it easier for businesses to find people like their followers through tools like lookalike audiences. We already filter out likes and comments generated by deactivated or memorialised accounts from individual Page posts, so this update keeps data consistent.” Once a person reactivates his or her account, the likes will be added again.
 		 	 		Akshay Gururaj, who has a page called Akshay Gururaj Photography feels that the new method will actually make the Facebook pages more genuine.
 		 	 		Akshay, said, “Once people know about the new method of calculating the likes then pages will earn more credibility. A page which has enough likes even after the method it will show that they were genuine and not just fake followers.”
 		
 		FB REPLIES
 		

 		 			Q. Why were Page likes from deactivated accounts included in the first place?
 			 		 			FB: When people liked Pages originally, their accounts were active. Facebook is making this update to drive real business results and ensure our metrics are consistent. 		

 		 			Q. Will organic reach increase once likes from deactivated accounts are removed?
 			 		 			FB: Thanks to this change, Page likes reflect all fans whose Facebook accounts are active. This does not affect organic reach on an absolute basis, not does it affect the long term decline in organic reach of Page posts. 		

 		 			Q. Why does my Page have more likes removed than others?
 			 		 			FB: The number of deactivated likes that are removed varies by Page. On average, the older a like, the more likely it is to be associated with a deactivated account. 		

 		 			Q. If a fan whose account has been deactivated subsequently reactivates their account, will their like be re-added to the Page’s tally?
 			 		 			FB: Yes?