Wildlife activists who have been combing the state’s two major forest reserves — Bandipur and Nagarhole national parks — over the past eight months have found more than a hundred metal snares and spring traps laid mainly for the tigers and leopards.  
 
 It’s an alarming find, especially considering that NTCA (National Tiger Conservation Authority) has cautioned the state forest department against the entry of tribal people from Madhya Pradesh into state. 
   It is estimated that around 180 tigers live in these reserve forests. 
   The snares were detected and removed by the activists of the Anti-Snare Perambulation (ASP) drive being carried out by Voice for Wildlife Trust and Wildlife Trust of India in association with the state forest department and Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) sleuths.
   A snare is like a land mine which remains active for years. “Snares remain active for a long time and are always a threat to wildlife, especially tigers and leopards,” said Sudheer K S, managing trustee of Voice for Wildlife Trust. “We have recovered over a hundred of them from Nagarhole and Bandipur national parks during the past eight months. This is an alarming figure.”
   The drive was launched in Bandipur and Nagarhole in last September with an aim to search and remove the snares laid on the forest paths spread over an area of 1,500 square kilometers. The exercise includes walking on forest paths on Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays. Each team has around 20 members including volunteers of the two NGOs, forest department staff and STPF sleuths and covers around 20 km every week. 
   The exercise is being conducted up to two kilometres from the boundary of forests. The teams have so far recovered over 60 live snares, 45 snare holds, and 25 spring traps, said Sudheer.  “I’s definitely an effective move. A new group of volunteers have joined us in the drive. However, not all snares are laid by poachers to hunt tigers. They are also used by local villagers to trap small animals and are put in the morning and removed in the evening,” said B J Hosmath, additional principal chief conservator of forests and field director, Bandipur and Nagarhole Tiger reserves.