Noted South Indian music composer Ilaiyaraaja, Hindustani classical musician Ghulam Mustafa Khan and thinker P Parameswaran were awarded the Padma Vibhushan while cricketer Mahendra Singh Dhoni and snooker player Pankaj Advani were among the nine people to be honoured with the Padma Bhushan this year. Kidambi Srikanth, Somdev Devvarman, Murlikant Petkar and Saikhom Mirabai Chanu were awarded with the Padma Shri. Besides these famous personalities, the government also honoured "unsung heroes" who have quietly helped the poor with Padma Shri awards.

"I think that through this award, Prime Minister Modi-led central government is honouring Tamil people and Tamil Nadu," Ilaiyaraja told reporters in Chennai.

Padma Awards, one of the highest civilian awards in the India, are conferred in three categories — Padma Shri, Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan — and are spread across several areas of focus. This year, President Ram Nath Kovind has conferred 85 awards (including two duo cases). Fourteen women have won an award while three recipients have been awarded posthumously.

Considered as the country's most successful cricket captain, Dhoni led India to two World Cup triumphs -- in the inaugural ICC World Twenty20 held in South Africa in September 2007 and the 2011 ICC ODI World Cup. India also won ICC Champions Trophy under him. It was under his captaincy that India climbed to No. 1 in the ICC Test Rankings in December 2009.

Advani also has a distinguished career, having won gold twice in Asian Games in 2006 Doha and 2010 Guangzhou. He is also a multiple world-champion.

Read Also:
President Kovind addresses the nation, makes veiled attack on Padmaavat protesters

Alexander Kadakin from Russia is the only foreigner and Ved Prakash Nanda is the only overseas citizen of India to be honoured with the Padma Bhushan this year. Philipose Mar Chysostom from Kerala (Spiritualism), Ramachandran Nagaswamy from Tamil Nadu (Archaeology), Laxman Pai from Goa (Art-Painting), Arvind Parikh from Maharashtra (Art-Music) and Sharda Sinha from Bihar (Art-Music) were the other Padma Bhushan awardees.

Saikhom Mirabai Chanu, 2017 World Weightlifting Champion in the 48kg category, and former Asian Games gold medallist tennis player Somdev Devvarman were conferred with the Padma Shri award as were ace men's singles shuttler Kidambi Srikanth; and India's first Paralympic gold medalist, Murlikant Petkar, who won an individual gold medal in the 1972 Summer Paralympics.

Internationally-acclaimed Gond artist Bhajju Shyam, West Bengal's Sudhanshu Biswas, a 99-year-old freedom fighter who serves the poor; Kerala's medical messiah to terminally ill, M R Rajagopal; were among the 85 people honoured with Padma Shri, as were Lentina Ao Thakkar, a Gandhian who has served for decades at a Gandhi Ashram in Nagaland; Romulus Whaitaker, a wildlife conservationist working in Andaman Nicobar Islands and Tamil Nadu; Rani and Abhya Bang, both doctors, who over 30 years transformed health care in Naxal-hit Gadchiroli in Maharashtra; and 98-year-old V Nanammal, India's oldest yoga teacher, who still practices and teaches 100 students daily in Tamil Nadu; Lakshmikutty, a tribal woman from Kerala, who prepares 500 herbal medicine from memory and help thousands of people especially in snake and insect bite cases; and Arvind Gupta, an IIT Kanpur alumnus who inspired generations of students to learn science.
 
— With inputs from PTI