By Melvin Mathew

As the Peripheral Ring Road project gains momentum, environmentalists are concerned about the ecological impact.
 
In the environment impact assessment (EIA) of 2022, the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) had suggested installing sound barriers in areas adjoining the project.

For the construction of the PRR, now known as Bengaluru Business Corridor, roughly 19.5 acres of Jarakabande Reserve Forest will be diverted, and the project will come up within the boundary of Bannerghatta National Park and Puttenahalli Bird Conservation Reserve located at a distance of 7.21 km and 1.49 km respectively.
 
Out of 36,824 trees facing axe, 13,355 trees will be felled in the TG Halli catchment area and 631 trees in Jarakabande forest where the diversion of 7.91 ha is proposed. As part of the project, flyovers have been proposed along the Jarakabande Tank, Chinnagenahalli Lake, Chikkabanahalli Lake, Gunjur Lake, Chikkatogur Lake and Thirumenahalli Lake. The proposed alignment of PRR passes through three major valley systems namely Vrisha-bhavathi, Hebbal and Koramangala-Challaghatta.
 
Some of the lakes such as Chikkabanavara, Varthur, Yelahanka, Kogilu, Jakkur, Rampura, Yellamallappa Chetty amongst other waterbodies coming under Madavara lake series, Yellamallappa Chetty lake series, and Varthur Lake series are part of the study area for the project. The EIA noted these lakes are polluted due to the entry of sewage from nearby areas which has led to foul odour, unaesthetic conditions, foaming and so forth.

It further said that while a significant increase in air pollution is not expected, there will be an increase in noise pollution. The KSPCB had proposed the installation of noise barriers all along the project road in a phased manner. In addition, green belt development and avenue plantation also form an effective sound barrier during the operation stage. Installation of polycarbonate noise barriers could reduce the noise levels by half.
 
For example, after operationalising the project, the sound from the two-wheelers are expected to be at around 80 dBA (A-weighted decibel) and with barriers installed, it could be reduced to 44 dBA. Roughly in 12 locations such noise barriers have been proposed.

For the conservation of Schedule 1 animals such as Indian peafowl, Black shouldered kite, Black kite and Brahminy kite found in the site as per the survey, the BDA was suggested to spend Rs 16 lakh towards environment education & awareness at 20 schools in the study area and provide financial assistance to the Karnataka forest department for habitat improvement in Puttenahalli Lake Bird Conservation Reserve.
 
As per the prevailing guidelines of Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Karnataka Forest Department, the Bangalore Development Authority has to pay NPV (net present value) and cost for compensatory afforestation; the BDA would be required to spend Rs 58,37,580 towards NPV for diversion of 7.91 ha of forest land and cost of compensatory afforestation. To compensate for the forest diversion, 36.10 acres of land have been identified in survey no. 156 of Mantapa Village, Jigani Hobli, Anekal Taluk, Bengaluru Urban district which is adjacent to the Bannerghatta National Park.

Additionally, Rs 15 crore will be spent towards the rejuvenation of the six lakes; Rs 2.5 crore has been estimated for each lake; three lakes have been proposed for revival in the first year and three lakes have been proposed for the second year.

To limit the impact on the environment, construction activities will be carried out only between 6 am to 6 pm only and will completely stand suspended during nighttime to avoid psychological distress on local people and faunal species in Jarakabande RF, said the EIA.

  At least 20% of the project cost should be spent towards improving the environment— Dr AN Yellapa Reddy, environmentalist
However, BDA officials said, to reduce noise pollution, the focus should be on improving public transport. “Once operational, there will be an increase in noise with vehicle passage. Noise levels should be mitigated by increasing public transport usage,” said a senior BDA official. “We don’t understand why forests are being impacted at a time when Bengaluru is struggling with water scarcity. Officials should consider building alternative routes and protecting forests. According to the forest department, Karnataka should have 33% of forest cover but it is reduced to 19-20%. Out of that, just 3% is for the protection of wildlife in terms of reserve forests, national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. This project is likely to increase human-animal conflict,” said Joseph Hoover, an environmentalist. To pursue the project sustainably, environmentalists are of the view, fodder and water security for wildlife should be ensured.
 
“Already we have instances of animals reaching the heart of the city as we are witnessing a rise in human-animal conflict. The government should work towards ensuring sources of food and water outside Bengaluru. At least 20% of the project cost should be spent towards improving the environment,” said environmentalist Dr AN Yellapa Reddy.