Garima Prasher

While the wildlife division of Karnataka Forest Department is counting days to fly in endangered vultures from Pinjore Vulture Conservation Breeding Centre in Haryana, experts fear that the killer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), still in rampant use in and around the city, will negate the department’s effort to arrest the dwindling population of the raptors.
 
Experts say more needs to be done to address the safety of these birds and it will be unethical to release them under the current scenario.
 
“Just breeding vultures in captivity is not a solution on its own as we cannot release them safely. The main issue behind declining vulture populations has not been taken care of and the wretched drugs are still very much in the system. The risks of these critically endangered birds eating cattle carcass with NSAIDS are still very high,” said Chris Bowden, co-chair, Vulture Specialist Group at the International Union for Conservation of Nature.
 
The drugs in question here are Diclofenac and its three alternatives: Aeclofenac, Ketoprofen and Nimesulide. While Diclofenac, the main drug that brought down the vulture’s population drastically, has been banned in India, experts say its alternatives are still in rampant use in Bengaluru and surrounding areas. 
“While there has not been a large-scale survey, some work has been done in the Ramanagaram area that has established that pharmacies are still supplying toxic drugs to veterinarians and cattle owners,” added Chris.

Raptors prey on cattle carcasses at dumping yards and other places, ingesting NSAIDS. 
Avian experts say that it is not just the open dumping of cattle carcasses with traces of NSAIDS, but dump yards also pose threat to these critically endangered species. 
“Raptors can fly more than a hundred kilometres in search of food on a daily basis. We monitored a few dumping yards in and around the area and found that carcass waste from nearby beef markets packed in plastic and gunny bags is dumped regularly. We sighted Egyptian vultures using these dumping yards for foraging,” said Satyapramod H V, of Karnataka Vulture Conservation Trust.
 
Notably, the behaviour of these scavenger birds, their movement pattern, etc, have not been studied in detail in the past. Likewise, there is no large-scale study to access the cattle carcass samples in and around the city to understand if there are traces of NSAIDS.
 
“Before getting started with the breeding program and releasing the birds into the wild, we need to conduct extensive work to understand how much cattle carcass is being dumped in open and the amount of NSAIDs in the carcass,” said Satyapramod. 

Safe alternatives to NSAIDS 
Meloxicam and Tolfenamic Acid are two safe alternatives to Diclofenac and other harmful NSAIDS. Experts say the immediate priority is to ban the drugs that are harmful to the vultures.
 
“It is doable as there are safer alternatives available,” informed Bowden. Notably, Meloxicam, one of the two safe NSAIDS, was tested on African vultures a few years ago and was found to be safe. The drug was also tested in India at multiple levels. It was directly released into the stomach of the raptors and other scavenger avian species.
 
Buffalos were injected with it and then were slaughtered and fed to the vultures to replicate the situation in the wild. The results showed that the drug is out of harm’s way.
 
Experts say that while Diclofenac was a late starter, it turned out to be popular as its mechanism of action is much faster. Diclofenac is economical as well. The patent was removed long back and multiple companies started manufacturing the drug leading to high supply and demand.
 
According to Dr Percy Avari, assistant professor, Department of Poultry Science, Mumbai Veterinary College, the harmful NSAIDS are still in rampant use as many veterinarians are still not convinced about the usefulness of Meloxicam and Tolfenamic Acid.
 
Moreover, many are unaware of the harmful impacts of Diclofenac, Aeclofenac, Ketoprofen and Nimesulide on vultures. “It is critical to educate people working on the ground.
 
We should also look for other safer alternatives so that veterinarians have other options. Moreover, treating ill or geriatric cows with these harmful drugs should be completely stopped,” said Dr Avari.