Injured snakes, reptiles and other wild animals and birds rescued and treated at the People For Animals (PFA) Wildlife Hospital in Bengaluru are indeed fortunate. They undergo treatment with state-of-the-art tech: advanced physio-laser treatment combined with traditional Chinese acupuncture, a fusion of both modern and traditional physiotherapy, said senior vet Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff, general manager at PFA, situated off Uttarahalli Main Road near Kengeri.

PFA’s volunteers received a lot of calls regarding injured snakes and peacocks soon after the lockdown was relaxed in a phased manner.

The serpents the rescuers come across, include spectacled cobras, rat snakes, keelbacks, Russell’s vipers, saw-scaled vipers, common kraits and sand boas. “Most injuries or fractures the snakes sustain are due to construction activities by earth movers. Sometimes the reptiles are run over on roads by vehicles,” said Dr Shariff.

A snake’s skeleton is different from most vertebrates — it does not have any appendages. It is made up of a skull, vertebrae (up to 500) and ribs. If a snake sustains a fracture mid-body, it would be paralysed and wouldn’t be able to move.

Bengalureans are often reporting injured snakes to animal rescue teams or the municipal control room, Dr Shariff told BM.

Soon after the injured reptile is brought to PFA, the injury and the extent of the fracture are diagnosed by digital x-rays and immediately the treatment is commenced, Dr Shariff said, adding that one wouldn’t know how much time the snake was left unattended. If a considerable amount of time passes and if it’s a major fracture, gangrene would develop and chances of the snake surviving are minimal.


 .

“Usually with traditional treatment, the snake would be out of action for six to eight months and it has to depend on caregiving and food, but with the advanced physio-laser therapy combined with acupuncture, the rehabilitation time can be reduced by 30% to 35% depending on the health of the snake,” Dr Shariff explained.

Days ago, PFA released an Indian spectacled cobra and a Russel’s viper into the wild after the two were successfully treated for fractures. The veterinarians were confident that the two could defend themselves in the urban wild. The cobra was rescued from RR Nagar four months ago and the viper from Nagarbhavi five months ago. Both underwent treatment and rehabilitation at PFA.

Apart from snakes, land and water-dwelling reptiles - terrapins, turtles and tortoises - are also treated at PFA. “Earlier, a tortoise/turtle shell fracture was rectified using surgical wires and pins which would look like a mess over the shell and would get caught in materials floating or under water. Now we use light-weight titanium plates which are compact. The procedure is impeccable,” Dr Shariff noted.


 .

Besides, PFA treats injured kites, peacocks, macaques and other birds using advanced tech.

“Kites get injured mostly due to the Chinese manja, while peacocks are often hit by vehicles on roads. Macaques and other primates like slender lorises suffer fractures and injuries due to falls,” Mahalakshmi Parthasarathy, environmentalist and trustee of PFA, told Mirror.

“Fractures of limbs, wings and other smaller bones are treated using intramedullary pins, surgically implanted after performing x-rays of injured birds and animals,” Dr Shariff said.

Quite often, Bengalureans are reporting injured snakes… Now, rehabilitation time is reduced by 30 to 35% depending on health of the snake… — Col Dr Navaz Shariff, senior vet, PFA


 Quite often, Bengalureans are reporting injured snakes… Now, rehabilitation time is reduced by 30 to 35% depending on health of the snake…— Col Dr Navaz Shariff, senior vet, PFA

Since inception, PFA have rescued, rehabilitated and released a total of nearly 30,000 reptiles, wild animals and birds. There are five two-wheelers and three four-wheelers at the PFA for rescue operations by wildlife rescue volunteers. There are three veterinarians on duty, one rehabilitator and a curator.

“Nowadays, PFA is receiving a lot of rescue calls for injured wild animals. We do have resources such as operating theatres, medical and technological infra. We could do much more for the voiceless wild animals,” Dr Shariff concluded.