The integrated film studio complex, Film City (Goregaon East, Mumbai), is undergoing a makeover. And the Maharashtra government has appointed award-winning art director Nitin Chandrakant Desai to develop the master plan for the same.
 
 The makeover will see the formation of a Bollywood museum in the said site. The construction work in this regard will commence next year.
 
  Since the last few years, the state government has been toying with the idea to prop up Film City. “However, concrete plans were never made in this regard. Finally, everything has been decided. The makeover is most likely to start within the next eight months,” a source told Mirror. 
 
 Explaining what swung the tender in Desai’s favour, the source added, “Well, Nitin’s selection has raised a few eyebrows in the industry, but then it is certain that he has a definite vision and resources to convert Film City into an extremely modern set-up. The ambience would also be bettered.”  
 
 Confirming the news, managing director of Film City, Shyam Tagade, told Mirror,  “Yes, Nitin Desai has been appointed as a consultant and will draw up the development plan of Film City, including the setting up of a Bollywood museum.”
 
 At present, there are 16 studios, 40 outdoor locations in the Film City campus spread over 520 acres. Revealed Tagade, “We are planning to recast the studios and provide better facilities for shooting. One of the main attractions will be a zone for tourists. Shoots get disturbed if tourists visit the studio. So, we will now have an area where tourists can come and visit.”
 
 “Apart from this, we will have access control. There will be a section where mock shootings will take place to show people a visual of what goes on inside,” added Tagade. To attract tourists, Film City also plans to have a theme park and hotels. 
 
 Talking about the proposed Bollywood museum, Tagade said that galleries of photographs would be put up which would depict the history of Indian cinema. There will be an amphitheatre as well.
 
 After Desai submits his plan, Film City officials would appoint a contractor to develop the area jointly with them. However, Tagade mentioned that the government is planning to go in for a public-private partnership or develop the area on a build-operate and Transfer basis.
 
 However, the increased activity in the Film City will cause a great deal of disturbance to the flora and fauna of the Sanjay Gandhi National Park in the neighbourhood. This in turn might pose a roadblock to Desai’s ambitious venture. A senior Indian Forest Service officer (on request of anonymity) said, “Film City has anyways been creating a lot of din. The theme park and the increase in the number of tourists will add to the decibel levels. We will surely oppose the makeover part that affects wildlife.”
 
 Nitin Chandrakant Desai remained unavailable for comment.
 
 
 About Nitin Desai
 
 Nitin Chandrakant Desai is a noted Indian art director and production designer-turned film and television producer, most known for his work in films like, Lagaan (2001), Jodhaa Akbar (2008), Devdas (2002) and Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam (1999). During his career spanning 20 years, he has worked with directors like Ashutosh Gowarikar, Vidhu Vinod Chopra, Rajkumar Hirani and Sanjay Leela Bhansali. In 2002, he turned film producer with Chandrakant Productions' Desh Devi, a devotional film on the Devi Mata of Kutch.
 
 He has won the National Film Award for Best Art Direction four times, and Filmfare Best Art Direction Award three times. In 2005, he opened his ND Studios spread over 52 acres at Karjat, which has since hosted movies like Jodha Akbar, Traffic Signal as the TV show Bigg Boss.