Pronouncing him guilty in the 1998 blackbuck poaching case on Thursday, a Jodhpur court sentenced Bollywood star Salman Khan to five years of imprisonment. While other co-accused - Tabu, Neelam, Saif Ali Khan and Sonali Bendre – have been acquitted, the 52-year-old Bajrangi Bhaijaan actor was convicted under Section 9/51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act.

Salman’s jail sentence has created a wave of concern and worry in Bollywood, with the future of several projects featuring the star now in jeopardy.

Race 3

Salman’s Race 3, directed by Remo D’Souza, completed a shooting schedule in Abu Dhabi and was heading towards an Eid release. The film also stars Jacqueline Fernandez, Anil Kapoor, Bobby Deol, Daisy Shah and Saqib Saleem and the actor’s absence during the film’s promotion might be a serious setback.

Read Also:
Salman Khan convicted in blackbuck poaching case: LIVE updates

Bharat

Directed by Atul Agnihotri and produced by Atul Agnihotri, Bharat is the official remake of Korean film Ode to My Father. The film is in pre-production and is expected to release on Eid 2019. The shoot was to begin in April. The shooting schedule and release date will now have to be altered depending on the eventuality of Salman getting bail.

Dabangg 3

Salman was to kickstart shooting of the third instalment of the Dabangg franchise, which also stars Sonakshi Sinha. The film was to go on the floors in mid-2018.

Kick 2

The second film in the Kick series had been announced and is to be directed by Sajid Nadiadwala.

Read Also:
Salman blackbuck poaching case: A timeline

Bigg Boss

Salman has been hosting the reality TV show Bigg boss for over eight years now.

A popular game show on TV

For a popular quiz show, Salman has reportedly already shot teasers and other promotional material. He was to shoot for this show after wrapping up Race 3.

The Sultan actor was accused of killing two blackbucks in October 1998 in Kankani village near Jodhpur, where he was present during the shoot of Sooraj Barjatya’s Hum Saath Saath Hain.