Cows make up the largest number of strays on our streets. But the New Age gau rakshak is too busy doing other things to save them
 
 I am a gau rakshak, however horrible that may sound (in today’s context) to many of you.
 
 For years, some of us have tried to stop the illegal transportation of cows and calves to illegal abattoirs for slaughter. (In some states, for every legal abattoir there are a hundred illegal ones.) At times, we succeeded. More often, we failed. They got away with bribery or influence; or just the callousness of the local police.
 
 But for all us who love animals, it’s a scarring sight. Luckless cattle packed into trucks and tempos with their legs broken so that more of them can be fitted in, one on top of the other. Some of them die, asphyxiated before even reaching the abattoir. Even the ones rescued barely survive.
 
 I am not just a gau rakshak. I am also a kutta rakshak, a billi rakshak, a bhais rakshak, even a chidiya rakshak, trying to save sparrows and swallows from extinction. For me it’s not about protecting an animal I worship. It is about protecting animals – all animals, all birds, all living creatures. For I believe this planet belongs as much to them as to you and me. Over the years, as I met others, I learnt how to become a tiger rakshak, an elephant rakshak, a black buck rakshak. I love all species; even the gentle nilgai that the Government has labeled as vermin, which means it’s fine to kill them. I believe all species bring beauty and magic to a world, we, humans are diminishing as we murder the forests and mangroves which are their natural home.
 
 But this journey, like all long journeys, began with a small step. That step was trying to protect the strays on the streets of our cities. When I first came to big, bad Bombay 35 years ago, stray dogs were picked up randomly and killed. Beating, poisoning, electrocution in large water tubs were some of the steps followed to cleanse the streets of strays. Yet every year, their numbers grew. We took a census, went to the courts, requested for a sterilization program instead. The courts, as usual, took some time but stopped the killing. Our justice system may be slow but it’s humane. We breathed easy. Now the problem was how to sterilize them with the meagre
 resources at our command. Luckily, many NGOs sprung up and took on the task. And they have done an admirable job.
 
 There are better men and women than me who look after our amazing wildlife and protect it. This is actually a much tougher task because there is money to be made from the forests and poachers are more protected than the animals there. So even though we all know who kills the tiger or the one-horned rhino (and to what purpose), the guilty are rarely caught and punished.
 
 In the cities, the killers are just random people. They propagate lies to explain their horrendous killings. Their main targets are dogs and cats but abandoned cattle, census shows, are the largest number of strays on our streets. They are chucked out by their owners once they are no longer useful. Most of them die eating plastic because they are so desperately hungry.
 
 Few gau rakshaks bother about them. They are too busy chasing the cows (and now buffaloes) going for slaughter. Sometimes, in their misplaced enthusiasm, they also attack those who are taking the cows legally for slaughter, for after all, cow slaughter is not illegal in all states.
 
 I wish it was. It would have not only saved cows but also human lives. Particularly lives of Muslims and Dalits and nomadic tribes who have now become the biggest target of the New Age gau rakshak on a rampage. They are now attacking anyone who they suspect is raising animals and killing them for food: shepherds, milkmen, normal people with meat in their frigidaires.
 
 Curiously, as we speak of gau rakshaks, we have proudly emerged as the world’s largest exporter of beef. According to the US Department of Agriculture, we exported 2.4 million tonnes of beef and veal in 2015, and the number is growing every year. India, Brazil and Australia, between them, account for 58.7% of the world’s beef exports. India alone, 23.5%.
 
 And yes, we make an embarrassing lot of money from it. ICRA predicts our annual earnings from beef export will touch Rs 40,000 crore in the next five years. It’s sad that most journalists who gleefully report this achievement justify it on the ground that cows are not killed, only buffaloes. We make a moral distinction between eating beef and carabeef, as if it really mattered to the animal.
 
 While the guys who work in the slaughter houses are largely Muslims, and the skinners, Dalits, the actual business of exporting beef is run by many wealthy and powerful people who are neither Muslims nor Dalits. They brand their business with Muslim names to make it easier to sell to Middle Eastern markets and to camouflage their own identity.
 
 If the gau rakshaks are serious about their intent, should they not be targeting these big guys instead of beating up and killing those who are merely employed to do their dirty work?
 
 Yes, I am still a gau rakshak. But the animal movement we built over the years, teaching people the importance of compassion towards all living creatures, is now on the verge of losing its legitimacy because of a few bullies and murderers. No one knows where they have come from. No one knows what they are up to. But one thing is clear: Saving cows is not on their agenda. Killing people is.