Autopsy reports on the simians allegedly shot dead don’t mention bullet wounds, say they only fell from a height
 
 	The death of two monkeys at an upscale Koramangala apartment a month ago has taken an intriguing turn. The autopsy reports have ruled out bullet injuries, and have attributed the deaths to the animals’ obesity! After gunning down two monkeys, man on the run
 	  	Though the forest department had alleged that the monkeys had died after a resident of Raheja Residential Apartment fired at them from the second floor, identical autopsy reports given by the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals (Bannerghatta National Park) state: “The animal was threatened to fall from heights, was fallen on concrete floor, and obesity of the animal lead to internal organ rupture...and death (sic).” A few forest officials, however, ridiculed the reports, asking: “Why are there no fractures in the monkeys’ limbs if they had fallen from the second floor? Second, why do the reports not explain how the monkeys’ abdomens were punctured?”  Hundreds pay tribute to dead monkeys
 	  	Bangalore Mirror was the first to report about the two monkey deaths (After gunning down two monkeys, man on the run, BM, Jan 19), about the call for a condolence meeting (To mourn death of two monkeys, residents call for condolence meeting, BM, Jan 24), and about the condolence meeting itself (Hundreds pay tribute to dead monkeys, BM, Jan 29).
 	  	In an earlier report (BM, Jan 24), we had quoted K R Puram Range Forest Officer Eranna B saying that the post-mortem report from Bannerghatta National Park had confirmed that the monkeys died of bullet injuries, and that four bullets were fired at them.   	Also, we had quoted one Mohan K, BBMP forest cell volunteer, to report that both the dead monkeys were females, and that one of them was pregnant (BM, Jan 19). 
 	  	But the reports issued by the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals confirm that one of them was a male. No pregnancy has been mentioned in the autopsy report on the female monkey.
 	  	This had become the first case in the city where two monkeys were allegedly shot dead by a civilian. The FIR filed against Roopesh, 37, an engineer who resides in Raheja Residency, PINE block, Koramangala 3rd block, by the Range Forest Officer, had booked him for hunting and violating Section 9 of the Wildlife Protection Act. 
 	  	The autopsy report, a copy of which is available with us, signed by the Assistant Director (Veterinary Service, Bannerghatta Biological Park) reads: “The carcass condition was good, well body condition, rigor mortis set in, pale mucous membranes, punctured wound in the left thoracic region with blood stains, severe bruises and harmatoma at entire lower abdomen region and pelvic region (sic).” 	The report also mentions that a punctured wound was found at the left thoracic region “about one inch depth and blood stained around that area, but no exit wound seen in the thorax (sic)”.
 	  	When contacted, I M Nagaraj, investigation officer and Assistant Conservator of Forests, Bangalore South, said, "I am looking after the investigation. There’s no mention of bullets in the autopsy report, and because of this the accused has been granted anticipatory bail. The report says that the monkey had fallen from a height and died. Doctors should have clearly mentioned that the monkeys died because of gunshot. The entire thing has vanished from the report. It is shocking. I have also asked the local police to check about the availability of gun in his house. Now I will issue an order that the accused Roopesh should compulsorily report to the range forest office once in a week during working days. This will make sure that he is in the city and not running away from the case."
 	  	Sharath Babu, environmental advisor to BBMP, said, “The monkeys were struggling after the incident, and the animal husbandry joint director Parvez Ahmed Piran had sent a veterinary official to attend the case, but the Koramangala police have not taken any action against Roopesh under the Arms Act. The cops have also not seized the weapon.“