Elephant’s crisscross tusks shortened to prevent farm raids and aid feeding in wild

A four-year-old tusker in Bandipur Tiger Reserve recently got a new lease on life after veterinarians from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) carried out a unique dental procedure, akin to tooth aligning in humans.

According to KFD officials at Bandipur, the young elephant had been continuously raiding farmlands in the GS Betta range of Bandipur Tiger Reserve for over the last six months. Upon requests from local farmers, the Bandipur administration received an order from the Chief Wildlife Warden, KFD, to capture the elephant.

However, Bandipur officials decided to observe the jumbo to understand the reason behind its frequent raids on banana and corn fields. They found this case intriguing as the elephant did not miss a single day and consistently raided the farmlands.

“We had received information about an elephant that had been continuously raiding farmlands and crops in the JS Betta range of Gundlupete Taluk of Bandipur Tiger Reserve. We observed the animal as it continued to descend into farmlands and raided crops, particularly bananas and corn. Upon observation, we realized its tusks were in a criss-cross pattern. The animal was not able to lift its head or trunk and graze. The jumbo was raiding farmlands because it was unable to feed in the wild and was thus hungry,” said S Prabhakaran, Deputy Conservator of Forest and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

Since the animal was healthy and young, officials decided to shorten the tusks to facilitate feeding and release him back into the forest afterwards. The elephant underwent the procedure nearly ten days ago. KFD officials noted that while this procedure is conducted on camp elephants regularly, not many wild elephants have gone through it.

“Our vets concluded that the tusks had to be shortened. The procedure was carried out while shifting the elephant. Elephants need to be tranquillised for capture and shifting. We carried out the procedure while the animal was sedated. It was a nearly 20-minute-long procedure,” informed Prabhakaran.

Our vets concluded that the tusks had to be shortened. The procedure was carried out while shifting the elephant. Elephants need to be tranquillised for capture and shifting–S Prabhakaran, Deputy Conservator of Forest and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve
The elephant has now been released into the wild and is being monitored by the department around the clock.

“The elephant has settled in a new place, and we are observing him continuously. It is easy to identify him since the tusk has been cut. We will keep an eye on him for some more time. The tusk is short and looks unusual now, but it will soon grow and become blunt as the animal continues to forage,” added Prabhakaran.