In what had created curiosity among highschool kids, the state government had announced a forest exposure programme to sensitise students to the issues of forest and wildlife. 

 	But 10 months later, the government has realised that the project is a herculean task to accomplish considering the huge number of schools and kids. The government has now asked authorities to implement the scheme initially at schools located close to the forest areas. 

 	The programme —Chinnara Vanya Darshana — had been announced for 10,000 students belonging to Class 9. As part of the programme, government had planned to take students to forests on weekends for awareness. However, now the government has realised that taking lakhs of students to forests at once would be a difficult task and decided to go about it in a phased manner. An amount of `2 crore has been released for the programme. 

 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, a senior officer from the forest, environment and ecology department said, “There are 14,472 high schools across the state with lakhs of students in Class 9. Taking such huge number of students into a forest at once may not be possible. So we have decided to go in for only those schools located close to the forest areas. Subsequently, we may focus on others too. The visits will happen either to the reserved forests or national parks depending on the school’s proximity.” 

 	According to the government order, a copy of which is available with Bangalore Mirror, Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has chosen 16 forest areas to conduct exposure programme for the high school kids. 

 	“The students will be taken to RFOs offices in designated forest areas before taken them inside forests. They will be put up at forest camps for two days and introduced to various aspects of forests through activities. Besides, students will also be taken on a safari to identify animals, birds and trees,” the order said. 
 	  	KFD also has plans to take students to timber depot, forest nurseries, and sacred forests.