Whenever Vinod Lal Heera Eshwer has to convince someone about the importance of trees, he draws an illustration that shows a tree standing between an exhaust-emitting car and a cloud. The logic is if the tree wasn’t there, there would be no rain. “But it is not so easy to talk about the dangers of plastic. People are not easily convinced,” says Vinod, who has dedicated a large part of his life and energy in bringing awareness about the need to grow trees, harvest rain and most of all, the need to ban the use of plastic.

Surprising, for someone who was trained to be a polymer engineer. After studying about the harmful chemicals that go into making this product, Vinod vowed never to practise the vocation. 

‘ESCAPE’ FROM HOME
“I never wanted to be an engineer but my father was sure it was the best thing for me. So I took up polymer engineering because that was the only branch for which I would have to leave home,” says Vinod, now a successful copywriter at Meridian Communications, an ad agency.

“I hated engineering from the beginning and did not want to continue. Somehow I stuck on and completed the course.” But he managed to follow his calling - two years into engineering, he started an ad agency of his own.

It’s been many years now and a nature lover that he is, Vinod is using his skills as a creative advertising professional to take forward his crusade to save the environment. He, along with other like-minded people, including his colleague N Ramesh who is art director, have designed many campaigns that spread important social messages.

SLEW OF AWARDS
One of the campaigns on the importance of planting and growing trees, which was initially created by the two as a social message, was later endorsed by the World Wildlife Fund and managed to bag almost all the advertising awards in India and abroad, including London International Advertising awards and at the Cannes international fest.

His campaigns for the Bangalore-based voluntary organisation, Treesforfree, has also bagged innumerable awards, including the ‘One Show Design’ awards.

“We did many campaigns for treesforfree and I still volunteer with the organisation, propagating the message of greening one’s environment. On the journey, there were many who identified with the cause we were campaigning for and decided to give their services free of cost,” says Vinod.

NO TO PLASTIC
Last year, Vinod created a website and a blog to send across a strong message against plastic. That is how www.lessplasticmorelife.org was born. “All plastic is equally harmful. The only good plastic bag is a cloth bag,” says Vinod with conviction. An image of a dead cow inside a plastic bag and other similar images of endangered species, that greet you as you open the website, jolts you and can be quite disturbing. That’s exactly what it is meant to do - jolt you into recognising the effect that plastic can have on a living being. “We wanted to say - ‘Plastic bags kill cows because they choke on them while eating from garbage bins. Decide which one is more sacred to you.’ That is the only way people will listen.” 

“My agency, Meridian Communications, sponsored the whole campaign. We did an outdoor and poster campaign and this one too bagged a lot of awards. The website was again developed by my friend Dipen Sagar and designed by Jerald Samuel free of cost.”

To take it one step forward, Vinod has now designed attractive cloth bags and is asking everyone he knows to take a cloth bag while shopping. “We are in talks with various NGOs to take these designs for free and use them to manufacture cloth bags,” he adds. He is also talking to schools and corporates to create awareness about hazards of plastic. How difficult is it to influence people? “There are some who really understand and decide to adopt a no-plastic policy. But it is not easy. Not many see the logic of how plastic can harm us because they do not see the effect immediately,” laments Vinod. 

But that does not deter him. Recently, he started another social venture - a website called water for free that talks about the benefits of rainwater harvesting. “Even if a miniscule of the population is converted, it is a victory for me,” he says. WHY PLASTIC IS BAD
Plastic is made by burning oil, a process that emits huge quantities of greenhouse gases and contributes to global warming and climate change

If buried, they end up in the soil, preventing rainwater from percolating through the soil and recharging the groundwater table. They do not decompose easily

They also pollute our oceans, rivers, lakes, and other water bodies and contaminate the sources of our drinking water

If plastic is burnt, cancer-causing gases are released and these end up in our own lungs

They also end up in the guts of animals, who mistake the bags for food, ingest them, and die