Forest department will test steel wire rope to prevent elephants from entering farmlands

The Karnataka Forest Department has come up with a new ploy to keep elephants out of the farmlands. And if everything goes as per the plan, the villagers on the fringe areas of forests in the state will soon heave a sigh of relief.

After elephant-proof trenches, railway barricades, solar power tentacle fences, it’s time for the department to test steel wire ropes to contain the jumbos.

“We are looking at a new method to contain elephant movements along the forest fringes. We will be using a fencing model that has already been tried and tested by the Hosur forest division in Tamil Nadu. The model, which includes steel wire ropes tied between steel poles, is being implemented on a pilot basis in the Veeranahosalli range of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve with few modifications based on our requirements. The Veeranahosalli range is a high conflict zone and has witnessed intense human-elephant conflict situations in the past,” said Mahesh Kumar, director of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve.

Work on the 3.5 kilometers of steel wire fencing project is expected to commence shortly. The department says that it took to the new method after traditional methods such as barbed fencing, elephant trenches and solar-powered fencing turned out to be ineffective.

“We have multiple methods to try and keep elephants away from the villages and farmlands and we use a combination of these in different places. However, some of these strategies have turned out to be ineffective. While the elephant-proof trenches face the problem of soil collapsing regularly, solar-powered fencing also could not go a long way. The best solution so far has been railway barricades,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.


We have multiple methods to try and keep elephants away from the villages and farmlandsKumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Dept
Officials say that jumbos easily destroy barbed fencing and solar-powered fencing by uprooting huge trees and pulling them over the fences. While railway barricades have been very useful, there have been stray cases of the pachyderms bringing that down too.

“There have been some stray cases where elephants have crossed the steel railway barricades too. To add to that, these barricades are also expensive. The cost of procurement and erection has become a costly affair for the department. Putting up railway barricades costs us Rs 1.3-1.5 crore per km. The steel wire ropes are the same as the steel ropes used for suspension bridges and will cost us Rs 50-55 lakh per km,” said Kumar Pushkar.

The steel rope model has other advantages too. Due to its retractable nature, the animals are less likely to get support. “It will not let the animals rest their weight on the barricade and break it open. While currently the project is being implemented on a pilot basis at Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, if the model works well, it will replace railway barricades in other forest fringe areas too,” said Mahesh Kumar.