A man walked into an aquarium in Jayaprakash Nagar in South Bengaluru and tried to extort its owner, claiming that he was with the anti-poaching division. The aquarium owner was unfazed, but this man managed to hoodwink the forest officials into believing that he is a senior officer as they came to the aquarium to raid it, based on his tip-off.

Two men came to the Bloo Aqua Studio on Puttenahalli Main Road on Thursday. “One of them introduced himself as Rahul and said he was looking for a marine tank and I asked him for the specifications,” said Kavitha Nandakumar, proprietor of Bloo Aquarium. The other guy asked her for corals. 

Nandakumar told him that corals are endangered and are prohibited under Wildlife Protection Act. “I told him that we don’t deal with any illegal stuff,” she said. The man’s tone changed. He identified himself as Deepak Kumar and said he was an officer with the Anti-Poaching division and Wildlife crime.

 His ID card showed he is the president of All India Raiding Team.

“He demanded that I pay him Rs 1.5 lakh or he would get the aquarium raided by forest officials, who would seal it,” Nandakumar said.

When that did not work out, the man returned to the aquarium on Friday. “Deepak called up a few senior forest officials -- office of Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) and Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) -- and asked them to rush to Bloo Aquarium. The officials arrived and conducted a raid on the aquarium for two hours. Deepak showed the officials some corals but I clarified that they were artificial,” she said.

A forest official source said that during the raid Deepak was treated as a senior forest officer due to the manner in which he barged into the aquarium and the stern attitude with other officials. They are said to have got him a breakfast and even arranged a car to escort him after his ‘tip-off’.

But when nothing was coming out of the 2-hour raid, Deepak managed to whisk away from the scene. The officials took samples of the corals to ascertain if they are fake. Assistant Conservator of Forests Venkatesh said, “Whenever we receive such information from an informer, we check if any wildlife crimes are being committed. But we have come to know from others that Deepak could be a fraud. I have told the Range Forest Officer (RFO) Kaggalipura to file a complaint and investigate.”

Nandakumar also probed deeper using the photo she had clicked of him. “When I posted his picture on social media, a few of my friends recognised him and said he had come to their shop to extort money. He took around Rs 5,000- 30,000,” said Nandakumar. She has filed a complaint with Puttenahalli police.