They are creating awareness on rules to be followed while travelling to forests
 
 	Many are heading out of Bengaluru especially to forests during year-end break. However, scores of Bengalureans are also heading out of the city to ensure that those going out of Bengaluru are safe!
 	  	“During the holiday season of Dasara, at the entrance check post of Bandipur, a traveller asked me whether animals were present here?” Yes, I said. Oh really, he exclaimed.” Long holidays such as Dasara, Diwali and New Year present opportunities for recreation to stressed city dwellers. Hill stations such as Ooty, Wayanad are among the hot choices of holiday destinations. However, one has to travel through Bandipur tiger reserve to reach these tourist hot spots (though alternate routes exist),” said Prashanth S, a Bengaluru-based software engineer adding that for the last few years, it has been noticed that the vehicular volume has grown by about 11 pc annually, proportionately increasing traffic density. Traffic through ecologically fragile landscapes exerts immense pressure on such habitats like Bandipur tiger reserve.
 	  	Venkat Raj, a techie who is volunteering at the outreach programme at Bandipur, said the long holidays like Christmas and New Year are a nightmare especially for wild animals at Bandipur. To mitigate such harmful effects, Karnataka High court had ordered closure of NH212 and 67 that cut across Bandipur tiger reserve for traffic from 9 pm to 6 am. Such welcome measures are to be applauded and followed. As per article 51 A of Fundamental Duties, every citizen is ought to be discharging this fundamental duty towards nature. 

 	Don’t travel at night
 	  	“Infrequent travellers and those from far off states may not be aware of such well-intentioned rules. Most travellers plan their journey in a manner that night time is used for travelling and reach their destinations or way back at day break. Those unlucky or uninformed travellers end up at check post at night after 9 pm unaware of the closure or the purpose of the closure. Inevitably, they grieve about the inconvenience or and important work they may miss after being stuck at the check post,” added Chandra Shekar, another techie who is now on a mission to educate these techies.
 	  	Praveen Ramaswamy, a techie-turned-conservationist said that Vanya , a non-profit trust has been working to fill this gap and create enough publicity to inform travellers about night closure and the reasons behind it. 
 	  	Hence you would not be surprised if you find a person at Bandipur check post walk up to you and inform you on this aspect. “Such outreach programs provide a wealth of knowledge such as proper understanding of travellers concerns, indications on the understanding or lack of it about ecological concerns, their willingness or lack of it. Information thus gained will be useful during discussions with concerned authorities such as Forest and police in designing, planning and implementation of measures that are on the middle path wherein interests of both Wildlife and travellers are attended equally,” he added.
 	  	While most of our populace are out this Christmas and New Year in revelry, a bunch of city youth from Vanya silently work as crusaders for wildlife and forests. Enhancing the support for forest and wildlife conservation, keen interest in human welfare creates a win-win situation.
 	  	It may be recalled that Bangalore Mirror had carried a story-“Festive weekend wreaks havoc in forests (October 26, 2015) as to how the long Dasara weekend was a 	 nightmare.