Organisers of the Republic Day celebrations at the Manekshaw Parade grounds on Thursday cut a sorry figure when the traditional practice of releasing pigeons — the symbol of peace, freedom and all that is noble — turned a complete fiasco. Most of the birds just flopped to the ground and struggled to fly.
   The birds were released by school children in full view of the dignitaries, including governor HR Bhardwaj and chief minister Sadananda Gowda. ‘Vande Mataram’ played in the background and, while a few birds flew away, around 20 others just tumbled to the ground. The programme continued without a pause.
   Sources claim the flock of homing pigeons was bought from Russell Market at a heavy discount — Rs 100 for a pair — because the birds were unhealthy and physically impaired. A pair of healthy pigeons costs Rs 700.
   The incident has enraged animal rights activists and wildlife enthusiasts who are now planning to push for a ban on the practice of releasing pigeons at official functions. 
 
 The pigeons were in such poor condition that some died after falling to the ground. While most of the dignitaries looked on in stunned embarrassment, S Harish, the deputy mayor, showed admirable presence of mind by quickly rushing out of the enclosure for dignitaries and putting in a call to the BBMP’s forest cell. Wildlife volunteers then came to rescue the struggling birds, but for some it was too late. Volunteers say some of those rescued may not make it through the night.
   “It was a sorry spectacle,” said Rajesh M, a wildlife volunteer. “The VVIPs sat stunned as the birds struggled. We found two of them lying at the entrance, while another two were beside the dais. The rest were scattered around. The birds were in bad shape. We found one which had no eyes, another had no wings, while one had its neck broken. We also found a young pigeon which hasn’t learnt to fly as yet. At least one bird became prey to a hawk while another died in our hands. Is this the way to show the spirit of Indian freedom movement?” he said.
   The rescued birds were shifted to the BBMP’s forest cell clinic. “It’s an insult to the whole celebration,” said Rajesh. “These birds are supposed to represent the spirit of the Indian freedom movement, but instead of flying they just flopped down. One of the birds died in my hands. Most of the birds were physically impaired. We will move to get a ban imposed on the practice of releasing pigeons at public functions.” 
   Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore urban, said, “This is a disturbing incident. These birds should be protected. Kudos to the deputy mayor for showing great presence of mind. We will seek to stop this practice. If they want to release birds, they should at least ensure the 
 birds are healthy and can fly.”
 
 
  At least one bird became prey to a hawk while another died in our hands