The National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS) for Ecology and Biodiversity Research will set up a field station for long-term monitoring of flora and fauna vis-a-vis climate change.
 
Dr Saraswathy Ganapathy, wife of late Girish Karnad and family have made available a large tract of uncultivated land near Western Ghats to the National Centre for Biological Sciences for Ecology and Biodiversity Research and long-term monitoring of biodiversity.

“The field will be made available for the larger community of ecologists and wildlife biologists in the region for their studies on biodiversity and conservation,” said Professor LS Shashidhara, Director of NCBS-TIFR.

NCBS-TIFR announced this amid a meeting of ecologists and wildlife biologists from academia, government organisations and NGOs across Bengaluru and Mysore regions. The meeting was aimed at fostering collaborative ecological research and exploring ways to establish long-term ecological monitoring in the country.
 
During the meeting, the group focussed on locating crucial spaces to set up long-term monitoring programmes, indicative parameters and, finding sources of funding for such initiatives. The discussion and suggestions also included the need for capacity building and training that ensures the availability of trained personnel for continuous monitoring of Indian biodiversity for decades to come.

Dr Ganapathy explaining her motivation to dedicate this land for research said, “We have always wanted to find a use for this land that preserves it for Coorg and protects the environment. We couldn’t have hoped for a better partner than NCBS to be its steward. Knowing that this forest will support long-term ecological research is very exciting”.

Professor Uma Ramakrishnan, a well-known population geneticist working on the conservation of endangered species said, “Environmental issues seem to surround us. To address these we must adopt sustainable practices, but also deepen our understanding of nature: how will it change, and how can it mitigate ongoing negative global effects. Only long-term studies allow such understanding. This required long-term access to parcels of land in biodiversity hotspots like the western ghats. We at NCBS are thrilled with this opportunity to be custodians of and work with this land parcel. We hope to contribute to scientific understanding.”

Professor Satyajit Mayor said, “With the lack of commitment to ecological monitoring and serious ecological stresses on the Indian sub-continent, long-term ecological monitoring of changes in ecosystems and biodiversity in vulnerable hotspots of extreme biological diversity becomes more than an imperative.”