A thriving business across Bangalore would come to a standstill following the Union government's decision to ban on the sale of peacock feathers. A new bill is likely to be passed in the upcoming budget session of the Lok Sabha. Even though the peacock is the national bird and protected by the Indian Wildlife Act, there is no ban on the sale of its feathers, which has a huge market. 
 
 Every day, traders from north India and rural parts of north Karnataka sell as many as 500 to 1,000 feathers on the busy streets of Majestic and Gandhinagar. This apart, the feathers are sold in several pilgrimage centres. 
   With heavy demand, traders source their requirements from Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. Officials of the forest department and wildlife activists suspect that the booming trade has made traders resort to clandestine killing of the bird as there are only so many feathers that a peacock can shed in a day.
   More than five vendors from Uttar Pradesh have been selling peacock feathers in the city for the last two years. They go all the way to Rajasthan to purchase feathers in bulk (1,000 feathers for Rs 2,000). Every vendor purchases up to 4,000 feathers at a time and sells in the city at the rate of about Rs 10,000 for 1,000 feathers.
   Ajit Singh from Uttar Pradesh said, “Bangalore is a good market. People buy it for their showcases and do not hesitate to pay our price. We also visit rural places where villagers buy feathers for religious sentiments. We get extra income during festive seasons as people buy in bulk. Every two months, we return to our native places. After a fortnight, we visit Rajasthan to purchase the feathers before coming to Bangalore.”
   When asked how the villagers in Rajasthan find so many feathers, Singh said, “I don’t know. When I asked some months ago, the wholesale merchant said they collect them from the forest and fields.”
   But Wildlife Trust of India enforcement manager (wildlife crime) Jose Louis told Bangalore Mirror, “There is no law against selling peacock feathers, but we have to think how sellers would get that many feathers. The growth in this trade cannot be possible by collecting feathers shed by the birds. I suspect that the birds are being killed for their feathers. One thing we have to note is that peacocks are found in protected forests.
 
 There is a rule against using material of protected animals and birds. Just the existence of this trade proves that people are going to protected areas to collect the feathers.”
   Sharath, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban said, “Sellers have to keep details of where they purchased the feathers from. Recently, I warned a person named Guruprasad to stop selling feathers after he showed a licence of 2011.”