Elephant capture ops turns tragic after forest dept loses its strongest tusker, who was star of Mysore Dasara for 8 years

Sixty-four-year-old Dasara fame elephant Arjuna died on Monday in a fight with a wild elephant. The incident took place during an elephant capture operation by the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) near Yeslur in Sakleshpur.
 
According to KFD officials, the accident took place around 2 pm when the forest staff were conducting the operation with four domestic elephants including Arjuna with all necessary precautions.

KFD was conducting the operation in Yeslur as Hassan district faces a high number of man-elephant conflict cases. In the operation, a wild tusker was supposed to be darted and radio-collared. However, when the KFD team approached the wild elephant, they realised the animal was in musth and he immediately charged Arjuna.

“They started fighting and the veterinarian and mahout both fell. However, they somehow escaped and stood at a distance while the two elephants continued to fight. Our officials fired in the air so the wild animal ran away but that did not happen. The fight went on for 15-20 minutes and unfortunately, Arjuna got stabbed in the chest and the stomach. He fell and that was when the wild elephant retreated. Veterinarians ran towards Arjuna only to find him breathing his last,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Arjuna was regarded as the most powerful elephant in the department and had carried the golden howdah in Dasara for eight years.

“All elephant capture operations are risky and not just kumki elephants but KFD staff are also at risk. We have been losing some of our people too in elephant-capturing operations. But, we need to resort to such operations looking at the high number of human-elephant conflict cases,” said a KFD official.

However, wildlife activists have alleged that the elephant-capturing operation on Monday by KFD hit a snag when the KFD veterinarian tranquilised another Kumki elephant accidentally.
 
Activists say while accidents in such operations are not uncommon, KFD staff involved in such cases are often inexperienced. “We have got confirmed reports from the spot that the department’s veterinarian tranquilised another Kumki elephant by mistake while the kumki herd was trying to corner the wild elephant. The department should look at boarding experienced veterinarians. Most of the current doctors with KFD are not experienced. Moreover, the condition of the wild elephant has to be assessed before starting the operation. The wild elephant, in this case, was in musth, and capturing such an elephant is not in line with the SOP,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

All elephant capture operations are risky for kumki elephants and for KFD staff–KFD official
 
This tragedy took place just two days after a incident in Chikkamagaluru where a wild elephant died during a capture. Experts say these incidents should be analysed. They say elephants above a certain age, like Arjuna, should not be involved in high-risk operations.

“Having robust SOPs in place, and staff trained in it, will prevent incidents like in the recent past where a wild elephant stumbled and died on a steep terrain after it was darted. Radio collaring and elephant capture operations involve a high level of risk for both captive elephants and the wild ones along with the several ground staff involved,” said Vinod Krishnan, Humane Society International/India.