Crowd-funding has saved lives, helped many win competitions and events, but what activist Rashmi D’Souza has done is something unique: she has saved a dog found on the streets of Electronic City through the initiative.

Rashmi D’Souza, who is into dog rescue, said she has raised Rs 35,000 to treat the canine.

“We have a small community. A friend in Electronics City found Kristy on the streets last November and then it looked like a Golden Retriever, whose growth was stunted, maybe because of inexpert breeding. It was too sick and unable to fend for itself. It was just over a year-old then, but its condition was painful because of a skin disease which was expensive to treat.”

  Untitled  

Rashmi said she could not keep the dog at her house since she already had two dogs with her. “We finally managed to find a foster home for Rs 300 per day and I was very optimistic at that point that we could find it a home soon. We soon realised the dog was quite aggressive. So keeping it with a family with children was ruled out. Thus, we knew adoption would take some time. It took sometime for its skin condition to heal. For its medication, a friend pitched in, but financially, it was tough to meet his needs. It was then I came across Impact Guru, a crowd-funding platform, but I wasn’t sure that they would take up this cause,” said Rashmi.

When approached, Rashmi is amazed by the response. Everything fell in place, and in 10 days, Rs 35,000 was pooled in.

She said, “We got donations not just from India, but also from foreign currencies. In 10 days, we managed to reach the target of Rs 35,000. The initiative led us to find Suzzane and Cias, who took it home and initially they wanted to take him to Kerala at their ancestral home. But I have found that Kristy is still in Bengaluru and he has been renamed as Joe. It’s hale and hearty. The crowd-funding platform has indeed changed its life.”

Piyush Jain, CEO, ImpactGuru said, “The Indian crowdfunding industry has tremendous potential for growth, not only because at this time per capita disposable income is rising, but also a culture of giving is slowly evolving into place. Apart from being a predominantly medical crowdfunding body, ImpactGuru caters to other causes. Our greatest moment of pride was when we helped Wildlife SOS raise Rs 1,30,879 to rescue and rehabilitate tortured elephants. We are also raising funds for stray animals and birds.”