At which point does conservation become interference? That’s the debate of the hour for forest officials and wildlife experts. Karnataka’s reserve forests have a good number of tigers. But last year, the director of Kali Tiger Reserve in Uttara Kannada district raised concerns over the dwindling populations of herbivores, without which the carnivores would starve.
 
 
 
 
 A request to translocate these animals from elsewhere was made, and it even got in-principle approval from National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), a statutory body under Centre’s environment ministry. But the forest department is now re-thinking it, amid criticism from experts.
 
 While one section of forest officers are batting for the translocation, a few, including BG Hosmath, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Wildlife, have opposed the move, calling it “theoretically good”, but “unfeasible”.
 
 The issue of translocation of herbivores came to the fore in June 2016 when the previous director of Kali Tiger Reserve, K Srinivasulu, wrote to the PCCF and NTCA on the insufficient numbers of prey available for tigers, and sought approval for translocation of herbivores.
 
 Based on a successful experiment in the forests of Madhya Pradesh, the NTCA accorded in-principle approval for it and called for a technical evaluation. But the present field director, O Palaiah, has now written to the PCCF, asking to abort the programme.
 
 Spread over 1,345 sq km in Uttara Kannada district, Kali Tiger Reserve was seen as a promising habitat for tiger conservation.
 
 With the rise in the population of tigers in Bandipur, Nagarahole, and Anshi-Dandeli, forests along the Kali river were seen as a crucial link for the big cats to roam freely. But the poor density prey was a cause of concern for the forest department.
 
 A consultation with YV Jhala of the Wildlife Institute of India also confirmed that the reserve’s herbivore population was far below average carrying capacity of the forests.
 
 “All India Tiger Estimate for the year 2014 has estimated the presence of 49 tigers. The herbivore population in the tiger reserve is in low densities and is far below the carrying capacity of the habitat,” the letter by the KTR director to PCCF stated.
 
 The estimates said chital population was only 18.67 per cent /100 sq km, sambhar was 15.66 per cent, and gaur, just 8.67 per cent across the Kali reserve.
 
 The letter had reasoned that 19 gaurs were successfully relocated from Kanha National Park [Madhya Pradesh] in February 2011 by the Wildlife and Forestry Services, Ujjain, MP. Similarly, 100 chitals could be brought in from Bandipur or Nagarahole forests to Kali reserve, under expert guidance.
 
 But after the change in guard, the in-principal approval was opposed. Palaiah, conservator of forests and director of KTR, wrote: “It was true that NTCA has previously given in-principle approval to translocate herbivores. However, the chitals and sambhars [would find it difficult to survive in the dense forests of Western Ghats]. KTR is not suitable for such translocation, and a re-evaluation of the field conditions has revealed considerable prey density. Hence, the earlier proposal of translocation is dropped.”
 
 
 WHAT EXPERTS SAY
 
 The issue of translocation has triggered a debate among conservationists. Sanjay Gubbi of Nature Conservation Foundation and a member of the State Wildlife Board said there are ecological and anthropogenic reasons why wild herbivore populations go locally extinct, or are fewer in certain areas. “For example, evergreen and semi-evergreen forests support low densities of large ungulates because there isn’t much food available on the forest floor.”
 
 “This is due to the fact that the thick forest canopy does not allow much sunlight to penetrate to the ground, which curtails photosynthesis, and in turn vegetation growth at the level where these ungulates can forage is also naturally lower. If the wild herbivore populations are suppressed due to man-made reasons, those causes need to be first identified and addressed before repopulation of species could be taken up,” said Gubbi.
 
 Praveen Bhargav, trustee of Wildlife First and former member of National Board for Wildlife, said: “National parks and tiger reserves are pristine wilderness areas which have been notified to ensure that natural ecological processes go unhindered by human interference. Just solid protection from hunting, fire and anthropogenic pressures has recovered herbivore populations in many reserves across the country.”
 
 “Instead of applying such time-tested management practices in Kali Tiger Reserve, the park manager and the NTCA appear to be chasing absurd ideas of translocating a common species and creating animal enclosures in an inviolate area. Further, this trend of excessive and unscientific interference, which is riddling many reserves with borewells, pipes, pumps and other civil engineering structures, must be stopped. Not only are these measures ecologically unnecessary, but also a huge waste of public money,” he said.
 
 Meanwhile, PCCF Hosmath told BM that the idea of translocation looks good only in theory. “The idea and project look good and sound exciting, theoretically. But it is not feasible and we have decided not to pursue the project,” he said.