By Coovercolly Indresh

A Kerala bridge project runs into Karnataka territory and gets stalled over permission issues

A bridge construction project has created unforeseen obstacles between Kerala and Karnataka. The government of Kerala started this well-intentioned road and bridge project, but didn’t account for the fact that the road would continue on Karnataka forest department’s land. Now, the project has run into trouble as Karnataka government says permissions were not sought for a bridge to be built on Karnataka’s land. If completed, the Kannur-Kootuhole road could give people in Virajpet access to the Kannur airport (once finished), in one-and-a-half hours. Presently, the closest airport to Virajpet is Devanahalli, in Bengaluru, which is 6.5 hours away.

But this important road’s construction and the construction of bridge in Kootuhole near Virajpet has been stalled due to boundary issues between Karnataka and Kerala. The Kerala government had taken up the work of widening and upgrading the Kannur-Kootuhole road at an estimated cost of Rs 217 crores, a year back. The work was awarded to EKK Infrastructure Company which included the construction of Iritty and Kootuhole bridges. 
However the Karnataka state forest department objected to the construction of the bridge across Kootuhole, 26 kms from Virajpet, claiming that the land belonged to them. The Karnataka officials say that the Kerala authorities had not informed them about the construction of the bridge taken up at a cost of Rs 16 crores.

Work stalled

Following objections, the construction of the bridge was stopped, and the roadwork was completed up to Kannur. The stalling of work is a loss for thousands of passengers and vehicle owners as it is major road connecting Kerala to Virajpet and Mysore. The present bridge is in a dilapidated condition and is almost hundred years old, say residents around it. When contacted, Virajpet DC Maria Christu Raja said that the construction of the bridge across Kootuhole was a clear violation of the rights of the Karnataka state government. The Kerala authorities had not asked for permission before construction began. The survey conducted by the Forest department three months ago confirmed that the Kerala border ends on the middle of the Kannur-Kootuhole road. The construction area comes under the Brahmagiri wild life sanctuary which has rare species of wildlife. When asked if the construction would affect wildlife, the Virajpet DC denied it.

  gap 2  
Villagers unhappy

Deputy project manager of the EKK infrastructure company, Sree Raj said that the Kerala government officers had held a meeting with the then forest minister B Ramanatha Rai, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, additional chief secretary and other officers at Vidhana Soudha in April but they were not able to reach a consensus. He also added that the Kerala government had approached the National Wildlife Board to get permission to complete the bridge.

But the people affected by the stalling of road construction are not happy. Residents of Makutta village and businessmen in Virajpet wish that the road would be completed. B K Ibrahim, a trader in Virajpet said that the road is used every day by hundreds of passengers. The road on Karnataka side is filled with potholes, residents say, while the road which continues on the Kerala side is well-maintained. Even in Karike near Bhagamandala, on Kodagu-Kerala border, the road, on the Karnataka side, is full of potholes, but well maintained on Kerala side, say regular commuters. The stalling of road work can also deprive people of easy access to the Kannur international airport which is to be opened in September 2018. The Devanahalli airport is five hours away from Virajpet but the Kannur airport is just one and half hour’s journey from Virajpet.

Read this story in Malayalam