By Iffath Fathima

Wildlife-themed section made using recycled materials inspired by state’s rich biodiversity

Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike’s Adopt-a-Flyover programme got a major fillip with the launch of Wild Arena – a wildlife-themed public space under the flyover at Veeranapalya on the Outer Ring Road, near Manyata Tech Park, on February 5, 2020.

Over the past two years, thousands of people have enjoyed the safe, secure and neat space under the flyover. The stretch will now have an additional 5,000 sq ft of space with a new bison-themed experience made using recycled materials, promising to be a major attraction.

There are four sections in the Manyata Tech Park flyover. Back in 2020, tiger and elephant motifs were added to a section of the stretch as part of the beautification. It was conceived and implemented as a CSR initiative by L&T Technology Services in association with India Rising Trust and the BBMP. The concept was taken from the film Wild Karnataka. Now the section of the underside of the flyover has been modified with Indian bison sculptures and will be open to the public soon.

“Karnataka has the largest concentration of elephants, tigers and bison anywhere in the world. Forests cover over 20% of Karnataka’s land area, support over 25% of India’s elephants and over 10% of the world’s tiger population. The general public is largely unaware of the state’s rich biodiversity. Here is a busy crowded junction next to one of India’s largest technology parks, on the way to the airport, that serves as a bus stop, cab pickup point and extremely high footfall area that is seen, visited and used by tens of thousands of citizens daily. The intent of creating such a pride-evoking themed space at this location is to bring such an experience into the heart of the urban jungle,” said volunteers from The Ugly Indian, part of the project.

The new section has sculptures of bison alongside landscapes. Paver blocks, kerb stones, grills and old bicycle rims have been ‘recycled’ from other parts of Bengaluru where roads were white-topped or repaved. Materials from footpaths on Cubbon Road, Palace Road and Vijayanagar have been recycled and reused here, to reduce the carbon footprint of this project, and keep tons of materials away from landfills or lakes.

“The place is open and people can just walk under the flyover. Usually if something new is created, it is fenced. Many people asked us not to implement this as people would spoil it. But we took it as a challenge and created and beautified the place. It’s been three years, and nothing has been spoiled, which is a victory for us. There are plenty more flyovers and we would recreate more such places,” said a member of The Ugly Indian.

This apart, minimal landscaping is done to reduce use of water, a scarce resource, for maintenance. However, a high-quality ambience has been created, the kind of which is rarely seen in a public space, including the use of packing wood for the walls.