Paparazzi’s favourite nawab Taimur Ali Khan turned two years old today and among the cutest posts for him was by his maasi Karisma Kapoor.

Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor Khan’s little boy brought in his second birthday with his parents in Cape Town, where the actor couple went to shoot a television commercial. Karisma took to her social media handle to share a picture of Taimur with her children Kiaan Raj and Samiera. The caption read, “Happy 2nd birthday to our little jaan. We love you the most. #babynawab #mybabies"

   Instagram/therealkarismakapoor   

The picture was liked by many, including Dia Mirza, Amrita Arora and Sonam Kapoor, who showered love on nawab Tim. Malaika Arora commented with hug emojis, while Amrita wrote, “Cuties.”

       Kareena, Saif plan a safari in Cape Town for Taimur's birthdayKareena Kapoor Khan and Saif Ali Khan has planned a safari in Cape Town, South Africa, in the coming days and will be spending Taimur’s birthday there.   

Before heading to South Africa, Kareena and Saif held Taimur’s pre-birthday celebration, which was attended by family and friends. In South Africa, Taimur will spend his birthday taking a wildlife safari with his parents. “We are going to ride horses and see some big cats for Tim’s birthday,” Saif had told Mirror.

   Instagram/poonamdamania   

Taimur’s first birthday was celebrated at Saif’s familial palace in Haryana’s Pataudi and was an all-family affair.

Apart from that, the social media is flooded with pictures of the Pataudi family’s South Africa getaway. From strolling on beaches to enjoying hearty meals and soaking in the sun at vineyards, Kareena, Saif and Taimur are having the perfect trip.

   Instagram   
On the work front, Kareena will be seen next in Karan Johar's Good News, opposite Akshay Kumar, while Saif will be seen in Taanaji: The Unsung Warrior.

       Kareena Kapoor Khan: Saif Ali Khan and I are struggling to give Taimur a normal lifeKareena Kapoor on her son who now has lookalike dolls, husband Saif and his career choices, being a friend to Sara and Ibrahim, her new beginning as an RJ and other exciting projects.