Best time for removal of weeds such as Lantana was anyway between Jan and May, say experts

Karnataka Forest Department’s (KFD) exotic weed removal scheme, to pave the way for native plants by eradicating invasive weeds such as Lantana, has not taken off this year in Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

According to the officials from KFD, the de-weeding process in the tiger reserve has not taken off due to a delay in fund allocation.

“We have not been able to roll the scheme yet in Bandipur this year. Fund allocation to remove exotic invasive plant species has to happen under CAMPA and Project Tiger, which is still pending. We have asked for Rs 1 crore to clear 100 hectares of area this year. Work will begin as soon as we receive the funds,” said S Prabhakaran, Deputy Conservator of Forest and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

Notably, an estimate on the extent of the weed’s invasion done by Karnataka State Remote Sensing Applications Centre (KSRSAC) nearly a year ago showed that eaving aside one-fourth of the total area of the tiger reserve, the rest of the landscape was invaded by lantana. While the majority of the forest landscape had a 20% and 60% density of weed, some pockets recorded a weed density of up to 80%, restricting the movement of animals in those areas.

Bad timing
Experts say the best time for the removal of weeds such as Lantana is between January and May when plants are not flowering and fruiting.

“This year’s de-weeding should have been completed by now. It will be difficult to uproot the weeds now as the rains have already started. All the weeds will shoot up now, making removal difficult. Even if they remove it now, it will re-grow within 15 days. Lantana, when summer it is dry. Removal will be easy, unfortunately, they also germinate during summer,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Wildlife conservationists also suggest that the department must draft a separate policy for lantana removal as it is the most invasive and widespread. They opine the current fund being allocated is not sufficient looking at the high level of invasion.

“Currently, the funds secured are being used for the removal of all exotic invasive plants, which is proving to be insufficient. The department must consider securing funds specifically for Lantana’s removal for the scheme to be effective.
 
The extra funds will also ensure better machines and bigger manpower to expedite the process and cover more area. Clean utilization of funds should happen and it should get diverted to any other program,” said Belagere.