Murder 3 is a tacky remake of the Spanish film, The Hidden Face. It is supposed to be a story about the consequences of mistrust and jealousy, it turns out instead being a simplistic, plot-driven B-movie that depends much too heavily on a single twist.   While admittedly the twist is not easily guessed or predictable, the film is so crudely directed that by the time it comes, your interest has already evaporated. RandeepHooda plays a photographer (the Bollywood kind of course, one who usesa long-focus lenses to shoot a wildlife subject not two feet away) and has a girlfriend in AditiRaoHydari. They’re based in South Africa (which provides a good reason for an outdoor shoot schedule, but has little relevance to the script) and move to India. She disappears, leaving a video note and he moves on with debutant Sara Loren (trivia: her name used to be Mona Lizza). Obviously I can’t give you any more information, but here’s a heads-up: you will have to watch a sizeable chunk of the film twice over because there are multiple POVs at work here. And since this ain’t no Rashomon, it’s taxing.   Director Vishesh Bhatt stretches the definition of cinematic liberty (and the general theory of relativity while he’s at it) to move the story along. Why would two super hot waitresses bring home a random, super drunken man from the bar? How come there is always an oversized checked shirt for the girl to wear the morning after, a piece of clothing that the hero would never put on? Why are the ridiculous red herrings never explained? It’s just one big, frustrating gimmick.Technically, the film has little of note. There is hardly a shot that stands out. Sound design basically consists of liberally putting in scare-effects at max volume. I expect many speakers will be ruined in many cinema halls. The songs are distractions and not a single track memorable, surprising for the Bhatts who are usually pitch-perfect in this aspect. Hooda continues playing the role he did in his last film, Jism 2. Maybe he couldn’t tell one movie apart from the other while he was shooting. Loren is perfect with her timing and angles when pulling on a shirt, sheet, or towel before revealing any more. The only actor who puts some thought into her performance is Aditi Rao Hydari. Her possessive character clings on to her lover with her eyes, always looking to lock his gaze.   Murder 3 is the kind of movie that aims for mediocrity, because this is apparently what appeases a majority audience and what makes tickets sell. If you’ve seen one, you’ve seen them all. But it has been a tested formula that works without fail for the Bhatt factory, and they’re not tinkering with what’s not broken anytime soon.