By: Habib Breary
 	 Mark Davider, who passed away last week, was a near-legend for his romance with the wildlife
 
 There is grief in the jungle and at Masinagudi, a bustling stopover town en route to Ooty, after news trickled in about naturalist Mark Davidar’s death at Pudducherry last weekend.
 
 Mark was taken to the former Union territory for treatment after he went into a coma at his serene abode Cheetal Walk, located in the foothills of the Nilgiris, barely a ten-minute drive from Masinagudi.
 
 Locals said his fondness for drink had taken its toll. Mark, in his fifties, enjoyed near-legend status in the region because of his long-standing romance with the wild.
 
 There is no dearth of anecdotes of his encounters with animals. “Mark saar is a creature of the jungle. He really loved animals” remarks old-timer Raghu, the affable chai shop owner on the main road leading to Mark's place.
 
 Mark named elephants after Brazilian football stars and his favourite was footloose tusker Rivaldo, who visited his home almost daily to say hello.
 
 The other apple of his eye was Roberto Carlos. Mark was devastated for a long time when Carlos died a few years ago.
 
 The mesmeric Bandipur/ Madhumalai forest range was his love and home for nearly three decades. Mark liked his space and not surprisingly lived a lonely life, enjoying the bliss of the eco-friendly environs.
 
 Son of conservationist and writer E R C Davidar, who set up Cheetal Walk in the 1960s, Mark continued his father’s pro- environment legacy. The place got its name after a book by the same name by Mark Davidar’s father.
 
 “I hate cities. I can’t stand the f ****n pollution,” Mark often used to tell visitors frequenting his pad, a hotspot of animal activity.
 Sitting in his verandah, one could get to see a constant parade of animal life in the migratory path flanked by a stream. Profanities poured out at the sittings but nobody took it to heart as Mark, sipping brandy and smoking Charminar , did not mean any harm. Spotting tigers, leopards, bears and wild dogs was not uncommon. Elephants were a regular sight and so were a plethora of birds.
 
 Among the many who have graced Mark’s home were world renowned ornithologist Salim Ali. “It was a surreal experience. You could not ask for more,” said Jayaprakash Raghavan, an avid bird watcher and wildlife aficionado, after his first session at Mark's place.
 
 “The sole reason that I love photographing and seeing birds is Mark. He was the inspiration,” said Sameer of scenic Forest Hill Resort , where Mark used to visit on a rare social call. Sameer recalls an incident where he got to see a rare sight of elephants and tiger in one frame.
 
 “All of us present there thought there was going to be an altercation. We waited in anticipation but nothing happened. Mark's was the only one who was calm...all he said was “The Jungle is actually a Peaceful place!”
 
 Mark was an agnostic with leftist leanings. A portrait of revolutionary Che Guevara adorned his home. He never missed an opportunity to attack ‘capitalist’ America and was critical of Barack Obama getting the Nobel Peace prize. “He should have got the P S award not the Peace prize,” he sneered, upset with Obama’s continuance of his predecessor’s policies in Afghanistan and Iraq.
 
 Mark’s romance with Rivaldo began after the tusker was hurt by poachers.
 
 He began feeding the elephant when it came on its rounds, striking up a cosy relationship which he treasured. “Go away, don’t be naughty,” he used to say when Rivaldo would get too close for comfort. And like magic the tusker listened, much to the relief of awed visitors.
 
 Whenever Rivaldo got too edgy, Mark used to counsel enthusiasts to step back and leave by the back door. He took chances, sometimes handfeeding wild elephants, giving many visitors a near heart attack. But never did he want to compromise with the safety of people visiting his place. Never mess with nature was his mantra, although ironically, he did break the rule by feeding elephants, gaurs and monkeys.
 
 “I am just doing my bit for them (elephants). They are my saviours,” he used to say, defending his action.
 
 Cheetal Walk is now under the care of Mark’s sister Priya and her husband.