Old habits never die. Ace director Selvaraghavan seems to be stuck in a specific formula of his protagonist falling in love with someone else’s lover. It was there in Kaadhal Kondein and Pudupettai and now in the third outing together of the brothers — Selva and Dhanush. In Mayakkam Enna, the hero falls in love with the girlfriend of his best friend and marries her too. The icing on the cake is probably the attitude of the heroine, who seems inclined more towards her boyfriend’s friend than her boyfriend himself, right from the moment she enters the frame. Maybe, it is a case of friend’s love-syndrome hangover for Selva though thematically he has totally departed from the essence of his previous outing Aayirathil Oruvan, a CG-generated fantasy flick that evoked only a mediocre response. This in fact is a quickie from the stable of Selva as we hear that he had completed this in a record 55 days. One cannot deny the fact that Selva is a 
 master at spinning romantic yarns which are usually lapped by the audience. 
 
 Here is another romantic journey. The premise has been set around the life of an aspiring wildlife photographer, Karthik (Dhanush) who virtually idolises a veteran, Madesh (Ravi Prakash), a world renowned photographer.  The screenplay sketches the plight of his adventurous and emotion-filled journey while he passionately pursues his creative quest in the company of his four friends, who stand by him every time a crisis pulls him down. One fine day, he gets introduced to Yamini (Richa) as the girl friend of his close friend, Sundar (Sundar Ramu who is a lensman himself, in a cameo) and Cupid strikes right then, though Karthik and Yamini visibly keep quarrelling each another. She even gets him a chance to prove his professional talent, but the assignment gets goofed up. Eventually they end up professing their latent love for each other during a dark, lonely, rainy night.
 
 Meanwhile, Madesh plagiarises a couple of photographs clicked by Karthik, after rejecting his plea to join him as his deputy. A photograph taken by Karthik fetches Madesh a global honour, much to the horror of Karthik who is almost pushed to a state of depression, realising that he has been taken for a royal ride. Karthik and Yamini get married, but the matrimonial life takes a severe beating as a dejected Karthik hits the bottle. How things get resolved with Karthik ultimately getting due recognition that he rightly deserves forms the rest narrated in typical Selva style. Surprisingly, both the brothers have doubled up as lyricists and singers. GV Prakash has come up with some excellent numbers. 
 
 Ramji’s cinematography is a fine point of the film but Kola Bhaskar, the editor, could have been more prudent while dealing with some scenes, especially in the second half. The film has too many drinking and smoking scenes as well. 
 Dhanush is in his elements as the youth chasing a dream. Making her Tamil debut, Richa has shown a lot of maturity. 
 The film certainly asserts the strength of the brothers’ combo, but it could not exactly recreate the old magic.
 
 
 RATING: 3/5