Notice issued to multiple state pollution boards as environmental concerns escalate

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has issued notices to the chief secretaries of Karnataka and the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) regarding pharmaceutical-induced environmental contamination.
 
Apart from the KSPCB, notices have been sent to all state pollution control boards after the tribunal registered a suo moto case based on a recent research paper published in the journal Current Science.
 
Through these notices, the NGT has sought information such as the number of pharmaceutical companies in the state, the number of such companies complying with norms, the number of companies against whom action is taken for violation of the norms, and the action taken by the state pollution control board for preventing pharmaceutical toxicity in the environment.
 
The research paper underlines that pharmaceutical-induced environmental contamination needs urgent attention because around 43 per cent of global rivers face risks from Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs). Moreover, the continuous emissions pose risks to the environment and human health. The paper also discloses that pharmacies sometimes cannot filter all the chemicals used in pharmaceutical production (e.g., solvents, and active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs).

These chemicals cause ecosystem imbalances that give rise to chemical pollution in the environment. Disposal by healthcare institutions, drug manufacturing units, and domestic and agricultural use of drugs are some of the causes leading to pharmaceutical pollution.
 
Through the paper, researchers have highlighted that although the levels of these chemicals in rivers and streams are relatively low compared to standard doses, there is a growing concern that prolonged exposure could result in health problems.
 
“Chemicals in pharmaceuticals may mix with water or be flushed in the toilets after exiting the body. Mostly, municipal wastewater treatment plants do not fully eliminate these chemicals and impurities from drinking water, necessitating a combination of treatment methods. The potential synergistic effects of these compounds, particularly endocrine disruptors, pose risks to biological processes such as growth, development, reproduction, and hormonal control. Studies have raised alarms about the presence of these chemicals in surface water and groundwater since the 1990s,” noted the research.
 
It also warns about bioaccumulation and the potential entry of certain chemical compounds into the food chain. Moreover, water contaminated by pharmaceutical compounds also impacts animals and wildlife. Researchers say sufficient resources should be allocated to public education initiatives around the appropriate and safe disposal of medications and bringing drugs under drug recovery programs.
 
In addition, more stringent regulations should be implemented to curb drug usage in numerous healthcare settings, including hospitals, nursing homes, and other medical facilities. The paper also highlights that one of the major causes of antimicrobial resistance in India is water contamination by antibiotics.