40% drop in manja cases this year compared to 2021

As schools, businesses and offices have reopened in Bengaluru, the number of cases of entangled birds rescued from killer manja strings illegally used in kite-flying has come down considerably.

Data compiled from various city based rescue centres showed there has been a 40% drop in manja cases this year compared to 2021. Between January and August last year, the rescue centres had logged 2,527 cases of various birds entangled in Chinese and cotton strings. However, this year, the number of cases reported so far is 1,514.
 
“There was a spike in the number of manja cases after the second lockdown (June-August) last year, but the cases started decreasing steadily from September and have now come down to pre-lockdown range. Now, people are busy with day-to-day activities and children are occupied with in-person classes. This is the most important aspect behind the drop in rescue cases,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC).

ARRC has received 1,382 manja rescue cases so far this year compared to 2,527 cases till August last year.

The centre recently conducted a manja cleaning drive at the Hennur Biodiversity Park and reported fewer manja thread entangled on trees. Experts said raids conducted by the BBMP last year to confiscate illegal kite strings or Chinese manja might be contributing to this drop as well.

“The drop in cases correlates with manja collected during our recent cleanup drives. There is less manja out there but the existing manja itself will continue to hurt birds for many years to come. There were some raids conducted on manja sellers last year; the sale has gone underground and obscure now. Earlier, every corner store had stocked up manjas, which is not the case anymore,” added Venkatesh.

However, they warn it is not enough to cheer about as there are tons of manja still hanging out there and still being sold at many shops in Bengaluru.
 
“Clean-up drives on hotspots are important. Moreover, targeted awareness drives and stricter implementation by the authorities are required to address the issue in the long run. While manja cases are mainly associated with the Sankranti festival, things have changed in the past few years. Moreover, awareness should be spread about the use of cotton strings too. We get birds stuck in not just synthetic, but cotton threads too, leading to injuries,” said another city-based bird rescue centre.

According to wildlife rescuers, birds such as black kites, crows, koels, barn owls and mammals like bats are commonly found entangled. Flight feather damage, bone fractures and head injuries due to fall and damage to the neck and legs are the most common injuries sustained by these animals.

While the National Green Tribunal (NGT) banned the use, manufacture, sale, storage and purchase of glass-coated manja or nylon threads for flying kites via an order in July 2017, the sale of the banned kite-flying thread continues in the city.

“Chinese manja is still available at many shops despite the ban. Authorities should take note of this issue and conduct surprise raids… More public awareness and strict implementation of the ban by the government is key,” said Dr Navaz Shariff, general manager and chief veterinarian, People for Animals.