There’s good news for the 20-plus long-billed vultures that inhabit the lofty peaks near Ramanagar alongside the Bangalore-Mysore highway. The Union Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) has directed the state government to stop using diclofenac while treating livestock. The drug was harming vultures, which survive on the carcasses of livestock.
 
 An associate professor in the Karnataka Veterinary Animal and Fisheries Sciences University said, “Studies have proved that the use of diclofenac caused kidney problems in vultures that ate the carcasses of animals which were treated with diclofenac.”
 
 The MoEF has now recommended meloxicam to treat livestock. At an inter-ministerial meeting to discuss conservation, including the setting up of a vulture sanctuary in Ramanagar district, the MoEF directed the state government to ensure better off-take of meloxicam. All the members agreed to free certain zones from the use of diclofenac. It was also decided to streamline the delivery mechanism for the alternative drug and subsidise it, a senior MoEF official said.
 
 Principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) B K Singh said, “There could be around 20 vultures in Ramanagar now. We proposed creation of a vulture sanctuary with the intention of conserving the species. We are happy that the MoEF suggested a new drug to replace diclofenac. Experts have told me that the new drug, meloxicam, is as effective as diclofenac in treating livestock, but does not harm birds.”
 
 The associate professor said, “Both are anti-inflammatory drugs used to treat livestock. Generally, these drugs are prescribed to cure animals from severe arthritis, pain and fever as the drugs are anti-pyretic and analgesic.”
 
 Even though diclofenac has been banned, it is available over the counter. One factor against meloxicam is that it costs more than diclofenac.
 
 A senior official from the veterinary department said, “But, keeping in mind the ecological importance, a request can be made to the government to subsidise the drug.”
 
 The population of long-billed vultures at Ramdevara Betta and surrounding areas has come down in the last decade. 
 
 Ramanagar is rated highly in conservation of these birds. It is the only place in south India where you can see vultures belonging to the family of Gyps indicus. These birds are found on cliffs and feed on the carcasses of animals. “A sudden decline in their population made the government include the species in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972,” explained Manjunath, a city-based bird-watcher who constantly visits Ramanagar.
 
  Experts have told me that meloxicam is as effective as diclofenac in treating livestock, but does not harm vultures
 B K Singh, Principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife)