High Flier
 
 Kate Elizabeth Hallam(wife of Lucky Ali, now separated — according to the husband) is going places. Not just Istanbul, where she is shooting for a television commercial, but also to the cockpit of the flight in Heathrow airport. Apparently, the captain recognised her from the recent commercial and was keen to take a picture with the English model. "I love flying and would love to learn to fly one day," she told the diarist. Kate, currently travelling in Istanbul, will be coming in Bengaluru on December 28, along with little Dani, soon after Christmas! Looks like Hallam is on a roll!
 
 
 Fascinated by sheep
 
 Award winning wildlife photographer Kalyan Varma is done chasing the monsoons. He is now chasing sheep of the Dhanghar community (in Maharashtra) who are travelling 400 kilometres, an annual migration towards their summer home, close to the Konkan coast. Apparently, our wildlife photographer is yet to get over the awesome sight of 50,000 sheep and their shepherds moving as a unit. And the fact that a record number of wolves are following the sheep (and Kalyan) makes the journey thrilling. The shepherds never carry a single rupee on them and barter sheep for essentials. And that includes cell phones. Oh well, technology is indeed penetrative. 
 	
 	Bollywood ‘Maya’jaal
 	
 	​Here’s another Bollywood-smitten international artiste. The diarist has learnt that popular Romanian DJ and composer Edward Maya is all set to make his musical debut in a Hindi film releasing in 2015. Last year, there were talks of Maya remixing a number for Himesh Reshammiya's composition Umarao Jaan. But it did not take off. 	The Stereo Love sensation, who will be touring India this weekend, is composing a track for the movie Shab directed by national award winning director Onir. In fact, the director has also offered Maya a cameo in the film. Apart from this, Maya will also collaborate with singers Neha Kakkar and Sona Mohapatra for his own crossover independent releases and an album.  	
 	
 	Different stroke for... 
 	
 The Kapoor brothers — Rishi, Randhir and Rajeev — were in full attendance at the Turf Club in Mumbai to vote in the hotly contested managing committee elections on Tuesday. What caught our eye was what happened after the voting formalities were completed. While Rishi took his seat with club members and was engrossed in an impassioned conversation about whether the club will manage to save the race course from the clutches of politicians — remember the Sena wants a themed garden there — a clearly uninterested Rajeev moved on to a table full of trainers. He was interested in only the hands-on racing stuff, regaling his audience with some of the audacious punts he had pulled off in the past and picking their brains for useful nuggets of information.