“Did I answer well?” was Lucky Ali’s main concern after his interaction with children at the 8th PEAS Environmental Conference for Kids held recently. Taking a respite after being ambushed by kids for autographs, the simple and down-to-earth singer spoke to Bangalore Mirror about his new music album and farming techniques.  His impression of the interaction with kids: The idea of so many children being so politically aware and with the kind of questions these 12-13 years olds are asking, you can’t just listen to them, you have to listen to them. I am worried for them.  His take on the BT Brinjal issue: These are terminator seeds. If it can’t reproduce again by itself, imagine the effects it will have on you. Working in his farm: I look after the orchards by myself but when it comes to ground work like tilling the fields that is done by workers. The fruits from the orchards are only for family. The farming is only for self sustenance and not commercial. I have reduced a lot of workload and so there are no dairy animals now. At one time, I used to have emus, sheep and ducks too.  On techniques of farming: I don’t till too much because that releases nitrogen from the soil which can be harmful and would increase the use of urea. I follow the Fukuoka method of farming pioneered by Masanobu Fukuoka, a Japanese soil scientist and farmer. It means no-work farming. Here, the entire weed, seed and earth management is done naturally. I am also interested in the concept of sky farming. On his role as an environmental conscious parent: My older son and daughter are very aware and interested about environmental issues. My son especially is very keen and attends Gerry Martin’s (wildlife expert and herpetologist) classes regularly.  
 
On shunning fame: I have had too much of it. My father had too much of it, my mother had too much of it and my aunt 
had too much of it. It was burdensome and let me tell you, it is just as difficult for me to get out of it as it is difficult for a 
person getting into it. On his non-conformist career choices: Sometimes I do things instinctively or impulsively and at times I go with the flow. I grew up wanting to make a place for myself. And here’s a beautiful thought (write it down, he says), “If you want to make a place for yourself under the sun, you have to walk out of the shade of the family tree.” On his current music projects: I’ve just released my latest album online. The music will only be available online and going completely digital is my step toward cutting my carbon footprint. Called Xsuie (pronounced ek-sui) it is about doing things at your own pace. A music video will be coming out shortly.  ‘Dil Gaye Jaa’, the first single from the album, can be heard and purchased at www.nimbitmusic.com/luckyali.