Here is an example of how technology came in handy during the ongoing lockdown. Three people from Karnataka managed to assist the Chandigarh Forest and Wildlife Department in mapping the movement of a leopard during the lockdown. The findings of a three-member team from Karnataka had put an end to all speculations recently spotted pugmarks – whether those are of a dog or a leopard. The team lead by Prayag Hodigere Siddalingappa has also helped the residents of Chandigarh as well as the officials of the wildlife department to heave a sigh of relief after knowing that leopard has left Chandigarh. 

When the news broke out about sightings of a leopard, the officials of forest and wildlife department, Chandigarh administration, could not do much in the absence of proper forensic evidence on the presence of the leopard in the city.
Meanwhile, Prayag HS, Assistant Professor/Chief Veterinary Officer, Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College, came into contact with Dr Abdul Qayum, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Chandigarh Administration via Twitter. 
   I got to know the situation through a tweet. With the help of my student and a naturalist from Nainital, we assisted in tracing the leopard–Prayag HS, Veterinary College
“I came to know about the situation through Dr Abdul Qayum’s tweet on March 31. Later, I volunteered to help Chandigarh administration. With the help of Nagarjun Kumar SM, a PhD student from Shivapura in Gundlupet taluk, Chamarajnagar district, and Imran Khan, a naturalist from Jim Corbett National Park, Nainital in Uttarakhand, we worked as a team to assist the Chandigarh Administration,’’ said Dr Prayag.

He said speculation and rumours about sighting a pair of leopards in Chandigarh have confused the forest officials. “Our team has helped Chandigarh Administration to conclude the leopard’s presence at an isolated place. We have successfully mapped the movement of the leopard. Now, it is located at Mohali. We will continue mapping the movement of the leopard till logical conclusion. I express gratitude for the opportunity given by Dr. Abdul Qayum,’’ he said.

The team has received a letter of appreciation from the department of forest and wildlife, Chandigarh Administration.

“I would like to extend this letter of appreciation to you and your associates Mr Nagarjun and Mr Imran. The forensic evaluation on leopard pugmarks and continuous support through GIS maps were of tremendous help in managing the situation, here in Chandigarh. Your ongoing assistance in the case monitoring of leopard straying incidence in Chandigarh since March 31 is greatly appreciated,’’ Abdul Qayum, Deputy Chief Conservator of Forests, Chandigarh Administration said in a letter to Dr Prayag H S.

Abdul Qayum said, “Dr Prayag’s team has worked round-the-clock and provided technical support in forensic investigation analysis as well in developing strategies to mitigate human leopard interaction and to bust fake news with evidence to the department have been of immense help.”

He has also said that it was commendable to see how the team’s extensive experience is contributing to the wildlife conservation and mitigating negative interaction in urban spaces. “We look forward to the team’s valuable services in the future as well,’’ he said.

Wildlife emergencies always demand a quick response. Despite lockdown, technology has helped govt agencies and experts from different States, come together as virtual teams to overcome such challenges.