Tiger conservationists have not only solved the mystery surrounding the death of a rescued tiger in the custody of the Karnataka Forest Department in the first week of January, they have also managed to identify the big cat.
 
 
 
 
 
 And they have made a worrisome discovery – that Bandipur and Nagarahole tiger reserves are overpopulated with increasing number of tigers per square kilometre than the actual count.
 
 Noted tiger conservationist Dr Ullas Karanth and his team have found that this tiger had died due to conflict with sub-adult tigers trying to dominate new territories and evicting older ones from their home ranges.
 
 While the tiger was rescued near Thalalu village of Moliyur range in Bandipur with chronic injury-related ailments, its identity had remained a mystery.
 
 A detailed analysis of the pattern of stripes and subsequent comparison with the internal database of tiger images available with the Wildlife Conservation Society-India (WCS), has revealed that the deceased tiger was code-named “NHT- 233”. 
 
 Interestingly, the same tiger was photo-trapped twice at two different locations close to the area where it was rescued from.
 
 Giving details of the analysis, Karanth said, “The tiger was previously captured in our camera trap during our study in the area twice. First it was photo-captured on the main road North in Nagarahole range on February 17, 2006, while the same tiger was again camera trapped in March 2008 in Moorbande Road of N Begur Range in Bandipur Reserve.”
 
 He elaborated: “Based on the size, its physical appearance and dates of our photo-captures, we estimate that the tiger would have been 10-12 years of age (the forest department had estimated it to be 8 to 9).”
 
 It has also been revealed that the tiger used to roam around in a large area within the limits of the two tiger reserves. The tiger was captured near Thalalu village of Moliyur range in Bandipur which is between the two places where the tiger was photographed previously.
 
 
 PROLIFIC BREEDING, ABUNDANT PREY UP TIGER POPULATION
 
 Dr Karanth and his team’s study in these tiger reserves showed that tiger population has shown an increasing trend over the years.
 
 “As per our research, the Bandipur-Nagarahole tiger population is at high densities of 10-15 tigers/100 Sq km. This is because of high rates of reproduction based on abundant prey base in the area. This huge population naturally has high mortality- and dispersal-related losses of nearly 20 per cent every year. This is part of the natural dynamics of tiger populations. Such mortalities and dispersals are likely among sub-adults trying to find new territories and among old, weakened residents who are evicted from their home ranges. Interestingly, the NH-233 belonged to the latter case,” he said.