Report reveals that over 70,000 native & exotic wild animals were seized in 140 wildlife trafficking cases at 18 Indian airports between 2011-2020

Many airports in the country including Bengaluru have been witnessing seizure of wildlife. For example, we keep hearing about star tortoises being illegally exported or seized at the airport. A latest report states that Indian Star Tortoise has been listed as “vulnerable” on the IUCN Red List. However, traffickers clearly disregard the threatened status and international CITES rules prohibit its trade. Indian Star Tortoise was the highest number of native species recovered between 2011-2020.

A latest report from TRAFFIC on High flying-Insight into wildlife trafficking through India’s airports found the trafficking of over 70,000 native and exotic wild animals, including their body parts or derivatives (weighing around 4,000kg) in 140 wildlife seizure incidents at 18 Indian airports between 2011-2020. Among the species seized (including both Indian and exotic ones), reptiles were the most encountered group during the study period (46 per cent), followed by mammals (18 per cent), timber (13 per cent), and species from the marine environment (10 per cent).

The highest number of native species seized included the Indian Star Tortoise, followed by the Black Pond Turtle Geoclemys hamiltonii.

The highest number of non-native species seized, Red-Eared Slider Turtle, is followed by the Chinese Pond Turtle Mauremys reevesii.

According to the report, while the unprecedented growth of the airline sectors has facilitated the smooth transit of individuals and goods across the globe, it is also being exploited by traffickers to move illegal wildlife products speedily and with significantly fewer transit losses. Several flora species, including Agarwood Aquilaria malaccensis, Red Sanders Pterocarpus santalinus, Sandalwood Santalum album, and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAP) like Kuth Saussurea costus roots were seized at the airports, the report adds.
 
It says that in the category of non-native species, seizure of Red-eared Slider Turtle was reported in the highest number of seizure incidents, over six per cent of the total cases. “Most number of live animals of exotic origin reported in seizure incidences, with 65 per cent of the total number of wildlife and derivatives seized during the observed period. Chinese Pond Turtle Mauremys reevesii were reported as the second highest number of live animals of exotic origin seized. The species identified in the wildlife seizure incidents during the study period had their native range throughout the world, reflecting on the international scale of the trade with a majority of these species being native to Asia, of which more than half are found in India.

Unprecedented growth of the airline sector is being exploited by traffickers–From the report
Species with their native range in South America, Africa, Australia, North America and Europe have also been recorded in seizure incidents at India’s airports during the study period.

 According to the report, the analysis of seizure incidents reported during the observed period showed the following transit methods being used to evade enforcement agencies while trafficking wildlife. “Trafficking through checked luggage and personal baggage, concealment of wildlife contraband within passenger clothing, footwear, and other wearables and wrong declaration of protected species”, the report highlighted. Though the highest seizures were reported from Chennai, Mumbai and Delhi, Bengaluru was recorded in the category of 6-10 seizures.