By Garima Prasher

The Indian Institute of Science’s latest announcement — a postgraduate medical school and an 800-bed multi-speciality hospital in the campus — has irked its students: concerned about the fast-depleting green cover and a lack of counter measures to salvage it sooner, they said, the latest project will totally consume it.
 
The century-old institute nestled in 400 acres of diverse green patch is known for natural beauty and rich biodiversity of immense importance. The campus is home to 140 species of birds, 112 species of trees belonging to 32 families, and a range of wildlife.

“While I am happy about the proposed medical facility, I am not happy about it being inside the campus. We boast of this campus’ tranquility. I feel the quietness will fade away with a project of this magnitude,” said a PhD student.

The only way for any building to come up will be by cutting down more trees, students told BM.
 
“Where is the space? This can only be done by felling more trees. Many were chopped off in the last few months. Patches roughly the size of football fields were cleared recently. At least two such sites that had dense tree cover have vanished,” lamented a student.

The institute management, meanwhile, told BM, the project will leave minimal imprint on the environment. “The medical school and specialty hospital will occupy 15 acres in a campus that spans 440 acres.

Every care will be taken during the construction stage; should the need arise to relocate any tree, IISc will take the necessary steps following the best technologies and procedures. We are committed to preserving the greenery on our campus and will continue to ensure that its rich flora and fauna are preserved as they are, even as we expand our research and teaching activities,” said professor Govindan Rangarajan, director, IISc.

According to a section of students, quite a few trees at the Jubilee Garden were cut down, and as a result, half of the garden disappeared. This led to students filing an RTI.

Many are questioning the idea of setting up the infrastructure at the Bengaluru campus as the institute has a ‘non-green’ piece of land in Challakere. “The Challakere campus has a lot of space unlike the Bengaluru campus. The institute could have thought about acquiring land in city outskirts too,” said a concerned scholar.

Students stressed that hundreds of trees have already been cut on the campus to make way for new development. “IISc is an institute of eminence. We lead from the front in matters related to the environment. We are a research community with focus on reviving the green cover and fighting climate change. We should not be the ones getting rid of the trees and damaging the city’s lung spaces. The clinical research work can also be performed from the Challakere campus or from the city’s outskirts,” said another student.


 Where is the space? Many trees were cut down in the last few months. Patches roughly the size of football fields were cleared...— student
Welcome move
That said, some welcomed the announcement. “Top global universities, MIT and University of Pennsylvania, have hospitals and medical research centres on campus. This will directly benefit citizens. While there will be one or two trees that will get cut, this project is great news for Indian research,” said an IISc student.

Expert concern
Environment experts in the city are terming it as a perfect example of anthropocentric development, which totally negates the project’s impact on environment and the surrounding ecosystem. “There are many hospitals in Bengaluru with hundreds of ongoing research projects. Healthcare centres are coming up with more buildings and beds. What is the need to have another hospital and medical school inside the IISc campus - city’s premium lung space? The need of the hour is research facilities for ecological sciences, environmental sciences and atmospheric sciences,” said AN Yellapa Reddy, environmentalist.

Experts explained that the green cover at IISc serves as an island of oxygen and any adverse impact on it will have repercussions around the city.

“Currently, there is no clarity on the building plan and the exact location of the project. However, any impact on trees on campuses such as the IISc will have some impact at the city scale. These are islands of oxygen. From an environmental perspective, it would make sense to locate the project at Challakere campus. Although many variables go behind such decision making, it will be unfortunate if IISc loses green cover,” said S Vishwanath, urban planner and water conservation expert.

Environmentalists further noted the campus is in fact a mini forest and the concerns being voiced are critical.

“The students’ concerns are valid. While this project is the need of the hour, biodiversity loss is irreversible. If the project goes ahead, I hope care will be taken to minimise the loss,” said Dr Indu K Murthy, sector head for climate, environment and sustainability at the Center for Study of Science, Technology and Policy (CSTEP).