Call it Mother Nature’s incontrovertible barometer of Bangalore’s growing garbage mess. In what wildlife experts are linking to our inability to clean up our own filth, an Indian gerbil, which has not been seen in the city for the last two decades, was spotted last Saturday.    Part of the rodent family, the gerbil has features that are distinct from the common rat. It looks like a baby mouse deer and has a physiognomy akin to a kangaroo’s. It can jump around five feet at one go, and plays dead when approached by other animals or humans. The specimen rescued last week was pulled out from a hole along with two snakes, and had survived unscathed because of its ability to evade the reptiles.    “It is a pretty-looking mouse. We have never found it in the city in the last ten years,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert and honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror. “We have rescued one specimen for the first time since inception of the wildlife cell in 2007; in fact, for the first time since we got into wildlife rescue in 1996. This is no doubt the find of the last decade, as these creatures were once common but had almost vanished from the city,” he said. The adult gerbil was rescued from a construction site near Abhiman studios in Uttarahalli. Locals who spotted two Russel’s vipers called the wildlife rescue team, and volunteers who rushed to the spot were astonished to find a gerbil along with the two snakes in a hole. The rescued rodent weighs around 500 grams and measures around 40 cm.    “It has a bushy tail which is as long as its body, and its hind legs, like a kangaroo, are stronger than the forelimbs. Unlike common rats, it can jump a good distance. When it comes to urban wildlife statistics, we don’t have a single entry on a gerbil being rescued in the last ten years,” Rajesh S, a wildlife expert, said.    Gerbils live in colonies and, like other rodents, thrive on all kinds of waste, which is why wildlife activists are linking Saturday’s spotting to the growing garbage mess faced by the city. “As we have rescued one, a colony could be back here. There has been a lot of dumping in several parts of the city, which could have drawn them back. If so, it should be a wake-up call for all of us. Its presence is a pointer to the fact that the city is crossing all limits when it comes to garbage dumping,” Sharath said.