Those of us who have had the pleasure of being to and staying in Bandipur have tended to take everything for granted. It is a human frailty because many of us do not understand the importance of preserving wildlife. The question that is not asked is how does wildlife concern us and change our way of living? It is time those involved in the preservation of wildlife answered this question so that the lay person is made aware of its importance.

This is something that has to be in the curriculum of all schools, irrespective of the medium of instruction which has now become a topic for debate and even controversy. For instance, how many children have been told the importance of trees and greenery? Also, what ecology means. Children are the citizens of tomorrow and it is crucial that they learn, so in turn, when the time comes they can pass this knowledge on to theirs.

To read that the Bandipur-Mudumalai (Tamil Nadu) and Bandipur Sultan Bathery (Kerala) road stretches are rid of most inter-state vehicles during the night would see wildlife conservationists heave a collective sigh of relief. The number of deaths caused by vehicular traffic in this area has become a cause for alarm. Reportedly, the deputy commissioner of Chamarajnagar had ordered a ban on vehicular movement on June 3 this year as a protective measure to prevent road kills of rare wildlife on the two busy stretches. Strangely, the order had been withdrawn after seven days, which can only mean that a combination of influence and money entered the picture. It is at night that cattle smugglers transport their ill-gotten wares to Kerala where the demand for beef is very high.

And this is where the lawyer comes into the picture. Of course, it might not be that he is an interested party and believes that wildlife must be allowed to flourish. He is probably merely representing an interested party. But then this lawyer, Bangalore-based L Srinivasa Rao, was the party-in-person at the Karnataka High Court and persuaded a division bench to stay the withdrawal order. The lawyer contended that the withdrawal of the order was due to political pressure and to please truck owners. The stretch of 30 kilometres passed through the Bandipur Tiger Reserve and National Park, according to him needed to be protected. The petition by the lawyer reasoned that vehicular traffic disturbed wildlife and had even led to the killing of hundreds of rare and endangered animals every year.

The division bench agreed with the lawyer and the night travel ban in the area has been restored. Talking to a Bandipur regular, former Hyderabad cricketer Saad Bin Jung about the development, it was illuminating to hear him observe, “The time has come to educate the public about the importance of preserving wildlife. The High Court’s verdict is welcome. Those who have to travel extra kilometres to reach their destinations cannot grumble. Wildlife must be preserved.”

Those hoping to see the elusive tiger might have a better chance of doing so for the Tiger Reserve and the National Park will henceforth be safer for wildlife to roam. On one’s last visit to Bandipur, all one saw were bison and elephants. And one remembers that these large animals were startled by the headlights of approaching vehicles. Smaller ones like the deer panicked and ran to the speeding vehicles. So let us thank Srinivasa Rao for a good deed done.