Case lodged with Cubbon Park police after cobra is killed at park by an unknown person

The Horticulture Department Deputy Director (Cubbon Park) has lodged a complaint with Cubbon Park police after a cobra was killed at the park on Thursday by an unknown person.
 
According to sections 9, 39 of the Wildlife Protection (Amendment) Act, 2022, killing a cobra is a non-bailable and punishable offence.
 
“I received information about killing a cobra by an unknown person. I lodged a complaint with Cubbon Park police requesting them to visit the spot and take necessary action against the accused person,’’ said Horticulture Department Deputy Director (Cubbon Park) HT Balakrishna.
 
The Deputy Director said the snake carcass was sent for post mortem. “It is for the first time that a visitor to Cubbon Park killed a snake. I want to appeal to the visitors not to kill snakes if they spot them in the park. There are snakes in the park. We have already put up caution boards about the existence of snakes in the park,’’ he said.
 
  .
He said that he would direct his subordinates to put up caution boards for the benefit of visitors. “Visitors should not kill or harm snakes in the park. They can inform us when they spot such reptiles,’’ he said.
 
Adarsha J, a medical student and witness to the gory incident that took place on Thursday, said that there were three people on the spot. “There was a commotion and I thought that they were quarrelling among themselves. Later, I realised that one of them killed the snake with a log and a boulder. It would be better if the visitors inform the Horticulture Department or snake catchers,’’ said Adarsha.

  I appeal to the public to not kill snakes, especially if they see one at Cubbon Park—Prasanna Kumar, a wildlfe rescuer
Appealing to the visitors not to kill snakes in Cubbon Park, Prasanna Kumar, a wildlife rescuer, said snakes come out due to excess heat in the summer as they could not remain in drains due to concretisation. “I appeal to the public, especially those who visit Cubbon Park, not to kill snakes. They can contact me on 9902794711 if they happen to come across snakes. I or my colleagues will rescue the reptiles,’’ said Prasanna Kumar.
 
Bengaluru Urban District SPCA member Arun Prasad said that cobras are protected species under Schedule I of Wildlife Protection Act and hence natural habitats must be protected and more awareness needs to be created for their conservation.