Don’t miss this photo exhibition

Wildlife photographer Lokesh Mosale is holding an exhibition this week, which is yet another series of images shot in the middle of wilderness. Along with the exhibition, he will also present his coffee table book on the same subject, a book he wants people to see to understand the environment around us better. A well-known photographer from Karnataka, Mosale has, over the past two decades, explicitly captured life forms in their natural habitat. Be it a snoozing leopard on a tree or a pelican swooping low upon the water. He travels voraciously and captures images of wildlife beyond their beauty- narrating the story of the life form in focus; some happier and some sad or even tragic. His photo-features published in local media have rung alarm bells, driving the authorities on to their toes. As though not to end his concerns for wildlife there, he visits children in the school to share his knowledge and concerns about Nature. 
WHERE: Chitrakala Parishath, Kumarakrupa Road 
 WHEN: 11am-7pm, on till October 16

 Try this food festival

Check out one of the most interesting food festivals in town – The Himalayan Food Festival, which celebrates the rustic flavours of the mountains. The food here is varied and unique, with local staples such as momos (steamy dumplings), thukpa (noodle soup), and the sukuti (dried meat marinated with spices) we’ve all come to love. And this particular menu gives you a taste of some of the most local dishes – the Emma Datshi (creamy mushroom with chili and peppers served with steamed rice and tingmo), Tofu Shapta (spicy chili garlic tofu served with tingmo), Lamb Shapta (spicy chilli garlic lamb served with tingmo), for instance. 
WHERE: Foxtrot- House of Subculture, 17, SBI Colony, Service Road, 3rd Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: For lunch and dinner, on till November 10 
 CALL: 43022526/7 

 Pair grills with cocktails

This festival features Goa-inspired gin-based cocktails with cashew, triphal and kokum flavours, and all sorts of popular grills. From the grills section, choose from Haloumi Cheese and Vegetable, Cottage cheese and cherry tomato, Haloumi cheese and vegetable for all the Vegetarians out there, to Uncle António’s Delicious Grilled Chicken, Beef Steak, Jumbo Prawn and Premium German Sausage - Bockwurst / Bratwurst for seafood and meat lovers. Inspired by Goa, the people, the stories, and the flavours, the cocktails have been specially crafted to infuse Goa in a glass, such as the Gin and Kaffir Lime, Five Spice Team, Uncle Braganza’s Apple Punch, Baga Recall, Grapefruit & Tonic and Berries in Anjuna.
WHERE: Lady Baga, 5/4 Lavelle Road 
 WHEN: Noon-11.30pm, ongoing 
 CALL: 9108934177

 A meet-up for startups 

Indian startups is organising a ‘Co-founder meet’ to help startup founding team find their co-founders. Startups address real-world challenges and provide solutions to improve our lives directly or indirectly. But everyone knows how challenging it can be, without a proper team or without complimenting skills among the co-founders. Here, they are trying to bridge the gap by hosting a meet where community members can attend, share their expertise and team up to create startups or join existing startups. 
 WHERE: WeWork Galaxy, 43, Residency Road 
 WHEN: 5pm-7pm, October 16 ENTRY: `200 

 Shall we laugh?

Comedy Shots in Association with Bistro Claytopia presents Tuesday Comedy Jam. This is a show where Comedians will try some of their new material for the first time, so drop by and be part of their journey and witness their material being developed. And the best part is that a lot of these performers are new, and your feedback might just help them to get better. 
WHERE: 11, 80 Feet Peripheral Road, Next To SBI, 1 Block, 
Koramangala WHEN: 8pm, October 16 
 ENTRY: `100, bookmyshow.com