By: Barkha Kumari
 
 Forest bathing, a Japanese practice of taking slow walks among trees, is becoming popular world over. And next month, Bengalureans stand a chance to learn it as well
 
 Shinrin Yoku is the refined and calming activity of taking a short unhurried walk through a forest that literally translates to ‘forest bathing’ from the Japanese. And there is no water involved.
 
 It has been part of Japan’s national health programme since 1982. The mystically Zen-sounding walking activity of forest bathing or ‘forest showers,’ if you prefer, reduces stress and blood pressure, combats diabetes, promotes sleep and recovery from surgery, and most importantly, boosts immunity (by increasing the number of ‘Natural Killer’ cells in our body; they are a type of lymphocyte). The fresh oxygen aside, trees emit essential oils called phytoncides to protect themselves from germs and insects. Inhaling these does humans good, too.
 
 Forest bathing is becoming popular as a type of psychological therapy, too. Next month, Bengalureans have the chance to accompany Mumbai-based spiritual guru Neeraj K Sharma, popularly referred as Acharya Neeraj, for such a walk, to be held over two days. He will take you to Nandi Hills on the first day to explain the concept, plus demonstrate it briefly. Next day, the workshop will shift to Nagarhole National Park, which is a five-hour drive from the city. He has been conducting these tours in Delhi and Mumbai for more than three years now.
 
 Why do we need an expert for something as simple as walking in the woods? Well, you need one such guided walk so you may venture out solo later, says Neeraj.
 
 There are a few guidelines for experiencing the 'forest bathing' better.
 
 Walking at snail’s pace – or covering no more than a kilometre in an hour. “It should be slow, fluid and effortless, as if you are floating,” he says. This pace allows you to be in the moment, and take in the sights, sounds and smells around you. The idea is to forget everything and focus on your immediate surroundings, use all your five senses, and connect with nature.
 
 You may pause, sit on the ground, hug a tree, smell a flower, talk to an animal, or just meander. “Whatever you do, immerse yourself in that moment. If you hear a sound, try to find its source, for instance.”
 
 Attention must be paid to your inhalations and exhalations, too. “Breathing is a process we are able to control. Once you are aware of your breathing pattern, you can improve it. I like to call this ‘Undeliberate Pranayama’.”
 
 Some parts of the workshop would require you to spare your footwear, but again that's a matter of choice and convenience. “Walking barefoot on soil is one of the best ways to connect your soul with nature.” Also, leave those DSLRs behind, please.
 
 Choosing the right spot also counts. A forest cover with some wildlife is ideal. “I don’t know why but we are always asked to keep away from animals. ‘They will hurt you’, ‘they will pass on infections’, we are told. That’s wrong.” Green cover without animals is a naked forest, he says.
 
 Neeraj heard of ‘Shinrin Yoku’ in 1998. He knew the therapeutic values of forests (who doesn’t?), but he was happy to find a name for it. “It becomes easier to popularise a concept when there is a catchy jargon to validate it,” says Neeraj, who grew up in a small town in Uttar Pradesh, in Azamgarh. “It had a lot of green cover and wildlife around it. So I was lucky to spend a lot of my time amid nature.”
 
 His four-year-old dog, Maximus, became his guru. “Dogs have a sensitive nose. Going out on a walk with them means you need to stop at every other step. This slows down your walking, and makes you focus on what the dog is focusing. And that is the principle of forest walking – being aware of yourself and your surroundings.”
 
 Neeraj is planning to initiate talks with the central government to adopt forest bathing in national policy on the lines of Japan. “I believe nature is the most potent preventive medicine, so we must harness its benefits. In doing so, we will also be able to bring attention to the importance of forests and save them.”
 
 So find a grove near you and get ramblin’. If you can’t access one, find a park or a corner with trees, which is away from traffic. Just 15 minutes of forest bathing a day can heal, relax and de-stress you.
 
 The two-day workshop in Nandi Hills and Nagarhole National Park runs on 27-28 May, 11am-5pm. To register (`5,500), write to edu@delotus.in