Tame jumbos to be released into the wild to make space for ‘troublesome’ ones at the centre of human-animal conflict
 
 The state government has an elephantine problem on its hands – how to tackle the problem of elephants that are at the centre of human-animal conflict at a time when the elephant camps across the state are already crowded with tuskers. The forest department’s solution: release captive elephants into the wild so as to accommodate the more troublesome ones. The forest department’s decision comes in the wake of the High Court’s recent directive to the government to find a solution within two months to the problem of human-animal conflict in various parts of the state.
 
 According to the department’s estimate, around 150 elephants are at the centre of the problem. While 60 elephants have been identified around Kodagu region, as many as 52 have been found around Alur-Islur region of Hassan district. The remaining are found around Bangalore and adjoining districts. Adding more elephants to the camps across the state would be financially unviable, so it has been decided to release as many as 35 of the tame ones back into the wild.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror , principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Gayathriprasad S Prabhu said, “We have decided to release 35 elephants from our camps into the wild, though we are yet to chalk out plans for the capture of elephants. Neither can the camps accommodate more elephants, nor do we have the funds to feed additional elephants.”
 
 According to sources in the forest department, there are five major elephant camps in the state under various forest divisions. Besides the Anechowkur camp, there are camps at Sakrebailu in Shimoga division, at Dubare and Anecadu in Madikeri division, at Ramapura and Bandipur in Bandipur division, at K Gudi in BRT wildlife sanctuary and at Cauvery Nisargadhama in Kushalnagar. Apart from Dasara festivities, the elephants are used for either eco-tourism or forest department logistic work at the camps or inside the forests.
 
 “We have a total of 91 captive elephants, including those used for Dasara festivities, in various camps. Anechowkur camp in Hunsur division of Nagarhole forest has the highest number at 30. Each elephant has a separate mahout and kavadi. We spend around Rs 25,000 for each elephant every month, which includes food, medical expenses and salary of the mahout. In a year, we spend around Rs 3 lakh on just one elephant. Only those that are tame and not aggressive will be chosen for release,” Prabhu said.
 
 However, sending captive elephants away from these camps will not be easy as the tuskers have got used to the plentiful food provided to them and are likely to keep coming back in search of food. Forest officials feel one solution is to gradually decrease the food given to them. “Currently the elephants are driven into the forest at night and come back to the camps in the morning for food. We have decided to gradually reduce the food provided to them. Initially, it will be reduced by a few kilograms and then we will stop giving them breakfast or lunch. Eventually they will figure out that they cannot get their food in the camps and will go into the forest to forage for food,” an official said.