Arpita Khan's emotional message for Salman Khan, says 'I wish only positivity and happiness for you, may all the jealousy and negativity fade away' 

Bollywood superstar Salman Khan's sister Arpita, who was present with sister Alvira Khan besides the actor's long-time bodyguard Shera in Jodhpur on the day of the verdict and subsequent bail hearings in the 1998 blackbuck poaching case, has wished for happiness and positivity for Salman.

Arpita in her Instagram post wrote said she wants negativity to stay away from Salman.

"My Strength, My Weakness, My Pride, My Joy, My Life, My World. God's Child. God bless all the people that can' handle you or your success, I wish only positivity and happiness for you may all the jealousy & negativity fade away. (Can or can't? The apostrophe after can' is causing some confusion)

"I pray you shine even brighter than you are and blind everyone with your success and good deeds. Love you Bhai," Arpita wrote alongside a picture of Salman.

Salman, has been sentenced to a five-year prison term after a trial that lasted two decades. He got respite on Saturday after a sessions court in Jodhpur granted him conditional bail. The next hearing will be on May 7. Salman will have to report to the court on May 7. He will not be allowed to leave the country without the approval of the court in future. After spending two nights in Jodhpur Central Jail, the actor left after completing all legal formalities and headed back to Mumbai in a chartered flight on Saturday, April 7.

Salman’s sisters Alvira and Arpita were inside the court when the bail application was heard on April 7. Arpita took ill as the prosecution strongly opposed the bail and she had to be taken out of the court room.

      

Salman killed the black bucks in Kankani village near Jodhpur on October 1, 1998, during the shoot of film Hum Saath Saath Hain. Black bucks are endangered animals and are included in Schedule-I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

Other co-accused - Tabu, Neelam, Saif Ali Khan and Sonali Bendre – have been acquitted in the 1998 blackbuck poaching case.

After Salman’s bail, his friends and well-wishers from the film industry expressed their happiness and were seen visiting him at his residence in Mumbai. 

Bollywood analysts say around Rs 400 crore- Rs 600 crore could be riding on Salman. His future projects include Race 3, Kick 2, Bharat and Dabangg 3.