Illegal fishing by Tamil Nadu fishermen in Cauvery river inside Karnataka’s Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary has always created a rift between the two states. More than the rift, the illegal fishing by Tamil Nadu fishermen is taking a toll on the rare species of marsh crocodiles that inhabit Cauvery waters along the border. 
 
 	
 	Triggering yet another round of bitter confrontation between both the states, a marsh crocodile was found dead two days ago near Muthathi; it was choked by fishing nets in the deep waters of the river.
 	
 	  	Eyewitnesses revealed to Bangalore Mirror that tourists informed them about a crocodile being washed ashore entangled in a fishing net. According to sources in the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), this is not the first time that a marsh crocodile, protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, was washed ashore. 
 	
 	  	“In the second week of May, a similar incident was reported and a crocodile was severely injured as it was strangulated by the fishing nets in deep waters,” revealed a senior KFD official who did not want to be named.
 	
 	  	Mahadev M, a local resident, said, “A team of tourists told us about the floating crocodile entangled in a fishing net. Over the months, the death of crocodiles in only increasing. Fishermen from Tamil Nadu illegally enter Karnataka waters and lay fishing nets, particularly during nights. Unaware of the net, crocodiles, when they go in search of prey, get stuck by the nets. Attempting to wriggle out of the net, they get further entangled resulting in their deaths.”
 	
 	  	Bangalore Mirror had highlighted the problem in detail in its edition dated April 5, 2016.
 	
 	  	Another local said that fishermen from across the border enter the state’s waters as there is a high density of fish due to sanctuary limits. “In the first week of April, two fishermen from Tamil Nadu and one from Karnataka were detained for allegedly killing a crocodile by laying fishing nets along the river.” 
 	
 	  	A senior KFD officer said that while the river on Karnataka side is a protected area, it is free for all along Tamil Nadu side. “Interestingly, the Tamil Nadu government itself issues fishing permits to fisher folk to fish in their waters. But they cross over the Karnataka border and come to our waters only to kill crocodiles,” the officer said.
 	
 	  	It is indeed disheartening for KFD staffers who patrol the wildlife area vigilantly and even crack down on illegal fishing during night.
 	  	
 	The deputy conservator of forests of Cauvery sanctuary has himself written several letters to the fisheries department of Tamil Nadu requesting them not to issue permits in this area. 
 	
 	  	Yet, there is no decline in fishing activity, according to independent conservationists working in the area.
 	  	
 	Previously, KFD staffers have detected several incidents of poaching and booked cases against the culprits. There have been incidents when poachers were arrested for poaching chital, sambar and other mammals. 
 	
 	  	“Conservation is in the interest of future generation and it would be beneficial for both the states. Incidents like these require cooperation from both states to enforce stringent action against miscreants. As illegal fishing continues unabated and offenders go scot-free, more and more crocodile carcasses wash ashore entangled with fishing nets,” bemoaned a conservation volunteer working along the Karnataka-Tamil Nadu border.