Karnataka recorded the second highest number of pangolins trafficked illegally in the country between 2018 and 2022, according to the latest report from TRAFFIC and WWF-India.
 
As per the report that analysed pangolin seizures in India, 150 animals in Karnataka were involved in illegal wildlife trade in the aforesaid period whereas pangolin scales equating to 129 pangolins were also seized.

The highest number of seizure incidents at 74 and the number of pangolins seized at 154 were reported from Odisha.

The numbers were deduced through seizure data of pangolins and their derivatives available through open sources for 2018 to 2022 period.

Experts said the numbers do not reflect reality as these are only a part of the illegal trade. If wildlife trade is active, only a fraction of those get caught and reported.
 
They are of the view that while enforcement is a continuous process, eternal vigilance is the key factor in controlling hunting and restricting wildlife trade by tracking smugglers and kingpins. However, senior officials’ limited field connection remains a cause of concern.

“During the three-decade period after the enactment of the Wildlife Act in 1972, field formations, with able leadership and support of senior officers recovered several areas from the brink, and that too without large financial budgets. However, there has been a clear mission drift ever since, leading to a lack of ‘ground connect’.

 Moreover, competent staff are not getting the right postings due to the sordid transfer system where merit has no place,” said Praveen Bhargav, trustee, Wildlife First and former member of National Board for Wildlife.

Pangolins in India are listed under Schedule I species of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, thus banning their hunting, trade, or any other form of utilisation of the species or their body parts/derivatives.

Wildlife activists BM spoke to said the fight to stop the pangolin trade is tricky and difficult due to several reasons. However, the data showed that Karnataka is at least recognising the issue, to begin with.

“Pangolins are nocturnal and shy animals, and the crime scene is missing in most trafficking cases. They are easy to handle. The animal does not even bite and is harmless. The forest department has to step up to put a check on this illegal trade. So far, I have witnessed only one incident of pangolin trafficking in Karnataka whereby the crime scene and modus operandi were established. While the issue is being recognised in the state, more needs to be done,” said Sharath Babu, a wildlife activist.

Forest dept needs to pull up socks
Conservationists highlighted that it is not just pangolins facing the issue; other wildlife species are also threatened by illegal trade.

“As per Interpol’s estimate, the global illegal wildlife trade is worth about $20 billion and is second only to narcotics. The only strategy that can be adopted to stop it is active patrolling and protecting areas of notified wildlife reserves. An active mechanism involving both police and forest department to track the illegal trade and initiate prosecution against the traffickers is essential,” said a city based conservationist.


Some officers, instead of acting against such mafias, have made it their mission to chase and harass NGOs, researchers, and activists who seek to share information of wildlife crime…— Praveen Bhargav, trustee, Wildlife First
Experts pointed out that protection and prosecution are no longer the priority of the forest department and with ballooning budgets, the focus is on civil construction and earthmoving, rather than conservation. Notably, a large number of wildlife crime cases are pending investigation across the state.

“Some officers, instead of acting against such mafias, have made it their mission to chase and harass even those NGOs, researchers, and activists who seek to share information of wildlife crime, and threaten them with cases. Unless the head of the forest force and the chief wildlife warden conduct a high-level review and issue strong instructions to park wardens to refocus on protection and work constructively, other endangered species are going to face the same fate as pangolins,” added Bhargav.

India scenario
As per the report, 1,203 pangolins were involved in the illegal wildlife trade from 2018–2022 in the country. Over 880 kg of pangolin derivatives and 199 live pangolins were reported in 342 seizure incidents in the five years.

Odisha reported the highest number of seizures of pangolin scales with 30 incidents, followed closely by 26 incidents in Madhya Pradesh. Pangolin scales equating to 129 pangolins were seized in Karnataka. This was followed by Tamil Nadu, with about 125 pangolins poached for the trade of scales.

Live pangolins represented 50% of the seizures and accounted for 199 animals. Most reported seizure incidents and the number of live pangolins were from Odisha (45 incidents and 50 pangolins), followed by Maharashtra (27 incidents and 32 pangolins).