While mining in Bellary posed serious hazard to environment, quarrying near Bannerghatta National Park (BNP), despite it being declared a ‘safe zone’, is posing threat to 180 species of endangered wild animals and birds. Six illegal quarries have come up in the last 18 months within one kilometre of the park’s border, where quarrying is strictly prohibited. The Karnataka high court and the Supreme Court had told the state government to keep a check on such activity.
 
 “Quarrying is ruining Bannerghatta National Park,” said a source at BNP. It is posing a serious threat to the wild animals here, especially the Asiatic elephant, leopard, sloth bear and sambar. He said there has been no stopping to quarrying across the elephant corridor that touches the Tamil Nadu border.
 
 The quarry sites are the rocky hills of Shivanahalli, Raagihalli, Kallubalu, Bukkasagar, Jaipur Doddi and Harappanahalli, which are part of the elephant corridor - a migratory route for 160 pachyderms (120 migrant, 40 native). More than 150 lorry-loads of crushed stone are transported everyday from the quarries, where the dynamite used for blasting rocks are driving the wild animals away from their natural habitat.
 
 Officials, however, seem to be unconcerned. In 1998, the high court ordered the state government to create a ‘safe zone’ (within 1 km from BNP border) and asked it to ensure quarrying in the safe zone is stopped by December 1998. The order was challenged in the Supreme Court, which dismissed the appeal in 2009. The high court had also ordered the shifting of existing quarries within a year (by April 2010).
 
 “It’s shocking that quarrying is going on in the area. We will write to the government,” said Suparna Ganguly, a member of the National Task force for Wild and Captive Elephants. BNP top brass, meanwhile, made it clear that illegal quarrying will not be tolerated. R Gokul, the forest official who took on the mining mafia at Belekeri and took over as Deputy Conservator of Forests of BNP recently, said, “Illegal activities in the safe zone will be checked. I will hold a meeting with officials of various departments, including mines and geology, revenue, law and order. A joint committee comprising these officials will be formed and an action plan will be formulated.”