Hulikere Lake                 

Not everyone opens the locks of old dilapidated temples and walks through wild grass to look for beautiful unexplored sites that ooze of heritage and history. But for travel enthusiasts Lakshmi Sharath and Arun Bhat, going off the beaten path comes naturally. While Lakshmi took a break from her media job to travel across South India and blog about her travels, Arun decided to quit his job as an IT professional to concentrate on his passion photography and travel. In fact, Arun has been a prolific travel blogger for the last five years, busy tracking the sites and smells of India. 

“Both of us had been following each others blogs for a while and we started interacting about our travels. We actually met only in March this year; I knew that Lakshmi had gone on a trail exploring the Hoysala kingdom and that she had stumbled upon many unknown temple structures and ruined monuments. We got talking and that’s when we decided we should start a weekend trail for those who are really interested,” says Arun. And that’s how Travelwise came into being.

Having imbibed the history and interesting vignettes from their Hoysala trail which mostly covered the Malnad region of Karnataka, the duo thought it would be a great idea to enlighten other urbanites through a tour of the lesser known Hoysala. What’s refreshingly different about this Hoysala trail is that it purposely steers off the usual touristy itinerary and looks at discovering beautiful locations in small villages that not many people would know about.

Under the banner of Travelwise, the duo take urbanites on the two-day weekend Hoysala trail that covers Dodagaddavelli, the ancient town of Dwarasamudra with its many ruins, Hulikere tank, Belavadi temple, apart from Belur and Halebeedu. While the participants stay in a homestay ensconced in verdant greenery, part of the deal is a two-hour tour of a coffee estate.

“We take just groups of 10 because we don’t want crowding and every participant will get equal attention. In the long term we plan to have tours for kids, corporates and other exclusive groups,” says Arun. 

MYRIAD STORIES

The visit is peppered with stories of kings and queens of the dynasty, interesting anecdotes that give a sense of the times gone by and also includes observing nature from close quarters.

“We did a lot of research on the Hoysala dynasty, so that we could help the participants of the trail get a perspective of life in those days and soak in the history of the time. For this, we read through Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) reports of the last 100 years, books on the Hoysalas which are not currently available and other such data. I and Arun would go to the NIAS and Mythic Society library and pore over the books there. We also interacted with local villagers, priests and guards of temples to get interesting bits of information from them,” says Lakshmi. Like the bit about the Hulikere tank near Halebeedu, where the watchman told them that it was the private tank of Queen Shantrala Devi, who used to bathe there and the story goes that the security was so tight that even a ‘huli’ (tiger) could not trespass. 

And then there is the story of a temple in Angadi, the origin place of the Hoysalas. According to folklore, tunnels were found under this temple where lights glowed in the darkness. These lights are believed to have followed people who used these tunnels.

BEYOND THE ORDINARY

Apart from the anecdotes, Lakshmi and Arun themselves have interesting tales to tell of their experiences while preparing for the trail.

“In Hullekere near Arsikere, where we were doing a recce, we found a temple in a dilapidated condition and the gates were locked. The villagers sent the keys through some of the kids and we opened the lock ourselves and explored the beautiful temple,” recollects Lakshmi. 

And this is the lesser known Hoysala that the twosome want to introduce to the participants. “The trail is not just about temples and their history but much more. We tell participants about the architecture, the social and political climate in those times, the kings and queens and also allow them to experience unspoilt nature. It is something that we have imbibed and want to pass it on.”

And the duo is now looking beyond the Hoysala trail. “We plan to have trails pertaining to other dynasties such as the Chola, Chalukya and so on and conduct nature, plantation, wildlife and coastal trails in future. The idea is also to extend it to Tamil Nadu,” signs off Lakshmi. (The next Hoysala trail will be held on August 29-30. Those interested may check www.travelwise.in or call 9902070689 or 9880006460.)