Edwin Joubert Van Ingen, one of the best-known taxidermists in the world, died a quiet death at the age of 101 in a rundown room at his sprawling home in Mysore last week. Since he died without an heir, his death was a stark contrast to the flurry of activity that followed concerning his property running into crores and his prized works that are, well, priceless.   While all of Mysore is agog, wondering what will happen to his prime property, the Regional Museum of Natural History (RMNH), Mysore, has quietly shot off a letter to lay its hands on records of the animal trophy mounts and stuffed animals that adorn palaces, government houses, museums and clubs across the world, and that are vied for at some of the best auction and art houses. The Mysore police, meanwhile, has taken over Ingen’s house and sealed the possessions to protect it from a man who claims to be Ingen’s adopted son. But that is another story (see box, page 9).   “We have already written to the National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) in Delhi, asking them to approach the Karnataka government for the requisite approvals. We are not interested in the prized possessions that Ingen has left behind; that is for the government to look into. If we could get a peek into the records of animals killed, then we will reconstruct it in digital format. The data can be an authentic indicator for all our future research on wildlife,” senior officials told Bangalore Mirror.   RMNH wants the data of specimens (works such as trophy mounts, animal stuffing etc) to get an insight into the kind of biological diversity that existed about 100-150 years ago and even before that since Ingen’s Dutch forefathers were also taxidermists in Mysore.    For instance, way back in the early 1890s, Ingen’s factory got 22 tigers hunted down by a maharaja of Madhya Pradesh on a single day. The records will, therefore, be critical to establish the density of fauna back then. Likewise, Ingen had worked on elephants, lions, leopards, deer, bison, dogs and pigs that are now spread across the world, including Mysore Palace.   However, some of Ingen’s best works are under lock-and-key at his sprawling home in Nazarbad area, built on a plot which the Wadiyars gifted to his ancestors. Before his properties and records go the Roerich way, RMNH wants access to Ingen’s records. (Artist Svetoslav Roerich and his actress wife Devika Rani died without an heir, leaving behind priceless art pieces and a 468-acre estate in Tataguni on the outskirts of Bangalore which the government got control of after a long legal battle in 2011-12.)   Started with forefathers Ingen’s forefathers, who migrated to Mysore as Dutch traders, were also in the taxidermy business. Ingen and his two brothers, Botha and De Wet, were trained by their father, Eugene Van Ingen, at their family’s firm/studio – Van Ingen & Van Ingen – set up during the 1890s. It was here that animals shot elsewhere were sent to be cleaned and turned into wall trophy mounts and stuffed animals.   However, after the government’s ban on hunting in 1972, Ingen’s work slowed down. Subsequently, in 1999, he shut the studio and transferred a major chunk of the osteological specimens (bone collections) to RMNH.   According to John Thomas, taxidermist at RMNH, the museum has nearly 25 specimens of Ingen’s works including tiger, lion, elephant, cheetah, etc. These works were handed over from Venkatappa Art Gallery in Bangalore when it folded up its natural history section. “We also have about 10-12 elephant skulls in our museum given by Ingen. He was one of the best taxidermists the world has seen and I had interacted with him on a personal level,” says Thomas.   Ingen’s name kept cropping up time and again when British journalist and broadcaster Mike Souter came to India searching for his grandfather Frederick Denison-Smith’s roots in Mysore in 2011. Denison-Smith, a designer in Mysore palace, was the Ingen family’s acquaintance.    “I was sorry not to have met him because he undoubtedly would have had much memorabilia and personal memories relating to his family’s history and its connection with my grandfather. My grandfather and Ingen both enjoyed big game shooting in the early 1900s and several of their trophies are now in the private collection at the Palace,’’ says Souter.   Amid all the controversies over Ingen’s properties, long-time Mysorean and secretary of Ramsons Kalapratishtana, R G Singh, feels that Mysore lost a golden opportunity to get an international taxidermy museum. Singh, who recently brought out a collection of ancient pictures of Mysore Palace on the occasion of its 100 years, says: “Because of the indifference of the government and Mysoreans, we did not get the museum. Ingen and his family lived here and set up the business mainly because of the royal family. But with the passing away of the family’s last member, that rich legacy is gone.’’
 
 ‘Adopted son’ stakes claim
 A day before he died, Edwin Joubert Van Ingen registered a police complaint alleging property encroachment. In fact, a man claiming to be Ingen’s adopted son was allegedly renovating the house while Ingen died a pathetic death in a rundown room. As a result, Mysore police has taken over Ingen’s house, sealed the possessions and conducted a mahzar. According to Mysore DCP Basavaraj Malagatti, Ingen’s vintage collections including the few pieces of eight- foot ivory are all locked up in one room to prevent thefts. “Whoever is claiming to be the adopted son of Ingen and the sole owner of property worth crores of rupees, can approach the court and take it back. As per Ingen’s complaint, there is a big attempt to grab his property and we are investigating it,’’ Malagatti told Bangalore Mirror.