Wildlife conservationists worry amendment to Act allowing transfer of elephants for unspecified purposes may prove tricky 

The Wildlife Protection Amendment Bill, which had proposed significant amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 was passed on Thursday. As per the bill, the most important amendment made to section 43 of the act will now allow for the transfer of elephants, a schedule I animal, for ‘religious and other purposes’.

However, this has raised concerns amongst wildlife conservationists and researchers in Karnataka about the indiscriminate capture of these animals and keeping them in captivity.

They say the clause on the transfer of elephants for religious and ‘other’ purposes is ambiguous and is going to be extremely challenging to continue with conservation activities.

“The term ‘other purposes’ has been left ambiguous on purpose. While elephant conservationists have always raised their voice against elephants performing in temples, this amendment will only open the gates for such practices without any checks and balances. It is now going to be a cakewalk for the temple trusts to transport and acquire the elephants for various festivals,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

Researchers also highlight that while breeding of this Schedule I animal was only allowed in the forest camps earlier, this amendment might override that aspect as well. This might also encourage state governments to exchange elephants for any purpose.

“Once the animal is out of its home state, there is no tracking and accountability of their living condition. For instance, the state forest department might now want to translocate elephants to other states since most of the elephant camps are full. However, the man-elephant conflict is still raging in various districts such as Hassan,” added Belagere.

After the amendment, it is going to be a cakewalk for the temple trusts to transport and acquire the elephants for various festivals–Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher
Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of State Board for Wildlife, said the amendment will spell doom for elephants in Karnataka as the state is home to the highest number of elephants in India.

“As it is, there are many captive elephants in possession of people with no proper paperwork and the forest department has not batted an eye. Captive elephants are brought in to participate in processions and are tortured in that process. The amendment will further allow things to go lax. Now any number of people will be able to own elephants. Many religious places in Karnataka own elephants illegally. Now the forest department officers will be more jittery in taking up legitimate cases of poaching and other wildlife offences,” said Hoover.