By Abhilash Prabhakaran

A frequent traveller on the Bandipur road shares his experiences of ‘man-animal’ conflict in the forest

A gray langur lying in a pool of blood, apparently run over by a vehicle, and its troop helplessly watching one among them die. This remains a haunting memory from my many drives through the forest stretches that straddle the Kerala-Karnataka border. It was otherwise a fine morning at the Nagarhole national park. I was driving leisurely in anticipation of the wildlife sightings. A couple of cars sped by; they seemed to be in a tearing hurry and oblivious to the beauty of the forest and the potential sightings. A kilometer or so later, I could see the langur lying in a pool of blood on the road and its troop watching from the side. I do not remember anything from the rest of that drive.

I used to drive to my hometown in north Kerala through the forests. I had driven through the Bandipur stretch late in the evenings. On one occasion, blinded by the high beams from the oncoming vehicles at one of the road bends, I stopped the car and waited for the oncoming traffic to clear out. 

When those vehicles passed and the view became clear, what I saw made me freeze: standing right next to my car was an elephant. Had I not stopped and had swerved a little more to the left side in that high-beam-induced blindness, the car would have hit it. I still do not know how I managed to drive away from there. If anything, I should thank the elephant for its magnanimity that it let me, the intruder, go home safe.

On many occasions, the indiscretion or overenthusiasm of people trying to get the perfect shots of elephants annoy and irritate the pachyderms. Often, people who come behind the offending groups bear the brunt of the actions of people who tease or heckle animals in their excitement or search for the perfect picture.

Once, near Muthanga in Kerala, we saw some bikers trying to get a lone tusker to turn towards them for a click. After teasing the elephant, they rode off and the elephant suddenly entered the road, turned around and came charging towards our car. In panic, I tried to back off but ended up killing the engine. The elephant stopped, trumpeted, and went back to its original position.

I often see people stopping their vehicles and getting down in the middle of the forest even though there are clear instructions not to do so. On a recent drive, I saw a car that stopped almost in the middle of the road to watch a tusker. We were right behind them and thought they would leave after they got a click or two of the elephant. But, they leisurely waited there and created a traffic block. Because we didn’t want to irritate the elephant, which was visibly getting annoyed and had started to rub its tusks on the nearby tree, we kept flashing the light to request the one ahead of us to move. He didn’t. 
He was putting everyone behind him in danger. Finally, when I managed to overtake him, we rolled down the window and asked him to move because he was blocking the road. He dismissed us and asked us to mind our own business. People are often insensitive enough to think the animals are for our entertainment and forget that we are intruding into their natural habitat and disturbing their peaceful life. Hemingway had one said “I love to go to the zoo. But not on Sunday. I don’t like to see people making fun of the animals, when it should be the other way around.” This applies to the ones who make fun of animals in their natural habitats too.

While roadkill is a serious and visible issue that traffic regulations attempt to address, there are other issues too -- such as noise and air pollution. There are many studies on how vehicles’ noise irritate wild animals and impacts their free movement. The impact of vehicular noise and light in the night is much higher.

Many people were upset when the 9 pm-6 am traffic ban was introduced in Bandipur because this road used to be the primary route from Karnataka to north Kerala. However, after the ban, the Karnataka government has repaired two other roads (Gonikuppa-Kutta-Mananthavady and Gonikuppa-Veerajpet-Makkutta-Iritty) that connect the states without disturbing the forest ecosystem. Even the powerful bus lobby that had desperately tried to get the night travel ban lifted for years seemed to have finally come to terms with the ban. Despite some people with vested interests and some media in Kerala trying to create public opinion against the ban with ‘stories’ about the ‘high-handedness’ of Karnataka officials at the entry points, most of the travellers seem to have accepted the regulation with goodwill and understanding.

However, it looks like with a new government in Karnataka, many powerful groups that wanted the travel ban to be lifted are now back in action. The central government is trying to get Karnataka to lift the ban altogether. This, despite the fact that we now have data that shows that the number of animal deaths caused by road accidents came down drastically ever since the night travel ban was introduced. On the Nagarhole side of the forest, the ban is from 6 pm to 6 am for many years now. I am sure a similar extension would do a world of good for the wildlife in Bandipur. It is time we started asking for an extension of the ban from the current 9 pm-6 am to a 12-hour one; from 6 pm to 6 am.

(The author is a technical writer based in Bengaluru)