Conservation activists allege that constructions contravene norms for roads in protected areas 
 
 
 A tussle over development around a temple on the fringes of Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve appears to be snowballing into a major controversy.
 While the forest officials have been silent about the development, conservation activists are up in arms against the construction of an approach road to a temple located on top of Siddeshwara Betta which will pass through the D-line of the reserve.
 	  	Every year, hundreds of devotees flock to the Siddeshwara temple on the hill at Hondarabalu village in Kollegal taluk of Chamarajanagar district, especially during Shivaratri celebrations to offer prayers.
 	  	While all these years devotees used to scale the hill by foot, the temple authorities, supported by a section of the local residents, decided to build an approach road to the temple a few months ago.
 Even though the hillock is located beyond the D-line (boundary) of the BRT Tiger Reserve, the temple and approach roads are said to have been well within the administrative control of BRT. “The new road being taken up for construction does pass through the D-line. Acknowledging that the hill and the approach road form a continuous habitat for wildlife like elephants and tigers, the forest officials recently set up a solar fence covering the temple and adjoining areas,” explained an activist working within BRT Tiger Reserve.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, a senior conservation expert said, “The forest department permitted the authorities to lay a road on the condition that it must be used only to carry construction material and should not blast rocks. But when authorities began blasting rocks, the forest officials intervened and stopped the work. However, following pressure by local leaders, the department has permitted work on the road again.”
 	  	This apart, the authorities have also been planning to come up with a community hall to accommodate around 1,000 people. “The top of the hill has no levelled land.They will have to blast the rocks and level the hill, causing so much destruction to the habitat,” opined yet another volunteer.
 	  	These developments are in contravention of a report submitted by the subcommittee on guidelines for roads in protected areas submitted on 22 December 2014 directing all states to avoid construction of new roads. A copy of the report, which is with BM, explained that any new road should be avoided within and in vicinity (1 km radial distance) of protected areas and blasting in any form, should not be allowed. “The option would be to avoid areas that are within or in the vicinity of any protected area and find alternatives that are socially and ecologically more appropriate,” the report said.
 	  	 Lingaraja SS, conservator of forests and director, BRT Tiger Reserve said, “The hill does not come under forest area. I do not know why people have been blowing up such a small issue.”
 	  	When it was brought to his notice that the new approach road passes through the D-line of the reserve, Lingaraja said, “Only investigations can reveal that and I do not want to comment further .”