Greens suggest capture of leopard

On Sunday, Forest Minister Anand Singh said that he will soon issue a ‘shoot at sight’ orders for the elusive leopard(s) that are on the prowl near Anegundi. The statement comes after a 16-year-old, grazing his cattle at Virupapur Gaddi islet in Gangavathi taluk of Koppal district was killed by a leopard on Friday evening. The deceased, a resident of Kariammana Gaddi islet, was also celebrating his birthday on the day he was killed. 

This incident had lead to protests from locals, who demanded the immediate killing of the leopard. Responding to the protests, Singh said that his department will be taking all possible steps to catch the leopard.

However, the latest statement from the minister has garnered opposition from the greens. Praveen Ramaswamy, a wildlife enthusiast said, “This is an unfortunate incident, but a leopard cannot be labelled as ‘man-eater due to one kill. Also, directing ‘shoot at sight’ orders could result in mass killing of leopards. We need to identify the problem animal. Leopards are an integral part of the ecosystem, they help the farmers keep a check on wild boars which destroy their crops.”

Another environmentalist Joseph Hoover also suggested identifying the problem animal, instead of a blind order. “Previously too, a few leopards were killed in Chikkamagaluru, while trying to catch one. Instead of repeating the same mistake, we must have a better response than killing it.”

 This is an unfortunate incident, but directing a ‘shoot at sight’ order could result in mass killing of leopards. We need to identify the problem animal–Praveen Ramaswamy, wildlife enthusiast
There has been commotion in the Anegundi area over the suspected leopard attacks for quite some time. In fact, Koppal Deputy commissioner Suralkar Vikas Kishor had earlier told the media that it was not time for one to rejoice over the capture of a leopard. However, there are more leopards in the area and restrictions on movement will continue till the leopards were caught.

Following complaints from the people over leopard attacks, the forest department had placed traps and camera traps to capture the leopard and its images. Based on the evidence from the images, the forest department now suspects around 20 leopards roaming in the hillocks.