By: Ranadeep Chakraborty
 
 
 The injured jumbo is being fed millets, sprouts, corn, sugarcane and rice balls for his meals
 
 
  
 
 
 Injured wild tusker Sidda has lost a significant amount of weight in the last few weeks and will need proper nutrition to recuperate, said veterinarians treating the animal.
 
 Sidda, who has a broken forelimb, has been under treatment for over a month near the backwaters of Manchanabele dam.
 
 
 His diet mainly consists of cereals and pulses such as millets, sprouts, corn, and sugarcane, supplemented with rice and ragi balls. “We mix the pulses with the ragi ball for proper functioning of his digestive system; because he moves so little, it might cause indigestion,” said a biologist working with the vets. “Fresh grass, straw and hay is also good for his condition and would help clean his digestive system,” said a vet treating him.
 
 
 The only point of concern at the moment for them seems to be dehydration. “Lack of water and electrolyte in his body is causing all the problems now. His water intake has drastically reduced. He is only taking 5-10 litres a day. Instead of drinking, he sprays it onto his body as he is not used to lying under the sun for so long,” he said.
 
 
 The vets believe that the elephant might be having trouble swallowing water lying down. To remedy this, they’ve been trying to build a supporting structure that could help him stand up.
 
 
 Dr Arun from Wildlife SOS had recently asked the Indian Army for help to bring the animal to a standing position.
 
 
 Colonel P Ravi said: “We built a gantry tower that can take hundreds of tonnes of weight. The tower will help bring the elephant to a standing position without having to put pressure on the injured leg. He can also rest in that position.” The 20-foot-long and 15-foot-high tower is custom-built for Sidda’s frame.
 
 
 The wild tusker is left with just 10 per cent vision and a very slim chance of getting operated on his limb injury because there is no place in India where a wild elephant can be operated upon in open air.
 
 
 Veterinarians from Assam and Kerala were contacted for the Sidda’s initial treatment. The experts were able to make him stand for the first few days, but had to eventually let him lie down to be able to treat him, said Dr Arun. “His moderate intake of food was seen as a sign of improvement. We are monitoring him closely,” he added.