Good Lord! 
 
 Ex-India spinner Anil Kumble combined activism with humour at the launch of a book by author and wildlife conservationist Vivek Menon. After speaking about the need for solutions to conserve wildlife, the topic switched to – but naturally – cricket, and the media blitzkrieg over the recent Test victory at Lord's “after 28 years”. “It's made a big deal of,” said Kumble. “But to be fair, we have played there only six times. I am sure Ram (Guha) will agree with me. We need to make a big deal about wildlife too.” We’re sure brother Dinesh Kumble, an avid wildlife photographer and also a conservationist, agrees.
 
 Sweet talk 
 
 It was business as usual for these actress-turned-politicians – Tara, Jayamala and Umashree – who seemed to have a lot on their hands at the legislative assembly on Tuesday. And just what were they celebrating with a box of pedhas? The last day of the session, we presume! 
 
 Writer’s bloc
 
 Not sure if it’s the sun, sea or the sand, but Goa is the one place where countless writers and directors head to, to finish their scripts in peace. Case in point, the Sur La Mer hotel in Morjim frequented by Bollywood filmmakers such as Ayan Mukerji, Tarun Mansukhani and Abbas Tyrewala. While popularity of the place has grown through word of mouth, the celebrity clientele has even led to Sur La Mer being featured in films like David Dhawan’s Chashme Buddoor and I Hate Luv Storys. The interesting thing is that all these people always stay in the same room (no. 110). “It started with Ayan who came to write the script for Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani. Most recently, Abbas was here writing his next film Mango,” said owner Aneel Verman. As for what draws them to the room, he just shrugs, “Supersition, I reckon!”
 	
 	Six appeal
 	
 Sudeep, who picked up a franchise at the Karnataka Premier League launch yesterday, seemed to be exchanging (or rather asking for?) tips from Vinay Kumar, captain of the Karnataka state team. Sudeep is all set to captain his new all-stars team – Rockstars – in the upcoming KPL matches. Brave move considering that all the other teams will have pros. Undeterred, the star requested the cricketers gathered at the launch to “go easy” on them. Here’s hoping the celebrity team is a big hit! 
 	
 	Tailpiece
 	
 	Artist Nilofer Suleman is a proud mom. Daughter and illustrator-cum-artist Shilo Shiv Suleman has not just followed in her footsteps, she’s also shown shades of brilliance. After studying art installation in New York, the young artist is headed to Boston to conduct a two-week workshop for MIT students. But that’s not all. Shilo’s next stop is Chicago’s Burning Man music festival where she will be designing the sets. You go girl!