Thanks to the lockdown, wildlife is having a free reign in Bengaluru; rescuers report getting multiple calls of peafowl and peacock sightings 

Thanks to the lockdown and the lack of human and vehicle movement on the road, wild birds are now taking advantage of the empty roads. Wildlife rescuers say that they have received a number of calls related to the rescue of peafowls from those areas where they are usually not seen. One such call was reported on Monday from Koramanagala.
 
Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer, said, “This week, I was surprised to receive at least three such calls. Many of our wildlife rescuers have been receiving a lot of calls as well. Monday’s call from Koramangala was one of the first such calls in recent times. For a long time, we have been finding peafowls in areas like Malleswaram, Peenya, Nagarabhavi, RR Nagar, Bangalore University, GKVK, Turahalli veterinary college campus, to name a few. However, the lockdown coupled with low traffic and lack of people’s movement has given them a free chance to move around.”


 As they are ground nesting birds, they require a different habitat. While they come to Bengaluru in search of food, they move to the outskirts for mating–Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer 
Kumar said peafowls were urban visitors in Bengaluru as they do not breed here. “As they are ground nesting birds, they require a different habitat. While they come to Bengaluru in search of food, they move to the outskirts for mating. A peafowl was recently rescued from a kitchen in MS Palya.” 
Santosh M, a techie said, “I stay on Tumakuru Road and go to nearby areas for a morning walk. Last Sunday, I was surprised to see peafowls all around. While a peahen was sitting on top of an anthill, a peacock was spotted on the terrace. Overall, it was a sight to behold. Many of my friends say that morning walkers in many of the green areas often hear the peafowls’ calls.”

 .
 
Meanwhile, locals from Gudibande -- one of the favourite tourist spots for the city’s residents -- have been spotting a lot of peafowls on the roads. “We have been spotting a dozen peafowls every day. Earlier, especially during weekends, we would see a huge crowd of visitors from the city to explore the nearby places. This has not been the case since the lockdown began and since then, the peafowls seem to have been back on the roads nearby. 
Kumar said that it was time for Bengalureans to understand how wildlife was an important part of the ecosystem.