A coffee planter and his cousin had the adventure of a lifetime after being chased for over an hour by a tiger
 
 	A 30-year-old coffee planter and his cousin were stalked by an adult tiger for over an hour near their estate in a bizarre incident which resembled something lifted straight out of a poorly-made action flick. The incident happened on November 11 near Chikkamagaluru, and a video taken of it with voice-over from the two describing the tiger at first as “awesome“, then as “cute“, and then as “crazy“ as it came very close, all the while calming each other repeatedly with the words “don't panic“, has gone viral on WhatsApp. After viewing the video, friends and well-wishers of Himakrithi BM, the planter, and his cousin Praveen have been calling from around the world, expressing relief at their lucky escape. But neither forest officials nor wildlife enthusiasts have been able to explain why the tiger behaved in such an odd way.Even strangely, the incident was the planter's second encounter with the tiger on that day. 

 	Speaking to Mirror, Himakirthi recalled the events of that fateful day, “On November 11, I got a call around 10.30 am from an estate worker who had spotted a tiger. I soon rushed to the spot to see a tiger near the labourers' quarters of my estate. The tiger just stood there in all its majesty and I had not seen the animal at such close range before. Some cattle separated me from the tiger, which didn't want to budge an inch as it had set its eyes on the prey.As the tiger refused to move, I summoned more people. One of my friends fired in the air with his licensed gun to scare the tiger, but it just ignored the noise. Within no time, around 30 peo ple had gathered heeding my sum mons. We screamed in chorus. Luckily it worked, and the tiger left the venue.“ Himakirthi heaved a huge sigh of re lief after the close encounter with the striped carnivore. But little did he real ise that the adventure was just begin ning for him that day. 

 	A chase to remember 
 	At around 5.30 pm in the evening, the planter found himself driving his Nissan Terrano to do the rounds of the estate through its unpaved, dirt roads. His cousin Praveen accompanied him. “The road was in a bad shape and we came across a protruding rock. My cou sin decided to get out of the car and shift the rock while I thought it better to hit the reverse gear to manoeuvre the car around it. But I was alerted by the din of the sensors, warning us about some thing very close to the car. At first, we couldn't make out what it was, but I soon realised it was the same tiger from the morning which was behind our ve hicle. Praveen, who was about to get out of the car, stayed put inside. We re mained in the car for a while thinking the tiger would move away, but it didn't. So we were forced to drive on top of the rock to move ahead,“ said Hima kirthi. The two quickly closed the car windows. Praveen, meanwhile, took out his phone and started videotaping from inside the car. Initially, he thought he might get to shoot a passing frame of the tiger, but little did he know that it was going to be a long encounter. 

 	As the car was moving slowly due to the bad shape of the road, the tiger too slowed down. At times when the vehi cle stopped, the stalking tiger too stop ped. When they turned back, even the tiger turned back. Looked like the tiger was determined to go the extra mile to follow the car. From the video voice over we can hear the two experiment ing with honking, and then stopping it.In between the attempts to calm each other with calls of “don't panic“, we also hear them wondering whether it's a tiger, or perhaps a tigress in search of its cub. Soon, they were forced to stop and take stock. 

 	Children herded to safety
 	Himakirthi recalled, “We were concerned that we were approaching the labourers' quarters, where their children could be out playing. What if the tiger attacked the children? We were worried. So we halted the car. The tiger too got unnerved and sat on the road.So we quickly made calls to our labourers asking them to get the children inside. Only after ensuring that everyone was inside did we start moving ahead, with our stalker in tow.“ The duo called up forest officials as well as wildlife enthusiasts over the tiger's behaviour, but even they were surprised and clueless to make a sensible suggestion. 

 	Luckily for them, the vehicle then hit a better stretch of road and finally could move at a faster pace. Surprisingly, even the tiger too picked up pace.“Now we were really concerned. We tried to stop the car and scream at the tiger and gestured at it to stop following us. But it kept its cool and did its work with precision. By then it was around 6.30 pm and getting dark. We could soon hit the gas pedal, and finally we lost our tail. Our hearts were in our mouths in that tense hour, and we are lucky to survive without accident,“ Himakirthi said. 

 	On returning home, the first thing he did was to send the video to one of his cousins over WhatsApp. Soon, friends and relatives started calling them from all over. It's an adventure the two will remember for a long time.