The state forests are brimming with the salubrious population of tigers. While the conservation activities by Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) are hailed across the country, sighting of tigers and attacks on livestock and humans outside national parks have put KFD in a sticky situation.
 
 Keeping watch on tiger sightings outside national parks, the KFD has decided to place camera traps beyond the boundaries of tiger reserves as part of All India Tiger Estimation 2018 exercise.
 
 Adopting advanced mechanism for accurate estimation of tigers, the department will use an Android app called ‘Ecological’ for computing carnivore and mega herbivore survey. The state has a population of 406 tigers and has now set its eyes on the tigers that have been roaming outside the national parks in adjoining protected areas like reserve forests.
 
 “All these days, our focus was on tigers within the national park limits. But there have been instances when people have sighted tigers outside national parks suggesting that the population of big cats could even be more. Hence, the department has decided to place camera traps outside the national park areas,” a senior official of the Forest department who is part of the estimation exercise said.
 
 According to an order circulated to all forest officials, the exact locations for placement of camera traps will be intimated at a later stage.
 
 In the first phase, the department will undertake an eight-day exercise that includes trekking across the designated beats spanning 15 km of distance.
 
 “The staffers will record sighting of any carnivores during the exercise. Each team has to trek for about 5 km every day and, in three days, they should have covered the entire beat. Subsequently, the personnel will record herbivore concentration in six km areas,” a field official said.
 
 No safaris for a week
 
 The tiger estimation in all tiger reserves and adjoining forest areas has come as a disappointment to wildlife buffs who have set their eyes on grand tiger safari. Facilitating movement of field staff, the KFD has ordered closure of tiger safari in all tiger reserves from January 7 to 13. The closure of safaris for almost a week will have a cascading effect on tourism and hospitality industry as tourists will be barred from entering forests.
 
 Prompted by the promotion of ecotourism by the tourism department, several enthusiasts had planned visits to tiger parks this weekend. But the tiger estimation exercise has cast a shadow on tourism activities as no vehicles will be allowed inside tiger reserves for almost a week.