By Barkha.Kumari
 
 A few Indian hobbyists and companies are trying to bring board games back to the table, but stumbling blocks are far too many
 
 Snakes and Ladders, Ludo, Chess, and Carrom. Think of Indian board games and these names come to mind. Sadly, only these. No, Business is not Indian, but a desi take on America’s Monopoly – it was devised in 1903 to promote economist Henry George’s ideas of taxation. Scrabble (1938) is a US import. Jenga originated in 1970s Ghana. Chinese Checkers rose in 1892 in Germany, not China. Known to us as Brainvita, Peg solitaire came from the court of French king Louis XIV in 1687. Yes, Teen Patti is ours.
 
 The modern titles popular in India include Scotland Yard, The Settlers of Catan, Mafia, The Resistance, Dead of Winter, Codenames, Cards Against Humanity, Ticket to Ride, Pictionary, and, yes, Uno. TV fans are fixated with A Game of Thrones, and Harry Potter trading card games. None is Indian.
 
 So where are the new-age Indian tabletop games – an umbrella term for games played on boards, or with cards, dices, figurines and tiles? Have we stopped producing them since our forefathers last invented Pachisi in the 6th century, or when Saint Gyandev created Snakes and Ladders in the form of Mokshpat to teach morals? Seems unlikely. And when India, especially Bengaluru, is now cracking the video and mobile game market, why is the tabletop game scene silent?
 
 
 
 Kids first
 In the West, board games are a fixture at schools, reunion parties, sleepovers, bars, and corporate team-building exercises . According to trade analysis magazine ICv2, the archaic tabletop market is seeing a revival, and was worth $1.2bn in the US and Canada in 2015. They made six times more money than video games in the first half of 2016 on the crowdfunding platform, Kickstarter.
 
 On the contrary, boardgames in India are considered toys. That’s why retail and online shelves are packed with edutainment offerings by Funskool, Mettel, ToyKraft and the newbie Kitki – a mix of dice and card games that teach alphabets, counting, geography, and logical problem-solving to kids, doubling up as a family activity. And that’s why adults are turning to foreign labels, especially Euro-style games such as Catan, Pandemic and Dominion.
 
 Biju Wilfred, who heads the e-commerce division of Funskool, a leading toy manufacturing chain headquartered in Chennai, tells us that board games account for just 25 per cent of their total stock. Plus, all their ‘adult games’ are imported. “Five years ago, we tried selling a board game created by IIT-Bombay students. It was a strategy game modelled on Chess. But it didn’t do well. People didn’t get it. Two types of board games do well in India: One, educational games for kids. Two, party games such as Taboo.”
 
 Bengaluru-based Kaadoo has been developing wildlife-based, family-friendly board games since 2016. Their latest release Jungle Patrol pits two teams of forest rangers and brigands against each other. The Big Game and Animal Buddy are the other two series. Despite dealing in the kid-oriented, educational space, co-founder
 
 Ganesh Subramaniam admits the going is not easy, referring to the distribution channels that are “very fragmented”. “It will take a long time and perseverance to bring about a sustainable change in the sector.” Equally fragmented is the ecosystem of ideators, designers, marketers and retailers.
 
 
 
 Money matters
 
 Value for money is must. Wilfred explains, “The Settlers of Catan comes for `3,999, and Ticket To Ride for `2,201, so these games are expensive. That’s why Indians buy only those games that are a hit in the Western markets, and have proved their worth.” In this bid to play safe and smart, the few new Indian labels lose out. This happened to Mayank and Kinari Doshi Solanki of Bengaluru’s Val-Ed Initiatives, and their three-in-one knowledge, task and strategy game, XII Immortals, last year. Kinari, a design graduate, recollects, “Our game explores Mahabharata, and is meant for 13-year-olds and above. When we approached a company to promote it, we were advised to redesign it for eight-year-olds instead, because ‘it will sell better’.” Basically, they were told to dumb it down. They didn’t give in, and plan to publish it on their own. But whenever they ready to retail their product, which comprises a board bigger than the usual and over 600 cards and miniatures, they will keep the price low, under `1,200. “The adoption rate of board games in India is very low. Since we are trying to push a product, we need to be pocket-friendly,” says Mayank. The prototype cost them `14,000 to manufacture. Their second product is Value Vocabulous, a word game to help children learn the meanings of values such as Justice, Egalitarianism
 and Democracy.
 
 
 
 Here and there
 
 There are others too. Education learning consultant Prasad Paramashivappa’s Kannada Scrabble might hit the market by November. He’s been tinkering with the dummy first made in 2011, and is currently converting its instruction manual into a comic strip.
 
 Design students also have made boardgames, but career and market dynamics cut their success short. Veethika Mishra designed a two-player strategy game on the subject of ‘colonisation’, as a final year project at the Toy and Design department of National Institute of Design, Bengaluru. Annexe was exhibited at the Nasscom Game Developers Conference 2016. “But I did not publish it because figuring out logistics and operations was too taxing,” says the 27-year-old. Three years ago, Roshan Shakeel and Sudeep Vashistha of Srishti School of Art Design and Technology made a card game ‘Trunket’ for an assignment to re-interpret the landscape of Western Ghats. They printed nine copies for college mates. Workbench Projects is thinking of creating a 3D chess game as seen on The Big Bang Theory. Some, like Shree Kant Bohra, raised `20,000 in a month via crowdfunding and shipped 50 boxes of their Politics of India game to 22 donors worldwide.
 
 
 A different move
 Meanwhile, non-commercial board games are growing. They are developed and customised to teach a specific lesson to a niche set, and require the intervention of a facilitator. Sample these: Baishnabi Monger and Anuksha Khargharia have developed a role-play game, The Sales Pitch, to simulate the tasks and challenges faced by sales personnel. The game has been played in eight companies so far. They are also completing a game for an NGO, called My Safe Home, to render sex education to children. Sales Samurai is another ‘sales’ simulation game, designed by Rohit Sasvehalli for corporate training. Plus, he has done two games for school students – The Leadership, and The Fellowship. While the former teaches the importance of leadership, decision-making and collaborative thinking, the latter lets you step into the shoes of doctors, actors and journalists, and evaluate career options.
 There are those gamifying urban policymaking for government agencies, economic stakeholders and citizens. Four months old, Urban Play has a roster of six games – Foul Games (to understand of trajectory of a lake’s life in Bengaluru); Whose City Is It? (on mobility issues experienced by the differently-abled); Transit (a card game on public transport networks in Hyderabad, set in 2041), among others.
 
 JP Nagar-located not-for-profit firm, Fields of View (FoV), is offering insights into waste management with the game called `ubbish. You lose the game when the landfill you are in charge of is filled to capacity. City Game lets players build a city and see it evolve. A 15-minute game, Piemac is designed to understand information flow during disasters. With Thrift, policymakers learn to finance a ‘smart city’. It’s not hard to see why these games have had IAS officers, entry-level policy makers and BBMP pourakarmikas agreeing to participate. By simulating real, research-backed scenarios, it puts participants in the middle of the field, and allows them to see and assess the consequences of their own actions. Plus, it’s an inexpensive way of replicating a broad scenario, replete with complexities and stakeholders on one table, thus offering a bird’s eye view, says FoV’s cofounder Sruthi Krishnan.
 
 
 
 Game over?
 
 So will home-grown, leisure tabletop games ever rise to the top? Not in the near future, at least, say the boardgamers. Pradyot Anand, who once used to co-organise a board game meetup at Dice N Dice, Koramangala, says, “A lot of factors go into designing even a half-decent game, from zeroing in on a riveting theme to researching the context (For Kaadoo’s The Big Game, its team went on a safari to Nilgiris), engaging rules, and replayability. This can take from a few months to years. Besides manufacturing, costs go into playtesting and improving the game, then marketing and distributing it. All in all, it is mostly a labour of love, and most designers – even abroad – have other sources of income and do not rely on royalties for their living.” It sure is a dicey turf, because despite raising funds from Flipkart and even Ratan Tata, Bengaluru’s board game-maker MadRats shut shop last year.
 
 Sandeep Jetty, who co-conducts this meetup now, has more bad news. He says, “Instead of making tactile boardgames, Indian companies have turned the classics ones such as Chess or Ludo into online and mobile games. On the other hand, foreign brands are customising their games with Indian context. The makers of Cards Against Humanity are shortly sending us their Indian version to playtest at our meetups.”
 
 And then there is the elephant in the room – dearth of ideas. FoV cofounder Bharath M Palavalli, who is also a guest lecturer of game design at NID and IIIT, Bengaluru, says, “Go to the stores and you will find games that are nothing but poor cousins of famous foreign games. Changing the overall look, names and faces of the characters or historical themes, don’t make them Indian games.”
 
 But much like India has broken its image as ‘the country of snake charmers’, these players are hoping they can make India more than a country of Snakes and Ladders soon.