After enduring a severe drought, tiger reserves in Karnataka are already gearing up to tackle another similar scenario next year. Many are desilting ponds and lakes inside the reserves to ensure water retention and groundwater recharge.

According to officials from the Karnataka Forest Department, while 18 ponds inside the Bandipur Tiger Reserve will be desilted, as many as 25 in the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve will be cleaned to increase their storage capacity and augment the groundwater table in the area.

“We have 18 ponds that require desilting. Out of these, two have already been cleaned using CSE funds of Rs 10 lakh for each pond. The rest of the ponds will be desilted using funds from the Tiger Conservation Foundation. Animals suffered a lot during the drought season, and thus our priority is to ensure we harvest enough rainwater for future calamities. Although we have lost the golden period to harvest water this monsoon, desilting will begin in November so ponds are ready for the next monsoon season,” said S. Prabhakaran, Deputy Conservator of Forest (DCF) and Director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

“Nearly 25 ponds will be desilted in the forest reserve. These water bodies were cleaned a few years ago, and it is important that we increase their capacities to store maximum rainwater,” said C Harsha Kumar, DCF, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve.

While wildlife conservationists and activists say that desilting of ponds will bring respite to wildlife in the future, they urge the department to focus on long-term and sustainable solutions to augment water availability in forests.

“Acacia plantations can still be found across reserves in Karnataka. Such exotic tree species are water guzzlers and are known to negatively impact the groundwater table in the area. These plantations have led to many perennial and seasonal streams drying. These are the areas that are dependent on artificial ponds and waterholes to ride through summers and drought conditions. The department should consider the root cause of the issue and come up with a solution. One is by extracting Acacia and Eucalyptus plantations. However, this is happening only in some areas,” said a wildlife conservationist.

Stopping plantation activities in natural forests, removing forest encroachments on a war footing, and putting an end to the diversion of forest areas for unscientific and unnecessary projects are some other measures that would help improve water availability, experts say.

“The forest department should put CAMPA funds to better use and let nature take its course. The department is more inclined toward development work instead of conservation, which is unfortunate,” said the conservationist.