By Reya Mehrotra

On August 24, volunteers who were out to clean the Hoskote Lake, were enthusiastically going about their job, picking up liquor bottles, plastic bags, food cartons and other rubbish. 

Suddenly, the clean-up drive came to an abrupt halt as volunteers discovered bags of biomedical waste dumped into the lake. Shocked at the sight of it, the volunteers decided to investigate further. Upon searching through the bags of medical waste, they said they found prescriptions, letters written on printed letters with name and address of the doctor and lab reports from the KR Puram Government Hospital. The City Municipal Corporation (CMC) was immediately informed about the matter. However, four days after they discovered the medical waste, it still lies at the lake and no one seems to be in a hurry to clear it, say volunteers. Residents say they fear that they could be at the risk of contracting diseases and contamination of water.

Nagabhushan, BBMP wildlife rescuer, who was also a part of the clean-up drive says, “We discovered large quantities of biomedical waste dumped in the lake while we were conducting a clean-up drive. We have not yet touched it because there were syringes and other hazardous waste. But I found a prescription of KR Puram Government hospital in one of the bags. The municipal corporation will levy a fine and let it go but this will not solve the problem. Hospitals have been mandated to dispose off biomedical waste carefully and not to dump it in the open. Hoskote lake has a rich biodiversity and attracts a large number of migrant birds. If this continues, the lake will become a dump yard. Dumping debris is also common at the lake. The biomedical waste has not yet been removed. ”

R Venkatesh, Environmental Engineer with CMC says, “I will inspect the lake and will confirm who has dumped it before initiating action. Hospitals are supposed to have a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with agencies to dispose off medical waste and not dispose it in the open.”