By: Khushali P Madhwani
 
 We find out why childhood friends Kaavya Nag and Mayura Kadur went from being an environmentalist and a dentist, respectively, to create a range of organic soaps
 
 In the 60’ by 40’ shed on Nag’s farmhouse in Hosur, 29-year-old Mayura Kadur and 28-year-old Kaavya Nag get their hands dirty — quite literally — in oils and lye. A strong smell of cocoa mixed with chocolate and besan wafts through the air. The duo, who met as toddlers at the city’s Valley School in 1990 are translating their love of all things arty into Do Bandar, a soap-making business.
 
 It started when wildlife conservationist Kaavya, daughter of theatre personality Arundhati Nag, was in Vietnam with her husband last year. A common friend in Bangalore was making soaps for fun and dentist Kadur suggested they join the bandwagon too. Visits to a government soap factory and some private ones such as Bangalore Soap Works, to see how it’s done first-hand, and books on handmade soap helped them understand the process. Initial investments included Rs 10,000 on raw materials, moulds and a blender, while an oil machine with a pulveriser came at Rs 2 lakh. In addition, the duo use an air compressor to seal bottles, a screw press and a tiny earthen stove made from bricks, coal and twigs, to make 13 kinds of soap of various fragrances.
 
 “My dad used to collect old match boxes with ek chabi, do chabi written on them. We were playing around with names when Do Bandar happened,” says Kadur. “We felt that there were limited choices in soaps,” she says. “You get lavender but not a turmeric or besan. Many Indian ingredients weren’t being used in soaps.” Committed to keeping things organic and non-toxic, they use food-grade oils.
 
 Each uncut soap from the mould is cut into three pieces by a shape cutter designed by Nag, based on a design available online. “Devamma’s our boss now,” she says, referring to the 56-year-old who helps them cut and package. Eight hundred soaps are made here in a month, which range from Rs 75 to Rs 300 . They retail from 10 outlets including from their own website.
 
 They may seem like pros, but the girls say they’re still learning. “We’re still figuring out marketing,” admits Nag. A family friend teaches the girls how to manage the numbers, while another, who runs an online business, taught them how to set up the website that Nag now manages.
 
 The girls have even created a shaving soap for men that they sell in a dried coconut shell. “When we get good feedback, especially from men, we know we’re doing okay,” says Kadur. “Men don’t usually experiment with toiletries, so it’s a good feeling when they buy ours.” New products include body scrubs, massage oils, lotion bars and even a soap for pets.
 
 “We want to build this into a fully established set up in the long run,” says Nag. “I dedicate so much of my time to this that I don’t get time for anything else,” adds Kadur. While Nag says she may not go back to being an environmentalist again, Kadur isn’t sure. For now, they are content dealing in lather and suds.
 
 Arundhati Nag, meanwhile, says she is proud of her daughter and her friend for taking on this initiative.