Winter’s coming and soon the markets will be flooded with avarekai, the humble hyacinth bean that is ubiquitous to the local cuisine. But the house sparrow, which used to flock the city during the avarekai season, has become a rare sight over the last few years.
 
 Their population is dwindling and conservation crusaders have been trying different things to bring the friendly bird back to the city. Joining this crusade is Valeesh V Kaushik. Yes, the well-known snake-catcher is now on a mission to save the tiny birds. Kaushik, who has been catching snakes for 20 years, is now is associated with the BBMP wildlife department. And this season, he has built homes for sparrows. As part of the Baanadi Marali Baa Gudige programme, some of these sparrow homes have been hung around Yadiyur Lake to attract the birds.
 
 “This the right time. From September, when the avarekai season begins, sparrows usually make their way to cities. Caterpillars usually feed on avarekai plants and sparrows love to feed on these caterpillars,” Kaushik said. “However, with pesticides being sprayed to keep caterpillars at bay, sparrows are not getting food. This time, we have small sparrow homes, which will help them stay long and safe.”
 
 These sparrow houses, that cost around `350, can be kept on rooftops and window attics; basically you have to keep them at a height to protect them from cats and dogs. The nests can be placed on terraces too, if it is safe. These cute homes sparrows are built with bamboo. “A lot of talk happens on World Sparrow Day, which is observed on March 20 to raise awareness about the importance of bird dwellings in urban areas. But it just that, all talk. Nothing concrete really happens.
 
 Unscientific proliferation of mobile towers is just one of the factors that poses a threat to the survival of sparrows. A host of other factors such as use of ceiling fans and refrigerators also contribute to the decline of house sparrow population,” Kaushik said.
 
 Kaushik hopes more people join hands in the initiative to bring sparrows back to the city. “September is the right time to hang these sparrow homes, more so if you seen sparrows in your neighbourhood,” he said.