Kodagu offers many things - the best coffee in the world; a visit to the picturesque Western Ghats, and the opportunity to see the origin of the river Cauveri. Kodagu, also known as Kodava Nadu, nestles in the high hills and evergreen dales of the Western Ghats which form its backbone from the north-west to the South, linking the high ranges of the Subrahmanya to the Brahmagiri. In this chain of high hills, rise lofty peaks with picturesque names such as Pushpagiri, Tadiyandamol, Brahmagiri and Peramalamale. 

In the Pushpagiri Wildlife Protected Forest lies Mandalpatti, one of the most offbeat and picturesque trekking routes in Kodagu, mostly untouched and blessed with verdant grasslands. A viewpoint located at a distance of about 13 km from Madikeri town, Mandalpetti is a little difficult to get to because of the lack of signage. Ask locals, they will tell you which turn to take. 

The first l0 km of the stretch is well-maintained, passing through coffee plantations, and offering vistas of palm trees along­side. Later, the roads get rough, but the steep ups and downs and journeys through small streams will give you a thrilling experi­ence. The route is serene, wild and weathered. 

You will pass through thick canopies, and if you’re observant, you can spot orange plantations and palm trees in between the coffee plantations. 

These steep slopes covered with thick tropical evergreens remain repositories of the world’s ecological wealth, which gives this place its cool, salubrious climate, making it the veritable Kashmir of the South. The sounds of various birds and insects welcome you to the base of the hill. Movie buffs might like to know that this is same place that was fictionalised as Mugilu Pete in the 2006 movie Mungaru Male. 

As you reach the base of Mandalpatti hill, you will be asked to register with the forest department office. From here on, it’s a climb that gets prettier by the minute. From vast open meadows to a huge green carpet of trees, there is much to see. What surprises you is the constant fog, slowly blown away by the strong wind, but instantly replaced by fresh fog. The fog is so dense that during the monsoon, visibility is only about 10-20 metres. When you reach the view point, you will have a breath-taking 360 degree view of lush greenery. The view is said to be around 1,600 meters above sea-level. A viewpoint pillar has also been built to get a full view, but be careful during the monsoons, as it is covered with thick fog and you cannot see what is in front of you. 

If you are not satisfied with this view, you can just step down from the view­point and climb down a small route (be careful, the loose stones make it slip­pery) with tiny steps, which will take you to another point. Here too, the view is magnificent. The colour of the sky-different hues, from pinkish to pale yellow mixed with blue-gives an amazing view of the sur­rounding hills which form the lovely Western Ghats. Mandalpatti usually has a salubrious climate throughout the year, except in the monsoons. Ensure you carry loads of water and refreshments as there are no such shops or eateries along the way. 

Getting there 
Mandalpatti is located around 13km from Madikeri. En route to Abbe waterfall, deviate right at a km stone and you will head towards the hill.