A committee constituted by the Supreme Court was to submit its report on the question of ban on night traffic on the highway passing through Karnataka’s Bandipur Tiger Reserve on July 23. But in a late development, Kerala sought time to file objections after the report was shared with the contesting parties. The Supreme Court cause list reflected this development and the case is no longer listed for hearing on Monday. The committee’s report stating there was no need to reopen night traffic is said to be the reason for Kerala seeking time. 

The committee was constituted earlier this year by the SC in a special leave petition filed by Kerala challenging the Karnataka High Court order of 2010 which banned night traffic on National Highway 212 (redesignated as 766) and NH 67. The possibility of an alternate route between Karnataka and Kerala / Tamil Nadu that will bypass all the wildlife sanctuaries is also explored in the report, sources say.

Karnataka had filed an application in the case on Saturday citing a report by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) which is against night traffic in the forest. 

The committee constituted by the SC is headed by the secretary of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and has representatives of the states of Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. A representative of the NTCA is also part of the committee. 

The NTCA is said to have concluded that there was no need to reopen night traffic through Bandipur forest as the animals including gaur, tigers and elephants had gotten accustomed to restricted vehicular movement at night and allowing vehicle movement again would affect them adversely. It has also suggested that there was no need to increase bus services, said sources. NTCA has held consultations with all stakeholders including bus service providers from Kerala. 

The movement of traffic between 9 pm and 6 am was introduced in 2009 by the DC of Chamarajnagar and withdrawn a few months later after pressure from Kerala businessmen. The matter reached the High Court which restored the ban. The Karnataka HC in 2010 had directed that an alternate route to Kerala be developed. Karnataka is claiming that the alternate Hunsur-Gonikoppa-Kutta State Highway 90 it has developed is only 30 km longer and outside wildlife reserves. 


NH 212, NH 67 stretches have a killer record

NH 212 passes through Bandipur (between Maddur and Moolehole) for 20 km while NH 67 passes through (between Melakamanahalli and Kekkanahalla) for 13 km. Between 2004 and 2007, a record number of animals died in accidents involving vehicles on these stretches which resulted in a chorus for ban on night traffic. 89 mammals including leopards, tigers, elephants, sambhar, spotted deer, barking deer, 73 birds and 53 snakes died during this period due to accidents. These were the only deaths that were noticed.