Says state needs power but not at cost of healthy environment; no non-forest activity should be allowed in reserve
 	
 As power woes loom large in state, the government has received a jolt with the State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) pulling it up on the proposed power project in the Jogimatti Reserve Forest in Chitradurga district. SHRC issued the government a notice on Wednesday citing this project to be a threat to wildlife, nature and the locals. SHRC had taken up a case following four months of protests by residents in and around Chitradurga. Jogimatti is a widespread reserved forest area spread across 10,048 hectares.
 		 	 		The project was the outcome of strong lobbying and it envisages a generation of over 19.25 MW of electricity through wind turbines within the 24.83 hectare core forest area and considered an alternative to hydroelectric and thermal power projects. But the SHRC, in its order, stated, “State needs power generation and windmills are alternative to hydro-electric and thermal power projects. But power generation need of the state cannot be at the cost of healthy environment essential for the life of residents of Chitradurga city. It is a matter of common knowledge of all the travellers from Bangalore to Chitradurga that windmills are seen right from Hiriyur taluk border to Chitradurga all along the rocky hillocks. Nobody objected and there was no question of objection from any one for the same. But erection of windmills in Jogimatti is like disturbing the lung space of the residents of Chitradurga city.”
 		 	 		SHRC brass has also directed the government not to allow any non-forest activity stating that the forest had rich flora and fauna including leopards and sloth bears that could be affected adversely. “That may not be a habitat for elephants and tigers. But it has several other animals like wolves, jackals and birds. The project will have an adverse effect on the public. No kind of non-forest activity can be permitted in Jogimatti reserved forest without proper assessment of environmental and ecological impact likely to have adverse effect on the conditions of life/living conditions of the residents of Chitradurga. It is also noted that any kind of non-forest activity in the said reserved forest area is likely to cause migration of wildlife to nearby urban area leading to man-animal conflict,” CG Hungund, SHRC member (in pic), told Bangalore Mirror.  
 		 	 		Further, SHRC has asked the chief secretary and the principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF) to send a detailed report within six weeks on the issue. The government has also been asked to conduct public consultation and incorporate the same in its report.
 		 	 		“We have taken it up as it is a serious and sensitive issue. One can’t disturb a forest like this. Any non-forest activity can’t be allowed in forest affecting residents and wildlife. We will take final decision once they submit a report,” Hungund added.