Forest Dept expects at least 350 volunteers from B’luru to help clean up MM Hills 

The Forest Department officials of the Chamarajanagar circle are expecting at least 350 volunteers from Bengaluru and other districts of the state for a mega plastic clean up drive at the Male Mahadeshwara Hills after the grand festivities of Maha Shivarathiri concluded last week. According to the forest officials, a whopping 5 lakh pilgrims visited MM Hills and its temple over the period of two weeks - from February 25th when the carnival ‘Jathre’ started and went on until March 10.
 
Tons and tons of plastic waste such as water bottles, water and buttermilk packets, plastic ice-cream containers, plastic cups and plates have been littered throughout the 18-km stretch starting from the foot of the hill called Talabetta and ascending into the forest area until Cowdahalli and reaching the Male Mahadeshwara temple on the hill top, forest officials pointed out.
 
Due to the pandemic, MM Hills and the temple remained mostly closed for devotees over the past two years since 2020 due to restrictions. In 2021, only locals from the Hanur taluk and residents of Chamarajanagar were allowed to the hill temple as the district administration took a decision based on the numbers of the positive cases in the district, allowed a number of devotees including temple committee members and families to the temple. People from other districts of Karnataka and other states were stopped at Talabetta and sent back by police and forest officials.

“This restriction for two years have led to the surge in the number of devotees this year and around 5 lakh pilgrims and devotees —all over from Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Chennai and Ooty from Tamil Nadu and also from Kerala visited MM Hills over the period of two weeks,” said Kiran Kumar, founder and member from an NGO, Green Army Force.


 .

Both the temple authorities and forest department officials engaged hundreds of volunteers from the city over the period of two weeks during the ‘Jathre’ including the Maha Shivarathri day for crowd control as it was a herculean task for the district authorities to manage the unexpected surge of crowd this year, sources said.

During the ‘Jathre’ and the Maha Shivarathri, the devotees walk from the foot of the hill Talabetta towards the top that is a 18-km stretch through the road. There is also a way which goes through the forest area from Talabetta to Cowdahalli and to the top of the temple and many devotees/pilgrims had taken that way as well, forest officials said.
 
MM Hills is a Tiger Reserve that houses 53 tigers in its wild habitat which is also an elephant corridor, forest officials added.

Waste collection
Forest officials are expecting around 350 volunteers from around 15 organisations/NGOs such as Friends of Wildlife, Eco-Volunteers, Nature Conservation Foundation, Lions Club, Rotary Clubs, etc so that they can deploy a team of good number of people for every five-kilometre stretch along with the forest department staff and clean up the entire plastic garbage from MM Hills which the authorities assume would be in tons this time.


 We are expecting at least 10 truck loads of plastic garbage to be collected from the total 36-kilometre stretch–Yedukondalu V, Deputy Conservator of Forests MM Hills
 
“We are expecting at least 10 truck loads of plastic garbage to be collected from the total 36-km stretch of road and the forested area. The clean-up drive would start on Sunday morning and it will continue until lunch time. Soon after the lunch there would be a workshop for alternatives for the plastics - and how large scale single use plastics could be avoided, and apart from these, innovative ideas, best practises, legal measures that would suit taking into account the religious sentiments and workable solutions to preserve the ‘pristiness’ of the forest area,” Deputy Conservator of Forests MM Hills Sanctuary, Yedukondalu V told BM.
 
“Every year we do it after the Maha Shivarathri festivities and this is one of the largest drives of single-day cleaning up of a entire hill in the state, but this year, the amount of plastic garbage littered is much more than previous years due to the surge in crowd,” Yedukondalu added.