The IISc-developed system issues early warnings on wild animals crossing roads or railway tracks
 
 Scientists from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have developed a sensors-networked early warning system to help prevent motorists from running over wild animals on the roads or railway tracks passing through wildlife-infested zones. At least 23 leopards have been killed in Karnataka between 2009 and 2014, of which nine have been on the outskirts of Bengaluru on NICE Road. Besides these, there are deer and other animals run over by speeding vehicles too. Even elephants are known to have been run down by speeding trains while crossing rail tracks in their path.
 	  	The scientists from the department of Instrumentation and Applied Physics (DIAP) at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have devised a low-powered, compact, rugged and simple device, which consists of two sensors and a retro-reflector screen. 	The two sensors are installed on opposite sides of the road or the rail track with one alongside the retro-reflector. Any object moving between the two sensors and the retro-reflector screen triggers the setup to reveal the distance, height, speed and ‘profile’ (or shape) of the object detected by the sensor to issue early warnings to approaching motorists or loco pilots to look out for wildlife to prevent them from being mowed down.
 	  	Dr GR Jayanth of DIAP, IISc, told Bangalore Mirror that data pertaining to height, profile and other features of the animals can compare with given templates to set off early warnings for motorists and loco pilots. The device, which is yet unnamed, captures data with an accuracy rating for the animal’s height up to 98.5 per cent and that for time and distance it covers up to 94 per cent.
 	  	“The maximum distance permissible depends on the sensitivity and resolution of the detector and the divergence of the source. Our target is to achieve a range of up to one kilometre,” Dr Jayanth said.
 	  	He explained that several devices can be mounted simultaneously along roads, railways and farmland edges to record data of wildlife movements. “The devices can be used by policymakers and conservationists to implement suitable remedial measures to minimize road kills, collisions with trains, crop damage and assess the effects of vehicular traffic on wildlife,” he said.
 	  	The scientists have initiated simulated measurements on roads inside the IISc campus. The lab prototype of the device costs about Rs 5,000. “The device is clearly not meant for replacing the far-superior CCTV camera technology used for detailed surveillance which record actual images and not just the profiles. However, to recognize objects automatically, it is necessary to perform image processing on a computer, which is an impractical proposition in remote areas and over extended distances,” Dr Jayanth added.
 	  	The scientists are collaborating with Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF) on this project to mitigate the problem of wild animals dying on the roads or tracks due to speeding vehicles/trains.
 	  	P Sathish Kumar, also with DIAP, hopes the innovation would be soon available commercially.
 	
 	
 	Killed on roads/tracks
 	
 	
 	 		February 2013: Two elephants were killed by a passenger train near Krishnagiri. The impact was such that one of the elephants was thrown into the air and landed quite some distance away from the accident spot while the engine was partially damaged. 
 		 	 		March 2003: Four pachyderms including two calves were killed on the spot when a train engine hit them near Hosur. 
 		 	 		February 2015: Three-year-old male leopard was mowed down by a vehicle on NICE Road 
 		 	 		October 2014: A female leopard was run over by a vehicle near Bannerghatta.