Go for this play
Meet Aravan – just another regular boy in search of his father. His only wish is to be part of a story greater than himself, so he can be remembered by someone... anyone. Which should not be difficult, once he discovers that he is the son of Arjuna, the great Pandava warrior. But the mastermind Krishna has other plans for him, and he manipulates Aravan into accepting one of the most unusual tasks in the Mahabharata. Between his acceptance of the task and its fulfillment lies one night. One night that could change everything. The play, One Night Only is the 63rd Akvarious production. It is a movement and dance-based drama, which uses dance forms such as Bharatnatyam, contemporary, Odissi, and Karagattam, and the martial art form of Kalaripayattu, set to modern and Tamil folk music, to tell this lesser-known but fantastic tale from the great Indian epic. 

WHERE: Ranga Shankara, JP Nagar 2nd Stage WHEN: 7.30pm, August 3 
TICKETS: `300, bookmyshow.com

Deep house and more
DJ Rahul’s 13 years of experience in deejaying translates into eclecttic sets where he picks apart and infuses together all the styles of music - from house to trance, hip hop to lounge, 70-80s disco to DnB Tonight at Saturday Smash Hits, he will go behind the console to spin some deep house and commercial house tunes.

 WHERE: Myu Bar, Gilly’s Redefined, 100 Feet Rd, Koramangala 4th Block
 WHEN: 8pm onwards, August 3 

 Check out this gig
Pineapple Express, a unique multi-lingual band, is bring their renowned audio-visual experience to the city this evening. Their gig will involve their original music, signature renditions of crowd-favourite tracks and tracks from their EP Uplift, hit releases such as Fire ft. Benny Dayal, the cult-followed track Anthem and the brand new EP – Deja Vu. 

 WHERE: Fandom, 1st floor of Gilly’s Redefined, 413, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 7.30pm, August 3
 TicketS: `400, insider.in 

Spin cycle
Conceived by Marti Bharath in 2007, Sapta is a groundbreaking independent electronic music act that seamlessly blends influences from India and the West to produce an energetic and compelling live act, with a global following. SAPTA’s unique soundscape draws on an eclectic mix of original electronic sounds, synthesisers, infectious rhythms and catchy vocal melodies that thrive on a live audience. The music draws on Marti’s experiences of living and performing in San Francisco, Paris, Dubai and India, and it all comes alive with live instruments, thumping percussion, soaring vocals and a few surprises along the way. Come watch them perform this evening. 

 WHERE: Foxtrot - House of Subculture, 17, 
Service Rd, SBI Colony, Block 3, Koramangala
 WHEN: 9pm, August 3 ENTRY: Free 

Retail therapy
Check out this popup that features gorgeous handloom sarees (in Maheshwari, Kuppadam, Chanderi), jewellery, bags and a range of eclectic cool decor and gifting solutions for the home and office, including handcrafted dreamcatchers, smart table organisers, handpainted trays and boxes, papier mache sculptures, stationary and more. 

 WHERE: Studio Orenda, 391, 6th B Cross, Koramangala 6th Block 
 WHEN: 11am-7pm, August 3
 CALL: 7625094555 



The wild picture
Treat your children and yourself with photographs from the wild at this exhibition, being held as part of the sixth edition of the Nature InFocus Nature and Wildlife Festival. On display are 120 curated photographs. The festival will also have stalls showcasing arts and crafts and other unique eco-friendly products, plus it screen 
films and talks about the need to conserve our jungles and the entire ecosystem.

 WHERE: Chamara Vajra, Jayamahal
 WHEN: 10am-8pm, till August 4
 DETAILS: festival.natureinfocus.in 

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’