City animal activists file FIR against Guhantara resort alleging that they kept emus in a starved, pathetic state
 
 
 Three Animal Welfare Officers (honorary posts affiliated to the Animal Welfare Board of India) from the city, Vasudev Murthy, Sree Kavya and Abhishek J, lodged a complaint on Tuesday at the Kaggalipura Police station, accusing Guhantara — The Cave Resort of cruelty to two emu birds which were lodged in the premises. The trio rescued the two birds that were being kept in “deplorable” living conditions and transferred them to Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre at Bannerghatta for treatment and rehabilitation. The police have registered an FIR against the owner of the resort and manager, DM Parameshwarappa, under sections 428 and 429 of the IPC, Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act and Karnataka Animal Diseases (Control) Act. 

 	Murthy detailed how he was alerted to the case after a friend spotted a post by a visitor on social media. Having been active in the field of animal rescue a welfare and equipped with enough knowledge of the law, they swung into action. 
 	  	“First we made a visit to the resort to verify the claims. They were both in an extreme state of malnutrition; in a pitiable condition. One of them can’t get up at all. It has a gaping wound near its leg and we think it may have been eating at the wound. So it has developed gangrene,” he describes. “The other emu too is severely starved, can barely walk and is missing an eye.”
 	  	The three reported the matter to the Kaggalipura police station. Murthy lauds the cooperative attitude of the cops, who took down their complaint and even sent two constables with them to seize the animals. Murthy says resorts across the state often indulge in this practice of keeping exotic animals for the “viewing pleasure of guests as if it’s some kind of a mini zoo”. Calling it “common knowledge” among animal welfare practitioners, he says he has even seen langurs and peacocks kept this way. “It’s a well-known fact that the exotic animal trade flourishes in Bengaluru, and we think these are the situations the poor animals find themselves in,” he rues. 
 	  	Raje adds, “We saw the picture of the injured birds going viral on social media and accordingly visited the resort for verification. There we found that the entire enclosure was filled with rotten flesh and birds ailing with bleeding legs.”
 	  	Emus are native to Australia and the national bird of the country. They do not belong outside that eco-system, Dr Roopa Satish, wildlife veterinarian at Bannerghaltta Rehabilitation Centre, WRRC (Wildlife, Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre), says. “If the conditions here were conducive to their existence, they would have been found naturally,” she adds. Unfortunately, exotic birds are not protected under the Wildlife Protection Act, unlike local species which cannot be housed and hunted. “So people use that loophole to bring and house them. Unfortunately, awareness is so low that there are no quarantines or standard operating procedures followed.” 	Not only do these practices endanger the food chain and eco-system of the bird’s native area by robbing it of a valid link, they also threaten the environment of the place they are brought into because they can cause infections, introduce parasites, get into unhealthy competition with native species and so on. 
 	  	Satish says she often sees similar cases of Grey Parrots, Parakeets and Red-eared Slider Turtles. “When people realise that they are difficult to maintain and disease resistance is low, they leave it in the forest or wild, which is the worst thing to do.” 
 	  	When Bangalore Mirror contacted Parameshwarappa, he said he had nothing to hide. “There is no cruelty towards birds or animals on our premises. These birds are around four years old. We had got them from a small farm near Kolar and have been feeding them with certified foods. In fact, we have been maintaining a regular register on treatment, medicines administered and documented the prescriptions given by a noted veterinarian,” he says.
 	
 	According to him, they spend around Rs 4,000 to Rs 5,000 on their maintenance every month.
 	  	He alleges that the injuries are a result of the quarrels the birds have with each other during monsoon, their mating season. “During one such quarrel one of the birds was severely injured and began pecking at the wound. Hence, the bird began to bleed though we had provided it with treatment. The complainants were not ready to listen to our version and refused to go through any of the records about their maintenance,” he adds.
 	  	The Kaggalipura police are further investigating the issue even as resort authorities maintained that they will fully cooperate with investigators by giving all the required documents and evidence pertaining to the birds.
 	
 	
 	A case of neglect?
 	
 	Dr Satish believes the birds’ injuries look more like a case of neglect than a result of a disease or an infection, as resort authorities claim. “The thigh has a deep gash, which they have tried to stitch up. But the bird has auto mutilated it. There are also superficial bruises and bald patches on the body where the feathers have fallen off. In the case of the other emu, the eye has closed and blackened. It could be a case of trauma that has been mishandled. That too has been stitched up. It can’t be an infection because that would happen in both eyes,” she says. Often, animals that are supposed to be foraging develop vices where they auto mutilate out of boredom. Saying it happens often to zoo animals, she says a conscientious keeper would provide distractions to prevent animals from becoming aggressive in this manner.