The state rafting camps heave a sigh of relief as after the imposition of strict guidelines, there is little chance of a rafting ban in Karnataka 	
 	
 	 		The state rafting camps were dealing with uncertainty that cropped up after the National Green Tribunal’s embargo on rafting on the banks of river Ganga near Rishikesh, Uttarakhand. While the government officials said that rafting in the state will continue to thrive, the adventure sports enthusiasts fear it might meet the same fate. However, after the guidelines issued by state tourism department and General Thimmayya National Academy of Adventure Sports (GETHNA), the fear of a ban on rafting is slowly fading.
 		 	 		Department of Youth Services and Sports director HS Venkatesh said, “GETHNA along with the state tourism department has come out with a set of guidelines to make rafting a safe experience to the adventure lovers. The guidelines were notified in mid-April and as the state has already implementing these guidelines, there was no question of rafting being banned here.”
 		 	 		The tourism department officials claim that they are not giving permission to permanent camps.
 		 	 		An official of GETHNA said they had included minute details including adequate measures for sanitation and other necessary facilities at the temporary camps. “The visitors are not allowed to be served food and alcohol and we are taking adequate precautions so that no rafter leaves behind empty bottles or food near the camp site,” the official added.
 		
 		
 		 			What the NGT said 		 			
 			 				An NGO had petitioned that the rafting camps in Ganga violated the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and also the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 as they were leading to pollution of Ganga by discharging effluents, throwing of solid waste directly and adversely affecting the ecological integrity of the river system. Further, it was alleged that the camps didn’t have any adequate sewage and sanitation facilities and disturbed the habitats of wild animals. A bench headed by Justice UD Salvi has asked the ministry of environment and forests (MoEF) and Uttarakhand government to file their replies by August 7. 			

 			

 			 				State guidelines 
 				 			 				* The River Guide must hold valid certification of competency from recognised institute or a national governing body recognised by the ministry of tourism. 			 				*  He must also hold a Life Saving Technique (LST) certification or an equivalent certification from respected national governing body. 			 				* The guide must complete two familiarisation runs under supervision before the commencement of each season and before undertaking commercial runs. The minimum age for guides is 18 years. 			 				* In contrast to the common adventure trip format, in these trip formats, a boating or commercial guide assumes some of the responsibilities normally exercised by the group as a whole, as appropriate under the circumstances. 			 				* The commercial guides or their employers have been advised to acquire trip or personal liability insurance: An “instructional trip” is characterised by a clear teacher/pupil relationship, where the primary purpose of the trip is to teach boating skills, and which is conducted for a fee. 			 				* Considering the “safety as the primary concern”, all activities must be supervised by internationally certified instructors, who adhere to international safety standards and practice and also use state of the art equipment.
 				
 				
 				 					Venkatesh H, a techie
 					 				 					“We allow dumping of millions of litres of sewage water into rivers till these rivers run dry. We allow growing water guzzling crops in places where dry cropping patterns are better suited (often with political patronage). We allow heavy metals and carcinogens to be dumped into waterways and forget the humans and wildlife are dependent on the very same waters. We already have a long list of woes. What is the point of banning the rafters and kayakers? Regulation is what we need, not ban.”
 					
 					
 					 						Manik Taneja, a techie and adventure enthusiast
 						 					 						Ban is an extreme step. However, it is true that there are certain violations by a few camp sites and there are way too many operators who do not follow the environment norms. This doesn’t mean banning is the solution. It may affect the livelihoods of many. This is also not a good move for the sports enthusiasts. The right thing to do is to form a committee and regularise it. Some genuine camp operators who are playing by the book shouldn’t suffer.
 						
 						
 						 							RAFTING CASUALTIES IN STATE
 							 						 							In 2012, two British rafters Ian Turton and Michael Easton were killed when their raft capsized in the Cauvery River. Their bodies were recovered two days later.
 							
 							
 							 								Rafting rivers
 								 							 								* Cauvery River
 								 							 								* Barpole (near Kodagu)
 								 							 								* Bheemeshwari (near Kanakapura)
 								 							 								* Bhadra (near Chikmagalur)
 								 							 								* Sita (Hebri)
 								 							 								* Kali (Dandeli)
 								
 								
 								
 								 									Charges 								

 								 									Rs 1,200 (for eight km) 								

 								 									Rs 2,500 (for 22 km)