Search is on to find a mate for 7-yr-old female giraffe at Bannerghatta zoo

At Bannerghatta, the quest for a new giraffe has become more than just a safari spectacle—it’s a heartwarming search for love. Meet Gauri, the single giraffe, who’s been a resident here since her arrival from Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens in 2018.

In an attempt to end Gauri’s loneliness, Giraffe Yadunandan joined the scene in April 2020. Sadly, tragedy struck in 2021 when the male giraffe accidentally entered the treatment area and got his six-foot-long neck ensnared in rods. Despite best efforts by the staff, Yadunandan succumbed to asphyxiation.
 
His ossicones were entangled, and attempts to free them resulted in his neck twisting twice. In the midst of panic and vomiting, Yadunandan’s heartbeat gradually slowed until he passed away.
 
Before his tragic departure, Yadunandan brought joy to the zoo, providing company to Gauri. The zoo staff fondly remembered the playful interactions between the two giraffes, sniffing and bonding instantly.

Now, with Gauri feeling the pangs of solitude and showing signs by not eating properly, the officials are on a mission to find her a new companion.
 
Though there are giraffes in Mysuru zoo, the officials say that it could result in inbreeding if brought here. To avoid inbreeding and support healthy development, officials are actively searching for a suitable giraffe from other zoos in the country.

Once found, they plan to seek permission from the wildlife board. Gauri, a Rothschild’s giraffe (these breeds are usually found in Africa and America), requires a suitable partner to avoid inbreeding. The zoo officials have set their sights on giraffes from other zoos, with a potential match from Alipur Zoo in West Bengal. Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre, during his visit to Bannerghatta, expressed support for bringing in another giraffe. Gauri is now seven years old, so finding the right partner becomes crucial for breeding and the overall well-being of this majestic creature.

Giraffes typically live up to 26 years in the forest. Gauri, who was brought to Bannerghatta at two years old, is now seven.
 
Finding the right partner is not just about companionship but holds the promise of breeding and contributing to the giraffe population.

Get insured to go on safari

The forest department has made the decision to introduce insurance for travelers participating in the Bandipur safari. Naveen Kumar, ACF, Gundlupet, said, “We have observed a growing trend of tourists opting for safaris in Bandipur. Hence, we have decided to provide insurance coverage, demonstrating our social responsibility.” An estimated 1.5 lakh people visit Bandipur annually, with the safari being the major attraction. Instances have occurred where elephants chased away tourist vehicles. Due to the potential encounters with wild animals, the forest department has opted to offer insurance. The forest department has entered into a partnership with an insurance company and paid a premium of Rs 94,900 on September 23. As per the agreement, in the event of any casualty, the deceased may receive up to Rs 1 crore in insurance.