By Reya Mehrotra

Flyover construction project will destroy Bandipur, environmentalists say

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan’s tweet of December 1 caused great agony and ire amongst environmentalists in the state. The tweet was about the Kerala Government bearing Rs 250 crore towards a flyover construction project in Bandipur.

Bandipur will be ruined, thanks to the flyovers, they say. 

This was the tweet from the Kerala CM’s Twitter handle: “Solution to traffic woes of the Bandipur-Wayanad stretch. CM Pinarayi Vijayan gave permission for the State to bear 50% of the cost for constructing 5 one-km long flyovers on NH 212 to facilitate night time travel. It is estimated that the project will cost ?500 Cr.” 

In August this year, it was reported that the Union Ministry of Road and Transport had proposed five flyovers of 1 km length each through the national park in order to decrease the ‘consumption of fuel’ on the alternate route which is 35 km longer. The cost of the project was estimated Rs 460 crore. After environmentalists opposed this, CM HD Kumaraswamy had assured them that he would look into the matter and ensure that the 2009 ban stays.

Currently, travelling through Bandipur forest area is no hassle at all, say the activists. In fact the alternative road (Hunsur–Gonikoppa–Kutta–Mananthavady) was developed by Karnataka by spending ?75 crore after the ban.

The exact location of the flyovers has not been notified yet by the Centre government.

BM spoke to wildlife enthusiasts from Bengaluru to know how the proposed flyovers will prove to be destructive for Bandipur.

Animal trafficking will increase drastically

S Santhosh Narayan, advocate and wildlife enthusiast, says, “The matter is pending before the SC. There was a hearing on November 30 before the SC but it was adjourned for two weeks as our state government didn’t support the proposed flyovers by the central government. In such a case, making statements like these is clearly an attempt to overshadow the SC’s decision.”

He said fencing both sides of the road would not prevent accidents involving animals as these animals are territorial. “Elephants can easily crush the fences. This is just a drama by the Kerala government as the project has not yet been sanctioned. This will give rise to smuggling, animal murders, and lot more.

‘Bandipur will become history if flyovers come up’

Some activists said the flyovers can destroy the forest. Shamanth Krishnamurthy, wildlife enthusiast, says, “During day, vehicle movement is permitted, even during the night, 16 buses are permitted to operate. The animals have also become habituated to the ban and plan their movement accordingly. It only takes 45 minutes more through the alternate route.”

Is the timber mafia behind this new plan?

The flyovers will facilitate the job for the timber mafia that operates on a large scale in Bandipur, the activists say. Shamanth says, “Bandipur has the highest number of tigers in our country. The construction of the flyovers will take around 2-3 years. We all know how chaotic it becomes during large scale constructions. Several animals will be affected. If there is one case in a month where an animal wanders into human territories, there will be 10 cases in future because of the flyovers.”

Why it makes sense to drop flyover plan

• Flyovers will ease access to the forest area, which can then be easily encroached as patrolling is not possible 24X7
• Poaching cases will increase fourfold due to lesser security and the heavy traffic movement near the forest area
• Cases of animals entering human territories will double
• Wildlife will be affected adversely during the construction of the flyovers, which will take more than two years
• It will lead to loss of habitat for animals
• It will open doors to illegal activities like felling of trees, timber mafia, animal hunting, allow humans to enter restricted areas
areas