As golf nets at the Bangalore Golf Club (BGC) turn into a death trap for birds and bats, city wildlife enthusiasts and rescuers have raised an alarm. They are calling for a day-to-day monitoring of the nets to reduce bird mortality. 
 
 	A pariah kite (Milvus migrans) was rescued from the nets on Monday evening following a three-hour op – the third rescue this month by the wildlife volunteers and firefighters. The team said that more than twenty birds have been rescued in the last six months from the vicinity, while many have died. They have called for an exclusive monitoring of these nets to save birds - who either are inhabitants of the area or visitors looking for their prey. Several birds die after being left unattended for days, while many fall to their deaths or suffer grievous injuries.
 	  	The city wildlife rescue team, led by Prasanna Kumar and firefighters, rescued the pariah kite stuck at a height of about 35 feet in the nets, facing the chief minister’s residence in High Grounds. “The nets are more than fifty feet in height and have been put up across the periphery of the club, adjacent to the arterial roads with traffic flow and public movement. It is in these areas that the birds get tangled in the nets. BGC staffers and authorities should depute or entrust security personnel with looking out for entangled birds on a day-to-day basis, and call us. We are available 24x7 for bird rescues. We appeal to the club authorities for such a system,” Kumar told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	BGC is spread across sixty acres and has been once a rich habitat of bird species. Jaishankar V, an ornithologist and founder trustee of Vanamitra, said, “The golf course has recorded sightings of over 86 small and large bird species in 2005. However, this number has been falling gradually.” Birds spotted around the BGC include the black-winged kite, black kite, brahminy kite, shikra, common kestrel, white-breasted water hen, rock pigeon, spotted dove, rose ringed parakeet, Asian koel, Indian roller, greater coucal, barn owl, spotted owlet, little swift, white-breasted kingfisher, small green bee-eater, white cheeked barbet, copper smith barbet, red-vented bulbul, red-whiskered bulbul, jungle babbler, jungle myna and the oriental magpie robin among others. However, according to experts, large birds like pariah kites get caught in the nets more often, unlike the smaller birds which are used to the nets and fly away unhurt.
 	  	“Pariah kites and bats are found stuck in these nets. Kites come in pursuit of the dragonflies that prey on the mosquitoes in these areas. We have documented the aggressive nature, especially of kites, when it comes to hunting its prey. Nets don’t bother the kites who are out to hunt. Some get caught in the process. As this is a tricky issue and the BGC can’t do without the nets, monitoring and rescue are the best options we have,” Jaishankar told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	BGC authorities, too, were accommodative. BGC administrator Group Captain, Anand Kishore (rtd), told Bangalore Mirror that the club was open to rescue teams to save the birds. 
 	  	For 24X7 help for bird rescue, Prasanna Kumar can be reached @ 9902794711.
 	
 	
 	 		What brought up the nets
 		 	 		The tall and secure nets across the periphery of BGC were put up after an incident in August 2006, when a golfer’s ball struck the CM’s car. This occurred when the CM’s convoy was passing in front of the Seven Ministers’ Bungalows on Sankey Road. By then, there had been over six occasions when the ball had crossed the boundaries. The police have also taken up a case. A driver of a Karnataka High Court judge was also injured at the spot, a month before. Soon, as a safety measure, the nets were put up.