Cheluvanarayanaswamy temple          I was excited at the idea of visiting Melkote, a town that was more than a 1,000 years old, and has still maintained the same culture even today. Due to its religious importance, it has earned the sobriquet “Badrinath of the South”. Thirunarayanapur, or Melkote as is it better known nowadays, is perched on a rocky hill called Yadavagiri overlooking the river Cauvery. This place is 132 km from Bangalore and comes within Pandavapura taluk of Mandya district. It has two major temples, the Cheluvanarayanaswamy temple at the base of the hill and the Yoganarasimhaswamy temple on the hilltop.

Many hotels
Melkote is just 51 km from Mysore. Many government buses ply there and one canalso hire a cab. The nearest railway station is Mandya, 25 km away. Melkote has many small private hotels offering the visitors a comfortable stay. Anytime from August to February is ideal to visit this place.

Legend has it that saint Ramanujacharya (the propagator of Srivaishnavism) was camping at the nearby town Thodanur in 1098 CE. One night, the saint dreamt of Lord Thirunarayana beckoning him to unearth his idol from the ruins. So, with the help of King Vishnuvardhana, he recovered the Cheluvanarayanas-wamy idol and reinstalled it within a newly constructed temple.

Following another dream, the saint approached the Badshah of Delhi and requested him to return the idol (which the emperor had taken after conquering the hill). This idol is called Ramapriya (also called as Sampathkumara). With all his charisma and power, Ramanujacharya successfully got back the idol, which is the utsavamurthy. This is a metal idol with striking resemblance to the main deity. The princess of Delhi, Bibi Nachiyar, in whose possession the idol was all these days, could not bear to lose it and followed the saint to Melkote. She is said to have breathed her last at the lotus feet of the Lord. Even today, we can see a small idol of her at the feet of Ramapriya, built in her memory.

This place gained prominence among the Srivaishnavas and is one of the four most important places of Srivaishnavism in South India. The other places are Kanchipuram, Thirumalai and Srirangam. This place is also known as Jnana Mantapam or the house of knowledge.

Radiant deity
We chose to visit the Cheluvanarayanaswamy temple first. There is a motorable road leading right up to the temple. There are colourful little stalls with bangles, puja articles and toys that welcomed us at the entrance of the temple.

The parapet wall of the temple is decorated with stucco images of different forms and incarnations of Lord Vishnu. In the centre is the sanctum in which is the beautiful and radiant deity of Cheluvanarayanaswamy, another incarnation of Lord Vishnu. In the east-west orientation, it has the mahamandapa and a small mukhamandapa. On the northern corridor is the Rangamantapa. This is adorned with pillars that have intricate carvings showing various forms of Lord Vishnu, and scenes from the epics like the Mahabharata. We walked around here slowly, admiring each and every pillar.

Beautiful art
Hats off to all the artists who 
created such lovely pieces of art. The sad part here is that photography is not allowed, so we were allowed only a couple of shots after persistent requests. Moving on towards the east, near the entrance is the high gopuram built beautifully in brick and stucco.

The steps leading to the temple pond are beautifully arranged. We were able to capture this beauty in one shot from the hilltop. Halls and small rooms enable the devotees to have a comfortable bath in the holy water.

The other temple
A short drive through winding roads and we arrived at the parking area of the Yoganarasimhaswamy temple. A flight of stone steps leads us to the shrine. This ancient temple is housed on top of the hill. The winds were so strong at this height that when we were climbing up, we had to hold on to the side railing. Also, the steps had worn out (wonder how many devotees have stepped on them since 1,000 years) thus making them smooth and slippery.

It is believed that Prahlada himself installed the Yoganarasimha idol here. This temple was built later and is said to be a Hoysala creation. The basic design of this temple is simple. Being built of stone, it is cool and quiet inside. There are two big bronze doors at the entrance. Also welcoming us were many monkeys, eagerly waiting for a banana or coconut. Inside the sanctum sanctorum is the Lord Yoganarasimhaswamy seated in the yogamudra. The idol is so charming that the image is still alive in my eyes. The air inside has a lovely smell of both the flowers blooming in the area and those offered to the lord.

Panoramic view
We then went around the temple. The walkway is guarded by high wall. The hill beyond this wall drops right down. Just imagine the effort if 1,000 years ago, all these huge stone blocks and carved structures had to be hauled up for the temple to be built! A panoramic view of the surrounding area can be had from here. On a clear day, the Gomateshwara of Shravanabelagola is said to be visible from here. There is a cave below the temple called Bilaswarga which is not open to visitors. It is said that this goes right under Lord Narasimhas-wamy’s idol. A huge drum donated by Tipu Sultan and a huge bell by Parakalamatha are kept here.

Sanskrit centre
This temple town has one of the oldest patashalas or academies of Sanskrit research. It was established in 1853, and even today imparts education in Sanskrit and Indian philosophy and has successfully retained the cultural heritage of the place. The private library of His Holiness Yatirajaswamigalu has many works in Sanskrit, Telugu, Kannada and Tamil. It also houses literature on philosophy, astrology, mathematics, dharmashastras, architecture, etc all neatly arranged in stacks.

To protect the wolf, in 1974 the Melkote Temple wildlife sanctuary was established. The fauna of the region also includes jungle cats, leopards, and many species of birds unique to this region. The locals also informed us that sometimes one can spot peacocks strolling around, but we were not lucky to see one. It was here that we got to relish the original Iyengar puliyogare, a delicacy made with rice, tamarind and other spices.

This town is really unique. One can feel the culture come alive here. 


Major festivals
Vairamudi Brahmotsavam: When the utsavamurthy is adorned with the crown and taken around the town in procession. Usually this takes place in the summer months of March-April.

Teppotsava and Tirunakshatram: Birthday celebrations of the saints of Melkote.

Angamani: The local folk festival. Savitha Ramachandra is a finance professional based in Bangalore who loves to travel