It was a fairy-tale ending for this Indian pond terrapin that was left to die in an abandoned public well near Lalbagh.  	On Tuesday, wildlife volunteers from the city conducted a unique rescue of the medium-sized fresh water turtle that was kept in the narrow, deep well to keep it clean. However, the well had dried up over a period of time leaving the turtles there to die.  	On Monday, authorities received a call about abandoned terrapins in the well. Immediately, a volunteer rushed to the well to do a recce -- the well was very deep, narrow and had no steps.  	The next day, the team, with professional mountaineer Balraj in tow, reached the spot armed with all the required equipment -- static ropes, anchors, descenders and rappel devices.  	While another wildlife expert, Prasanna, decided to scale down the well, Balraj stayed up to monitor the whole operation.  	When Prassana reached the base, he found that three terrapins were dead. Only one terrapin was alive, but it was very fragile and needed immediate medical attention to surive.  	The terrapin, which had many wounds, was brought up after three hours and provided medical aid.  	“The lone surviving terrapin was badly hurt. At the bottom of the well I felt giddy. This show how bad the conditions were there. A few more days there and this terrapin would also have died," Prasanna said.  	People believe terrapins help to keep wells clean as they eat the green algae, weeds, insects and worms. Some people also believe terrapins bring good luck. But keeping them in wells with no outlet is very harmful for the animals.  	When you find a terrapin, release it in its habitat and not closed wells, authorities said.
 	
 	For rescue and release of terrapins, call 9902-794-711
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	ENDANGERED SPECIES
 	  	Indian pond terrapin is an endangered species. Hunt and kept in captivity in pet trade, it is omnivorous and feeds on aquatic plants, insects and carcasses of dead animals. Water bodies including ponds, streams, rivers and artificial water bodies are its habitat.