It was news that the country’s environmentalist were happy to receive. Six years after the proposal was sent, the 1,600-km long Western Ghats, home to 30 per cent of the world’s Asian elephants and 17 per cent of the world’s existing tigers (as per WWF), have been declared a world heritage site by the UNESCO.   The Western Ghats, which extend from Gujarat to Tamil Nadu — even to Sri Lanka, though this stretch is not listed as heritage — are older than the Himalayan mountains. The ghats, also known as the Sahyadri range, are recognised as one of the world’s eight hotspots of biological diversity.   D Stalin, project director for the NGO Vanshakti says that in 2006, the Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE), in collaboration with the Nature Conservation Foundation and the Wildlife Institute of India, sent a proposal to the UNESCO’s Natural Heritage Properties suggesting that the Western Ghats be included in their list. Seven sub-clusters were selected to represent the outstanding universal value of the diverse habitat types distributed along the Western Ghats. The proposal was supported by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). Stalin says the proposal received a boost when Jairam Ramesh served as the head of the ministry. In March 2010, MoEF appointed veteran ecologist Professor Madhav Gadgil to prepare a report on the bio-diversity of the ghats and the threats it faced.   The proposal, Stalin says, took so many years to be cleared because the International Union for Conservation of Nature hadn’t visited the proposed sites along the Western Ghats. “In fact, they still haven’t seen all of them,” he adds. Stalin has also been working along with Gadgil on this project.   The ghats, which cover a total area of 1,60,000 sq km and with an estimated human population of 245 million, are subjected to several development projects that threaten its bio-diversity. In his report, most of which is available on the web site westernghatsindia.org. Gadgil has suggested that the government look at ways to incorporate development in eco-friendly ways. For instance, instead of big dams Gadgil has suggested that smaller dams are built in each village so that people become self-sufficient.   In his March 2010 report, Gadgil spoke strongly against proposed mining projects in Sindhudurg, saying that besides the bio-diversity of the place, even the local human population will be affected. He had written then that most of those living there were not interested in employment through the mining projects and that their livelihoods will be ruined if the projects are given sanction.   “Our report does not say that there should be no development in the Western Ghat section. Rather the concerned people should be accommodated into the decision making process,” Gadgil told Mirror.   Stalin added that recognition as a world heritage site will mean that the government has to preserve bio-diversity of the region, no matter what the economic benefit. “International tourists come in and we will be watched by the world. Thus, the government will be forced to protect the area.”   Welcoming the UNESCO tag, Gadgil added, “It is a matter of pride for the country. It is expected that conservation efforts in the area get a boost. Now, the central government must take a strong international posture on this issue. It must take measures to implement it along with the concerned state governments. If the steps are not taken, then the recognition will mean nothing.” While the UN will provide some funds for the preservation of the ghats, the various state governments involved will have to pitch in as well. However, it is not yet decided how much that amount will be. Last month, the Maharashtra government allocated Rs 100 crores to the forest department, a large share of which went to the Western Ghats.   Besides the ghats, India has 23 cultural sites and five natural sites - Kaziranga National Park, Keoladeo National Park, Manas Wildlife Sanctuary, Nanda Devi and Valley of Flowers National Parks, Sundarbans National Park - on UNESCO’s World Heritage Site list.