Two birds rescued from Doddaballapur; superstitious people like to slaughter the nocturnal bird during Deepavali for ‘untold wealth’
 
 In a major rescue operation along with NGOs, Karnataka Forest department officials rescued rock eagle owls, one of most sought after creatures in the illegal wildlife trade, more so during Deepavali, when these species are said to be in high demand for the superstitious beliefs attached to them.
 
 The rescue operation on Tuesday was led by Bengaluru rural division officials in association with the Humane Society International - India and TRAFFIC India. The raid was carried out based on a tip-off that the traffickers were trying to sell the rock eagle owls.
 
 Bengaluru rural division DCF, Natesh, led the raid on the trafficker’s hideout in Doddaballapur and rescued two owls which were still alive. Girish V, Gangaraju, Naveen Kumar and Lokesh, all residents of Doddaballapur, were arrested. In fact, Gangaraju even showed the scene of crime and the weapon used to hunt the wild birds near Doddaballapur.
 
 Owls, especially rock eagle owls, are in big demand during Deepavali. They are killed for their body parts, including feathers, skull, liver, kidney, blood, eyes, beak and bones which are used in black magic. It is also believed that sacrificing an owl during Deepavali forces Goddess Lakshmi to stay on in one’s house for a year (thus bringing prosperity to the household as owl is believed to be the Goddess’s vehicle).

Read Also:
Four arrested while trading 'two-headed' snake in city 
 
 Ornithologists say that at least 15 of the 30 owl species in India, including rock eagle owl, jungle owlet, brown wood owl, spot bellied eagle owl, eastern grass owl and barn owl, are part of the illegal trade and often targeted by those in the illegal trade, officials said.
 
 Owls are protected under the Wildlife Protection Act and anybody found dealing in their trade can be imprisoned for three to seven years. Also, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) prohibits international trade in owls. However, ineffective enforcement and lack of awareness mean that the trade goes mostly unchecked in India.
 
 Sumanth Bindumadhav, wildlife campaign manager for HSI (India), who was part of the rescue team, said, “The owls were in poor physical condition. They were severely dehydrated and their legs were tied tight using a nylon rope. We hope rescue will only lead to a stronger collaboration with the forest department to protect these animals from the illegal wildlife trade.”
 
 “These species are used in occult practices widely. It revolves around pre or post Diwali because people are cheated with stories of fortune and good luck out of occult practices using these birds. These are all false and only throw light on the need and importance of a strong anti-superstition bill,” wildlife expert Sharath R Babu told Bangalore Mirror.

Read Also:
 Mysuru zoo director in leopard trouble