Tree conservation in the city has received a shot in the arm after a city MLA agreed to sponsor a team dedicated to rescue and revival of injured trees.
 
 MLA Priya Krishna (Govindrajnagar constituency), impressed by the team that recently rescued two poisoned trees in Vidyaranyapura, will bankroll their activities in tree rescue, revival, besides tree census across city for a year.
 
 Vijay Nishant, who led the team during the rescue and revival, said the MLA, one of the richest in the state, has agreed to be his patron and support all green initiatives in the next one year.
 
 “The support will boost tree conservation activities; the proposal is to carry it out on a large scale involving experts and other groups who are willing to join the initiative,” Vijay told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Vijay said the MLA’s patronage will bolster the first of its kind effort in the city – the tree census. “We are working with some other groups to carry out the grievance redressal and census initiative in a big way,” Vijay told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Vijay, being mentored by city’s honorary wildlife warden Sharath R Babu, is into the green initiative in a unique way.
 
 To address the issue of disappearance of trees, Vijay has been working with three others -- Ravi Kumar R, Shariff S and Chaveen TV -- on the concept of scientific tree census, exactly on the lines of population census through their platform Vruksha.com, which aims for effective monitoring. The team does a manual census of trees with respect to each lane and map the details (which include the tree number, species, name of tree, position of tree, ward details, street details, area, rating, height, GBH (girth at breast height), observations and comments) on the digital map.
 
 
 Census completed
 
 The census has already been completed in Pattabhiramanagara, Jayanagara east and Byrasandra and the sponsorship will make sure that it extends to other parts of the city as well.
 
 Vijay also volunteers in cases of grievances related to trees. Recently, the team rescued and revived two trees that were being poisoned to death.
 
 
 
 Read: Awesome Treesome: Three heroes who revived two poisoned trees to life