BWSSB let sewage directly into Puttenahalli Lake that was declared ‘Bird Conservation Reserve’
 
 
 	In less than five months after Puttenahalli Lake near Yelahanka was declared a ‘Bird Conservation Reserve’, the lake is nothing but a vast pool of sewage. Thanks to the Bangalore Water and Sewerage Supply Board (BWSSB) which has not only let raw sewage directly into the lake but also commissioned a sewerage network right on the lake bed, violating Karnataka Forest Act 1963 and Indian Wildlife Act of 1972.
 	
 	  	BWSSB carried out its work on a sewage network on the lake bed despite the government notification declaring the lake a bird reserve – the first of its kind in Bengaluru.
 	
 	
 	Surprisingly, the work went unnoticed until last week as it was being carried out at the rear entrance of the lake. It was the intolerable stench that forced the
 	neighbourhood citizens to go looking for the cause. Upon close inspection, the citizens realised that the culprit was none other than BWSSB. Besides letting the raw sewage into the lake, BBMP has also laid a road and constructed a man-hole right on the lake bed to link the sewerage network starting from Attur and other adjoining layouts located upstream of the lake.
 	
 	  	Angered over the BWSSB’s actions, citizens from the neighbourhood knocked on the doors of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) and officials were quick to act. On Saturday, KSPCB Chairman Lakshman, along with other officials of the board, visited the lake and took note of various violations by BWSSB. 
 	
 	  	Giving details of the problem, Dr SK Sangunni, retired professor from IISc and a resident of the locality said, “Previously, the sewerage network was passing alongside the lake and it was pumped to Yelahanka STP for treatment. Of late, with several new connections linking up Attur Layout and other adjoining private layouts, BWSSB has begun to let sewage directly into the lake.”
 	
 	  	“The BWSSB officials have built a man-hole right on the lake bed. The man-hole is part of the sewerage network connecting all the adjoining layouts located upstream of the lake. Excavating equipment and trucks were taken inside the lake to build a man-hole which is in complete violation of various acts and rules. Earlier, one could see patches of water across the lake, but with the sewage entering the lake, level of phosphates have increased considerably and the entire lake is covered with aquatic weeds like hyacinth. The result is that these days not many birds are seen at the lake,” Dr Sangunni revealed.
 	
 	  	Deepika Bajpai, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Bengaluru Urban also visited the lake on Saturday morning along with other officials. Both the KSPCB and forest officials were witness to various violations committed by BWSSB. Bajpai said, “All of us were in shock. How could BWSSB go ahead with such construction on the lake bed and directly let its sewage into the lake. The lake is a declared bird reserve and protected under various laws including Indian Wildlife Act of 1972. The provisions under the law are stringent and violators will be dealt with severely. At first, BWSSB should not have entered the lake bed without prior permission. In this case, they have even executed the work and commissioned the man-hole damaging the lake bed without a clearance from respective departments. I have directed my staff to register a complaint against BWSSB and serve a show cause notice.” 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	CITY’S FIRST BIRD RESERVE
 	
 	 		Puttenahalli Lake located on Doddaballapur Road, Yelahanka and is one of the first lakes in Bengaluru to receive migratory birds from Siberia and other European countries. Spread across 40 acres, the lake had caught the attention of ornithologists who in association with the forest department had submitted a proposal to declare it as the city’s first bird reserve. The state government in October 2015 officially declared it as a bird reserve and declared it as protected area under Wildlife Act of 1972. Birdwatchers have recorded as many as 127 different species of birds at the lake. 	 		
 		
 		
 		 			Is the lake in your locality under threat? Do you have any suggestion to rescue and revive the city’s dying waterbodies? Write to us:  		 			bmfeedback@gmail.com