Part-time tour guides and full-time heritage buffs, city professionals from various walks of life are rediscovering their passion for a subject that they thought they had left behind in school

Travelling on work assignments to Edinburgh and London made 32-year-old software developer Sarang Mandke realise how well local history was preserved in those cities. “Information is easily available; there are tour guides, museums, walks and other activities that help you learn more about each place,” he says. Such experiences pushed Mandke to become a storyteller of Pune’s history, and team up with his college friend, Sarang Bhoirkar, who is also 32 and an IT professional. Since a year now, Mandke and Bhoirkar have been telling stories at city venues like housing societies, book cafes, and during heritage walks and treks to historical destinations such as forts and temples around the city. The duo is among a growing list of amateur historians hosting and leading activities to spread awareness about Pune’s history and heritage. With only their interest guiding them, and not any formal training in either history, Indology, archaeology, architecture or conservation, these self-taught ‘experts’ have set out to connect the residents of the city with Pune’s historical past.

Called ‘Goshta Ithe Sampat Nahi’, which means ‘the story does not conclude here’, Bhoirkar and Mandke’s storytelling sessions mainly focus on tales of the Maratha kingdom and Peshwa period. “Until two years ago, we were not sure how to take forward our interest in the city’s history. We started with a blog of stories from Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s life and the Peshwa rule,” says Mandke. Things changed when they were invited to conduct a storytelling session at a friend’s home, for an audience of 20–25 people. “The session was supposed to be for two hours but went on for three, and the feedback was reassuring. We were told that we sound very professional,” recollects Mandke. They were then invited by another friend to present a similar session at her building society of about 100 flats. Then, a year back, the founders of Trekism, an adventure and outdoors company in the city, invited them to enhance their tours with storytelling. About twice a month, Bhoirkar and Mandke narrate stories at Trekism’s treks and walks.

               Clockwise from the top: History buffs Sarang Mandke (left) and Sarang Bhoirkar, Saket Deo and Shantanu Paranjape           
The software professionals’ interest in history was spurred by trekking and travelling when they were students of engineering. But it was Bhoirkar’s passion for the subject that made Mandke veer closer towards history. “He used to tell me many stories,” recalls Mandke. Like many boys growing up in Maharashtra, Bhoirkar was inspired by the legendary tales of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. He read about them in Marathi novels like Shriman Yogi by Ranjit Desai. “I wanted to go deeper than the fictionalised stories and learn about the actual events in Shivaji’s life,” says Bhoirkar, who progressed from studying about the warrior king to the Mughal and Peshwa periods, in the last decade.

The trips to forts, caves and temples located in the city’s vicinity inspired Shantanu Paranjape, a 22-year-old aspiring chartered accountant, to co-author the book Firasti Maharashtrachi. Written along with Anurag Vaidya, a postgraduate in computer applications, the book features 33 heritage destinations. “Anurag and I later thought that why not share information about local history and temple architecture etc., with others? So we launched a company called ‘Firasti Maharashtrachi’ in December 2018 to conduct heritage walks,” says Paranjape. Starting with a walk in Bhuleshwar Temple, the company took up one destination every month. “People asked us for information about the city’s sites like Shaniwarwada and others. So we started city-based heritage walks too,” says Paranjape, who grew up in Pen in Raigad district before moving to Pune to study commerce. “We don’t conduct treks. Our focus is on caves, temples, and old monuments. Besides young professionals, we have good participation from senior citizens because they have time and are interested in heritage,” he explains.

               A heritage walk conducted by Firasti Maharashtrachi, the company started by Shantanu Paranjape and Anurag Vaidya (seen wearing a cap)           
Eighty people took part in the heritage walk at Bharat Itihas Sanshodhak Mandal in Sadashiv Peth, hosted by Firasti Maharashtrachi in March. Once a premier research institution which continues to promote local history, the Mandal, founded in 1910, now hosts a heritage museum containing rare documents, paintings, coins, manuscripts and books. The writings of its co-founder, Vishwanath ‘Itihasacharya’ Rajwade, and Govind Sakharam Sardesai’s Riyasat series are among the information sources relied on by Paranjape. Bhoirkar too discovered several interesting texts at the Mandal, which are now his vital reference sources. Babasaheb Purandare’s accounts of Shivaji’s life are at the top of the list referred to by the city’s amateur historians. “The figures of speech and metaphors used by him are helpful for polishing our storytelling,” says Mandke. Besides these, their essential reading includes the 19thcentury gazetteers; documents and letters of the British, Dutch and Portuguese officers; Shivaji’s letters and royal farmans. The books by Vasudeo Sitaram Bendre, and Jadunath Sarkar’s study on Shivaji are useful too. Bhoirkar adds contemporary historian PK Ghanekar’s writings on trekking and heritage sites to his list of influential sources, while Mandke is a fan of surgeonturned-historian Dr Uday S Kulkarni’s books on the Maratha Empire and Peshwa era. Additionally, experts are also consulted. Bhoirkar and Mandke have held discussions with Indologists and heritage experts, while the team at Firasti Maharashtrachi seeks the help of historian Mandar Lawate for their walks.

The heritage walk in Shaniwar Peth led last month by 21-year-old commerce graduate Saket Deo, included narratives he sourced from the neighbourhood’s residents. Deo also highlighted the area’s historical personalities while covering the trail that included Gadre Wada, where Fergusson College and New English School were founded, and Nene Ghat. Deo also raids the raddiwalas’ shops to excavate old books for research. “There are many books in Marathi on the city’s history,” informs Deo, who relies a lot on Pune Nagar Samshodhan Vrutta, a three-volume set on Pune’s history published in 1942 by the Mandal. Deo, who is studying German and Japanese languages, has accumulated nearly 200 books and several cuttings from newspapers and magazines in the last three to four years. He has developed six heritage walks for Rocks to Roars, an adventure and wildlife company in the city,of which the first one was to Parvati Hill in January 2018. “I was weak at history in school, but developed an interest in the subject when I started travelling with friends to places around Pune from 2015 onwards,” he says.

The format adopted by each of these historians is different. “We don’t restrict ourselves to information about a monument and its architecture. We chronologically narrate the events that the monument has experienced. We also relate history to daily life, for example, by imagining Shivaji as a 16-year-old who wanted to build his own company and launch his own start-up,” adds Mandke, of their storytelling sessions that attract around 70 people. Firasti Maharashtrachi’s focus is to make people aware of history, and to spread knowledge about heritage. “Right now, people have no knowledge of the heritage that’s around them,” says Paranjape, adding that heritage conservation first requires an informed citizenry. While their walks organised in Pune draw 50–60 members on an average, the outstation events are restricted to 15–20 attendees. Deo, who routinely ducks into wadas and temples he discovers while in the old city, illustrates his narration with photos, sketches and other visual aids. “It helps create an interest among the attendees,” he says.

While the popular heritage walks are conducted by organisations such as INTACH, Heritage India, Indian Heritage Walks and Janwani, which rely on academically qualified experts, there is plenty of room for the events by amateur historians, believes Paranjape. “The number of participants attending our events shows that people are keen to learn about the city’s history,” says Paranjape. “No one has said anything about our lack of formal training,” adds Mandke. The interest by young enthusiasts is a positive trend says Dr Manjiri Bhalerao, an archaeologist and associate professor of Indology at Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth who is associated with Heritage India. However, she cautions, “It is not very easy to conduct a heritage walk. People ask questions that one may not be able to readily answer. Such efforts are good for conveying generic information, but experts are able to go deeper and give information about details like iconography and philosophy,” she adds. Paranjape is realistic, though. “If I don’t know something, I say I don’t, and that I’ll find out,” he says.

Although Pune was also where pioneering social reforms took place, such as those led by Savitribai and Jyotiba Phule, as well as modernised education initiatives and the Freedom Movement events, very few walks focus on them. In her 2017 documentary, In a Shadowless Town, filmmaker Gouri Patwardhan explored the upper caste bias in some of the popular heritage walks of the city, which take no note of histories of other communities. Themes like social and educational reforms and the Independence struggle make for interesting stories, agrees Bhoirkar, who recently led a group of visiting Indonesians to the Aga Khan Palace, a prominent venue during the Freedom Movement. Deo too is planning a ‘freedom trail’ walk, and a walk set in Camp.

The self-taught historians are clear that their hobby will not turn into a full-time occupation. “I cannot see myself quitting my job to do this full-time,” says Bhoirkar, who meets partner Mandke over weekends to work on their plans. The duo hopes to launch vlogs soon. “It is very tough to balance a job in the software industry with these activities,” says Mandke adding that reading, analysing and crafting stories requires a lot of time. While their events generate some income, money is not at all the draw. Deo, who spends about three hours a day to prepare for his heritage walks, has also organised activities like a clean-up of Ghorpade Ghat and a commemoration of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, in April in Narayan Peth. “Firasti Maharashtrachi is a working capital business, and whatever little profit we earn goes into buying books and on travel for recce,” says Paranjape, who works as an associate at a chartered accountancy firm. Only history will tell if these combined efforts will translate into the making of a wiser city.

               We don’t restrict ourselves to information about a monument and its architecture. We chronologically narrate the events that the monument has experienced. We also relate history to daily life—Sarang Mandke, 32, software developer