A proposal mooted by wildlife conservationist Sanjay Gubbi might be the scientific and realistic solution for both wildlife and travellers in the ‘Save Bandipur’ issue

The past month has seen a surge of citizens taking to the streets with placards, wanting to ‘Save Bandipur’. This, after the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH), Government of India, proposed to the Supreme Court, the development of elevated roads through the National Park. The MoRTH submitted to the apex court that it wanted to construct five one-km-long stretches of elevated roads through the forest to facilitate the 24x7 movement of vehicles along National Highway 212 (renamed as NH 766). This would effectively nullify the night ban on movement of traffic through the area (except emergency vehicles and 16 state transport corporation buses), which came info effect in August 2009 to protect and conserve wildlife in the area. What many protestors do not realise, however, is that sloganeering in blind opposition to all elevated roads is not the answer. As instances of man-animal conflict increase, creative, practical solutions that work for both parties can be the only way forward. 

Which is why, wildlife biologist and conservationist Sanjay Gubbi’s proposal to the State Board for Wildlife – to develop 9.8 km of the 35km alternative route (SH-90, from Allur gate to Titimathi) and 8.7 km, which passes at the edge of Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary – as two elevated roads, seems to offer a realistic solution. The proposal is part of the affidavit submitted by the Karnataka State Government, Forest Department and petitioner Anup BP, in the ongoing case on the matter going on in the SC.

 This entrepreneur is reviving a dying form of Rajasthani block print. Bengaluru responds with great enthusiasmGrowing up in a traditional family in Alwar, Rajasthan, she spent many an afternoon watching her grandmother making dhurries – “there was not much for the ladies to do at home after lunch” – and fell in love with the whole process.  
 To enable the free movement of Crepuscular animals, the proposal recommends the closure of NH-212 to be extended from 6pm to 6am (as opposed to the existing 9pm to 6am night ban), barring emergency vehicles. Gubbi explains: “Since the alternate road literally passes through the edge of the forests the impact it has will be far less than the current highway that passes through the core of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve. In addition, a high-speed road would be available to reach Kerala state. These kinds of alternatives have already been implemented in North American and some European countries.” It also cites that after, NH-212 (NH-766) be “decommissioned and closed”. 

  Sanjay Gubbi  

The proposal also refutes suggestions to implement barricades on NH-212 to stop animals from coming on to the highways, as well as the suggestion to guide wildlife through four underpasses proposed for the 1 km length. “These barricades will have a serious effect on the movement of wildlife. Fast running animals that are also very sensitive in nature (such as sambar, chital and barking deer) will run into these barricades and die. There will also be constant damage to these barricades by elephants, irrespective of the raw material they are constructed from. Hence, such barricades are neither useful nor sustainable.” 
Even as the activists have submitted a memorandum to the authorities registering their opposition, and have been drumming up support on social media, Gubbi points to the danger of a well-intentioned but one-note protest. The night ban has been a contentious matter in Kerala – which maintains that it affects tourism and trade – and has taken on a political colour, with authorities promising to revoke it if elected to power. Gubbi cautions that a myopic approach to the matter – which has been lying in Supreme Court since May 2010 – might do more harm than good. 

Which is why, he bats for a more “scientific solution to the problem”. To the protesters in Kerala who claim it has affected trade, he says that is unfounded. “Vegetable markets close at 5.30pm. Even if they leave Mysuru at 6pm, they still have time to go out and cross Bandipur before 8pm,” he says. In any case, he believes certain areas must be kept sacrosanct. “We don’t use a puja room like a dining hall, do we? Ten years ago, we could drive through Vidhana Soudha, but now we can’t, for security reasons. We adapt. Tomorrow, if we want to build a highway through Belur and Halebid – our architectural heritage – can we? The forest is our natural heritage, that needs to be saved for perpetuity and given to the next generation.” 

 It’s a happy story: Publishers, librarians and festival curators say kids and teens are reading more than ever​​The voracious reader – who can juggle five books at once – often loses track of time between the pages, that she devours on the schoolbus, during holidays and in between homework.