Ambulance with modern equipment to help animals in distress in Yelahanka; will help rescue trapped birds

A brand new ambulance with modernized animal rescue equipment is going to be added to the fleet of infrastructure meant for the urban wildlife rescue in Yelahanka. It will be run by People for Animals (PfA) Hospital headquartered in Uttarahalli, a western suburb of Bengaluru.
 
“We have been getting a lot of animal rescue calls in Yelahanka and its surroundings where there are a lot of lakes and green vegetation including a hub for urban wildlife at the University of Agricultural Sciences, Gandhi Krishi Vignan Kendra, GKVK, on Bellary Road,” said the General Manager/Chief veterinary surgeon Colonel Dr Navaz Sharif.

Earlier, they had to dispatch our rescue team all the way from Kengeri, Uttarahalli Main Road towards Yelahanka for the rescue of an animal in distress. This would easily be around 44 km via the NH-48 Ring-Road Highway or a couple of km less if one takes the Dr Puneeth Rajkumar Road. With the city’s traffic, it would take at least an hour and 15 minutes to reach the destination (Yelahanka), and by then the rescue volunteers would not be sure as to what happened to the animal in distress.

Adding more to the animal rescuer’s woes, they had to rope in the Fire and Emergency Services’ fire-trucks and other equipment like their ladders to scale up trees and buildings to rescue trapped animals and birds, but now with this new ambulance, there is no need for that.
 
A software engineer and a head of an IT firm, Rajasekhar Halaharvi (51), a resident of Yelahanka decided to do his bit for the animal rescue services. He observed that an ambulance took around four hours to arrive at the place where the animal was in distress. “Three months ago, a monkey had fallen from our apartment and I had called in for animal rescue and they took nearly four hours to reach, but by then the monkey died. Later I found that another macaque got electrocuted and was sitting still at a place where again I had called in for an animal rescue ambulance,” Halaharvi said. He then decided to donate some money and purchase an animal ambulance that would be stationed at his place in Yelahanka that would go for animal rescuing operations in and around that place.
 
He contacted the general manager of PfA and offered to donate Rs 8 lakh for purchasing an ambulance that will be exclusively used for the rescue of urban wildlife and other animals in distress. And in no time, a Maruti Eco was purchased for Rs 6 lakh and the new van was fabricated as an animal ambulance with rescue equipment worth Rs 2 lakh. A driver and a rescue volunteer were also appointed by the PfA.

No strings attached
The highlight of the ambulance was that it carries a unique equipment. It is a metal pipe around 10 to 12 feet in height, and which can go up to a height of 100 to 120 feet. This is single-man operable equipment, costing around Rs 1.2 lakh, and primarily used for rescuing birds, reptiles or smaller animals that are entangled in manja threads on trees.

This is just the start, and I am looking forward to expanding the presence of these animal ambulances across Bengaluru, let us see how it goes–Rajasekhar Halaharvi, software engineer
 
“Each digit of this metal pipe-arm gets interlocked as it goes up in height and it has a maze atop of it which can be rotated by the operator standing down so that the manja thread gets broken and the rescued bird is trapped in the maze of the equipment. Once the bird is rescued from the entanglement, each digit unlocks itself as it comes down along with the rescued bird safe in the maze. This equipment has to be carried in a four-wheeler which is about 10-12 feet in height when it unlocks and comes down to its regular size,” said veterinary surgeon Dr Sharif.
 
Earlier, the rescue volunteers had to depend on fire trucks and their ladders to reach heights, but now that’s no more needed, the doctor added. Along with this equipment, there are also other basic rescue kits, hand torch, head torch, snake tongs, snake bags, animal restraint cages, nets etc.

“This is just a start, and I am looking forward to expanding the presence of animal ambulances across Bengaluru, and let’s see how it goes,” said Halaharvi. Sharif from PfA said they want to have similar ambulances in Electronic City, Bannerghatta and other places in Bengaluru.