Police have booked duo for illegal trade; online classifieds website to be warned
 
 
 A father-son duo that tried to sell an antique Ganesha statuette in ivory on an online platform has been arrested by the police. The two hail from Trichy and were caught red-handed on Friday, trying to sell the idol that weighs about 42 grams and is five centimeters high. Despite its small size, the piece was priced high because of its antique value and intricate work, CID forest cell sleuths told Bangalore Mirror. Officers refused to divulge the amount.
 
 The accused — Krishnan and his son — claimed to have bought the artefact from Sri Lanka more than 20 years ago. Wildlife sleuths booked the duo for violating provisions of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, as they produced neither the documents of purchase nor the declaration of possession of a wildlife product before the chief wildlife warden.
 
 “He had posted an advertisement in an online classifieds site intending to sell,” a CID forest cell sleuth told Bangalore Mirror. “In the first place, transactions pertaining to wildlife products that include possession, exhibition and sale are illegal. This applies to ivory, as the elephant is listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. Based on information, we got in touch with the accused and laid a trap. Subsequently, they settled for a price and brought it to city and were caught trying to sell it.”
 
 CID sleuths have booked both the accused under various sections of the Wildlife Protection Act like Section 9 (prohibition of hunting), Section 39 (wild animal to be government property), Section 40 (declaration on inheritance or possession of wildlife product) and Section 379 of the IPC (punishment for theft). If charges are proved, the accused will land in prison for up to six years, officials said.
 
 A top officer of the Forest Department said that the online classifieds platform will be shortly told to bring in checks and to stop publishing such advertisements in contravention with the Wildlife Protection Act.
 
 An alarming number of people are taking to online classifieds to market wildlife products, the sleuths explained. Officials said those into illegal wildlife trade think selling online is a smart way to avoid middlemen and hoodwink forest officials, but a strict vigil has been maintained recently. A quick search for ivory products on some of the commercial sites, yield many results like ‘150-year-old ivory carved box’, ‘150-year-old ivory stick’, ‘bed with ivory carving’, ‘rare and antique ivory Mahaveer’, ‘ivory-studded antique Sitar’, ‘antique ivory Saraswati’, ‘real ivory wall hanging’, ‘miniature painting on original ivory’ among many others. Officials said trading in such articles is illegal and both sellers and buyers are liable for prosecution under the provisions of IWLPA and IPC.