By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 It was a busy Sunday evening at Sankey Tank. The chaat carts were out in force and doing brisk business. As I was ordering my masala puri, I caught a glimpse of some movement under the cart. It turned out to be a pigeon with a broken wing, which the chaat man had spotted and sheltered under his cart. He was heading out soon, and asked if I could help with the bird. I agreed, but really had no idea what to do next.
 
 
 	Many Bengalureans find themselves in the same predicament that I did. They come across wild animals in distress in the city, and don’t know what to do. My story had a happy ending, when a young man walked up to me saying he knew where to take the pigeon, and gently carried it away. But what if there is no Good Samaritan around? Who does one call?
 	
 	  	It turns out there are a few committed organisations looking into the welfare of urban wildlife in and around Bengaluru. Two that spring to mind are the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC) with its facility in Bannerghatta, and the wildlife wing of People for Animals (PFA) located in Kengeri. Both these organisations have helplines for reporting urban wildlife in trouble. They also have staff and volunteers who can visit the spot and, at the very least, take the animal to their centre for further treatment.
 	
 	  	I was curious to see what one of these centres looked like, and what kind of “patients” they dealt with. I decided to visit WRRC, where I met the dedicated team – Dr Roopa Satish, veterinarian and Anand Nair, resident manager, along with other support staff members. I joined Dr Roopa as she hand-fed a baby squirrel with a carefully chosen diet. She showed me how to make it pee and poo, as its mother would, so essential to keep it alive. I know people who tried to hand-rear squirrel babies by feeding them cow’s milk. They didn’t last long. Good intent coupled with ignorance is a lethal combination.
 	
 	  	As I walked around the centre, the other inmates gave me a sense of the challenges that wild animals face in Bengaluru. There was a monkey that had lost a limb from electrocution and another which was taken into a human home as a cute baby, only to be discarded when it grew older. I saw black kites that had hurt their wings when they got entangled in manja, the glass coated thread used in kite-flying contests. There was a rat snake whose innards were gouged out by an earthmover excavating a new apartment’s foundation. Two barn owls stared at me from their cage, still sick from the poisoned rat they ate recently. 
 	
 	  	These were the lucky ones, explained Dr Roopa. They were brought in and treated in time, and would be returned to the wild as soon as they were well. There were others that didn’t make it, and some that were victims of wilful acts of human cruelty. For example, the centre recently received slender lorises that were pierced with needles like voodoo dolls, as part of some black magic ritual. There’s the bright side as well. Dr Roopa spoke of a young man who brought her a wounded python after fighting off a crazed group who were beating it to death. Or of another person who drove overnight to the centre with a wounded animal, as there were no facilities close to his village. 
 	
 	  	I glanced at the monkey enclosure, where Thaatha (grandpa), the old male, kept a watchful eye on his wards. In the wild he would have been aggressive and territorial, but here he assumed the role of foster parent for every little monkey. He seemed to have found his caring and compassionate side. As I left this remarkable place, I sincerely wished that we Bengalureans would never lose touch with ours!