The rift between the state Forest Department officials and snake-rescue volunteers has intensified with the latter knocking on the doors of the union cabinet minister, Maneka Gandhi, seeking help over record-keeping rules. 	
 	The showdown started last week when the Forest Department officials shot a letter to the deputy conservator of forests at the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), seeking details on the number of snakes rescued and released in Bengaluru in the last three years (see box). 	
 	The snake rescue volunteers, who claim to have handled over 7,000 snakes across the city in the last three years, have taken objection to the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF)'s demands of rescue and release details for all the cases. In a letter to union minister Maneka Gandhi, who is also an animal rights campaigner, BBMP's honorary wildlife warden Sharath Babu stated, “We have answered all the questions barring the last two. Providing mahajar (release reports authenticated by officials) for 7,000 snakes is practically impossible.” 	
 	A snake rescue volunteer stated that the cell gets at least 30 snake rescue calls daily from different parts of the city, and volunteers are immediately dispatched. “From the time we get the distress call, to the time we reach the spot, Bengaluru traffic notwithstanding, we have very little response time. Waiting for forest officials to come to the spot to oversee the rescue is a bit risky. We release the rescued snakes in habitats that are safe for the snakes - like in the forest areas on the outskirts of the city.” 	
 	However, the Forest Department officials maintain that the directive has been issued to streamline the rescue business. An official, who did not want to be named, said, “Rules mandate that records pertaining to rescue and release have to be maintained, but we don't have any. Snakes rescuers make claims of rescue, and we are not even sure as to how, when and where the reptiles are released. We are trying to ascertain if rules are being followed in snake rescue-and-release operations, and the volunteers are seeking Maneka Gandhi's help in stopping us.
 	  	Long Lissst 	
 	The directive, a copy of which is available with the Bangalore Mirror, issued on December 31, 2015, sought six type of details – 	
 	List of snake rescuers in in Bengaluru 	Rescuers’ expertise in ophiology (study of snakes) 	List of species of the rescued snakes 	Address and phone numbers of the venue of rescue 	Release records duly stating the date and place of release 	Name of the authority that authenticates the release 

 	‘Let them give training’ 	
 	A N Yellappa Reddy, former secretary, forest, environment and ecology, Karnataka told BM : "The forest department should give training in snake rescue. If somebody is not doing it properly, they should teach them how to do it. They should get experts and impart training. If they (forest department officials) don't do that, how can they object? If somebody is doing it voluntarily, they should encourage them. Even for the documentation part, they should give a format, and ask for things to be done on those lines. The involvement and motivation of the public to protect wildlife is important."