Every season brings its own magic to Bengaluru. This is good news for me, your chronicler of urban wildlife. It means there are a whole lot of amazing new stories I can tell you, ones that you can actually experience if you just step outside. That’s exactly what I’ve been doing for the last 176 weeks – writing about all the natural miracles I see around me in our beautiful city. 

My field work, if you can call it that, mostly consists of staring out into my backyard or into the canopy of tall trees that surround my house. I’ve got more than enough material about Bengaluru’s wild inhabitants by doing this, which speaks highly of our city’s rich biodiversity. The more I write, the more I see the connections between my stories.

Take, for example, the weather we are going through right now. It’s hot, really hot. But occasionally, there are gentle showers that just kiss the dry earth. These unleash an aroma from the soil that touches the inner core of our being. It’s called petrichor – the smell of rain. In cultures across the world, petrichor triggers a feeling of joy and wellbeing among people, because it signals the arrival of rain and hence bountiful crops. This unique aroma is produced by billions of tiny denizens of our urban jungle called actinobacteria. They are really good at decomposing plant matter, and while doing so release a chemical called geosmin into the soil. Gentle rain provides just the right impetus to lift geosmin, along with other volatile compounds, into the air and permeate our senses.

Elsewhere, the same gentle rain acts as a cue for virgin princes and princesses who are getting ready for their nuptial flight. Winged termites, malé hula in Kannada, wait patiently in their subterranean nests for just the right moment. It’s mating season, and they need to meet suitors from other nests. Rain is like a sign from above – termites from all around use it to time their exit from their nests. They fly out into the skies to meet and procreate. When a new queen is ready to start her nest, the ground is just about moist enough for her to burrow into.

As the termites emerge, an eager congregation awaits them. Among the many predators in the crowd, black drongos are the most aggressive. They swoop down, grab the insects and fly off with them to their nests. They have hungry chicks to feed. It’s no coincidence that these hatched shortly before the rains. They were timed for the termites, and numerous other insects whose population started peaking during that period. The same drongo that pinned its fortune to the termites has its own share of dependants. Many birds, including bulbuls and flycatchers, build their nests close to the drongo’s. This bird, called the kotwal or policeman in Hindi, is quick to attack and chase away potential threats, and its neighbours stay safe in the process.

Perhaps you see where I’m getting to. The urban jungle is like an intricate web. Every strand links to another in ways that one could never imagine. Human life in the city is quite the opposite. We urbanites are driven to detach ourselves from our surroundings. If it’s hot, we buy an air conditioner. If the ground is slushy, we pour a layer of concrete on it. If a branch so much as grazes our home’s facade, we chop the whole tree down. But deep down inside we know that we are linked to something much larger. We yearn to be connected to the planet that sustains us. Dear readers, I hope that through my column I have helped you make that connect. After more three years of being with you every Thursday, it is now time for me to bid adieu. My column ends today, but I hope its message will live on!