The world around us

Don’t miss the last day of the Nature and Wildlife photography exhibition. In a first of its kind, Nature inFocus, has been curated by experts in their field and are showcasing photographs from around the country. There are 100 unique images on display at the exhibition, across five different categories: Deserts and Grasslands curated by Arati Kumar-Rao, Rivers and Oceans curated by Tasneem Khan, Mountains curated by Harsha J and Payal Mehta, Rainforests curated by Vijay Mohan Raj, and Deciduous Forests curated by Shivang Mehta.
 
 WHERE: The Oterra, Electronic City Phase 1 WHEN: 10.30am-7.30pm, September 9 
 DETAILS: natureinfocus.in

Forgotten men

How much do you know about the contribution of Bangalore Cantonment and Mysore State in World War 1? If you are looking for answers, head over to Entrenched, a travelling exhibition. Here, you step into the role of a millennial teenager, who finds an old trunk in the attic of his or her house which is full of strange objects and letters related to some war. Through six spaces and tunnels, you will learn about the lives of million Indian soldiers who fought on the foreign lands 100 years ago.
 WHERE: National Military Memorial Park, Millers Road, Vasanth Nagar
 WHEN: 10am-5.30pm, September 9 
 CALL: 934206046


Double take

One venue, two shows. That’s what Quiver Productions has in store for you today. It will stage a children’s play, followed by show for ghazal lovers. Called Town Musicians of Bremen, it follows the journey of four abandoned animals who go to the famed town of Bremen to become musicians. Mera Salaam Kahiyo, whereas, is a tribute to the famous Urdu poet Ghalib, with a journey into his life through anecdotes and ghazals.

 WHERE: Alliance Francaise, Vasanth Nagar WHEN: 4.30pm & 7pm, September 9 
 TICKETS: `300 onwards, bookmyshow.com


Speak and slam

The third edition of the Airplane Poetry Movement Courtyard Slam is here, and so is your chance to listen to the original works of 20 poets. The poetry performed will be in Hindi and English. What’s more? Members of the audience will get to pick the winner of the slam.
 WHERE: The Courtyard, 105, KH Road, Shanti Nagar 
 WHEN: 5.30pm-9pm, September 9
 ENTRY: `100 
 CALL: 9620874176


Say cheers 

As India rejoices the repeal of Section 377 and the dawn of a new era of oneness, this outlet is invting one and all to raise a toast to the judgement. Celebrate the occasion over limited-edition ‘PrideLLIIT’ and mouth-watering dishes and lots of groovy music.

 WHERE: Social, Church Street, Koramangala, Whitefield 
 WHEN: All day, September 9 
 HOW MUCH: `377
 CALL: 9591224992

Comic caper

If sitting back and laughing out loud is what your ideal Sunday looks like, then this gig will do you good. Shankar Chugani, Aamer Peeran and Kjeld Shresth are three men who are ‘tall, dark and ugly but talk smooth and funny’, and they will make sure you get enough laughs to last you the entire week. Also, you get to indulge in signature food amd beverages.
 WHERE: Foxtrot - House of Subculture, 3rd Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 8.30pm, September 9 
 TICKETS: insider.in