While gold rates are skyrocketing, here comes another shocker to those gearing up for marriages and hoping for a good fortune and eying one of most bought stones among the Navratnas - red coral, the gem of Mars. It may disappear from markets soon. The Karnataka Diamonds and Gems Merchants Association (KDGMA), which has 150 wholesale dealers covering 10,000 shops across the state, has stopped the supply and sale of red coral, which is a must in marriages in coastalKarnataka and a stone that is said to bring good luck to horoscopes governed by the planet Mars.
   The association has banned the sale complaining of harassment by forest sleuths, who are reportedly raiding gem and jewellery shops citing the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972. The red corals have their origin in Corallium Rubrum, an endangered animal belonging to Gorgonian species and hence protected under the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. The ministry of environment and forests issued a notification in July 2001 banning the possession, exhibition and trade of the animal in any form.
   “With this, now it has become impossible to get the famous red coral anywhere in Bangalore. If at all one gets it before the ban is lifted, that would be a duplicate one,” said a wildlife expert.    The tug of war The KDGMA maintains that the stones they sell are imported ones and do not attract Indian laws. “We are being unnecessarily harassed,” said Parameshwaran P, general secretary of the association. “So we have put a ban on the sale and supply 10 days ago. We import the stones from Italy and the question of violating the Indian Wildlife Act doesn’t arise at all.”
   The forest department has sent the red coral samples for test by marine experts and labs with expertise in this. “The gem and jewellery shop owners import it as a rough coral, concealing the fact that it’s a red coral or Corallium Rubrum or a Gorgonian. Even importing it is a violation. We are positive that the lab reports will confirm it. We will put a complete ban once the report confirms our stand that the sample is a Gorgonian,” said MK Murali, DySP, forest department.
   “We have stopped sale (of red coral) as objections are being raised despite requisite permissions from CITES (The Convention on Trade in Endangered Species) and having customs department clearance. Moreover, red corals from Corallium Rubrum are nowhere found in Indian waters. We want to run our business in a clean manner. We will lift the ban once the (lab) reports confirm that what we are selling are imported stones,” Parameshwaran said.