A 21-year-old male Siberian tiger, King, had died only on Saturday. All these tigers were hit by age-related ailments as well as poor living conditions (read dingy enclosures), according to sources.

Though these tigers were brought to the park in 2002, their tragic tale began in February with the death of 16-year-old male tiger Harek followed by the demise of Judy and King. While Harek died due to cyanide poisoning, others died due to age-related ailments. Three other tigers died due to similar ailments in 2004 and 2008.

Shankare Gowda, Range Forest Officer at the park, said, “They were aged; they were rescued from circus companies that had kept them in cages for more than 12 months.”

He said the life span of captive tigers is 17-20 years. King was 21 years old and he died due to age-related problems. Kidney failure killed Judy and King, he said. LACK OF SPACE
While the tigers roam in large areas, the enclosure at Born Free Foundation in the park curbs their movement. “They go through severe mental agony as they are kept in separate enclosures,” said a senior park official. He said the climatic conditions here are not suitable for Siberian tigers as they are used to living in extreme cold conditions. Their food habits are also different from that of the Royal Bengal Tiger.

While there have been rumours that the lower rung employees at the park are involved in selling wild animal parts, Shankare Gowda refuted the charges, saying the entire cremation is documented and videographed. “We take only three samples of each organ of the dead animal for the autopsy,” he said.

Later, the carcass will be burnt using firewood and diesel. 

Careless BMTC
With visitors increasing during weekends, the Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation has been reportedly hiring BMTC buses for organising wildlife safari in the park. According to wildlife enthusiasts, BMTC buses are finding it difficult to move through the narrow roads on the safari route and often hurt these animals by brushing against them. Further, they operate without any safety net around them. On one occasion, a tiger had snatched a baby out of a safari bus in the absence of a net.