Wildlife conservationists and activists have alleged that the Karnataka Forest Department is promoting another illegal structure, a hanging bridge, inside the Kali Tiger Reserve as a tourism spot.

According to the conservationists, the bridge was brought to the notice of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) a couple of years ago and NTCA had sought a factual report from the department regarding the same. While the department is yet to submit the report, the bridge is being publicized by the department.

“The hanging bridge is located in the Shivpur area of the reserve, which is not a tourism zone as per the project tiger guidelines. However, the department is promoting the structure as a tourism spot and charging entry fees. The structure was brought to the notice of NTCA and the authority had then raised questions regarding the development,” said a wildlife activist.

Conservationists say that every tiger reserve has a tiger conservation plan and NTCA demarcates tourism zones for respective reserves. The bridge is not part of the tourism zone as per the plan.

In the past, NTCA has written to the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka on multiple occasions, appealing to take action against officials of Kali Tiger Project and NTCA southern zone officials for violating the Forest Conservation Act by allowing illegal construction activities in the tiger reserve; the most recent one was dated May 30.

The series of letters are being issued by the authority after locals and wildlife conservationists alleged and highlighted the issue of illegal construction activities inside the reserve forest without due approval. An orchidarium, jungle e safari, and canopy walks were some other illegal projects brought to NTCA’s notice.

  NTCA has the power to stop funds in case of violations. However, these options are not being exercised–City-based conservationist
Activists allege while the authorities, including NTCA, are aware of violations, they are shying away from issuing specific instructions.

“NTCA has been writing to the department either seeking factual reports or appealing to them to act. No other steps have been initiated so far. Issuing reminders, a couple of times is fine, but it is not acceptable if just reminders are issued for years at a stretch without any action taken,” said a conservationist.