By: Chetan R & Sridhar Vivan
 	
 Techies complain that motorists, especially two-wheeler riders and cab drivers, stop to watch snakes mating in a vacant plot below the flyover, causing massive traffic jams
 	
 Regular motorists and commuters who traverse the Central Silk Board flyover are hissing and spitting at serpentine lines of traffic. On a stretch that sees about 20,000 PCU (passenger car units) during peak hours, slow moving traffic is not unusual. Over the last fortnight though, traffic in the tech corridor is being held up for a strange reason — snakes.
 		 	 		Regular commuters, mostly techies travelling to offices in Electronics City and around, complain that some motorists, especially two-wheeler riders and cab drivers, have been stopping on the flyover to take a look at “something” happening down below. Wildlife volunteers say it is the mating season for snakes, and invariably, a courting couple is found in a vacant plot in the KSRP premises below the flyover. The snakes attract an ‘audience’ on the flyover, resulting in traffic snarls. The flyover connects much of the city with Electronics City and beyond.
 With no sign of the menace of people stopping on the stretch to peer down abating, techies and other commuters have taken to posting complaints on the Bangalore Traffic Police’s (BTP) Facebook page. “Dear BTP, want (sic) to bring your attention to the traffic bottlenecks on the Madiwala flyover, due to people stopping their vehicles on the flyover to check out a “snake” down below,” posted Pradeep Amaresan, a commuter. “This is causing traffic jam during peak hours and inconveniencing office goers. This has been happening for the past few days and is a pain for everyone! (Sic) Can BTP take some action against this please?”
 		 	 		It is not just the BTP’s Facebook page which is abuzz with the issue. Other social networking sites are also spitting venom. “People standing on Silk Board flyover and disturbing others, and traffic police at Madiwala busy doing nothing,” wrote one netizen. “Another replied, “I too have seen this! Since three to four days, people are even parking their vehicles right on the flyover and going to see some very interesting stuff happening!” To which the first commuter replied, “I noticed this the other day as well. Absolute stupidity. And it's not like they were parking only on the side. Pretty much the whole of two lanes was blocked due to these idiots! For the past few days I am seeing this while I come back from Electronics City through the flyover... People are curiously watching something! But don't know what.”
 		 	 		Pramod Puliyankalath, another commuter, in his post on the BTP’s Facebook page, claims that it is a miracle no accidents have happened on the stretch. “Curious motorists (mostly 2-wheelers and cabs) stop/veer left abruptly to take a look at something happening below the flyover (till date I am not able to find out the actual reason, but I do hear very creative explanations such as cobras mating), towards the East. Despite this senseless act causing quite a few near-miss scenarios every day, it continues unabated. The location is hardly 200 metres away from Madiwala Police station, yet the BTP personnel are nowhere to be seen. 1. Is it not wrong to stop on a flyover? 2. Can't the police proactively ask these onlookers to move?”
 		 	 		While commuters have taken to the Internet to vent their frustration, a YouTube video on snakes mating below the flyover has only made matters worse. Titled ‘Romantic Snake Sex Dance Bangalore silk board', the video garnered several thousand Views resulting in a lot more curiosity and more traffic jams.
 		 	 		Sadhu Shobab, another regular on the stretch, in his post on the BTP site, has even analysed the pattern with “Excel sheet-like” precision. “This system works more or less like a chain mail,” states Shobab. “Every minute (I have timed) (sic) at least three cabs (Indica), >5 Auto rickshaws and countless motorbikes stop on either side to see the great Snake (sic). Of course, I can't help but wonder what would be the size of the snake which should be visible in the %empty ground (with grass and water) from the flyover.”
 		 	 		When contacted, traffic police said they were aware of the issue. “We heard that snakes were spotted mating in the vacant plot and since then some weird stories have been floating around,” said Ravi Shankar, inspector, Madivala traffic police. “People are stopping their vehicles on the flyover, clogging traffic and causing inconvenience to other commuters. We have been trying to ease things. Strangely, t he crowd is more on Tuesdays, perhaps, because of superstitious beliefs.”
 		
 		
 		 			King cobras and snakes with five heads! 		 			Wildlife volunteers, who have also been bombarded with weird calls, say the mating season extends till the end of March. “For the last fortnight, we have daily been getting two or three rescue calls from callers who claim to have spotted king cobras, cobra with five heads and so on, below the Central Silk Board flyover,” said Mohan K, a BBMP wildlife volunteer. “In fact it’s nothing of that sort. It’s just that the mating season, which begins from the end of January, is on. Snakes in the vacant plot under the flyover are a common sight since the area is infested with serpents. We have been advising callers not to get scared nor disturb them.”
 			 		 			Sharath R Babu, environment advisor to BBMP forest cell, rubbished suggestions that there were snakes with many heads slithering around. “During the mating season, male snakes compete for a female. It is a natural phenomenon. This happens with several snakes and is mistaken for one snake with many heads. We advise people to stay away since there could be other snakes around which one may not spot.”