By Garima Prasher

There is a sharp increase in the number of cobras and vipers in Bengaluru, a recent study, and latest data furnished by snake rescuers have revealed.

Cobras and vipers, two of the most venomous snakes, are responsible for the majority of deaths due to snakebites in India.

“The number of calls to rescue Spectacled Cobras and Russell’s Vipers has increased tremendously. Earlier, around 20% calls used to be to rescue cobras; it has gone up to approximately 80%. Calls to rescue Russell’s Vipers have also doubled,” said Shuayb Ahmad, city-based snake rescuer, working with the BBMP.

The study noted that the two species of cobra and viper, constitute 41.5% and 18.9% of the snakes, respectively, encountered by humans in urban Bengaluru, cumulatively making 60.4% of the city’s human-snake encounters potentially deadly. This number is expected to surge further.
 
A total of 33 snake species are found in Bengaluru.

“The population of Spectacled Cobras and Russell’s Vipers has skyrocketed and is expected to go up further leading to more human-snake encounters,” said Yatin Kalki, a herpetologist who’s a co-author of the study.
 
Experts said rampant urbanisation and accumulation of garbage are among reasons behind the rise in the aforementioned serpent numbers.

“Due to the rapid geographical extent of the city, we are likely to see an increase in human-snake conflicts as time progresses. Spectacled Cobras and Russell’s Vipers are habitat-generalists and feed on rodents. Accumulation of garbage and food waste around human settlements make rodents abundant, providing an excellent food base. The sewers and stormwater drains act as highways not only for rats but also for the snakes that eat them.

Consequently, these animals can stay unseen while surviving in urban areas,” added Yatin.

Non-venomous snakes in decline
The population of non-poisonous snakes is dwindling. The study indicated that Common Cat Snake, Indian Wolf Snake, Buff Striped Keelback and Banded Racer have become rare in Bengaluru.
 
Experts blamed it on habitat destruction, decline in prey base and the fallout of the climate crisis.

“Barren land with grass or thorny crops is considered waste land and converted to residential or commercial areas. However, these ‘waste lands’ are prime habitats for many snake species and their prey bases. Snakes, when spotted in the city limits, are either captured and relocated by untrained ‘rescuers’ to far off places or even killed; these factors contribute to decline in population,” said Karthik AK, co-author of the study and a member of Wildlife Conser­vation Group.
 
Non-venomous snakes require a specific type of habitat to survive and are highly susceptible to changes in the land use. Some of them have limited prey bases and others depend on distinct conditions for reproduction that can only be found in natural settings. Any change in land use pattern due to urbanisation creates a devastating impact on these habitat-specialist species.

“Urbanisation and development have destroyed the tropical deciduous and thorn forests of Bengaluru. This has led to a drastic drop in the populations of Common Cat Snakes, Green Vine Snakes and Bronzeback Tree Snakes. These are arboreal serpents and have suffered due to the change in the landscape. The numbers of Saw-scaled Vipers, Green Keelbacks and Olive Keelbacks have diminished too. The latter two species have a peculiar requirement of clean waterbodies as their habitat.


   .
 Unfortunately, most of the lakes in the city are heavily polluted. Hebbal Lake once had a good population of Olive Keelbacks, but today, one can hardly spot any. On the one hand, the number of rats has gone up; on the other hand, we are losing prey bases such as garden lizards, rock agamas and birds, which are preferred by non-venomous snake species,” said Shuayb.

How to mitigate conflict?
According to experts, non-poisonous Rat Snakes and Keelbacks can act as our allies in controlling the population of venomous snakes, thus reducing the number of encounters and deaths. Coexistence with the non-poisonous snakes, short-range relocation of venomous ones, and taking precautions are some of the ways to mitigate human-snake conflicts in the city.

“Non-venomous snakes compete with cobras and vipers for resources; so, areas that have more harmless snakes are less likely to have venomous ones. Additionally, large Rat Snakes often feed on smaller snakes, including venomous ones. When people call snake rescuers to relocate innocuous snake species, it creates a void for venomous snakes to move in. So, we need to treat the harmless snakes around our homes in the same way we treat the squirrels or birds,” said Yatin.


   Relocation of innocuous snake species creates a void for venomous snakes to move in…— Yatin Kalki, herpetologist
Moreover, akin to any man-animal encounter, creating awareness is the first step towards conflict mitigation.
 
“People should be educated about venomous and non-venomous snakes. A large number of snakebites are the results of people trying to capture or kill snakes. This can be prevented by following precautions such as using a torch while moving around at night and never attempting to handle or kill snakes. If a snake has entered your home, call a professional snake rescuer, and keep an eye on it until they arrive to capture and relocate. Do remember that snakes are not vicious monsters that are out to bite us. They are more scared of us than we are of them,” added Karthik.

India recorded 11.67 lakh deaths due to snakebites from 2000 to 2019, averaging 58,000/year. Total deaths for the 2001-2014 study period were 8,07,500. Deaths for 2000-2019 were calculated by extrapolating these annual deaths. The extrapolated annual deaths in thousands for outside the study period were 54.0 for 2000, 62.3 for 2015, 62.0 for 2016, 61.4 for 2017, 60.3 for 2018 and 59.8 for 2019.