By Reya Mehrotra

Mounds of trash, especially plastic, being dumped rampantly by tourists, at the Devarayanadurga forest is an eyesore, besides the ecological threat it poses.

The Karnataka State Forest Department organised a clean-up drive, along with 100 volunteers from Wildlife Aware Nature Club and Avani Academy for Nature on February 3, to remove the accumulated garbage. 

Overall, they collected 300 bags of trash dumped at the forest. The collected waste, mounted on six tractors, was then sent to Tumkur Waste Management Centre for recycling. Dr Prasanna Kumar of Wildlife Aware Nature Club & Avani Academy for Nature said, “We have been working with the forest department for over 25 years to support conservation activities. The most important step to ensure cleanliness in the forest is involving the local community there and students from nearby schools and colleges in Tumkur. This forest is an important lung space for Tumkur and it needs to be preserved and maintained. Apart from waste, human-animal conflict is another problem with Devaraya-nadurga forest as there are several cases of leopards entering villages, but all that is manageable. Despite multiple efforts, visitors don’t maintain cleanliness. Installation of bins will curb the garbage problem to an extent.” 

The group will also make efforts to have several signboards installed in the forest that read ‘Garbage Free Zone’ and others for visitors. Kumar added, “Mostly people come here for picnics so a lot of waste is disposed. We left biodegradable waste and only collected plastic and glass as it’s dangerous for animals.” 

Mahesh V Malagatti, Range Forest Officer, (RFO) of Devara-yanadurga Forest said, “We are planning to engage neighbouring communities and volunteer groups to help the forest department conduct cleanliness drives in the forest every week. We will also install dustbins to ensure people don’t litter. We are also in talks with the municipal corporation to clean up the forest area once in every 10-15 days and also segregate the waste there.”
Though forest zones are technically plastic-free zones, visitors still bring in plastic. To ensure zero plastic waste in Devarayanadurga, we will encourage people to carry paper covers The enthusiasm shown by volunteers was amazing,” he said. 

Team sells plasticto boost campaign

A group of trekkers, who had earlier cleaned up the Kumara Parvatha mountain peak in December by collecting over 200 kg of trash, has done it again. Over the weekend, they collected about 2,000 kg of waste from the Shivagange peak. “We were a group of 150 people who had gone for the trek. We divided ourselves into 10 teams of 15 members each and gave away big bags to collect thrash to every member. Of the 500 bags, 440 bags were entirely filled up at the end of the trekk,’’ said Subrahmanya Kumar, who is one of the people who leads the initiative. 

The team collected 480 kg of plastic bottles and about 1600 kgs of waste like paper plates, plastic bottles, milk containers, liquor bottles, plastic spoons and forks , packets of chips/wafers and chocolate wrappers

The group said two of the spots in the mountain peak were the most littered. “Once you go up the hill, you can find Olakala Teertha, an underground spring. It is a popular belief that if you can touch the water, it is proof that you have committed no sins.While the other spot was almost at the end of the peak where many take a break,” said Kumar. The team then sold 480 kg of plastic bottles to scrap dealers from which they made Rs 7,000. The team is planning to pool in more amount to buy 10 huge dustbins which will fill 240 litre of waste and install at different spots on the the Shivgange Hills. 

Unique eco-spot

Devarayanadurga Forest, spread over 42 km, has in fact been identified as a biodiversity hotspot by IISc experts. According to them, the forest has important species like yellow throated bulbul, leopard, sloth bear and medicinal plants. The surrounding areas of the forest are also home to several tribes like Lambani tribe and a place of origin for many small tributaries.