High Court calls for stringent laws as current law allows accused to be easily released

The High Court has directed the authorities to make stringent laws with severe punishment for those involved in wildlife smuggling. The court had to release an alleged wildlife smuggler accused of sending Indian Pangolins abroad. The court said that there are not enough stringent process to control such activities. 

Though the court released the main accused on bail, Justice BA Patil, in his judgement, a copy of which was directed to be sent to the Chief Secretary of the Government, said, “It is painful to mention here that though several steps have been taken by the State to prevent wildlife rackets, but in spite of such acts and enactments, there is no preventive and stringent process to control such activities. Such activities are increasing day by day, thereby endangering rare species like the Indian Pangolin and such other animals which are on the verge of extinction. Strict action has to be taken in this behalf against persons involved in such criminal illegal wildlife rackets and activities by bringing stringent enactments and imposing severe punishment.”

Forest officials in Chikkamagaluru were lucky enough to catch a wildlife smuggler red-handed. They cracked down on a gang involved in sending abroad the endangered Pangolins and also rescued two animals. But they were not lucky in keeping the four alleged smugglers in custody. All the four are now out, despite the prosecution fearing that they would continue with smuggling wildlife. 

Pradeep Gowda from Chikkamagaluru is the main accused in the case file by the Range Forest Officer, Balehonnur Range under the Karnataka Forest Act and Wildlife (Protection) Act. The allegation is that on September 7, 2018, the forest officer and his staff were at Kabbinamane Circle when two men came on a motorcycle. When they were intercepted one of the men on the bike ran away. The other, Pradeep Gowda, had in his possession, two live Indian Pangolins. 

The forest officials who were lucky to nab the smugglers were however, not lucky to keep them under custody. Three of the accused were released on bail by the trial court except Gowda. Pradeep Gowda approached the High Court for bail. Considering the situation in the case, the HC released Gowda on bail for Rs 1 lakh in personal bond and two sureties for the likesum.