At a city film festival, environmental and nature filmmakers address the complex issue of battling for the environment, while shaping public opinion

Have you seen what happens when the Madivala Lake floods?” asks filmmaker Sriharsha Ganjam. “Toilets in the neighbouring areas overflow. Clearly, sewage and effluents are getting dumped into the lake.” Ganjam is part of the photographers collective, Landscape Wizards, which has made environmental documentary films on Karnataka’s undammed river (Aghanashini) and an underground cave network in Meghalaya (Subterranean Landscapes). He admits to having opinions on the city’s environmental issues “just like any of its citizens”. 

Ruing the lack of infrastructure and development in the city, he suggests that we learn from many successful examples from across the country. “Take our lakes for instance,” he commented. “We could learn to value our water bodies and natural resources like the small Toda community living in a tiny hamlet in Nilgiris.” Filming this community and their relationship with their small freshwater lake for an upcoming documentary film, he wished that every Bengalurean would see how the community of about 50 families has managed to do something that the city can only dream of. “I actually drank the water from that lake,” he marvelled. “It was sweet and fresh.” An ethnic pastoral community, the Toda people look at the natural resources in a “pagan way” and make sure that their lake remains unpolluted. This is a remarkable feat considering that the lakes in and around Ooty are polluted and littered with plastic refuse.

Ganjam believes in the effectiveness of films, which he says instil a sense of wonder and responsibility in viewers. “When we view a film showcasing the environmental concerns of local natural resources, we do it from our own perspective,” he points out. “No one is judging us and if we have been part of the problem it will hopefully help us mend our ways.” That message is part of the purpose behind the ongoing film festival Suchitra Environmental Film Festival. The festival’s co-curator, filmmaker Ashwin Kumar Bhat, speaks of the lack of such a festival in the city, a place which he says, has “so many environmental activists and enthusiasts”. Although the films featured at the festival address issues from across the globe, the commonality of some of the problems make it interesting to see how people are reacting in different countries. Directing Aghanashini was an eye-opener for him. The 124-km long river flows from the Western Ghats along its natural course and flows into the sea at its estuary near Gokarna. “There are neither any dams nor any industries along the river, thanks to vigilante local communities,” he commented. “We should learn from that.”

But would that help against huge vested conglomerates or ruthless power? One of the films screened at the festival, Mindless Mining by Shekar Dattatri, offered encouragement to the aspiring game-changers. In 2002, because of the PIL filed by NGO Wildlife First, and the overwhelming evidence of environmental destruction, the Supreme Court of India ordered the closure of the mines. It restored a stunning rainforest and grassland ecosystem after the renewal of the mining license 20 years by the mining company was denied. The film continues to be a talking point for those who are against powerful institutions. “Here is a small entity which brought a mega conglomerate to its knees. That’s inspirational,” Bhat commented.
Amoghavarsha JS, one of the co-directors of the recently released documentary Wild Karnataka (which has Sir David Attenborough as the narrator), believes that films on environmental issues are the first step of a multi-pronged action. “Films such as these create awareness,” he said. The next step, according to him, would be to build campaigns and policies. Only then, when everything fails, should drastic measures such as protests be taken. “In my personal experience, it is best to work with the local authorities who have the right tools to enforce laws and regulations on ground.” He has been working with the local departments for about two decades now. In the film Wild Karnataka, a team of 20 filmmakers including Kalyan Varma worked in tandem with the forest officials and the Forest Department. “Without the help of the local authorities, we can’t do much,” Amoghavarsha says. “By simply fighting, one can’t accomplish much.”

 This sentiment is echoed by Ganjam. About six years ago, he filmed Subterranean Landscapes, a film on an underground network of caves near Cherrapunji. The main issue was that it sat below a cement factory. “There was indiscriminate limestone mining going on,” Ganjam recalled. After the filming, he shared it with the local guides who had showed him around the caves. They, in turn, shared it on social media and the film was viewed extensively by the local community. The guide later told him of the positive feedback from the locals and how they themselves were not aware of the significance of the natural wonder. But has the mining stopped? “It has been a while but I am hopeful that the factory authorities would have realised their folly.”

Catching people young would help. “Today’s policy makers have also been in school once,” Amoghavarsha says. Showing such films in schools, and more importantly, giving attention to environmental sciences in the curriculum are ways of making more people aware of their surroundings. Education, unfortunately, has become more about scoring marks, competitive exams and securing jobs. How do the young get involved then? Bhat takes pride in the fact that Aghanashini has been screened at 25 schools along the river. The students were amazed to see how communities along every part of the river were responsible for it. “The ones in the Upper Ghats couldn’t believe that the estuary was so big and the ones in the plains had no idea what it took to keep the river flowing the way it did,” he recalled. The connection was immense and with that came awareness and vigilance.

Filmmaker who spend a considerable amount of time on ground are likely to come in contact with those on the wrong side of the law. In 2006-2007, in his early days of photography, Ganjam remembered questioning people in a lorry who were dumping trash at the popular Karanji Kere in Mysuru. “I was manhandled and shouted at and accused of taking advantage of my position of privilege.” Today, he knows better. “It is best to victimise the perpetrators, empathise with their issues and then make them aware of their actions.” He cites the example of garbage being dumped by residents in his area in Bannerghatta into rainwater harvest canals. “Even though rainwater harvest canals have not been built properly – as the recent rains proved when the water flowed on the roads instead of going into the canal – this civic apathy is partly because garbage collection does not happen correctly.”

However, an effective example would be the plastic ban in the city. No city in the country has been so committed in banning low grade plastic covers. Amoghavarsha believes that the media, including films and documentaries, shaped public opinion by making them aware of the downsides of plastic. As public opinion altered, the government was quick in imposing the ban. “Eventually, the government does what the people want,” he said. It is important that the public knows what’s good for them and their environment. “We are all fighting the same cause in different ways,” Ganjam notes.