Activists, ex-servicemen plan a rally at the bordering Kutta opposing massive projects that cripple the catchment areas
 
 After fighting silent legal battles for years against the destruction of the Cauvery catchment area in the name of development, people of Kodagu have finally decided to hit the streets demanding scrapping of projects which they say would cripple the pristine region.
 
 A protest rally has been organised on August 26 (Saturday) at Kutta, a border village in south Kodagu, to send a strong message to the policy makers in Karnataka and Kerala.
 
 United under the banner ‘Save River Cauvery’ volunteers from various districts, close to about 50 organisations, ex-service men, planters and famers will take part in the rally beginning from Ponnampet and culminating at Kutta. The rally is aimed at creating awareness about the projects that would destroy Cauvery and its catchments across Kodagu.
 
 Expressing solidarity with the cause, hundreds of Bengalureans are also expected to hold a rally at Town Hall on Sunday. Talking about the rally Col CP Muthanna, president, Coorg Wildlife Society, told BM that it would be a unified effort from the people of Kodagu to tell all those who are dependent on Cauvery water that "only you can save your river".
 
 “Both Karnataka and Kerala have been pushing for infrastructural projects through Kodagu with scant regard for ecology. Many projects are being planned with no scientific validation whatsoever. Be it the railway line, national highway, power transmission line, everything benefits Kerala. Clearing large tract of forests for power transmission cable and other projects, policy makers have already done enough damage. Even during the peak of monsoon, wells in many parts of Kodagu go dry and incidents like this would reveal the gravity of the situation," Col Muthanna said.
 
 Already, ex-servicemen of Kodagu have petitioned to Union minister for Railways Suresh Prabhu to scrap the three railway projects that would pass through the district. "After the Mysuru-Kushalanagar railway project, similar railway project between Thalassery and Mysuru that proposes a corridor between Iritty and Virajpet will axe several lakh trees. Just for transmission line work, a whopping 60,000 plus trees have been cleared which has already affected the rainfall pattern in Kodagu,” said another activist.
 
 Quoting a survey, Muthanna said, “Kodagu district has 32 per cent forest area besides 30 per cent of coffee estate. It's estimated that railway projects proposed through Kodagu would clear 2.5 lakh to 3 lakh trees. It's time the state government woke up."