Apart from a few volunteers who have rescue vans, the city has only four rescue vans for handling trauma cases
 
 
 	What do you do when you see an injured or ill animal lying on the road? Especially if you’re the sort who simply can’t walk past and hope someone else takes care of it.
 	
 	
 	On Thursday morning, on a stroll through Domlur, I came upon a stray that was not his normal playful self. He lay in a corner, refusing food. When I enquired with shopkeepers in the area about his condition I was told that he was hit by an auto a couple of days ago and has been off colour ever since. I could see no visible injuries on him, but sensed that the dog was in a lot of discomfort.
 	
 I must confess, that while being an animal lover, I have never been in a situation where I’ve had to physically help an animal. So I did the only thing I could think of, calling up animal rescue centres. I got in touch with one volunteer who offered to come all the way from Hosur Road. I decided, to see if I could get a rescue van or a pet ambulance to take the dog and myself to a clinic and have him checked.
 	
 When I called Cupa (Compassion Unlimited Plus Action), they said that they did not have an ambulance available until the next day. I then called up a couple of animal NGOs in the area, all of who told me that they would treat the dog provided I brought it to them.
 	
 I called up emergency numbers like the Voice of Stray Dogs and Karuna, both numbers were out of service. Finally after almost two hours, I managed to get a volunteer to help me out.
 	
 While, this may be just one incident, it was enough to make me question why there weren’t more animal ambulances in the city. Apart from a few volunteers who have their own rescue vans, the city has only four rescue vans for handling trauma cases. Of these, Cupa has two vans for trauma and two for animal birth control, and CARE (Charlie’s Animal Rescue Centre) has two ambulances.
 	
 	  	But given that Cupa gets more than 100 calls a month, the number of ambulances is barely enough to meet its need. Even though the city might have a strong network of animal volunteers, a well-networked rescue van service is the need of the hour, I realised.
 	
 KB Harish, Cupa cruelty inspector and honorary animal welfare officer of the AWBI (Animal Welfare Board of India) says, “The demand is so high that we often have to use the animal birth control ambulance for trauma accidents. Now, I have my own car that I use for rescue because the Cupa vehicle is not enough.”
 	
 While the BBMP has almost five NGOs listed under them to assist in dog rescue, they depend completely on Cupa, which is overburdened with an increase in such cases. The other four NGOs do not provide a rescue van. Other NGOs like Animal Rights Fund have a vehicle but that is only used for the sterilisation of dogs.
 	
 Most of the rescue vans focus on wildlife injuries and not urban strays. Sudha Narayan, founder and trustee, CARE told BM, “We have two vans, but at any point of time one driver is off duty. This one van is being used for critically ill dogs, releasing cases, etc. Moreover, these ambulances have to go far, beating traffic and very often the dog dies before reaching the centre. I get at least 10 cases every day and with a shortage of rescue vans we have to really analyse and prioritise our cases. Cupa and CARE work in tandem. In a few cases, we say that we request them to get the injured or ill dog in an auto and we pay the auto charge. There are pet cabs but they are overbooked and expensive. We need at least two more NGOs working with rescue vans and at least 10 more rescue vans in the city, especially areas in South Bangalore like Electronics City, JP Nagar, BTM Layout, etc.”
 	  	
 Although there are a few good people who use their own cars as rescue vans. Anurag Verma, 40, uses his Maruti Swift to rescue dogs, and has done so for the past three years. “There is a big problem transporting these dogs to hospital. You cannot rely on autos because they end up overcharging, which is why I decided to take them in my car.”
 	  	
 	  	‘An effort to fill the gap’
 	
 In order to fill this gap, Ashwin Sameeran, an animal rescuer, is going to initiate a service by introducing two rescue vans. “NGOs like Cupa definitely require more support from the public in terms of infrastructure and funds. Most NGOs have vans, but do not have drivers, which is another big hurdle in this segment.”