By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 When I visited the Ranganathittu bird sanctuary near Mysore last week, it was brimming with visitors. Holidaymakers from all over the country queued up to get a ride on the boat that would take them into the reservoir. They would row past the small islands in the middle of the water, which contained what they came to see – trees and bushes laden with bird nests, filled with squawking babies and harried parents. Pelicans, ibises, storks, spoonbills and egrets made trip after trip to the water and returned with beaks full of fish for their little ones. Crocodiles lurked on the ground and rocks beneath, ready to make a meal of the chicks unlucky enough to fall out of their nests.
 
 But my attention was on the skies above. As I boarded the boat, I got a fleeting glimpse of a bird silhouetted against the evening sun. It was clearly a raptor. It had white undersides and outspread wings shaped like the letter “M”. My heart went racing – it was an osprey, that fish-catcher extraordinaire, a bird that I always hoped to see when I passed large stretches of water. Would this be the occasion when I would get to witness its incredible skills? By the time our boat hit the water, the bird was gone, so I had to console myself with the thought that there was always a next time.
 
 Every birdwatcher dreams of seeing the osprey in action. Its dive is like poetry in motion, yet represents millennia of evolution encapsulated in a few brief moments. The osprey flies above water, cocking its head from side to side in search of prey. Its vision is well adapted to spotting underwater objects. When it sights a fish, the osprey hovers for a moment, as if aligning its sights. Then, it breaks into its dive. It goes feet first, plunging into the water with a spectacular splash to grab its prey.
 
 The dive sometimes takes it fully under water. If it does get submerged, the osprey closes its nostrils (yet another adaptation to its unique lifestyle) so that it doesn’t
 take in water. Its feathers are oily and don’t get waterlogged, allowing the bird to fly again in spite of getting soaked.
 
 More adaptations come into play as the osprey rises out of the water, grasping a big, wriggling fish. Its outer toes are reversible, allowing it to hold the fish. There are spikes and backward facing scales at the base of its feet, so that it can get a good grip on its slippery prey. Its powerful wingbeats give it enough lift to clear the water surface and fly towards the nearest perch. Once in the air, the osprey gives its feathers a shake, sending water droplets flying in all directions. Some of the best wildlife footage I’ve seen is based on the osprey’s dive.
 
 Winter is the best time to spot ospreys in the Bengaluru region. They arrive here in the colder months from beyond the Himalayas. With some luck, you could spot this bird flying over any of the lakes on the outskirts of the city. Osprey nests, found in their breeding grounds in Europe and America, are enormous structures of twigs and branches built on rocky outcrops, trees and even utility poles. They are many times taller than the bird itself, six feet across and weighing more than 100 kg. In many countries, conservationists erect artificial platforms for ospreys to build their nests on.
 
 Ospreys almost went extinct in the 1950s, when rampant use of pesticides like DDT impacted their eggs. These majestic birds are making a comeback now. Bengaluru is fortunate to host these birds for a few months, and through them, get a glimpse of Nature’s raw beauty.