By Akhila Damodaran

In tech city Bengaluru, everybody loves to use tech jargon to make mundane things sound tantalising. So it was when officials recently announced that the much-delayed dog census (nay, canine count) would finally get underway. Activists, dog lovers and a section of the media was in a flap as officials declared that face recognition technology would be used for the census. 

Turns out, they were talking about a photo.

G Anand, who retired as joint director (animal husbandry) in the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), clarified that the tender – which is still being finalised – has no such proposal for facial recognition. “We were thinking of photographing the dogs while doing the census. The idea is still at the initial stage,” he said, adding that the file and the proposal had been handed over to the new in-charge, Dr Shashikumar. 

Dr Shashikumar told Bangalore Mirror that even photographing the dogs wouldn’t be feasible. “It would be difficult as many strays look alike and we will have to assume that it is the same or a different dog if we find it in another area. Also, the dog may run and hence, it will be a challenge to get a photograph. We will be discussing with the agency that will be carrying out the survey if the photography would be feasible. If it seems difficult, we would go with the regular census itself. It would take at least a month’s time to finalise it. Tenders are yet to be floated,” he said.

In fact, in order to hard sell the technology component (the finesse, in other words), officials cited “similar census” that were carried out in New Delhi, Mumbai and Pune. But when Bangalore Mirror called up the municipal corporations in all three cities, none had even heard of such “bunkum”. The Mumbai and South Delhi municipalities still follow the conventional methods to survey the stray dogs in their cities. Pune, however, did use photography while surveying the stray dogs on a pilot basis. They tried the same technology that is used to do census of wildlife by tying up with Ashoka Trust For Research In Ecology And The Environment (ATREE). 

So is there no tech component to the census? There is, but it doesn’t sound as tantalising as “facial and skin recognition”. 

The BBMP’s animal husbandry department has asked NGOs who have taken up the ABC (Animal Birth Control) programme to inject a microchip in every neutered dog so that all details such as where and when the operation was carried out can be accessed easily. The civic body hasn’t received any response from the west and south zone and hence, they have floated the tenders again.

Dr Shashikumar says the new additions in the tender this time is the microchip and GPS-enabled vehicles to catch the dogs. “The vets who are performing surgery should inject the dog with a microchip. It will hardly take a few seconds. This microchip will help us get the details of who and where the dog was neutered and in case, it has been dislocated,” he said.

He added that though the ears of the dogs are chipped post the surgery, they have been receiving flak that many dogs’ ears are being chipped even if they are not neutered. 

“Hence, microchip would be better,” he said.