Bipasha Basu
Travel is one of my inspirations to live. The reason I became a model was because it gave me an opportunity to travel and see the world at a young age. I love to see new places, savour different cultures and customs. I love to meet people and taste new cuisines. I love both posh and economy travelling depending on my group of friends.

Katrina Kaif
Have you ever felt the first nip of air in a new country? That feeling of exhilaration when your aircraft touches down on a new territory? The feel of a new breeze as you drive away from the airport, new sights and new architecture, the scents and flavours of new food? And most of all, the people in a newly-visited country who expand your emotional and spiritual horizon? 

Shabana Azmi
Often travelling is a chore because of the packing, which I hate but can’t leave to the house help. If I want a vacation, I usually stay at home. When I’m holidaying, I’m rarely interested in sightseeing. I like to chill with friends, eat like a pig, 
watch movies and plays.

Isha Koppikar
Travel for me is the journey of life which makes each day memorable and beautiful.

Urmila Matondkar
Travelling, to me, is the most essential part of growing. To see, know, earn, understand different cultures, people, 
landscapes and horizons… there’s no greater pleasure.

Nandita Das
Travel provides me with a window into human psyche and cultures. It’s the best method to decrease prejudices 
and also get to know oneself. I love travelling.

Juhi Chawla
What travel means to me? The question comes at an amazing time. I’ve just returned from Uganda, where there are rolling green hills as far as the eyes can see, freedom and, of course, a wildlife safari trip. I’ve returned home to the stress and pollution of Mumbai. Humdrum life after travel is a pain. 

Travel to me is a getaway holiday, preferably to see a culture I haven’t seen before. I prefer travelling to cooler 
climates, countrysides rather than large, humid cities.

Naseeruddin Shah
Travel to me means tension. I’d rather stay at home.

Boman Irani
To me, travel is time to spend with family.

Jiah Khan
To me travel is simultaneously the ultimate escape and the greatest homecoming. It allows me to get away, frees me from obligations and bombards me with the unfamiliar, all the while teaching me more about myself.

Rahul Khanna
Travel is escape, adventure, long security lines at airports...

Genelia D’Souza
Travel to me is a way of life. Not surprising since for the past one year I’ve been practically living out of suitcases.

Tusshar Kapoor
Travel for me always means a holiday. 
I can never enjoy travelling if it’s for work. To me travel means being with people who can share new places and experiences with me.

Farhan Akhtar
Travel means going from one place to another. (Ha, ha)

Dia Mirza
Travel means growth. There truly is no better education than travel. No matter what the journey entails or what the final destination is, each time one travels there’s something new to be learnt.

Raima Sen
Travel is a great chance to do shopping. 

Sunidhi Chauhan
Travel is fun… most of the way.

Celina Jaitly
Travel for me is an adventure,  and it quenches the constant thirst for discovering something new, as I’ve always felt like a nomad at heart..

Minnisha Lamba
Travel to me means work. I make mini vacations out of my work travels, that’s all. For me, a holiday is not about travelling, but about relaxing at home.