A poster in his cozy entertainment room cum bar shows four mugs of beer - one half empty, depicting a pessimist,one half full, depicting an optimist, one with a cloud over it, depicting a spiritualist and the last with the beer all drunk up, for the realist.

The slogan on top reads “Attitude is everything in Life.” 

Chat with Dr Ajit K Huilgol, Chief of Medical Services, Kidney Transplant Surgery at the Columbia Asia hospital for five minutes and you know that his positive attitude is what has kept him going and helped him excel in his field.

Being a jet-setting doctor, his work has taken him far and wide. But apart from that he is also an avid wildlife photographer.His house is a showcase of his various jaunts across the world - Kenya, Nigeria, Portugal, England and many more and there are not many wildlife sanctuaries in the country, whose inhabitants have not been captured by his lenses - be it the majestic lions and cheetahs of Gir forest in Gujarat; sloth bears in the Daroji Wildlife Sanctuary, 15 km from Hampi; tigers in Jim Corbett National Park in Uttaranchal or the Woolly Neck Storkand Grey Heron in the Rollapadu Bird Reserve in Andhra Pradesh.

AN EARLY START

Just back from a trip to Kenya and its wildlife reserves, Dr Huilgol says, “As a kid, I was very fond of animals...I think we all are, it’s an inherent trait. But somewhere along the way as we grow into adults, we lose that bonding. In 1971, when I went on a college trip to Bandipur wildlife reserve, my love of the wild was rekindled. But at that time I could not buy a camera to follow my passion. I was able to fulfill my dream only in the 1990s.” But that is all a thing of the past. He now has state-of-the-art equipment and such is the clarity in his pictures that it would put many an expert wildlife photographer to shame.

But the doctor is not like any other lensman, who would be happy just mounting his pictures in the house. He has tried to make a difference —once on a trip to Nagarhole wildlife sanctuary, he and his son noticed the tiger had a snare around its paw, the kind used by professional poachers. He immediately shot a video and showed it to the forest department authorities, who refused to acknowledge it had happened in their sanctuary. Dr Huilgol approached a news channel and the video was shown on national television, attracting the attention of well-known wildlife protectionists.

“Only then was the tiger tracked and the snare removed. By then, gangrene had set in and the tiger’s paw had to be amputated.” After this incident, Dr Huilgol can drive into any wildlife reserve. 

“The Chief Conservator of Forests gave me a pass which allows me into any protected forest.”

PRICELESS POSSESSIONS

One thing that will immediately catch your eye when you enter his study is an olden style box camera, around 80 years old, which he acquired from a house in Alwar, Rajasthan. Talking about the camera brings back old memories. “I am an alumnus of Bishop Cotton School and we had a class teacher called O C Edwards, who used to be the resident photographer who used to take pictures with a similar camera. “Only later did we learn that he was one of the pioneers of wildlife photography in the country,” says the doctor.

Speaking about a few nuances of wildlife photography, Dr Huilgol feels the shift from analogue to the digital photography format was more of a mental block for him than anything else. “First I used a camera which could shoot six frames per second.Now I have one that can shoot up to 10 frames a second and that is a big novelty.” He feels animals are one of the most fascinating subjects to shoot pictures of. Giving a few tips, he adds, “The clicking sound really doesn’t disturb the animals, it’s our movement that puts them off. If we are still, they won’t bother about us.”

Dr Huilgol seems to have learnt a lot about animal behaviour. He opines that the same species of animals behave differently in different regions. 

“A tree pie, a bird commonly found all over India, would perch right on top of your palm and eat from it at the Ranthambore Wildlife Sanctuary. But the same species of bird is extremely shy at Bandipur or at Kabini.”

For him, these mysteries of nature are always inviting and he is ever ready to explore.

A COMMENTATOR

As if surgery and photography were not diverse enough, Dr Huilgol has also dabbled in cricket commentary in the 70s and 80s for All India Radio. 

“Doing commentary on radio for a game like cricket is a challenging task because you have to describe the whole scenario to the listener. Now with the advent of television, everything has changed and the commentary given on live television by former international cricketers can be quite taxing,” he says with a smile.

Dr Huilgol also has some interesting crciket memorabilia in his house - like a portrait of Don Bradman and one of W.G.Grace, miniatures of the cricket bat evolving through the years and also a framed write-up on the history of the cricket bat.