Instead of bans, dept must get to the root of forest fires, say experts

The Forest Department has temporarily banned trekking to scenic places and waterfalls on several stretches of the Western Ghats in the wake of Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) or monkey fever. The decision to ban trekking is also a step to prevent the outbreak of forest fires.

According to officials, the temporary ban has been imposed only as a precautionary measure and only because the department wants to avoid a Tamil Nadu like incident in the State. Last year, in Tamil Nadu, at least nine trekkers died when they were returning from a trek to the Kurangani hills as they were trapped in a forest fire. The safety of trekkers is important, an officer said.

An official from the Kudremukh Wildlife Division told Bangalore Mirror, this is a temporary ban that will be lifted once the region receives rain and KFD is brought under control. 

The department’s move has proved to be a dampener among the weekend trekkers from Bengaluru. 

Dinesh Holla, convener, Sahyadri Sanchaya, said banning of trekking because of forest fires is not a welcome move. 

“On several occasions, we have expressed concern on how forest fires are only increasing over the years and the forest department needs to find the cause for forest fires. Illegal activities like hunting and mushrooming illegal resorts have to be curbed instead of putting a blanket ban on trekkers. In fact, the regular trekkers could act as the eyes and ears of the forest department by alerting them in case of an emergency and the department can use the service of volunteers,” he said.

Holla has been guiding students on treks to the Western Ghats to help them understand its value and protect environment. They have also been conducting cleanliness drives regularly. He said, “Many serious trekkers understand conservation and environment issues and are not just going to have parties in the jungles.” 

This year, the forest fire has been recorded very early and environmentalists have been demanding the government to provide choppers at least on rent for three months, so that the spread of forest fire can be curtailed at the earliest and forests are protected.

Several ranges — Kollur, Mudigere, Agumbe, Kudremukh, Charmadi have already implemented the ban. The need of the hour is to curb illegal activities, maintained Holla.