Segments of highway closed for vehicles couple of years ago, have higher number of tree species

The segment of State Highway 33 passing through Nagarahole Tiger Reserve, which was closed for vehicles a couple of years ago, has a higher tree species count than the other stretch which is closed only for nighttime traffic. This was the finding of a study conducted by scientists from the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) Dehradun, which has been highlighted by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA).

The assessment aimed to understand the impacts of the highway on the flora and fauna of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. The study looked at the difference in the impact of SH 33 along its two stretches – one that is completely closed to traffic (decommissioned segment) and the other stretch that is closed for nighttime traffic (night traffic closed segment).

Researchers found that tree species composition and richness were higher in the decommissioned road segment compared to the night traffic closed road segment. On the other hand, shrubs and herbs had higher species richness in the night traffic closed road segment. According to the researchers, this can be attributed to the edge effect. Moreover, the invasive species cover of Lantana and Eupatorium, was higher in the area devoid of traffic. “This can be attributed to increased light intensity on the forest floor due to lower canopy cover in the decommissioned road segment and higher animal activity, which acts as seed dispersers. Lower canopy cover in decommisioned segments can result from the breakage of the canopy and crushing of new regeneration by the presence and activity of large mammals, like elephants,” noted the study.

Wildlife researchers and conservationists say outcomes from such studies show that national parks or protected areas should not be considered for infrastructure projects. “Any traffic is not good for forest areas, especially tiger reserves. No new linear project proposals inside forest areas should be sanctioned. We took up a study a couple of years back on the number of road kills on SH 33 and during our study, we counted nearly 800 wildlife, including keystone species, dying in road kill,” said Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

“Proposals such as road widening and elevated highways in protected areas should be rejected from the outset,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist.