A 20-hour rescue operation was carried out by a wildlife rescue team to save the life of a two-month-old crow. The crow was injured after getting entangled in a nylon manja used for flying kites. As the bird suffered serious injuries to its wings, it was shifted to a veterinary rehabilitation centre near Banaswadi, and is expected to be under treatment for at least a month.
 
 
 It took two professional rock climbers and a rescue team to save the bird at Murugeshapalaya in HAL. The team began the rescue mission after some locals spotted the injured bird perched atop a rain tree on Tuesday. The initial rescue operation had to be aborted due to bad light and altitude and was resumed on Wednesday.
 
 
 The two rock climbers – Balu and Puneeth – used professional gear to rescue the bird. One of the major safety concerns was the frail branches of the tree and the possibility of it buckling under the weight of a rescue crew member.
 
 
 “By 8.30 am, the two rock climbers managed to rescue the crow. The rain tree was very old and its branches were weak. Balu and Puneeth scaled the height using ropes and other safety tools. The entire operation was extremely risky. In an attempt to free itself, the crow got further entangled and seriously injured,” Rajesh Kumar M, one of the volunteers told BM.
 
 
 The injured bird was shifted to a veterinary rehabilitation centre near Banaswadi with heavy swelling and dislocation of its wings. It has also suffered bruises while trying to free itself from the manja.
 
 
 The Chinese manja is a ‘death trap’ not only for birds but also for humans. Last week, three people including a three-year-old girl and a four-year-old boy were killed in New Delhi after their throats were slit by manja when they were travelling with their heads out of their car.
 
 
 To avoid such accidents, the state government had imposed a total ban on manja and other synthetic threads coated with glass powder. The order also empowers officers of the forest and horticulture wing of BBMP, assistant environmental officers, forest officers and senior environmental officer of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board to enforce the above directions. The officers assigned with the implementation of the ban can take cognizance of offences and initiate legal action for violation of this direction under Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, wherever they are empowered.