Data shows that cases of birds, animals getting injured by the kite string have risen in June

The ‘Chinese manja’, glass-laced thread used for flying kites, also carries the ‘serial killer’ tag. It has claimed several lives with birds and humans often falling prey to the deadly thread. Data shows that such incidents have increased during the lockdown.

According to the data collected from City rescue centres, cases of animals and birds getting injured or killed in manja have seen a sudden rise, from 197 in May to 506 in June. NGOs are receiving around 16 cases on a daily basis. In June alone, the organisations rescued over 500 animals and birds that were caught in the manja thread. Many are left injured and some are even handicapped.

Though there are helplines for Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), Bescom, fire and emergency and animal welfare department, a person ends up spending four to five hours to get help for the animal or bird while it’s battling for life. Veterinary doctors say by the time the injured animals or birds are rescued and shifted to the hospital, they often die on the way or become handicapped.

On Sunday evening, an eagle was found hanging from a high tension wire in RT Nagar and was tangled in a manja thread. The residents started reaching out to the government helpline numbers. Neelu from RT Nagar said the rescuers, who arrived at the spot after an hour, were unable to help the bird and asked her to contact the Bescom.

She said, “The rescuers said they would not take the risk as the bird was hanging from a high tension wire. I contacted the BBMP who agreed to send a volunteer and asked me to speak to the fire and emergency department for assistance. Fire and emergency officials refused to help and shared the contact of ARRC, an NGO. We spent over three hours searching for contacts. Finally, the bird was rescued.”

One of the volunteers who rescued the bird said that they were taking the bird to WRRC, an NGO in Bannerghatta. Distance became a problem because the bird needed immediate attention. Dr Prayag, who attended the case, is a local and with the request from the volunteer and residents, he decided to take the risk of treating the bird at his house.
 
Dr Umapathy, urban deputy director, Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, on Monday said that there are 98 veterinary hospitals in the City and they would attend such emergency cases at any time. However, he later contradicted his words when another case of monkeys being electrocuted came up in the evening. He said, “We treat both domestic and wildlife animals but only during official hours. After 5 pm, one can reach out to organisations like People for Animals, a wildlife NGO.”

Dr Roopa from Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Center said, “People often don’t wait for the rescuers to arrive and take things in their hands. This should stop as they might injure the bird or animal even more. Some do not realise and try to hold the injured bird, they start taking photos and videos… this leads the species into more stress and it might get a heart attack.”

Major Manivannan, secretary, animal husbandry department, said they have started a dedicated animal welfare helpline and would try to appoint one member from every department to make the process easier.