As state promotes ecotourism, as many as 21 tigers are reported to have died in 2016-17
 
 While the Karnataka government has drawn up strict new guidelines to promote ecotourism in the state, statistics tell the real story of plummeting tiger numbers.
 Latest figures show an all-time high rate of tiger mortality in the state. According to the government’s revelation in the Legislative Council on Wednesday, as many as 21 tigers were reported dead in 2016-17. In 2013-14, only six tigers were reported dead.
 
 Ecotourism tends to attract local, governmental or international funding for tiger reserves. This in turn enhances constant vigil and attention from conservationists to protect invaluable wildlife resources.
 
 But the sudden spurt in the death rate of tigers in various tiger reserves of Karnataka – hailed as the tiger capital of India – has raised many questions over the effectiveness of conservation programmes launched by the Karnataka Forest Department.
 
 When the issue was raised by JDS MLC TA Sharavana in the legislative council, B Ramanatha Rai, the minister for forests, environment and ecology, attributed the rise in mortality to age-related ailments, natural death, starvation, internal fight and poaching activities.

Read Also:
Forester and vet killed this tigress  

 
 	 
 
 
 So far this year, Karnataka has lost 15 tigers. The dead tigers included Prince, the most photographed tiger in South India.
 
 While neighbouring states have managed to bring down the mortality rate, Karnataka has been witnessing rise in deaths leaving conservationists and wildlife experts worried.
 
 Contrary to claims of KFD and the state government that tiger reserves across Karnataka have salubrious prey density, several tigers have died due to starvation.
 
 Spurt in their population and fragmented forest landscape has often pushed these animals stray out of forest areas or fight with each other over possession of territory.
 
 Even though the mortality due to internal fight is considered natural, the lack of space in forest is evident from the trend, according to sources in the KFD.
 
Read Also:
Leave custard apples for bears, KFD tells residents