Gabbar Singh’s den near Ramanagara now has another reason to be famous. Ramgarh aka Ramadevarabetta (Hills), the spot where Bollywood blockbuster Sholay was shot, has been declared a Vulture Sanctuary, the country’s first and only one. 
 
 Acting on a forest department proposal which has been pending for more than five years, the state government issued the notification declaring 346.14 hectares in and around Ramadevarabetta area as a Vulture Sanctuary. This is a big boost for the conservation of endangered Long-Billed Vultures belonging to the class Gyps indicus.   Ramadevarabetta, interspersed with lofty cliffs, was an ideal location for these high flying birds (known as gidh in Hindi) to reside and reproduce. More than a decade ago, there was a sizeable population of these birds at Ramanagara, avid birdwatcher and biodiversity expert Harish Bhat said. “But today, you see only 15-20 vultures. We have been demanding that the government declare a sanctuary and set up a vulture restaurant to feed these birds and help them reproduce there. It is heartening that the government has finally realised the importance of the location.”   A bird watcher in Ramanagara attributed the decline in numbers to illegal quarrying and rampant use of diclofenac medicines to treat livestock. “The carcass of livestock containing remains of diclofenac had almost wiped out the birds. Last year, the MoEF directed the Karnataka government to ban diclofenac and use the safer drug meloxicam instead. Now with the official notification, the illegal quarrying and other activities in the locality will come to an end,” he said.   The notification, issued a few months ago, renamed the area as ‘Ramadevarabetta Vulture Sanctuary’. The government has more or less retained the guidelines of an order issued way back in 1917 by the then Maharaja of Mysore.   According to sources, the notification said, “Considering the area, situation and limits which are specified in the schedule notification of the Government of His Highness Maharaja of Mysore State, Notification No R-2992-FT-61-17-4 dated 17 September 1917 to an extent of 346.14  hectares to declare as the Ramadevarabetta Vulture Sanctuary.”   A senior official from the forest, ecology and environment department told Bangalore Mirror that the proposal, pending for five years, was okayed after the government realised its importance – in terms of ecology, flora, fauna and geomorphology – and how it was imperative to protect, propagate and develop wildlife or its environment.    Acknowledging the notification, principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife) Deepak Sarmah told Bangalore Mirror, “It was declared a sanctuary a few months ago.” Asked for details, he sought time to look into the records and details of the notification.   Meanwhile, the forest department fenced the area at Ramadevarabetta a few weeks ago with a gated arch, with information about the  newly set-up sanctuary.