After all, it is not every day that you come across a successful freelance HR consultant living in an upmarket locality, getting calls almost every second day to rescue a snake. While city slickers might not blink before killing a creature less powerful than themselves, Prithvi Raj’s sole mission is to make people aware that it is important to live in harmony with other creatures.

With the rains, Prithvi has received at least 10 calls in the last one week from residents in his locality and beyond, about a snake in their house or garden and he is always ready to help. He has been rescuing snakes in the Sarjapur Road, Marathahalli and Whitefield areas for two years and has caught around 50 of them — both venomous and non-venomous, before releasing them in the wild.  

“I used to be very scared of snakes at one time, but was always fascinated by them and wanted to learn more. Once, when I had gone to a resort near Mysore, I happened to meet Snake Shyam and learnt a lot about these reptiles from him. From then on my interest grew,” says Prithvi. 

LEARNING THE ROPES 

He didn’t leave it at that. Prithvi took part in a three-day Herpetology camp conducted by wildlife expert Gerry Martin in Sakleshpur in 2007. Once he was back, he send out e-mails offering help in catching snakes. He uses a stick with a hook on its end and a cloth bag as his rescue equipment. To motivate guards and gardeners not to kill a snake, Prithvi has thought of a unique scheme — he rewards them every time they manage to get a snake alive. 

“Now if there is any snake that is sighted, people call me. If it is a non-venomous one, I release it nearby as it won’t cause any harm. If it is a venomous snake, I release it in a wooded area or forest. I also tell residents that there is no need to panic, as of the 300 snakes found in India, only four are poisonous,” he says. He has caught rat snakes, cobras and vipers and many more. Prithvi holds awareness sessions in layouts near Sarjapur Road and has also taken snakes to a school near his home to familiarise children with these reptiles and remove their fear. His 10-year-old daughter Viha is also interested and accompanies him on his rescue missions. 

ON A RESCUE

When Bangalore Mirror accompanied Prithvi on a rescue mission, the residents in the layout where the snake was sighted seemed scared. He slid into the storm water drain where the rat snake (khere) was hiding and after some effort got it out. He then spoke to residents about poisonous and non-poisonous snakes and encouraged them, especially the kids to hold the snake in their hands. 

He kept talking to the frightened and aggressive snake while rescuing it, saying, “Don’t worry, calm down. Nobody is gonna hurt you,” and surprisingly it seemed to work!

“I caught my first venomous snake in October 2008 — it was a huge Russell’s Viper, which had entered a neighbouring compound. I was a little scared but managed to catch it and I gave it to Gerry as “guru dakshina,” he smiles. He has written about this incident in his blog, which he cheekily calls ‘Monk who drives a Baleno.’ 

“My intention is to get people to respect these creatures and just let them be. I am reminded of a line from a movie I watched where the protagonist says,’we have been given this power so that we can protect those who are powerless.’ That is my philosophy,” Prithvi says. 

He can be contacted on 9886928580.