By Garima Prasher

3,746 manja rescue cases in 2021; 156 cases already recorded this year

Time after time, manjas continue to injure wildlife in Bengaluru. According to data furnished by rescue organisations in the city, at least 3,746 ‘manja rescue’ cases were reported in 2021. This year, 156 cases have already been recorded. The number of cases in 2020 was 1,634.

“There has been a phenomenal rise in such cases across the city. Previously, we used to get one to two calls a day, which has gone up to 10-12. This is not just during the festival. Amid the last lockdown and this ongoing weekend curfews, many Bengaloreans have resorted to kite flying to while away the time. Yesterday, with the help of the fire department, we rescued a black kite that was stuck in manja at a height of 150 feet,” said Dr. Navaz Shariff, general manager and chief veterinarian, People for Animals, Bengaluru.

Experts from Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC), Bengaluru agree. “While manja cases are associated with the Sankranti festival, this time around, it is different. We have been getting cases post lockdown last year itself. We get birds stuck in not just synthetic, but cotton manjas too, leading to injuries. The only difference is that cotton manjas are less dangerous,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC.

According to rescuers, birds such as black kites, crows, koels, barn owls and mammals like bats are most commonly found entangled. Rescue operations are performed with the help of telescopic poles and ladders. Many times, Fire department and BESCOM officials help in the rescues with earthmovers and buses to reach the height.

Flight feather damage, fractures and head injuries due to fall and damage to the neck and legs are the most common injuries. “In case of fractures, external or internal fixation methods are used for bone repair. For feather damage, feather imping is done. It is a procedure of implanting donor feathers into the injured bird’s feather bones breaking cases. We do intricate surgeries and put intramedullary pins inside the birds too,” said Dr. Navaz.

It’s not just the birds
While most of the reported rescue cases involve big birds, experts say that other species of birds and mammals are affected too. According to a statistic by PfA, in 2021, 25 different animal species were affected by manjas compared to 13 in 2020.

“Birds are curious creatures. When they see bright manjas, they approach and get entangled. The more they try to get away, the more they get stuck. Those we rescue are generally bigger animals that we can spot struggling. But a tree also houses smaller creatures such as bulbuls or squirrels. Many of these get entangled, choke and die immediately. So, the actual number of the animals we are losing to manjas is higher,” said Dr. Roopa Satish, senior veterinarian, Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, Bengaluru.

WHY ARE KILLER MANJAS STILL IN USE?

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) had banned the use, manufacture, sale, storage and purchase of glass-coated manja or nylon threads for flying kites via an order in July 2017. Despite that, the sale of the banned kite-flying thread continues in the city.

“I have been reaching out to the authorities regularly, demanding for action on the sale of synthetic manjas. However, just one raid has been conducted so far. To add to that, the information of the raid was leaked and by the time the team could reach the spot, all majas had disappeared. Authorities should conduct spot raids and those selling the killer manjas should be fined heavily. The rule has been enforced well in states like Telangana and Tamil Nadu. However, in Karnataka, no FIR has been lodged and no conviction has happened in this regard,” said Dr. Navaz.

The synthetic and glass-coated manjas are in demand due to low prices as well. They are available at one-third of the price of cotton manja. Moreover, they are bright in colour and sturdy, making it popular among kite flyers.

According to the wildlife experts, the need of the hour is to ban the manufacture and sale of manja, apart from spreading awareness about its dangers, and better implementation of the rules to ensure safer skies.