Osl Scientists asked people around the world on Monday to help compile an internet-based observatory of life on earth as a guide to everything from the impact of climate change on wildlife to pests that can damage crops.

“I would hope that ... we might even have millions of people providing data” in the long term, James Edwards, head of the Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) based at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, told Reuters of the 10-year project.

Linking people

He said scientific organizations were already working to link up thousands of computer databases of animals and plants into a one-stop “virtual observatory” that could be similar to global systems for monitoring the weather or earthquakes.

People in many countries already log observations on the internet, ranging from sightings of rare birds in Canada to the dates on which flowers bloom in spring in Australia. The new system, when up and running, would link up the disparate sites. About 400 biology and technology experts from 50 countries will meet in London from June 1-3 at an “e-Biosphere” conference organized by the EOL.  “This would be a free system that everyone can access and contribute to,” said Norman MacLeod, keeper of paleontology at the Natural History Museum in London which is hosting the talks.

All to benefit 

Edwards said a biodiversity overview could have big economic benefits, for instance an unusual insect found in a garden might be an insect pest brought unwittingly in a grain shipment that could disrupt local agriculture. Among health benefits could be understanding any shifts in the ranges of malaria-carrying mosquitoes linked to global warming, Edwards said. 

“Within 10 years, scientists say they could have an efficient and effective way of tracking changes over time in the range and abundance of plants and animals as worldwide temperature and precipitation patterns shift,” a statement said.

And plane accidents might be averted by studying DNA genetic samples of birds sucked into jet engines and the timing, altitude and routes of bird migrations.  Green, eco-friendly dates! 

Washington: Now, single men and women who care about living a natural and holistic lifestyle, can get to know other green, eco-friendly singles, through an online dating site. According to a report in ENN (Environmental News Network), called EcoDater.com, the site offers its members a comprehensive array of tools to participate in the EcoDater community and find other green, eco-friendly singles easily and efficiently. 

Members include environmentalists, vegans and vegetarians, organic farmers, outdoor enthusiasts, yoga practitioners, activists and much more.