RMNH will use priceless documents to create a database on wildlife density a century ago
 
 	The Regional Museum of Natural History (RMNH) in Mysuru, which was trying for a year to access the registry of the globally acclaimed taxidermist, the late Edwin Joubert Van Ingen, can finally go ahead with its plan to prepare an inventory. 

 	Taxidermists are skilled in the art of stuffing animals for display or research. The museum wants access to the registry to get a peek into the wildlife that existed some 150 years ago in India. Ingen’s registry, which maintained records on the hunted animals brought to the factory, and which went out as mounted animal trophies, will be useful for an analysis of wildlife wealth. 

 	HEIR GIVES OKAY
 	Van Ingen died in March last year at the ripe age of 101 leaving behind priceless works, prime property, and a coffee estate, along with a dispute over the property. Michael Eshwar, who claimed to be Ingen’s adopted son and heir to the properties, fought a legal battle and prevailed after the High Court ruled in his favour in June 2014. Michael has taken  	possession of the properties and started renovating the sprawling house in Nazarbad. The house contains mounted  	trophies and the voluminous records that Ingen had  	maintained. 

 	“The RMNH first approached me after I won the case. I was positive, but asked them to give me some time as I was in the process of moving into the property. Now things have been sorted out. A whole pile of documents are locked up in the room and I have not been able to look into it. The museum (government) can take whatever it wants for research. I am ready to give it away and offload the papers,” Michael told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	The process was set in motion last year by John Thomas, taxidermist at RMNH, who was recently deputed as research officer at the Union Environment Ministry. Soon after Ingen’s death, the museum evinced interest in accessing the registry, whose documents contain a wealth of information on the density of fauna some 100 years ago. “Since the police and Michael were locked in a property dispute, there was a delay. After the case was resolved, I spoke to Michael who was busy with taking possession of the properties and asked me to give some more time. Once we access the registry, we can analyse the records to establish a database on the dense wildlife dating back more than a century ago,” explained Thomas. 

 	To illustrate the database creation project and show how meaningful it can be, Thomas narrated the instance when Ingen’s factory got one huge parcel of 22 tigers hunted down by a maharaja of Madhya Pradesh. This happened some 125 years ago when the factory was looked after by Van Ingen’s father Eugene Van Ingen. This is considered an authentic indicator of the tiger density at  	that period. 

 	MUSEUM HAD PLAN B
 	If Michael hadn’t given the green light, the museum had a Plan B in place to create the database. An English researcher, Pat A Morris, the author of Van Ingen & Van Ingen, Artists in Taxidermy, is in possession of records which he had obtained during his research. Thomas had spoken to Morris in this regard, and the latter had agreed to share the facsimile and digital format records of Ingen’s works. 

 	The family-run taxidermy business in Mysuru, Van Ingen & Van Ingen, manufactured stuffed animals and wall-mounted trophies using wild animals that were shot and sent to the studio. The factory dealt with tigers, elephants, lions, leopards, deer, bison, dogs, and pigs. After the ban on hunting in 1972, Ingen’s work slowed down. Set up in the 1890s, the factory ran for 90 years until it finally shut shop in 1999.