Hyderabad: In a shocking incident, over 50 monkeys were poisoned to death in Mahabubabad district of Telangana. Their bodies were found in a highly decomposed state, when villagers smelt the unbearable stink from a hillock. Many of the deceased monkeys were babies.

The incident took place at Sanigapuram village. Officials believe that the simians were killed at least five to six days ago, as they were in a highly decomposed state.

Forest officials and police inspected the spot after receiving an alert from the villagers.

District forest officer P Krishnamacharyulu told Mirror, "We were shocked to receive the information. We never came across such ghastly atrocities on monkeys." He said postmortem could not be conducted as the bodies were fully decomposed. "Just skin and bones were found in the gunny bags," the official said.

Initial understanding of the officials is that the monkeys could have been poisoned to death for destroying crops. "They might have been electrocuted too," Krishnamacharyulu expressed. Officials suspect that the killers might have become nervous after so many died and hence, dumped them on the hillock to conceal evidence.

According to Upendramma and Naresh, both residents of Sanigapuram, some people complained of a bad smell from the hillock which is close to the village. The villagers went to the location and searched. The smell came from gunny bags. They opened a bag, only to find dead monkeys.

Upendramma broke down while saying, "We are sentimental about monkeys. We worship them. A person who can kill a monkey can kill a human too. We request the officials to nab the killers and give them the highest degree of punishment." 

The Mahabubabad police have registered a case under Indian Penal Code section 429 (killing animal by poisoning or maiming) and section 11L of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act. 

Monkey tortured in Khammam earlier

In June this year, a farmer and his aides tortured a monkey to death in Ammapalem village of Telangana. The Sattupalli forest officials arrested three persons. The accused resorted to the brutality to scare other monkeys from entering their fields.

Monkeys, like other wildlife, are protected by the Wildlife Protection Act (1972), Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act (1960) and various sections of the Indian Penal Code.