Wildlife for many might mean hopping into those heavily grilled buses or jeeps for an animal safari or a rare glimpse of a tiger or a lion on a forest trip. But when wildlife gets into one’s senses, it craves for more — and the satisfaction one gets capturing that rare moment of a wild animal in its natural habitat, is simply exhilarating.

There have been many such moments for Diinesh Kumble, brother of former India captain Anil Kumble and an ardent wildlife photographer and a nature conservation enthusiast. And he has frozen them for posterity and compiled 250 breath-taking photographs of the African wildlife into a coffee table book Dream Safari. “This actually has been a dream safari for Diinesh,” said Anil Kumble, who released the first copy of the pictorial representation of Africa’s cradle of life. The inspirational leg spinner not only knows how difficult it is to rise through the cricketing ranks but is also well versed in the subtle art of photography. An amateur photographer himself, he says it is indeed a tough art to master. “Being in the wild on numerous occasions, I know how difficult it is to get that perfect shot and I congratulate Diinesh for coming out with this wonderful book. Probably Diinesh is the only Indian to have come out with a coffee table book on Africa.” 

For Diinesh Kumble though, photography has always been a part of him since childhood. “It’s been a fascinating journey, from the time when we could not afford cameras to releasing a book on wildlife photography. Taking pictures has been so much a part of my life that I used to ask Anil to carry a camera whenever he toured. When he was selected for the all India U-19 camp for the first time to Srinagar the first thing I told him was to take a camera.”   

As much as it takes a lot of passion and patience, wildlife photography comes with a lot of special memories. “Spending three hours with a leopard in Kabini is one that comes to my mind in a flash,” says Diinesh. There have been others too – like watching a lion courtship, something that he will cherish all through his life. Wildlife photography is not only about capturing animals in the wild but an important step in conserving nature, he believes. “These books not only spread awareness but also by using recycled paper to portray our work we are doing our bit for nature,” Diinesh added.

For the enthusiastic lensman, this is just the beginning as this launch should help him go a long way in contributing to Indian wildlife and environment. For a person who grew in Bangalore, feeding pigeons that would throng his terrace, wildlife is like a powerful magnet. And what draws him towards the wild? The answer is simple - “Its pristine nature is what draws me there and I always believed that humans are a part of nature and they play a huge part in the development and conservation of nature.”

Diinesh is also doing his bit for wildlife photography. “We have launched a website to promote wildlife photography, www.wildlifebeat.com,” he said.