500 acres of land in Western Ghats must not be diverted for ill-conceived Yettinahole project, say experts

The state government announced the diversion of 500 acres of forest land for the Yettinahole drinking water project on Thursday, drawing flak from ecologists, wildlife conservationists, and citizens who see the move as a green light for further destruction of Western Ghats.

The announcement was made by Deputy Chief Minister DK Shivakumar on Thursday, after meeting Karnataka Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre and Revenue Minister Krishna Byre Gowda. The Deputy CM also announced that the Revenue Department will hand over an equal area to Forest Department.

Experts say the state is rapidly losing lush forest cover to poorly conceived infrastructure projects, impacting the ecology and biodiversity of the area. “Yettinahole is an unscientific project with flawed water availability assessment. There are hydrological errors, which will not ensure water availability for even six months of a year.
 
Apart from its adverse impact on the Western Ghats and Netravathi River, the project’s cost has risen exorbitantly due to unscientific conception. Diverting forest land for such an ill-conceived project is outrageous,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

According to data from the Forest Department, Karnataka has diverted 32,062.49 hectares of forest land under the Forest Conservation Act of 1980 till December 2023 for 791 non-forestry projects. Of these, the majority (144 projects leading to diversion of 10,220.83 hectares) are mining and allied category, followed by 120 transmission lines projects (1391.99 hectares) and 94 linear infrastructure (road and railways) projects leading to diversion of 1,047.29 hectares of forest area.

Green imbalance
According to the National Forest Policy of India, the ideal percentage of the total geographical area under forest should be at least 33% to maintain ecological stability. However, Karnataka has just 21.21% of the total geographical area under forest cover.

Environmentalists say the government should look at more sustainable solutions to water scarcity.
 
“While we are already struggling with grave climate change issues, diverting forest land for non-forestry purposes sounds criminal. The government should rather focus on conserving existing green landscapes such as the Western Ghats and focus on sustainable ways to ensure water availability such as rainwater harvesting,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board of Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

Yettinahole is an unscientific project with flawed water availability assessment. It will not ensure water availability for even six months of a year–Ramesh Belagere, researcher

Some citizens BM spoke to said the money spent on the project should have been used for the conservation of existing water resources to improve groundwater levels.They say diversion of 500 acres of forest for the water needs of a few towns and Bengaluru for Rs 24,000 crore is short-sighted policy. “By the time the project is completed, there will be cost overruns. Also, there is no guarantee that it would help the people in these regions over a long time. The project will lead to irreparable ecological damage. The amount would have been well spent if used for rejuvenation of lakes and ponds through desilting and community awareness,” said P Vidyasagar, a citizen.