Forest department plans to make it compulsory for handlers to undergo certification programme to make snake rescues organised, safer

Snake handlers in Bengaluru and across Karnataka may soon have to undergo mandatory training in scientific handling of snakes before they embark on a rescue mission. The Karnataka Forest department has come up with a draft operational manual for the effective mitigation of human-snake conflict by institutionalising the process and making it compulsory for the handlers to seek a certificate from the department.

As per the manual, anyone interested in snake rescue will have to undergo a periodic certification programme at institutes notified by the department.

“The certification programme will be launched soon. It is an endeavour of the department to make the snake-rescue process safer and organised. We want to have a system in place where all the volunteers and rescuers are trained in the process. Those who claim to have the expertise will be tested and certified. Even the BBMP-certified rescuers will have to get the certificate,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Moreover, any individual or organisation found to be rescuing snakes without completing the certification and assessment will be deemed to violate sections 9 and 12 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and suitable action will be taken against them.

According to the department, the idea is to provide standard operating procedures to guide a rescuer in managing a conflict situation and also to build a system of accountability to regulate snake rescue across the state.

“As per the law, the department has to be contacted in case of any human-snake conflict situation and rescue. Many times, we have witnessed underage volunteers conducting the rescue process. This can be dangerous to both the animal as well as the rescuers. Moreover, since the process is unregulated, we have not been able to document the snakes that are being captured and released across the state,” added Pushkar.

The periodic certification programmes will be conducted in forest training institutes or academies as notified by the department soon. The handlers will have to undergo the certification and assessment programme every two years. The programme will span a duration of four to five days and cover topics such as crowd management, understanding snake conflict, humane snake handling practices, snakebite management and understanding snake biology and ecology, to mention a few.

 We want to have a system to train all volunteers and rescuers in the process– Kumar Pushkar, APCCF, KFD
Upon successful completion of the programme, the department will issue time-bound and division-bound permission to the rescuer.

Rescuers that are found not following any of the practices outlined in the document will be subjected to stringent action under relevant sections of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and their certificate will be revoked. Once this happens, they will not be eligible to undergo the certification for one year.

“Release points of the snakes are also of utmost importance. These animals should be released at the closest point to the rescue spot. If they are let out far away from the place, they die due to lack of food and other threats. The certification programme will ensure that the rescuers are updated on such aspects,” said the official.

All certified rescuers will also be required to submit a monthly report of their rescues to the jurisdictional deputy conservator of forests.