Ministry of Environment moves to reduce ESZ by a whopping 100sq km, despite State govt assurance

Mining mafia and real-estate lobby appears to have gained upper hand with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change succumbing to the pressure and reducing the eco-sensitive zone of Bannerghatta National Park by a massive 100 square kilometres. The move is likely to affect the wildlife especially the elephant corridor. 

“The eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) shall be to an extent of 100 meters to 1.0 kilometer around the boundary of the Bannerghatta National Park and the area of the eco-sensitive zone is 168.84 square kilometres,” the gazette notification, dated March 11, stated. The original eco-sensitive zone of the park was 268.96 sq.kms.

The Ministry’s move has surprised environmental activists as they had initially directed the state government to maintain 268 .96 sq.kms as the ESZ. Chief Minister B.S Yediyurappa had, however, recently wrote to the Centre, asking to reduce the ESZ, despite a large number of objections and protests. 

“The eco-sensitive zone of the park has been reduced without a proper research backing. The arbitrary exercise of the government only favours quarry and real estate mafic. It will destroy the elephant corridor. The notification centres around human needs without considering the wildlife/. It will destroy Bengaluru’s last lung spaces,” Bhanu Prakash, coordinator at Bannerghatta National Conservation Trust. 

Environmental activist Vijay Nishanth said the move will have a catastrophic effect on the next generation. “The government is not mindful of such decisions. Over one lakh people had signed against reducing the ESZ. The government has bowed down to the lobbyists.”

Meanwhile, the newly declared ESZ of the park will get a separate Zonal Master Plan and Tourism Master Plan. Both the plans have to be ready within a period of two years in consultation with local people and different departments including Environment and Urban Development. 

While the Zonal Master Plan will focus on restoration of denuded areas, conservation of existing water bodies, needs of the local community and other aspects of the ecology etc., the Tourism Master Plan will be based on the study of carrying capacity of the Eco-sensitive Zone. All approvals will be given by the monitoring committee headed by the regional commissioner of Bengaluru. The committee comprises nine members from different departments.

.