The Bannerghatta Biological Park is spread across 637 hectares adjoining the Bannerghatta National Park. Apart from the 
Big Cat safari, there is also a safari showcasing other animals like deer and gaur. The tourism department wanted a portion of the biological park and had readied a blueprint for the night safari. Worldwide, night safaris are to be found only in China, Malaysia and Thailand.

The night safari was to come into effect in three phases. The first involved a separate compound wall for the convenience of safari visitors, while the second and third would have involved lighting, piped music in safari vehicles, and new roads. The first phase was to be inaugurated by the chief minister three months ago. But a PIL by advocate BR Deepak in the High Court stalled it. A division bench of Justices Manjula Chellur and BS Patil is hearing the case and a decision is expected soon. Meanwhile, the recent deaths of big cats in the park has put a question mark over the project.

Whichever way the verdict goes, animal rights activists are dead against the idea of a night safari. “There is a day safari that functions between 10 am and 5 pm. If the night safari is conducted between 6 pm and 10 pm, what relief will the animals have? Why is wildlife being treated worse than stray dogs? These animals are on the brink of extinction; why are we playing with their lives?” said KR Sudarshan Babu of the Hoysala Wildlife Protection Society.

Kunigal MLA BB Ramaswamy Gowda said, “When you have failed to provide hygienic food to these animals, what is the point in wasting Rs 180 crore on a night safari?”

Park officials not for it
“We should find the answers for some questions before initiating the night safari. Do we really need it? What will be the effect on the animals? If the number of visitors increases, will there be more chances of infection? Only if the answers are satisfactory should we go ahead,” said Dr BC Chittiyappa, the Bannerghatta Biological Park’s vet. “Even though the first phase of the night safari is on, in the present situation it is not good for the animals,” said Millo Tago, the executive director of the park.