It was just another day for wildlife rescuer Rajesh Kumar, an expert at rescuing snakes, other reptiles and animals and releasing them in their natural habitat. But on Monday he got a call from a staffer of MS Ramaiah Medical College stating they had spotted a white snake. Kumar immediately rushed to the spot and spotted an albino snake which is said to extremely rare.
 
A staffer at the college spotted the snake in the ground floor. They kept a watch at the snake from a distance. When Kumar reached the spot, he saw a 1.5-feet adult albino snake. Albino snakes are said to have albinism where the body does not produce melanin that results in white scales. Their life span is said in between 15-20 years. The colour of the eyeballs of albino snakes are generally red. Interestingly, many people do not even know they exist.
 
Kumar said, “These snakes are venomous. However, they tend to be calm and slither around. They do not harm anyone until they feel threatened. The albino hatchlings are hatched mostly after in breeding among themselves. As these are rare to be found, there are no other mates of the same species. Most of the time they in breed. This apart, the survival rate of albino snakes is very difficult as the colours are easy to identify and they usually don’t survive for long in the wild and aren’t able to pass on their genes.”
 
After rescuing the snake, Kumar informed the BBMP forest cell. The snake was examined and as it looked healthy without any injuries, it was left back in its natural habitat.
 
Currently in Bengaluru, four snake species are commonly found -- the cobra, saw-scaled viper, Russell’s viper and common krait snake.
 
In 2018, Kumar had rescued an albino snake hatchling at Mathikere and released it in the wild. That was the first time an albino snake was found in the city. This was the second time however an adult snake was spotted which is said to look huge and even better to look at.
 
Kumar pointed out that as the winter season is fading away, the season of mating starts. “This is the time when the snakes will be getting out to find its mate. After which, there will be a gestation period of 45 days and then the eggs are hatchlings will emerge during the monsoon period.”
 
The snakes are protected under Indian Wildlife Act 1972. It all about coexisting with them and letting them survive,” he said.