A number of city individuals and initiatives are working to make science engaging and informative for the non-scientific community. And much of it is done through engaging workshops and fun activities
 
 In India, we live in strange times.
 
 We fast during Lunar Eclipses, and shower after. We have Union Ministers dismissing Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution as “scientifically wrong”. And we are told by MPs that cow urine can cure cancer. Meanwhile, Elon Musk sends cars into space, just because he can. If there were ever a time when the country needed to cultivate a scientific temper and rational thought, it is now.
 
 Which is why we scoured the city for institutions and individuals who are doing just that, taking the effort to make science palatable to the general public, many of whom have been scarred by complicated jargon, unhelpful textbooks and teachers, and wild, illogical claims by so-called educationists. It’s time to celebrate science, and everyone is invited. 
 
 The hot spots
 
 At Cafe Oikos, ecology and all things related are made not only easy but interesting enough to get the audience come back for repeats. Not an easy task for its founders Shishir Rao (31) and Anisha Jayadevan (29), both ex-techies but now trained ecologists. Although they have submitted papers in academic journals and written extensively on subjects such as tropical river ecology or herbs in the trans Himalayan region, they decided to start monthly events under Cafe Oikos where the public can engage and learn about the research in India (and elsewhere) in ecology and conservation biology. “I felt that publishing in academic journals does not make this subject palatable to the public,” Rao notes. Through personal interactions as well as word of mouth, the duo selects researchers and scientists who have done significant work in ecology. Being a good speaker, incorporating pictures and videos in their talks are prerequisites. “Importantly, we ask them to have a story line and use plenty of metaphors to make it clear for everyone,” Rao clarifies. So, when post-doctoral fellow Krishnapriya Tamma talked of her thesis on bio-geography of the Himalayan region, she explained the phenomenon of tectonic plate movement by comparing it to a boiling pot of tea. They have had research associate Dr Geeta Ramaswamy talk of Lantana plant relooking at it as an invasive species threatening to spread across Bandipur and Nagarahole.
 
 “The reactions to the talks are phenomenal,” Rao says, “and from three-year-olds to students and professionals, everyone gets involved in the subject.” They hold these events (about 30-40 people on attend on average) in bookstores who offer to host them. “Neither do we charge anyone nor do we pay the speakers,” Rao stresses. All do it for the love of the subject. “The aim of Cafe Oikos is to influence people to get interested and involved in ecology, wildlife and conservation,” Rao notes.
 
 On the top floor of an otherwise nondescript-looking building at JP Nagar, are 10-year-old future innovators, hard at work. This is Science Ashram Tinkering Lab, where kids aged 10-16 come to create, not consume. Rows of work benches are scattered with equipment – glue guns, magnets, soldering wires and whatnot – that are used by the 30-odd kids who come in here every other day to put their hands to use, and their problem-solving skills to the test. Co-founder Manu Bharadwaj, who brought the concept from Mysuru (was operational in the city since 2014) to Bengaluru last year 2017, speaks of how we all go from being kids with a “spirit of enquiry” who want to “take apart objects and tinker with them” to being slaves of rote learning who lose interest in “making”.
 
 
 At the Lab, then, children, based on age and ability, are asked to solve problems, which Bharadwaj calls “the essence of learning, or ‘common sense’”. “We give them scenarios. Say there is a piece of land, and a river flowing nearby. How will they irrigate it? Or they’re in a submarine below, and need to keep a lookout for spies above land. What will they do? We never use the words ‘hand pumps’ and ‘periscopes’. We encourage them to understand the problem, and come up with a solution,” he explains. Workshops are conducted, maps and diagrams are drawn, and using virtual currency and a software, children ‘design’ their solution. Then, using the Science Ashram’s inventory of tools and implements, they begin making it a reality. This is the gamified maker class programme, which has led to creations such as a smart helmet that won’t allow the biker to ride without wearing it first, or a device that can charge devices using our kinetic energy. There are activities and workshops too – from visits to industrial units such as an ice cream company, to retreats that include camping and agriculture.
 
 Not all talk
 
 Once a month, Goobe’s bookstore on Church Street sees a motley crowd of persons troop in, for a lecture on Science. From why animals change colours to the nature of proteins and even the meaning and role of astrobiology, scientific concepts are explained in palatable terms to anyone who’s willing to listen. The idea, says Ipsa Jain, coordinator of the initiative which is called Science high, is to take science out of the confines of labs and into people’s lives in a more engaging manner. Jain rues that people often understand science as what they see in the paper.
 
 “They know only a small fraction of what we do. Science sometimes comes across as a panacea for all of mankind’s problems. Most of the science in the public domain is health-related, about cancer cures and so on. But we wanted to invoke curiosity and wonder about basic science, nature and the universe,” she explains. She believes some of the blame also has to be shared by the scientific community itself, which has not made the effort to reach out and disseminate and engage. To that end, about 20 alumni from IISc are involved in the initiative, which aims not only to popularise science, but also offer an exercise for scientists to understand how to communicate with people other than their peers. Sessions have songs, presentations, sculptures, and in one case, even a Hydra under a microscope, for a look at how wounds heal and how animals regenerate.
 
 Sushama Yermal, a consultant (teacher education), is a trained biologist who gave a talk on astrobiology at one such Science High session. “It’s the science of thinking about life on a scale that is not limited to earth. It includes life on earth but also the possibility of life elsewhere. It’s fascinating to think that we are not here in isolation, or that we aren’t the only ‘intelligent’ life,” she explains. It’s important to talk to the general public about these things, she says, because science is a part of everyday life, and cultivating a scientific, rational temper is paramount. The audience of 25 people evidently agreed, because her hour-long session soon crossed over into two. 
 
 “Curiosity is the only requirement to be able to understand and enjoy science,” says Dr Vijaykumar Krishnamurthy, a faculty of International Centre for Theoretical Sciences (ICTS). It is with the intent to create curious minds and an interest in science that ICTS made Kaapi with Kuriosity their most important outreach programme. Held once a month on a Sunday at the Jawaharlal Nehru Planetarium, the talks are given by renowned scientists, mathematicians and physicists from all over the world. And even if it is the Nobel Prize Laureate for Physics (2017), Kip S Thorpe who gave a talk recently, the brief given is elementary (pun intended). It should be interactive, there should be no complicated jargon, icebreakers are preferable and the audience can ask questions even during the talk. The speakers are instructed to prepare the talks for those with high school knowledge of science and yet discuss cutting-edge science.
 
 The result is gratifying for the core committee comprising four members, including Krishnamurthy. Ever since they started streaming live on YouTube, the audience has increased exponentially, with the session with Thorpe registering a record 400 online viewers who stayed on till the end of the talk which was on black holes. Over 1,300 were in physical attendance. “The audience usually has young children, many of whom ask questions, as well as senior citizens,” says Anupam Ghosh, project coordinator, Outreach. “And unlike boring lectures, the speakers at Kaapi with Kuriosity pepper their talks with videos, pictures, graphs and interesting narration.” He talks of the 7,000-strong followers of their Facebook page as well as the “huge” subscription list and their young audience in the age group 18-24.
 
 Knowledge comes first
 
 “Science is not primarily about facts. Science is about a search of knowledge, and everything else is a spin-off of that,” says Amitabh Joshi. The professor of evolutionary biology at the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research is also, since last year, the editor of all the publications of the Indian Academy Of Science (IAS). “It’s not just about crops, dams, guns and bombs. In school we emphasise facts, not the process of analysis. In India, science needs to become part of popular culture, the way it happened in the US after Sputnik. And that’s because the scientific community has failed to communicate with the public.” With two publications – Dialogue and Confluence, Joshi and his colleagues at IAS are aiming to do just that. Confluence is an online platform that aims to bring together all stakeholders of science by contributing to ‘jargon-free discussions’ on how science and society impact each other. It asks people to write in, in informal ways, about subjects that interest them, without the burden of academic citations or scholarly influences. 
 
 Both initiatives were undertaken after the scientific community at IAS felt a “general feeling of discomfort with the state of science outreach”, Joshi says. This concerted effort is being made in other aspects of their work too, such as when the country’s three IAS released a joint statement rebutting the minister’s remarks on evolution, a move that Joshi says was “unprecedented”. The statement is also available in all major Indian languages, in a bid to encourage easy and wide dissemination.
 
 Next, they plan to have public meetings that take science out of campuses and labs. An upcoming meet in Pune, for instance, will be held in the open, and in Marathi. All in an effort to combat the false dichotomy of western ‘science’ versus ‘traditional knowledge’. “Every ancient civilisation had traditional knowledge. The important thing is to differentiate between speculation and a finding that has been subjected to empirical validation,” Joshi explains.