Perched in a corner of its fibreglass cage at the national park in Borivali, the leopard sits calmly, chin resting on forepaws. Look beyond the surface and the four-year-old cat could well be worried for its future. 
 
 Rescued over 18 days ago after it strayed into a village near Uran, it was carted to the national park which is equipped with experts to tend to captured leopards.
 
 What could be worrying the feline is that if it remains caged for another 12 days, it will never be released into the wild, as is mandated by guidelines formed recently for Human-Leopard Conflict Management.
 
 And national park officials are worried that the fully-grown, healthy leopard, which would have helped boost the cat population, were it in the wild, may be caged forever.
   TIME’S RUNNING OUT
 Bureaucracy is impeding its release. Officials of the Sanjay Gandhi National Park, Borivali are only its caretakers. It is officials of the Forest Department's Alibaug Division who are responsible for the animal’s release as the village from where it was rescued, falls under their jurisdiction.  Officials from Alibaug have written to the forest headquarters in Nagpur for permission to release the animal. And it can be released only after they receive a reply.
 
 “We have sought necessary permission from our headquarters. The process is on,” Deputy Conservator of Forests (Alibaug Division) Anwar Ahmed told Mumbai Mirror. ""Once we get the nod, it will be released in the wild at Karnala or Phansad sanctuary.""
 
 A senior official at the Borivali national park expressed concern over the passage of time. “Let'’s hope that another healthy leopard does not remain caged,” the official said. “Due to the falling population, we need to cut red tape and have a one-window clearance.”
 
 Another official said that the leopard should have ideally been released in a day or two after its rescue. “At least four such leopards rescued this year were quickly released,” the official said. “If kept caged for long, they get used to a regime which they may not find when released in the wild.”
 
 Meanwhile, the leopard continues to languish in its cage, awaiting the Forest Department’s nod.
 
 Now, for some cat talk
 
 A few guidelines for Human-Leopard Conflict Management laid down by the Ministry of Environment and Forests  »If the animal has been held captive for over a month, it should not be released into the wild.
 
 » Ideally, such leopards should be kept in covered cages. Only healthy ones should be released into the wild.
 
 » Captured leopards must not be put on display. Such forced contact with humans may alter their behaviour adversely after release.
 
 
 Expertview
 
 The animal must be immediately released if it is healthy. Earlier releases were quick, so why should this case take so long?
 Dr Anish Andheria project director, Wildlife Conservation Trust
 
 The leopard should have been radio-collared and released. It would have helped study its movement pattern. The study has become vital with the animals often straying into human habitats
 Krishna Tiwari project officer, Bombay Natural History Society