Catch a film screening 

If you enjoy watching world cinema, do not miss the screening of Swiss comedy-drama The Divine Order today. The film centres on Nora Ruckstuhl, a housewife and a mother in a small village. She publicly advocates for women’s suffrage in Switzerland to be voted on in a 1971 referendum.

 WHERE: Bangalore International Centre, TERI Complex, Domlur II Stage WHEN: 6pm, October 6
 CALL: 9886599675


Sounds of a choir

The Bangalore Broadway Company is a contemporary choir and a music theatre band performing music from across the globe. This 25-piece band will perform a repertoire of music live, from African folk to big band arrangements and music theatre, in the city tonight. It promises to be a grand gig, so you should be there. 

 WHERE: Shoonya, Centre for Art and Somatic Practices, 4th Floor, Brahmananda Court, 37 Lal Bagh Road
 WHEN: 7pm, October 6
 TICKETS: Rs500 onwards, bookmyshow.com


City connect

UK-based violinist Jyotsna Srikanth and her Indian contemporary music act Bangalore Dreams will take the centrestage tonight. Here, the Indian violin will be at the forefront with the backing of drums/ethnic percussion and keyboards. She will be supported by Varun Pradeep on keyboards, Karthik Mani on drums and Bruthva on bass.

 WHERE: Chowdiah Memorial Hall, Malleswaram
 WHEN: 7.30pm-8.30pm, October 6 
 ENTRY Free


Attend a book launch 

Author Nilanjan P Choudhury will launch his latest novel Shillong Times: A Story of Friendship & Fear. It is coming of age tale set against the insider-outsider conflict in Shillong in the 1980s. Here, 14-year-old Debojit Dutta meets an older Clint Eastwood Lyngdoh, in his maths tuition classes. Clint introduces him to a brave new world – the heady charms of Kalsang, the Chinese restaurant forbidden by Dutta’s mother; the revolutionary sounds of Pink Floyd; and Audrey Pariat – the coolest girl in town. Together, the three of them embark upon many adventures. 

 WHERE: Atta Galatta, KHB Colony, 5th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 6.30pm-8.30pm, October 6 CALL: 41600677

 Celebrate B’luru’s Bird Day 

Bangalore Bird Day is back for the fifth time to celebrate its winged friends. This year’s event recognises the contribution of women towards wildlife and nature studies in India. All lectures and the memorial talk will be by eminent women working on various facets of systematic studies, ecology and conservation. They include Ovee Thorat, Jainy Kuriakose, Nirupa Rao, Garima Bhatia, Abhisheka Gopal, Usha Rajagopalan, and Aparajita Datta.

 WHERE: Xavier Hall, St Josephs College, Langford Road
 WHEN: 8.45am-7.30pm, October 6 DETAILS: birdday.in


 Celebrate with DJ Dubfire

One half of the Grammy award-winning duo, Deep Dish, Ali Shirazinia, developed his skills playing at local clubs in Washington DC. After their Grammy win in 2002 for the remix of Dido’s Thank You, Ali began his solo career with the stage name Dubfire. Forming his separate identity from Deep Dish, Ali’s music features more of techno rather than progressive house. Winner of multiple awards, DJ Dubfire’s concerts are aesthetic blends of technological advances to enhance audience experience. 
The executive director of The LaLiT Suri Hospitality Group, Mr Keshav Suri, was elated to share the news with patrons of Kitty Su/KittyKo. “I am a happy and proud man today. I feel our country has taken a huge step towards a just and all-inclusive society. This landmark judgement deserves a huge round of applause and celebration. We at Kitty Su /KittyKo couldn’t have asked for a bigger performer than DJ Dubfire to set the ball rolling. We want to invite everyone to join us in celebrating a new India,” he says. 

 WHERE: Kitty Su/KittyKo, The Lalit, Kumarakrupa Road
 WHEN: October 7
 ENTRY: `1,400 (per person) CALL: 9980158286, 9606477220, or visit www.kittysu.com