Animal lovers ask where primates have been packed off to from apartment complex

Four monkeys have gone mysteriously missing from the Shriram Samruddhi Apartments, a gated community on Varthur Main Road, Thubarahalli near Whitefield since March 20. Soon after the monkeys went missing, a few animal lovers in the apartment complex, who used to care for them, got together and tried to find out what happened to the primates, but their efforts have so far been in vain.
 
Worried about the monkeys’ condition, an animal lover resident has shot off grievance emails to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) and the Chief Wildlife Warden about the illegal monkey catchers and the relocation activity by the residents association even after the issue was in news on March 12, this year.

Bangalore Mirror had reported that the association had announced that the Forest Department had given them approval to relocate the monkeys from the residential complex, but a few residents took objection and approached animal activists suspecting perfidious intent.

In a letter addressed to the PCCF and the Chief Wildlife Warden, a resident Anand Vedula stated that the four monkeys were peacefully living in the society over the past two years.
 
“They just lived there for food and shelter and never harmed any resident. Animal lovers in our society used to feed them and take care of them,” Vedula wrote in his email. However, a few residents were scared by their presence and complained to the management committee who it is alleged decided to involve illegal monkey catchers and get rid of the monkeys in an unscientific manner. The committee even brought illegal animal catchers and threw away cats earlier, Vedula alleged in the letter.

On March 9, the association president is said to have made a false claim that he had secured the forest department’s approval to relocate the monkeys at their own cost and asked residents’ help to take photos and share it with facilities managers which will be used by the monkey catchers to conduct this activity.

“The animal loving residents believe that the association had made a false claim on the approvals as there are ongoing legal proceedings in the High Court on this matter and hence the forest department may not have given any such approval,” said animal activist Arun Prasad.


 The mirror has two facesFacility manager Umar told BM the monkeys usually sneak into homes through kitchen doors and steal food. They also hide in the narrow duct and utility cable passageways and frequent the terrace and meddle with water connections. He said, whenever plumbers go to the terrace, they jump on them to scare them away.

When animal activists and AWBI officials made a hue and cry about the issue, the residents welfare association temporarily suspended their activities. “However, on March 20, they brought an animal catching van and cage into our premises and clandestinely started the activity again. We took pictures, escalated and got the activity suspended again,” stated Vedula.

There was a General Body Meeting on April 24 at the apartment and the association officer bearers played a CCTV footage of a suspect who took photos of the cage and animal catcher van and sent it to the Animal Welfare Board, and they also mentioned that the monkey issue has been resolved. Vedula, on the behalf of all animal loving residents, has requested the PCCF and Chief Wildlife Warden to probe into the incident of the four missing monkeys since March 20, and also ensure the safety of the four primates, he added.