By: Deepthi Sanjiv in Mangaluru
 
 All charged up to document rare birds of the region
 
 The sighting of rare species of birds in coastal Karnataka has increased this season due to more youngsters takiing up bird photography and study.An increase in the number bird watchers was seen in the last few years from a mere one or two to a bunch of over 20 dedicated watchers, though the Facebook page `Coastal Karnataka Bird Watchers Network' has over 1,000 followers. Shivashankar M, an engineer who currently works for a local software company from his home office, and is specialised in nature and wildlife photography, has travelled extensively across the twin districts of Dakshina Kannada and Udupi for bird photography of the coastal Karnataka eco region.
 
 He has co-authored two books namely The Birds of Southern Coastal Karnataka and Birds of Nitte University Campus. He has contributed his photographs and images to many national and international books and journals, including Rainforest Safari (Carlton Books Ltd), Glimpses from India's Natural World (Broadway publishers), Indian Birds and many more. He maintains a websiteblog, which can be accessed at http:www.trogon.in. He is also associated with nature conservation and educational programmes and was instrumental in uniting bird watchers of the coastal belt. 

 	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Shivashankar (in pic) said it all began about five years ago when he and his friends started organising SA Hussain Memorial Day at Bhuvanendra College in Karkala.This became a platform for naturalists and nature lovers to attend the event. Following this, a Facebook forum was formed called the Coastal Karnataka Bird Watchers Network, that has more than 1,000 naturalists who keep posting sightings on regular basis.Some just post pictures, and details are then provided by experts. The network is now in the process of documenting all birds of coastal Karnataka. “From a mere two dedicated birdwatchers in the last two years, the number has increased to almost 20 fresh graduates and professionals keen on birding and bird photography,“ he said. 

 	The sightings are mostly from Karkala, Kudremukh, Someshwara, Agumbe, Manipal, Udupi, Kundpur, Chitrapu (Mulky), Manjalpade and Kenjar in Mangaluru. Several experts like Prabhakar K Achar, an honorary wildlife warden of Udupi district and Ramit Singal from Manipal who has to his credit A Birder's Handbook o Manipal, are encouraging amateurs. 

 	Arnold M Goveas, who took voluntary retirement as a technician in Bangaluru and currently based in Mangaluru, said, “Mangaluru has a good number of bird species. Though the number of bird watchers is increasing, the bird count is certainly dropping.Their habitat is dwindling.“ 

 	RARE SIGHTINGS IN COASTAL KARNATAKA
 	AMUR FALCON
 	Ashik, an employee of the New Mangalore port, sighted a migratory bird called the Amur falcon recently whose breeding place is Mongolia, at Kulai here. Shivashankar said it was the first sighting of the Amur falcon in this coastal belt during the current migratory season. These birds are found in Nagaland also during their migration. 

 	LESSER FRIGATE BIRD
 	This is the first photo documented for India from Malpe in Udupi on Aug 6. 

 	The lesser frigate bird that was spot ted by Vijaylakshmi Rao is said to be the most common and wide spread frigatebird in the Aus tralian seas. It is com mon in tropical seas, breeding on remote islands, including Christmas Island in the Indian Ocean in recent years. 

 	ARTIC SKUA
 	Arctic Skua was captured on camera about 30km into the sea from Mangalore coast on October 26 by Shivshankar. Arctic skuas, also called parasitic jaegers, have a wellearned reputation as avian pirates, stealing much of their food from other birds. Arctic skuas live most of their lives at sea, and come ashore only to breed in the Arctic summer. 

 	SOOTY GULL
 	Sooty gull was recorded by Swetadri Doraiswamy at Kundapur in October.The sooty gull is native to the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf and its range extends as far east as Pakistan. It is also native to the east coast of Africa as far south as Tanzania and Mozambique. It occurs as a vagrant in India, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel and Bahrain. 

 	ORIENTAL DWARF KINGFISHERS
 	Oriental dwarf kingfishers are very small beautiful kingfishers. They are not sighted during winter and summer from others parts of India, but they are regularly seen and reported from the coastal region. Shivashankar spotted the same at Someshwara, Seetanadi Nature camp and Udupi.