Those staying within 10 km of national parks will not be issued gun licenses to avoid misuse of firearms
 
 	Illegal weapons and ammunitions have begun making sound in national parks and tiger sanctuaries of the state. Arrest of couple of villagers and recovery of weapons and ammunition a few days ago in Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) has turned out to be a tip of the iceberg as gun trade is promoted by smugglers and poachers in these forest areas. However, alarmed by the growing trend, forest department officials have written to the deputy commissioner not to grant any fresh licenses without approval from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).
 	  	The widespread camera traps deployed in various corners of forest areas by the KFD to monitor movement of wild animals has resulted in exposing some of the illegal practises adopted by the local villages under the influence of poachers and smugglers. Two days ago, the camera traps deployed in DATR revealed incidents of local villagers carrying weapons and ammunitions while moving inside forest areas during the night. Based on pictorial evidences, DATR officials arrested villagers and were shocked to learn that their weapons had licenses neither from the police department nor do from KFD.
 	  	Giving details of the incident, K Srinivasulu, Conservator of Forests and Director of DATR said, “The Wildlife Act of 1972 makes it clear that, within the radius of 10 km of any sanctuary, owners of weapons under Arms Act shall obtain prior permission by the Chief Wildlife Warden or authorised officer by paying required fee for the registration of his name. Further, no new licenses under the Arms Act shall be granted within 10 km of sanctuary without the prior concurrence of the Chief Wildlife Warden.”
 	  	Sources in DATR revealed that arrested villagers had no licenses even under Arms Act. “That itself reveals the spread of weaponry and ammunition in forest areas of the state. Since we do not have permission to initiate action under Arms Act, we requested the police to take up the case through the court. A case has been registered under Arms Act and the accused have been sent to judicial custody. It is high time that the police crackdown on such cases,” explained another official from the forest department. 
 	  	The DATR officials have now written to the Deputy Commissioner of Uttara Kannada to bring the matter to the notice of the forest department. The letter, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, said, “Possession of unlawful arms is a serious offence under Arms Act 1959 in general and such incidence in and around protected area poses grave danger to wildlife, people and violates the provisions of the Wildlife Protect-ion Act. Hence, due precaution and procedure should be followed while granting any new license or renewal of licenses in these areas under the Arms Act to safeguard wildlife, people and prevent untoward incidents.”