By  Ranadeep Chakraborty
 
 A city-based animal welfare organisation – People for Animals – took the initiative for treating the sunbird, which was merely a nestling separated from its mother
 
 A bird was rescued from Rajarajeshwarinagar and rehabilitated till it could fly on its own and acclimatize with its natural birdie environment.
 
 A city-based a private animal welfare organisation, People for Animals, took the initiative for treating the sunbird, which was merely a nestling separated from its mother.
 
 A PfA informant brought the Crimson-backed Sunbird nestling from Rajarajeshwarinagar, in south-west Bengaluru, which was removed from its natural habitat. It fell off a tree and was lying on the ground till PfA rescued it. Since it was a nestling, it did not know how to fly, lying at the place till afternoon. “When the bird was brought to our hospital, it was weak and had probably was under the sun for few hours, which had led to its weakness,” said Dr Karthik M, the veterinarian.
 
 A team of doctors then examined the bird and prepared a diet chart appropriate for a nestling. “A nestling generally needs to be fed every hour, but since it was lying on the ground from morning to afternoon, the gap was quite a lot. So we had to keep the bird separately and feed it with oral rehydration solution and also give artificial warmth to keep it alive,” he said.
 
 When the nestling was rescued it had lice all over its body. But once it was recovered it was treated for the parasites. The condition of the bird required hand-feeding, and a solution that was a substitute to nectar was given to her manually.
 “A solution containing vitamin supplement was put into its mouth with a syringe to revive it from the condition which we found it in,” the vet said.
 
 Then it was important for the bird to know its source of food; so the vets attached a syringe with a flower. The syringe that contained nectar triggered its instincts to drink nectar by artificially sourcing the solution through a syringe attached to a flower.
 
 Just as the bird was recovering slowly but steadily, it had to be exposed to the conditions in which it would later survive. So, it was put into another larger enclosure which had plenty of vegetation for the bird to learn how to find food for itself.
 
 “Since, the bird was unknown to the concept of finding its own food, it was kept in an enclosure where the bird was exposed to plenty of flowers so it could learn the art of gathering food for itself,” said Karthik.
 
 It took a month for the bird to recover and get accustomed to its natural environment and was finally released in the month of March once the rehabilitation process was over. “The bird slowly started socialising with other birds and once the process was over it was freed. But it keeps visiting us often.” According to PfA general manager Kiran S Rudra, they rescue and release urban wildlife like squirrels, monkeys etc.