As many as nine resorts, home stays and hotels are operating illegally around the Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) tiger reserve located in the Chamarajanagar district, says a report by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). According to the report, these establishments have been functioning in the eco-sensitive zone of the BRT tiger reserve.

The illegal operations around the reserve were flagged by Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist in the area, by raising a complaint to NTCA. An NTCA team led by Harini Venugopal, assistant inspector general of forests, conducted a detailed inquiry in the reserve and prepared the said report.

The officials from NTCA have now directed the Karnataka Forest Department to take action against these illegal establishments.

“The home stays/resorts which are operational in commercial ways without getting prior approval from the competent authorities are a clear-cut violation,” said the report.

The report further recommended that the field director, BRT tiger reserve in the capacity of member secretary of the monitoring committee for BRT sanctuary eco-sensitive zone shall convene the meeting and review the matter case-wise about violations.

“Accordingly, legal action shall be taken up case-wise by the authorities from the department of revenue, forest, environment, tourism, urban development and state pollution control board of Karnataka as per law,” it added. According to Kulkarni, as human-wildlife conflict mitigation has become a big challenge for the state government, they should take the recommendations of NTCA seriously and take immediate action against the violations.

“There should be immediate action taken to safeguard the BRT tiger reserve which is also an important elephant habitat,” he said.

“Action against such illegal tourism facilities would reduce the tourism pressure on the tiger reserve to a greater extent as it is a well-known fact that due to the presence of tourism facilities at BR Hills, the tourism inflow has increased in the recent past,” he added.

NTCA has also observed that the area where these constructions have come up is an important elephant habitat and is part of Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. So, the monitoring committee must review the matter keeping the protection of elephants in mind.