Everyone knows dogs and birds don’t get along and, given a chance, a dog would make a meal out of every bird it sets eyes on. But in the home of GB Nagbhushan, a dog and a pigeon live in complete harmony and are best friends.
   Tiger, a stray dog that was taken into the Nagbhushan home six years ago, is the scourge of cats and other animals in the neighbourhood. But with the pigeon, he’s as docile as a lamb and a pretty good helpmate too. The two are always together — the pigeon’s favourite perch is Tiger’s back — they eat the same food and sleep together. They’ve been together for a year now.
   Wildlife experts say there is no scientific explanation for this strange bonding, but perhaps, it has to do with the fact that both suffered grievous physical injuries in the past. Tiger was taken into the Nagbhushan home in RPC Layout, Vijaynagar in 2006 after a member of the family found him lying injured in the street. The stray had been hit by a two-wheeler. Of the species commonly called junglee, the pigeon, which had lost its right wing to injury, was rescued last year. 
   The Nagbhushans took the bird home, embracing the risk of keeping the bird and dog together, after a wildlife organisation refused to take care of it. To their amazement, the two animals got along splendidly and they are now an extension of the Nagbhushan family. They even are the wonder of residents in the area.
   “It’s interesting to watch them together,” Nagbhushan, a senior government official, said. “In the company of each other, both seem to curb their natural instinct. Instead of attacking the bird, Tiger helps the pigeon. The pigeon eats whatever Tiger eats. If Tiger leaves some rice, the pigeon eats it. Tiger guards the injured pigeon from cats and other animals. Other animals are scared of him, but the pigeon is his friend.” 
   Sharath Babu R, honorary wildlife warden (Bangalore Urban), said “We haven’t come across such a thing in the city in the past. The first thing a dog does on finding a bird is to bite off its head. But this relationship is rare. It must simply be put down as one of the several wonders of the pet world. There is no explanation for this unique bonding.”