Government orders do not apply to the government. In what seems to be a ‘give back old, take new’ exchange offer, Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) authorities have swapped two old elephants belonging to Suttur Mutt of Mysore with two calves, flouting a government order which bans donating, transferring or selling elephants to religious institutions or individuals.   The mutt had two domesticated elephants, Maasti and Lakshmi, for more than 20 years. On August 22, 2011, the two elephants went berserk. It took three hours to bring them under control.    The mutt then handed them over to the forest department. A request was subsequently made for calves to take their place. Recently, BBP obliged by sending the mutt two two-year-old calves, Drona and Champa. Wildlife activists are vexed over the decision and plan to take up the issue with the state government.   “We are deeply disturbed over the development,” said Suparna Ganguly, member of the Central Zoo Authority’s Elephants Inspection Committee and former member of the state government’s Elephant Task Force. “There is no provision to swap elephants in BBP. It goes against the state government’s own order in letter and spirit.”   It is the welfare of elephants which is at the heart of wildlife activists’ protest. Elephants are social animals and isolating two calves from the community would inevitably bring a change in their behaviour, activists say.   “There is no guarantee that these young ones would not also turn violent and ferocious,” Ganguly said. “Perhaps, in a few years, the cycle would repeat. This has to be checked.”   Forest officials claim there is no provision in the Wildlife (Protection) Act that prohibits swapping of animals. They appear to be hiding behind a technicality as the government order (GO NoAPJ223/FVVL/99) issued in June 2000 says nothing about exchange.   A report submitted to the Karnataka Elephant Task Force in September last year states that there are 48 elephants owned privately.    Of these, 31 belong to temples and religious institutions and were procured by their owners before legal restrictions came into force.    In a letter to the state government in 1999, the Central Zoo Authority (CZA) had observed that due care was not being taken by charitable trusts, endowments and temples in the upkeep of elephants.   “Animals are underfed and kept chained (tethered) which is violative of the Wild Life (Protection) Act/Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,” the CZA stated in a letter to the state government. It was on the basis of this letter that the government order was issued in 2000.   Channabasappa, the administrative officer of the Mutt, claimed they had not done anything illegal and due process was followed. “There is no question of violating any rule at all,” he said. “The two adult elephants we had turned over to the forest department had turned ferocious and there was a behavioural change. We take good care of elephants here and we have mahouts to train the young ones. We have applied for and received all the permissions required.”   Deepak Sarmah, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), said, “There is no ban in this regard and they had applied to BBP DFO (divisional forest officer). Accordingly, after due verification, it was permitted.”