From February 12-15, hundreds of birdwatchers from all over India will be looking for birds, recording what they see and sharing the information online. They will join over 100,000 other bird enthusiasts from all over the world in the annual Great Backyard Bird Count (GBBC).
 
 	
 	Last year, almost 1,000 birdwatchers in India compiled more than 7,000 lists totalling 735 species - the second highest of all participating countries. Indian birders also constituted six of the top 10 birders globally for number of checklists submitted, and four of the top 10 for number of species seen. House Crow, Common Myna, Asian Koel and Black Drongo were the commonest species reported in India.
 	
 	  	GBBC uses the power of citizen science to help answer questions about whether birds in India are doing well or declining, with a wealth of data captured for later analysis. It also provides a fun forum for those new to birding, young and old, to get out and enjoy the environment and learn how they can easily contribute to our collective understanding of birds and conservation planning for the future.
 	
 	  	In India, the GBBC is being coordinated by Bird Count India, an umbrella group of a large number of birding, nature and conservation organisations. Bird Count India is a consortium of organisations and groups working together to increase collective knowledge about bird distributions and populations. The partnership conducts periodic bird-related events and activities, offers support and resources to birding groups for conducting their own events, and by provides information on bird monitoring.
 	
 	  	“Events like these generate a wealth of information about the natural world and how it is changing; information at a scale that is unimaginable without the participation of citizens across the country. Such data has now become very valuable as we seek to understand and address issues relating to climate change at various scales”, said Dr V B Mathur, Director of the Wildlife Institute of India (a member of the Bird Count India partnership).
 	
 	  	A number of local events are being planned to accompany GBBC 2016. Around 150 campuses are taking part in the ‘Campus Bird Count’ - an effort to document birds that make their home in educational and institutional campuses. Many local bird walks have been arranged for the public to spread interest and awareness in our birds and other wildlife.