By Garima Prasher

According to a team of wildlife researchers, Bengaluru is fast turning into the black magic capital of Karnataka. Researchers conducting a study on slender lorises discovered that between 2002 and 2020, while 179 cases of rescue were reported across the state, 139 were from Bengaluru.

When they further analysed the 139 cases, they discovered that 116 of these slender lorises had been involved in black magic rituals, including piercing or burning the body and the eyes.
 
“We recorded 139 cases related to slender lorises in Bengaluru. An analysis of the injuries found on their bodies indicated that 58 of these cases were related to black magic; 58 were classified as trafficking that was most likely connected to black magic. And there were 21 cases of displaced lorises,” said Smitha D Gnanaolivu, wildlife researcher and co-author of the study.
 
According to the research team, consisting of researchers from the University of Mysore, Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, Bengaluru, and their colleagues from Oxford, Indonesia and Coimbatore, the number of cases related to black magic and classified as trafficking of slow lorises within Bengaluru increased steadily between 2002 and 2020.
 
Black magic rituals done to this primate are hair raising. Their eyes, limbs, kidneys, heart, anus, and heads are pierced; to bring about danger to the targeted person.
 
Their elbow or knee joints are broken; to heal the targeted person. Thin copper wires are used to tie the hind limbs; to obstruct the flow of blood in the targeted person.
 
Lorises are killed by hitting their heads on rocks; to kill the targeted person. They are buried alive and dug out after a few days to make magical potions of the rotting flesh, for beliefs unknown. The researchers interviewed 293 informants in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu to understand people’s beliefs regarding the use of slender lorises in traditional medicine, black magic rituals and other cultural practices.

“More often, female slender lorises were subjected to rituals and during the new moon. The informants revealed that while astrologers regularly used live lorises for fortune-telling or for warding off evil, body parts of the animal are used to make traditional folk medicine, develop ‘black magic potions that bring people harm’, and hypnotise people or thwart evil,” Gnanaolivu told BM.

Habitat loss and anthropogenic pressures, coupled with the existing slender loris trade for superstitious ritualistic practices, are some of the reasons behind the high number of poaching cases. As per wildlife researchers, lorises are solitary and territorial animals. While in an ideal scenario, one can find only one slender loris within a 100 sq m area, it is not the case in Bengaluru. “If you spot a slender loris in Bengaluru today, chances are you will find more in the same vicinity.
 
Although they are territorial and solitary in nature, their territories overlap because of the fragmentation and loss of habitat. When habitat loss increases, it pushes them closer to each other, leading to higher visibility and thus more poaching,” explained Gnanaolivu.

The study also detected a monthly variation in the new cases of black magic, with peaks in May, June and September. Experts said this can potentially be linked to certain lunar festivals that could lead to the use of lorises as effigies. These findings were contrary to online trade where sales of slender lorises increased significantly in the last four months of the year.

“Black magic rituals increase during May, June and September. This information warrants a further deep dive into the rituals and witchcraft literature. It can be because these are vacation months and people can spot the lorises and rescue them. During the winter months, people reduce their activities during early morning hours. These are all early morning rescues,” added Gnanaolivu.


  Rituals often use female slender lorises, and during new moon… Their eyes, limbs, kidneys, heart, anus, and heads are pierced; to bring danger to targeted person…— Research
Tip of iceberg?
According to the researchers, the actual number of slender lorises in trade could be much higher.

“Lorises are tiny animals and even small injuries inflicted can kill them. Dead lorises do not make it to the rescue centres’ logbook. The research is based on cases that could reach the centres as the animals were still alive. The majority of the lorises that are poached for such activities are burnt or buried alive and die after the ritual.

 This number is just representing around 5% of the total number of lorises that are being caught and used,” said Gnanaolivu.

While the elusive nocturnal animal has somehow survived in parks and green patches of Bengaluru, their numbers are fast declining. Keeping green patches intact and higher vigil can save these animals.

“While the increase in the number of cases can be attributed to many more organisations working in this field now leading to more rescues and detection, the numbers have to be brought down. It is high time awareness is spread regarding myths.

 The onus should not be just on the forest department. Agencies such as Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and police should pitch in. Slender loris is a Schedule I animal and it should be dealt with as per the law,” said Sharath babu, wildlife activist and study’s co-author.