By Kumaran P
 
 Forest officials have imposed a ban on tourists from entering the forests in Agumbe. Called the Cherrapunji of South India, Agumbe is a treat to the eyes, especially during monsoon, and a favourite with the state’s trekkers. The Agumbe forests are also well-known for the King Cobras that flourish in the area.
 
 Though there is no official notification banning tourists from the area, a local source told Bangalore Mirror, that the forest department is not allowing people to enter the forest.
 
 An official from the forest zone of Agumbe said, “There are two tourist spots in Agumbe. One is the Bharkana falls and the other Jogigundi falls. Many tourists have been visiting these spots. In 2015, a student from Manipal, died at the Jogigundi falls. From then, the Jogigundi falls were not open to the public, but in a few months Bharkana too became off-limits.”
 
 He said in 2012, the forest region was declared ‘Someshwara Abhayaranya’ as it was known for its medicinal plants, which must not be touched or destroyed by anyone.
 “There is no official notification stating tourists are banned in this region. It is a call from the forest officials and the DFO has declared it prohibited to the public. Until 2012, the region was under the regular forest department, but once it was declared a Abhayaranya, it came under the wildlife department,” he said.
 
 He said people can be restricted in various ways from entering wildlife zones.
 
 In 2005, the Agumbe Rainforest Research Station, a field-based conservation and research organisation, was set up inside the Agumbe Reserve Forest. This centre was founded by India’s leading herpetologist Romulus Whitaker, who was fascinated by the way people in the region reacted to King Cobras.
 
 The local authority said, “After the establishment of the research centre, many people even came here to study the forest and know about the habitat of the snakes. The Western Ghats is filled with King Cobras. The research centre protected the eggs of the snakes and the number of snakes in the forest increased.”
 
 He explained the region had two types of forest – evergreen and deciduous – which follow the cycle of shedding and spring. “Even in the normal forests, snakes are in abundance,” he said.
 
 Asked whether it was dangerous to go into the thick forests with the snakes everywhere, he said, “Not at all. Snakes here do not disturb you until you disturb them. This is not why the ban is in place. Forest officials are saying that as it is a thick forest, they are not willing to put people to monitor the movement of tourists. The forest officials fear that people might start forest fire or pollute the place and hence they have decided they should ban the public from entering the forest.”
 
 He said said another reason the department is giving is that an elephant has killed a person in the forest in 2014. “All these years, people have been coming and going and they were getting to know about the forest and its flora and fauna. So what is the use of stopping people from learning?” he asked.
 
 “They have put up a board at the start of the road that says, ‘Permission Restricted for Public’. When we do not allow people to know about their own country’s beauty, what is the point in having Forest Departments? The Forest Department is supposed to take steps to prevent unexpected situations, and not ban people completely. The department should actually be conducting awareness programmes and showing the people how the forest looks and what its importance is.”
 
 Prasenjit Choudhary, a techie from Bengaluru and trek organiser, said, “We went on a trek to the region last year. It was a great experience to cross boulders, small streams, understand the flora and fauna of the place. We are trying to go this year, but when I contacted a local person, who helped us last time, he told me it is banned now. We have mailed the department too, but have received no response from them. There is no official information as well.”
 
 
 
 
 
 The guide told Choudhary that officials have told them not to come there. “When we go in groups, we ensure people are sensible enough not to disturb the region and we are strict about not throwing garbage in the area. We are already sensitised about it. Why can’t the authorities have bins placed inside the forest, if that is major concern? They are not even allotting a trek guide from their side which is why we ask locals to go with us. It would be great, if the forest department sends their personnel with us,” Choudhary said.
 
 Agumbe Gram Panchayat authority, Nandan, said, “A few illegal activities were going on in the region. That’s why it was restricted for a few days, but I am sure it must be now be open to the public.”