On Friday, the Karnataka High Court took suo moto action on media reports about elephant deaths in the state and issued a notice to the state government asking it to come up with an explanation within a week.

Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa could have done without this court notice after he courted controversy by gifting an elephant to a temple in Kerala on November 4. The Wildlife Protection Amendment Act 2006 prohibits purchase/sale/ gift/transfer of wild animals and punishes any violation with imprisonment and penalty.

The court has taken note of nine elephant deaths reported last week. Official figures put the number of elephant deaths in the last six months at 24 But the ground reality seems to be even more shocking. In little more than one month, more than 35 elephants have died across the state. These deaths span Nagarhole, Bandipur, Biligiri Rangana Betta range, Bannerghatta and Male Mahadeshwara hills. Most of these deaths have gone unreported in the media.

More recently on November 4, four elephants were found dead in a canal of the Kabini River in Nanjangud, Mysore. Though not widely reported, recently elephants have died in surrounding forest ranges at an alarming rate. Two elephants have died in the Nugu Forest range about 20 kilometres from Nanjangud in the last 15 days. In one incident villagers chased about 40 elephants and a calf died in the ensuing stampede. Man-elephant conflicts are also on the rise.

Electrocuted
Most elephants have died due to electrocution. The trenches dug by the forest department to keep wild elephants from farmlands are most often ineffective. Elephants manage to cover up trenches to make a path for themselves. So, the only option for villagers is to put up electric fencing, though illegal, leading to unnatural death of elephants. Villagers are paid a paltry Rs 15,000-20,000 for each acre of standing crop destroyed even though their actual losses sometimes exceed Rs 1 lakh per acre.

Dwindling Numbers
The 2007 census of wild elephants in Karnataka by Asian Nature Conservation Foundation (ANCF), Indian Institute of Science (IISc), estimated their population at 4,035. 

This shows a decline of about 300 elephants. 

Their population was put at 4,347 in the 2005 census. Bandipur has the largest number of elephants estimated to be at 1,005. 

It is followed by Biligiri Rangana Sanctuary at 692 and Nagarahole with 591.