Eco-activist Rohini Ghatpande’s paper bags are going places: to Switzerland and Canada, to be precise. And to think that it all began as an attempt to reduce paper waste and to find an alternative to plastic bags.   It all started in Rohini’s locality — Marathahalli — on June 5, 2010. The former Robert Bosch employee started a campaign to collect newspapers in her locality. As awareness caught on, her neighbours started donating paper which would have otherwise clogged garbage vans.   Each neighbour would donate at least 3-4 kg of paper, including newspapers, once in 3-4 months, recalls Rohini, 32. However, since it was a non-profit initiative run solely by her, Rohini made an average of 600 bags every month. So far, she has produced over 20,000 bags in various sizes. And now, the bags are going places.   “We have been effectively turning waste into a usable product. So far, we have received orders for about 5,000 bags from a Swiss couple who run a boutique there. A Canada-based citizen has already bought 500, and is placing an order for about 1,500 more. However, the rates are kept cheap, but it will help underprivileged women employees working with us. The green message that’s spreading is our asset, and even as it expands, it remains a non-profit initiative,” Rohini added.   The initiative has meant employment for 20 economically weak women. “I started this initiative alone and never expected it to come this far,” she said. “With the paper bags I prepared, I met people and asked them to replace plastic bags with these bags as it’s an effective way to reduce paper waste, thus addressing the garbage issue.”   She has now set up a paper bag producing unit at Mumbai port, which she feels will help her ship the eco-friendly bags. The initiative is now inspiring fellow-activists, who have decided to join hands with Rohini. “This was a small initiative when the team started three years ago,” Sharath R Babu, wildlife expert, said. “She started in a small way, but it made a significant impact by becoming an effective way to address waste management in the city, and by inspiring fellow activists. If every Bangalorean starts making his own bag as Rohini does, there would be a sea change.”