By: Gauri Lankesh
 
 Union Minister Mr Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi has ordered all beef-missing souls to take a hike to Pakistan. Inherent in his statement is the widely held belief that, in India, only Muslims eat beef, that the practice of eating beef started in India only after the marauding Muslims arrived here and that all Hindus have been worshipping the cow since ages past. But is that really true?
 
 	Anyone who has read essays by Dr B R Ambedkar on Hindus and untouchability will learn that beef was a much-coveted food in India much before Islam was even founded and that the recent politics around beef — though overtly aimed at the Muslim minority — is in fact covertly targeting Dalits and farmers.
 	  	How many Indians actually eat beef? According to one estimate — apart from tribals, Muslims, Christians and Dalits — a whopping 40 per cent of Hindus eat beef. While beef is the cheapest form of nutrition for the poor, the rich love juicy steaks. Why then this myth of the holy cow?
 	  	Everyone knows that when the Aryans wandered into these parts, they were a nomadic tribe dependant on their cattle wealth. Therefore, Aryan tribal leaders were called ‘gopatis’ (owners of cattle) and their daughters as ‘duhitr’ (one who milks!). What did the Aryans do when their cows stopped milching and the oxen got too old? They simply killed them in various rituals and enjoyed the meat!
 	  	The gods that the Aryans brought along with them — such as Indra, Agni and Soma — loved cow meat and liquor so much that it was regularly offered to them. The Rgveda (created some time during 1500-1200 BC) says that during the ‘ashvamedha’ ritual which was conducted by kings involved sacrificing cows. Ditto for other yagnas such as ‘rajasuya’ and ‘vajapeya’. It also says that when esteemed guests pay a visit or a marriage ceremony is held, serving beef is the duty of the host. The Rgveda sometimes refers to guests as ‘goghna’ meaning one who leads to the slaughter of a cow.
 	  	Cattle was so much a part of life in those times that the ‘Atharvaveda’ says, when the dead were being cremated, a bull was also burnt so that the departed person could hitch a ride to the other world.
 	  	Manu, who codified religious and social norms for the Hindus sometime around 200 BC — 200 AD, says camel meat is not to be eaten but beef is fine. He also says since animals were created to be sacrificed, eating their meat on special occasions is a divine rule. According to Manu, both the sacrificed and the sacrificer would be blessed with a higher status in the next life. Yajnavalkya, a highly respected sage who lived in Mithila around 100-300 AD, declared “I, for one, eat it, provided that it is tender.”
 	  	Even literary texts speak of various kinds of meat being eaten by all castes of people. Mahabharatha — composed in 8th or 9th century BC — mentions that when the Pandavas were banished into the forests, they, a la Salman Khan, killed all kinds of wildlife for food. At one point of time, Draupadi offers Jayadratha and his retinue loads of deer meat. The epic also praises a king called Rantideva, in whose kitchen two thousand cows were butchered every day.
 	  	Valmiki’s Ramayana is not far behind when it comes to beef. Having its origin sometime in 5th century BC, Ramayana speaks of animal sacrifice as a means to propitiate gods. Not only was Rama born after his father Dasharatha conducted elaborate rituals involving the sacrifice of animals declared as edible in the shastras, when Sita is being ferried across the Ganga and Yamuna, she promised to offer loads of cow meat and liquor to the rivers upon successful completion of exile. Not just literary texts, even medicinal theories of ages past, recommend meat as cures. Caraka Samhita says beef stew is good for intermittent fevers, while Susruta Samhita maintains that beef is not only holy but also good to get rid of fever, cough and other such  	ailments.
 	  	Chanakya, who ensured the rise of the great Mauryan empire, did not consider the cow as holy in his famous treatise ‘Arthashastra’. Ashoka the Great, who pioneered PETA’s concerns in third century BC, significantly, did not ban the slaughter of cows.
 	  	The first one to oppose slaughter of animals as part of rituals was Buddha. Though he propounded the principle of ‘Ahimsa’, Buddha did not support vegetarianism. Some historians believe that Bud-dha died because he ate pork which had gone bad. For many centuries after Buddha, bikkus, who depended on the largesse of the common people, ate all kinds of meat that was offered to them. They had no option since they were trying to propagate their religion in a land where most people were beef eaters.
 	  	Why, when and how did the slaughter of cows become a mahapaap and the cow got elevated to ‘holy’ status?
 	  	According to Dr Ambedkar, the prime reason for the cow to be declared as ‘holy’ was the severe conflict between Brahmanism and Buddhism. He says that, at one point of time in history, many Indians converted to Buddhism relegating Brahmanism to the fringes. That was when Brahmans divided society into three separate categories: 1) Vegetarians, 2) Meat eaters who did not consume beef and 3) Beef eaters. In order to do one better than the Buddhists, Brahmans decided to become totally ‘pure’; that is, stop eating all kinds of meat. They not only said cow was holy, they also started looking down upon beef eaters — meaning dalits — as untouchables.
 	  	Under the counter attack by Brahmanism, Buddhism gradually lost ground. Brahmans not only regained their stranglehold on society, they succeeded in elevating the cow to a deity. Though the cow was at the center of social and cultural wars for centuries, it is only in the twentieth century that it became a political tool for some communal organizations.
 	  	How are farmers being targeted by Naqvi and his ilk these days? Reports emanating from Maharashtra — which recently banned beef — speak of the distress people in agrarian and dairy sectors are facing. It just does not make sense for farmers to continue to keep old cattle; and it makes even less sense to those who make a living selling cow’s milk.
 	  	Many secular Indians oppose fundamentalism precisely because we don’t want India to become like Pakistan. So, why should beef-eating secular atheists like me go to a country that we dislike? Instead, will Mr Naqvi kindly give us a monthly stipend in Euros and get us all long stay visas in some European country? France — with its exquisite cuisine which includes beef — will do fine!
 	  	(Note: Information sources for this article are historian D N Jha’s book The Myth of the Holy Cow and B R Ambedkar’s essay Beef Eating and Untouchability)
 	  	The writer is an activist-journalist