If you thought dental problems and tooth extractions were only for humans, think again. Rescued sloth bears under the care of a wildlife charity, Wildlife SOS, also undergo various endodontic procedures. Odum, a 22-year-old male bear and resident at the NGO’s Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre in the city, recently underwent an hour-long tooth extraction procedure to prevent further infection.

The rescue centre in Bengaluru is jointly run by Wildlife SOS and the Karnataka Forest Department. The otherwise active and playful 22-year-old bear was off late observed with signs of discomfort and the care staff noticed that he was eating less and had become less active.

Veterinary doctors conducted an X-ray examination which revealed that the bear’s lower incisor was broken, causing him immense pain. The veterinarians immediately proceeded to conduct a tooth extraction procedure, following which Odum was prescribed painkillers for a duration of five days as a part of his post-operative care. He was also kept on a semi-liquid diet of porridge for a few days, after which he was back to a normal diet.

“As oral health is a reflection of body health, any decline in dental care can lead to fluctuations in dietary habits and social behaviours. Bacterial infections and permanent canine teeth damage are negative outcomes of declining oral health. It is reassuring to see that our efforts are making a positive difference in the lives of these bears,” said Dr Arun A Sha, Director - Research and Veterinary Operations, Wildlife SOS.

Working in partnership with indigenous communities and the Government of India, Wildlife SOS was able to close the curtain on the ‘dancing’ bear practice in India in 2009. Having rescued 628 sloth bears from this barbaric practice, the organisation found these animals unfit for release into the wild as they had suffered mutilation, severe physical and psychological trauma, as well as chronic medical problems.

The exploitation of these bears included being subjected to the painful trauma of having their delicate muscles pierced by hot iron pokers and their teeth forcibly removed. With their injuries mostly left untreated, dental infections, rotting teeth, painful abscesses, and mouth ulcerations, were common among them.

Odum too was a victim of the ‘dancing’ bear trade, and having been malnourished and poorly cared for as a cub, he suffered from stunted growth.

In 2009, Wildlife SOS rescued him from a village in Karnataka and gave him a second chance at life at the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre. Hollywood actor Julia Roberts, who was filming for ‘Eat, Pray, Love’ in India at the time, visited the centre, and it was she who named him Odum.

“Over the years, our dedicated veterinarians have been able to provide expert care for our bears by carrying out root canal surgeries, tooth extractions and various endodontics,” said Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder and CEO Wildlife SOS.