The site of Sabarimala
stampede                 When talking about Friday’s stampede in Sabarimala, whether it’s in the media or private conversation, we have largely dwelt on it as we would when discussing a plane accident or a natural disaster. What went wrong, how it could have been prevented etc. Hardly anyone seems to have bothered to ask – since this was a pilgrimage – about the possible loss of faith in those who lost their family or friends, on the legitimate thought that would arise in a bereaved mind that here’s a god that failed. How else do you explain that these were pilgrims, devout people who believed, had real faith in what they were doing when they were visiting a sacred place and that things went so totally wrong.

Unless, of course you believe that the gods were pleased with their prayers and actually did them a favor by putting them out of their earthly miseries early enough. Either that, or call it fate. Chapter closed, move on, which is what the family of Srinivas and Raghvendra Babu, two of the Bangaloreans who died in the hills, would do, just like any of us in similar circumstances would too.

Meanwhile, those of us who are not believers refuse to say anything because of our basic decency, but all the while we shake our heads at the very futility of faith, of religion and notions of sacredness. Which explains our silence on these questions, and why we only asked questions about whether there were enough policemen at Pulmedu when there were over two lakh devotees taking that alternative route to view the makara jyothi or why the Kerala government even allowed a prohibited route through a wildlife sanctuary in the first place.    

But is it possible that our silence is NOT because we are embarrassed by the fatalism of the aam aadmi, can only shrug it off with smug superiority, but because we are missing something? One of the myths that we, the enlightened ones, have acquired through a certain form of education is the institutionalized rift promoted from Plato onwards through Descartes and Bertrand Russell down to Deepak Chopra between good and evil and, more crucially to our discussion here, the one between spirituality and materiality.  

Often, the excesses of material religious expression – the pilgrimages, the self-mortification, the ostentatious piety, the easy satisfactions – tend to reinforce our belief that it has nothing to do with the sublime, the blissful and superior detachment we normally associate spirituality with. The philosopher Michel Foucault, who famously proclaimed in the eighties that European thought, which gave mankind ‘the idea of the universal’, was dead, felt that new thinking should emerge from elsewhere, notably from those not in the thrall of logo-centric thinking (the word as light). In his unpublished Confessions of the Flesh, Foucault writes of the way Paul, a Jew himself, saved Christianity from how the Hebrew scribes preferred to interpret it: Man’s fallen state, the quest for the apple, the forbidden pleasure, and its attendant guilt and, hence, the constant need to rise above them. Paul saw the carceral and betraying ways of the flesh as the preferred, indeed only, route to redemption. Man engages god primarily with his own materiality, with his longings, fears, his wealth and liabilities and, finally, the extent to which the whole process reeducates him.

There is a lesson here for us. It is easy to scoff at Vijay Mallya donating 32 kilograms of gold for the Sabarimala temple, or that he gets each of the latest additions to his airline fleet to ‘circumambulate’ the Tirupati shrine before it is inducted formally into service, as a rich man’s predilection to cast god in his own image. But then at the other end of the spectrum, Srinivas and his brother, who had put behind them a deprived childhood, and risked the crowds and privations to make it to Sabarimala on makar sankranthi, were also casting god in their own nothing-comes-easy image. The question is not that these devotees are basically selfish in doing so, but if their selfishness at some point can yield to a larger end? Prayer, which is more than just piety, is essentially a form of awareness, and the devotee can go beyond selfishness through such prayer. Else he could be forced to confront it, as it happened at Sabarimala on Friday night.

For, to use an analogy, more than complaining about the traffic nightmare and breakdown of infrastructure, shouldn’t we all be asking if the problem more likely is because everyone is taking their car out at peak hour, all heading to the most happening place in town? It is necessary to ask, as the nun quoted at the beginning of this piece asked but in a very different context, if Ayyappa still resides atop Sabarimala? Faith cannot be fashion and you can fool a deity only so much.