For many of us, wonderful natural resources have long been considered 'free'; it is in abundance and never going to end. And we think little about it beyond this point of contact. To Dia Mirza, environmental protection is a way of life. “What is the point of success and money and everything else if we don’t have health? When people ask me why you do these things I tell them how can I not?” she asks. According to her, each one of us needs to acknowledge that we are not separate from nature; the health of the environment is solely responsible for the health of individuals. Just because we get clean air and water for free, we cannot take them for granted. When we speak of plastic pollution or the need for free air or the need to protect wildlife and natural habitat, we are extensionally drawing attention to the fact that we all need to do this to survive and that our very survival is under threat. She is a woman who is inspired to push for passion, compassion and better things from life. She is committed to doing everything she can—through any medium—that gives her an opportunity to participate and bring consciousness that our well being is connected with the environment; its relation to human health and its protection. Here’s a glimpse into her world.

Green spaces are being used for urban development in Mumbai (#SaveMNP, #SaveAarey).
Progress cannot come at the cost of health; it is as simple as that. If we speak of Aarey, it is a remarkable example of citizen participation and a movement to urge the government to acknowledge the fact that it is absolutely unnecessary to destroy bio-diversity. As we progress and continue to urbanise, we need to develop our city and country in a sustainable manner. It can’t come at the cost of health.

How do we as individuals and government change the way this city lives and behaves?
The good news is that there are many areas in which we are witnessing a change in mindsets. The government is acknowledging and addressing the fact that conservation is not obstructionism; it is a necessary measure to ensure the health of people. And, to view conservation from the lens of obstructionism, is a failing on our part of society. When the Maharashtra government announced a complete ban on single use plastic, it was a welcome move and I celebrated it. It is our responsibility as civil society that we do everything possible within our power to ensure that this move is implemented on the ground. We will continue to engage as partners to ensure that every single stakeholder embraces this ‘movement’ (I actually don’t want to call it a ‘ban’). The need of the hour is to recognise the good things that the government is doing and support them to implement those measures on the ground.

I know that there is a lot of work happening even to address the air pollution in the country. Delhi has announced a fantastic plan to improve the air quality of the city but that doesn’t change the fact that Mumbai has experienced worse air quality in the last five months as compared to Delhi. And nobody is talking about it. I think every single section of civil society, media, all of us should become aware of our dependence on a certain quality of life and the need for it. We should keep putting the pressure on government, policy makers and stakeholders to make better choices to improve quality of life.

            Mumbai has experienced worse air quality in the last five months as compared to Delhi.Dia Mirza         
How do you contribute towards protection of environment?
Through the United Nations Environment Program, I am participating in important conversations that hopefully will lead to some improving measures in industry policies. But I think there are simple, everyday measures that I have embraced and that I hopefully aspire other people to do as well. For example, I have completely stopped drinking water from packaged water bottles; I carry my own metal bottle. Even when I travel overseas I carry my own 1 litre metal bottle and refill it from filter/ water cooler wherever I am staying. Personally, I have completely stopped the use of packaged water which feels really good.

I have replaced the regular sanitary napkin with 100 per cent bio-degradable version. Instead of using a plastic ear bud I use a bamboo ear bud, instead of using a plastic toothbrush, I use a bamboo toothbrush. I do not use plastic bags I always carry my own cloth bags that are lighter than sunglasses and they fit in any bag that you carry. I have ensured that every person who is delivering something to me is bringing those supplies in jute bags or basic cloth bags.

We segregate waste and compost waste in our society. We have ensured that everyone cleans their car just once a week and that too with only one bucket of water so we reduce our water consumption and wastage of water as well. We are also installing a water harvesting system for the monsoons, so that we start storing water as a society. I think once you become aware and responsible of your consumption, you find ways to do more to implement those changes in your everyday lives. LED bulbs are used in our society and my personal household, instead of regular light bulbs. We insure than we turn off the mains on all our gadgets and electronics that are not in use. The list is endless!

 We need to understand every action and every choice that we make has an impact on the environment and we can be more responsible in the ways we make those choices. One of the big items of plastic that we can so easily refuse and we unthinkingly use for a few minutes is a plastic straw. Before we order a drink we can say, 'please don’t give me a straw' because that one plastic straw lasts in the environment for up to 500 years and in many places over 500 million straws are used in a day and that is just one item of plastic that I have highlighted now. I think just awareness can bring a huge difference in the choices that you make every day. While hanging around, carry your mug in coffee shops don’t accept disposable plastic mugs and most of us either have a backpack or hand bag when we are travelling so a water bottle and mug is easy to carry and a plastic straw is easy to refuse. Of course, carrying our own cloth bag is the basic thing that one can start with.

            We should keep putting pressure on the government, policy makers and stakeholders to make better choices to improve quality of life.Dia Mirza         
What do you want to say to the authorities on plastic ban and waste management infrastructure? 
We find ourselves in a critical situation that we do because of lack of infrastructure to manage waste. I am personally witnessing and am involved in work being done to bring better awareness to civic bodies in helping them implement better waste management systems but I also think that there is a need for more stakeholders from the private sector as well. For example, if each company takes the responsibility for the quantum of waste they generate I think we would have way better infrastructure to manage waste and we would not find our waste entering the ocean and polluting the air.

If every citizen is determined to become a part of the movement to refuse the use of single use plastic we can make a huge difference to the quality of air, life and health. The second thing is even in the way we choose to do events, festivals and celebrations. The third part is if we can all in our own way find a way to support community and organisations which are working relentlessly to protect green spaces, our forests and wildlife. This is the best life insurance plan we can invest in; to support organisations that protect nature, to bring conscious changes to our everyday life and consumption and to bring conscious changes to the way we celebrate life, whether it is religious festivals or personal celebrations like birthdays, anniversary celebrations and weddings.

On the work front, you will be next seen in actor Sanjay Dutt’s biopic, where you are portraying his wife, Maanyata Dutt, directed by Raju Hirani. How was the experience?
I am very excited about the film, grateful for the opportunity to work with such incredible human beings who know what they want to say through their story and have such a strong command over craft. I had a wonderful time filming and I learnt so much and it was a really precious experience to work with Raju sir, Mr Vidhu Vinod Chopra and all the incredible actors starting with Ranbir. It was magic.

Is it about time the industry needs to mature in its treatment of women and the kind of roles that are written for them?
Oh absolutely, it also means we need to improve in the way we perceive women in their mid 30s, the way we write parts for women in their mid 30s and married women. There are many stereotypes that need to be shattered. And I am pretty certain that many of us through the choices that we make and the way we approach our work and the kind of work we choose to be a part of, will do that.

            I will continue to be very discerning about what kind of work I want to be part ofDia Mirza         
Do you agree that gender pay disparity exists largely also because films are usually headlined by men?
Oh yes, and gender disparity isn't just limited to the fact that more films are written for men. I haven't heard a man being told that you're lucky you get to work after marriage, your wife allows you to work after marriage (laughs). But married women get to hear that a lot. So something as basic as that needs to change.

You also lauded the #MeToo and Time's Up movements that started after the Harvey Weinstein sexual harassment scandal. Do you feel actresses somewhere are still living with the fear of losing on films and massaging egos?
It is a very real fear. And it is prevalent in all spheres of society. It exists in the corporate world, media world, teaching faculty, etc. It is for the men to acknowledge that this needs to stop.

Any projects in the pipeline?
I am having some interesting conversations with filmmakers. I have become and will continue to be very discerning about what kind of work I want to be a part of simply because it is so important for me to do work that gives me true joy. I find myself at the stage of life where I am doing so many interesting things and that give me so much happiness. I don't want to find myself in a situation where I am doing something grudgingly.