Kottuchatta waterfalls is a stunningly beautiful place, a piece of heaven on earth. But it’s also where 13 Bangalore students went through hell as their friend, Naveen Kumar, disappeared into the whirling waters deep within the forests of the Western Ghats. 
 As one of the survivors spoke to Bangalore Mirror over the phone, there was no sense of relief at having survived — just the  immeasurable pain after a 28-hour harrowing drama that invol-ved walking 15 km through forests infested with leopards and elephants to get to the nearest checkpost for help. By which time darkness had descended — literally and metaphorically. 
 Even as Amit was talking to this correspondent, his friends were urging him not to speak to the media. Their panic had clearly not subsided. The mobile was running out of battery, and they were desperate to send messages back home to let their worried families know that they were safe and in constant touch with the police.   
 Discovering Ombattu Gudda The students discovered their picturesque destination the way most of the people who get there do — through the internet. When you Google Western Ghats trek, one of the search results is an interesting post on Ombattu Gudda — the very place where the students from BMS College of Engineering had planned a weekend outing. 
 “We searched the internet. There was a lot of information about the place. So, all of us decided to book a vehicle and head to the place. We left Bangalore at 11 in the night,” said the survivor, shell-shocked after the death of his friend. 
 But in their excitement, the trekkers seemed to have forgotten bloggers’ word of caution about the place. One blogger, Nishant Ratnakar, wrote: “A piece of advice to future visitors to Ombattu Gudda. Don’t go to this place without a map and a compass if you want to return to civilisation on Monday. For happy hippies, this is paradise; you don’t need to work hard to get lost.”   
 Reaching paradise On Saturday morning, the trekkers crossed Sakleshpur by 5.30 am. They had breakfast in a nearby hotel and at around 8 am, they ventured into the forests. 
 “We entered Kabbinale Reserve Forest. We thought of taking the trail starting from Gundya checkpost, heading towards the waterfalls, climbing up Ombattu Gudda and getting down at Hosakere before heading towards Mudigere. After breakfast, we set out at 8 am for the forest. By 2 pm, we reached a place called Kottuchatta waterfalls. This place is very beautiful. The water falls from 40 feet. We camped here and had our food. Our next destination was Ombattu Gudda. While some of us were collecting firewood, the others decided to swim in the waters. Among them was Naveen Kumar, a sixth semester mechanical engineering student. When he started swimming, we were on shore. Suddenly, one of my friends noticed that Naveen was not to be seen. There seems to be a whirlpool in the falls and he must have got trapped,” said another survivor. 
 They searched for a whole hour but there was no luck. “This was when we decided to go back to the villages and to get some people to help us. 
 But reaching back was not easy. We had almost trekked 15 kilometres deep inside the forest. Then, a few of us — Swaroop, Naveen and Avinash — decided to walk back to the Gundya checkpost. By the time we reached it, it was already dark,” another survivor said. The remaining 10, including girls, stayed on in the forest the whole night, waiting for the rescue team. 
 Sakleshpur circle inspector Ashok said, “It was very dark. Someone at Gundya checkpost informed the police station in Uppinangadi from where we got the information. We went at night along with the three students but thought it was not feasible to search for the body as the place is infested with elephants and leopards. On Sunday morning, we went into the forest with 70 people including 16 divers. But it was not easy even for these 16 divers. Many of them complained of ear pain after getting into the waters as it was very cold and deep — around 40 feet.” 
 The 13 students returned on Sunday evening. 
 “Tomorrow, we are hoping to take some more expert divers to search for the body,” Ashok said.
 
 
 College warning  City colleges want to send out reminders to students not to venture into forests. A day after Naveen Kumar drowned, BMS College of Engineering principal Dr Mallikarjun Babu said, “We are always doubly careful about trips. This is why we abolished all trips unless they are essential. It is unfortunate that one of our students is dead. Since morning, I have been trying to call my colleagues but none of them have any idea as to who all had gone on the trip. We cannot afford to lose anyone. We will send reminders to students not to venture into such forests or waterfalls. We also make it a point to spread this message during college fests.”  
 Dr Suryaprasad J, principal of PES College of Engineering, said, “It is always difficult to control students’ activity outside the campus but still we want to send reminders that students should not undertake such risky ventures.”   
 Blogger’s paradise According to Sandeep’s World, a blog: “Let me start with an apology to all those who have conquered these mythical hills long, long ago and kept it as one of the most well-kept secrets in the Western Ghats.... For a long time, Ombattu Gudda had been a secret of only hardcore trekkers and by now, the place has accounted for a few trekkers getting lost and even some lives! While praying for no more mishaps in this area, I also hope that the mystery of these hills remain as it is.”
 
 
 Where is Ombattu Gudda? Ombattu Gudda, about 350 km from Bangalore, is so named because there are nine prominent humps on top, almost in a straight line. The peak is at about 971 metres above sea level, and at a distance of about 20 km from Gundiya checkpost, inside Kabbinale Reserved Forest. From the checkpost, it’s about a six-hour trek to the peak. 
 The trek starts along NH-27 for about an hour and then we say goodbye to civilisation. The initial route winds along a jeep track where you would come across interesting wildlife! The path mostly goes along a stream where we can practise some diving. It’s largely virgin forest with huge bamboos and dense foliage playing host to a range of wildlife — from tigers, leopards, jungle cats, barking deer to gaurs, sloth bears and, of course, wild elephants. You get to see fresh elephant dung along the way. As you go along the jeep track, there are many places where one can get lost and hit dead ends, a blogger writes. 
 The route is said to be one of the most mysterious routes in the Western Ghats.