By Melvin Mathew

Bengaluru-based NGO’s People for Animals(PfA) Hospital has earned a reputation for animal rehabilitation and rescue work is becoming popular in other states as well.
 
The NGO is receiving requests from Tamil Nadu and Kerala to conduct workshops for volunteers and many are travelling to Bengaluru to attend the workshops.

“People from Tamil Nadu approached us to hold ‘Urban Wildlife Rehabilitator Workshop’. There were around 15 people had come to attend today’s session. Some were individuals who wanted to learn more about rehabilitation and some belonged to wildlife organisations. Through the workshop, we are teaching people how to hand-feed formulas and captive management in areas where rescue centres are not present. We are showing them how animals are fed, mammals, reptiles and birds, caging, surgical facilities, rehabilitation of a variety of animals in different settings,” said Chief Veterinarian, Col, Dr Nawaz Shariff.
 
According to the NGO, they are also getting requests for workshops from other states especially in places with no animal rehabilitation centres. Trained with the PfA hospital, they will now start rehabilitating animals in their respective areas.

Worshop learnings
PfA held the day-long workshop covering various aspects of animal rescue and rehabilitation.
 
“Rehabilitation is a lesser-known subject. I haven’t seen a setup like this before. Every box is designed for host-specific animals. We also got to learn about legal issues about animal rescue and learned to make homemade feed for squirrels and birds. We also learn about how to feed six different animals,” said S Padmaja, a veterinary student from Chennai.

Subhashree, an IT worker who lives in a city had to rescue birds and snakes but lacked the skill sets.
 
“After the rescue, you need to rehabilitate the animal. This training will help me rescue the animal and increase its chances of survival. There is very less information about the benefits of snakes and they are often attacked by humans.” she added.

Highlighting his experiences, Gopi Janarthanand, a volunteer from URVANAM said, “We are a group of volunteers assisting the forest team with animal rescue. But we lacked knowledge about rehabilitation. We have volunteers from different districts of Tamil Nadu and we usually encounter parakeets, mongoose, lorels, pythons, cobras, etc. There are a few experienced people who
 
have been helping us but the rehabilitation of animals has been a major challenge.”