Info commission cracks the whip on officials who ignored request for details in a case of forest land encroachment, orders joint survey of grabbed green space
 
 
 Activists have time and again pointed at the large-scale encroachment and destruction of forest lands of Kodagu that are vital to the Western Ghats, and to river Cauvery.
 
 
 A case before the state information commission (SIC) had estimated the encroached government and forest lands — the devarakadus and ooruduves — to be thousands of acres. But after denial of information for three years, and no action even after seven SIC hearings, the commission cracked the whip recently, ordering for disciplinary action, as well as a joint survey (by the revenue, forest and survey departments) to determine the extent of encroachment in more than 25 villages in Virajpet of Kodagu district.
 
 
 Devarakadus are forests, in which — legend has it — gods and goddesses would hunt. Ooruduves are places where villagers would gather for ‘town halls’ and religious ceremonies.
 
 
 
 FACING ACTION
 
 
 The SIC — which had sought a report by October 3 — has now ordered for a joint survey by forest and survey authorities within January 11, 2017. The commission also ordered disciplinary action against officials, who failed to survey and record encroachment over government and forest lands for years.
 
 
 “The principal secretary to the government revenue department is hereby directed to submit a report and initiate action to conduct a joint survey by the revenue and forest departments,” L Krishnamurthy, state information commissioner, ordered. In January 2013, CP Muthanna, a resident of Kodagu, had sought information from the revenue department on the orders of eviction of encroachments of devarakadus and ooruduves in Kodagu district in pursuance to the High Court (ILR 1998 Kar 2757) and Supreme Court judgements.
 
 
 He had sought orders, if any, from the government, which had prevented authorities to implement the court orders and act on the alleged encroachments of natural green forests. He had also sought information on measures that had been taken thereafter to evict encroachers, and stay orders, if any, to this extent, which may have resulted in inaction.
 
 
 Activists had sought similar information with regard to Virajpet, Somwarpet and Madikeri. However, in the case pertaining to Virajpet, repeated denial landed the case before the SIC.
 
 
 The SIC, which had taken up the case, ordered a survey and sought a report on such encroachments in Virajpet taluk. The commission which has so far had seven hearings, also levied a penalty of Rs5,000 on Virajpet’s tahsildar.
 
 
 However, in June the tahsildar’s office had submitted that survey had been done in Kuchi, Kothur, Hudur, Bekkesodlur, and Kirugoodu and had sought time for survey. But when the case came up on October 3, nothing came forth.
 
 
 Besides non-compliance, what made SIC furious was a communique from the office of assistant director of land survey, Virajpet, which (upon the commission’s direction to provide information to the tahsildar) had reverted saying documents couldn’t be created and given when they were not available. He had also sought closure.
 
 
 Besides the tone, it was also the admission that they neither had information nor were attempts made to provide it, that resulted in the order, including one directing disciplinary action.
 
 
 Repeated violation of directions and the March 2016 deadline resulted in the SIC order, which also sought from the assistant director why he should not be penalised. The commission has also asked the deputy commissioner, Kodagu, to initiate disciplinary action against the official.
 
 
 WHY THIS MATTERS
 
 
 Increasing encroachment of the forests the district compelled activists to take up the matter officials. What started in the late 90s is picking up pace today.
 
 
 Take the case of Chelavara, which once had 600 acres of devarakadu on paper, now has just 3 acres available on ground. In Valnur village, about 3,000 acres of devarakadu has been reduced to about 25 acres. A similar trend has been seen in most villages of the area, which is bound to affect biodiversity.
 
 
 In olden times, all this land would be recorded in a jamabandi (land records). But as encroachments began, the devarakadus and ooruduves started getting omitted in the modern day land records, explained RTI activist Viju Muthappa.
 
 
 “The encroachments are blatant. Besides the timber mafia, people from neighbouring states are brought here and made to camp by vested interests in these places. Later, they turn into a vote bank. This is a systematic way of encroaching government land. The SIC order will now bring some accountability and give statistics on these encroachments,” he said.
 
 
 These devarakadus have a rich diversity in plants and wildlife. Encroachment or destruction of these forests affect biodiversity and ecological balance of this land, through which river Cauvery flows and becomes a lifeline for the state, he said.