In a major haul of illegal wildlife products in city, Bengaluru urban forest officials, on Wednesday, seized two pairs of spotted deer (Chital or the Axis axis) antlers and a pair of gaur (Indian bison or the Bos gaurus) horns with skull, from a house in BTM layout.  	The wildlife products were seized from the residence of 43-year-old Chengappa, who hails from Madikeri, forest sleuths told Bangalore Mirror. Possession, showcasing, transporting or trying to sell animal products pertaining to wildlife protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWP Act) is illegal, and the products had been kept without any valid records, officials said. A case has been registered under various sections of the Act, deputy range forest officer (KR Puram range), Jagannath Reddy, told BM.  	He said they had a tip-off on wildlife products being kept in the house. A raid was conducted and the products were seized. “The products are more than 20-years-old and don't seem from one hunted in recent times. However, the probe is on,” Reddy said. The accused had a licenced weapon but since the products he possessed had no legal records, they were seized, and the accused was arrested.  	Reddy added that Chengappa’s antecedents, his background on his employment, and other details are yet to be verified, though he claimed to be associated with many companies.  	Forest sleuths have slapped cases under various sections including Sec 9 (prohibition of hunting), Sec 39 (wild animals, etc to be government property), Sec 40 (declaration on possession of wildlife products before the commencement of the Act and prohibition on possession after the commencement of Act), Sec 43 (regulation of transfer of animal without a certificate of ownership) and Sec 44 (prohibition on dealings in trophy and animal articles without licence).  	There had been a provision in the past to legalise antique wildlife products passed on from generations to family members by way of declaration to the chief wildlife warden (CWW) of the state government. In the present case, despite the accused claiming them to be legal, no papers existed or were produced to prove their legality, and this resulted in a case, forests sleuths explained.  	Now, the investigation will focus on getting to know the source of the product and see if it was hunted from any wildlife reserve, or if it was from any illegal wildlife trade channel, explained another officer.  	While spotted deer is protected under Schedule III, gaur is protected under Schedule I of the IWP Act. Deer are hunted for the products such as antlers used for interiors in office and homes, and skin and meat is in demand in the illegal wildlife trade circles. Gaurs face threat of poaching for meat and trophies, the officer explained. The charges, if proved, could result in imprisonment for three years, Reddy added.