It has become a trend — a film highlights a tourist spot and then suddenly, there is a rush of tourists to the place. The latest is Dudhsagar Falls on the Karnataka-Goa border. After the success of Kannada film Mynaa, most of which was shot near the falls, there is a spurt in the number of people visiting it.    Around 200 to 300 visitors throng the place every day. The numbers doubles on weekends.   Though in summer the place is not as spectacular as what is shown in the film, people are arriving in droves. Many visitors have even started referring to the place as ‘Mynaa Falls’. But the downside is, with very limited infrastructure, the surrounding forest is taking a beating.   Y S Naik, the station master at Castle Rock railway station, which is around 3.5 km from the falls, told Bangalore Mirror, “Every day, hundreds of people are arriving. The falls is spectacular only during the monsoon — between July and November. Still the number of visitors during this summer is more than in the previous years.    “Many people also come by their own vehicles. Since there no road beyond the railway station, leading to the falls, the area behind the station has become a sort of parking lot,” he said.   Sources said most tourists arriving there have no idea how to reach the falls. “It is not possible to go there any time you want. Only two trains stop at Dudhsagar station — one that comes in the morning from Chennai and Nizamuddin Express at 5 pm to return. Just now, (4.30 pm on Sunday) around 30 people arrived and wanted to go to the falls. I sent them back, asking them come in the morning. However, many people hop on to goods trains and jump down at Dudhsagar station.”   Trains travel on this route only on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. There is no place to stay or buy food and water at the Dudhsagar Falls. Before the film was released, only trekkers visited the falls. People also take different trekking routes to reach the falls. Though place falls under the Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary (of Goa), permission from the forest department is not required to visit it. This and the increased number of visitors are creating environmental concerns.    Nagshekar, director of Mynaa, said, “We shot at the falls for 20 days. The Railways helped us a lot. I was told that there is an increase in the number of visitors after the movie’s release. I only wish all the tourists have a safe visit and maintain the beauty of the spot.”   A few years ago, Jog Falls had a similar experience. After the release of the film Mungaaru Male, a large number of tourists trekked to the top of the falls where some scenes of the film was shot. The rush also led to a number of deaths. Before this, film Nammora Mandara Hoove caused a sudden increase in the flow of tourists to Yana in western ghats, leading to environmental issues.