Experience, educate and engage in wildlife photography and week-themed events

Passion for the protection of wildlife and the conservation of natural resources M.N. Jayakumar, retired Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Member Secretary, Zoo Authority of Karnataka, has transitioned from a distinguished forest officer to one of India’s leading nature photographers and one among the few forest officials to take up nature photography.

Jayakumar is now set to host a grand exhibition titled “Encounters in the Wild 2.0,” for the Bangaloreans. A celebration of global wildlife as well as 50 years of India’s iconic Project Tiger, from 28 September - 8 October at Chitrakala Parishath. He joined the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) in 1975 and retired in 2012. His passion for the protection of wildlife and the conservation of natural resources continued, as he travelled across various national parks and sanctuaries in India and captured some of the best wildlife photographs.
 
“Encounter in the Wild 2.0” will take the visitors on a journey across India, South East Asia, Africa and America. The exhibition will showcase a staggering collection of 231 photographs spread across four themed halls at Chitrakala Parishath. These striking images will highlight 47 species of mammals, 109 species of birds, eight species of reptiles and frogs, and breathtaking landscapes.

“The theme of the exhibition is experience, education and engagement. Visitors can come and experience the beauty of nature through photographs. Each photograph will have a QR code, where a person can scan the code and read more about the animal or bird. The pictures of tiger shots are all from the Indian forests and will be exhibited in hall one. Hall 2 will feature primates and birds, some from Vietnam. Hall 3 will cover the African continent Kenya, Tanzania, Botswana and South Africa.

 While Hall 4 will cover Costa Rica, Ecuador and Peru. There is also a fifth hall in the premises where other events and workshops will be conducted,” Jayakumar told BM.

This exhibition isn’t limited to photography alone. There will be a host of events like wildlife week-themed drawing and painting competition, wildlife quizzes for high school and college children, a panel discussion on various topics like challenges of wildlife management in Karnataka, and the role of media in forest, environment and wildlife conservation. Visitors can also enjoy screening of nature themes, short films and documentaries, followed by filmmaking workshops and many other events.
 
Project Tiger, launched by the Government of India in April 1973, is a one-of-a-kind project that aims to protect and save the Royal Bengal Tiger in India. This year marks the 50th anniversary of Project Tigers’ unique conservation success stories. And the event at Chitrakala Parishath would be free for the public to come experience, educate and engage.
 
Jayakumar said, “From the implementation of Project Tiger, the tiger habitats have received more protection and the numbers have gone up in the country. Currently, Karnataka holds the second-highest tiger population in India.”

Jayakumar’s photographs have also been displayed across exhibitions in India, England, Germany, Belgium, Spain, Finland, Australia, Scotland, the USA and South Africa.