The recent spike in elephant deaths in Karnataka due to electrocution has raised concerns. The Karnataka Forest Department has decided to hold a meeting with power-supplying companies to discuss the issue of illegal tapping of power lines.

“We are soon scheduling a meeting with BESCOM, HESCOM, and other electricity supply companies in the state to discuss this issue. There are guidelines given by the center to ensure that illegal tapping does not happen in the forest fringe areas. The meeting is being held to understand reasons behind unchecked illegal tapping,” said Saswati Mishra, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, KFD.

A tusker electrocuted in Kodagu (Virajpet) on Sunday has once again raised concerns regarding the high number of elephant deaths due to electrocution. In two most recent cases of electrocution, an elephant was found electrocuted in Kurubarahundi village and a tusker was electrocuted on July 30 in Virajpet, Kodagu district.

According to elephant and wildlife conservationists, barrier assessment of conflict-prone areas must be conducted at regular intervals, preferably at every five years’ gap.

“We conducted a barrier assessment of nearly 50 kilometres in Kodagu in 2015 and submitted a report to the then chief conservator of forest. Our study showed that nearly 94% of the barriers spread over 44.3 kilometres were prone to elephant entry. Based on the report, KFD proposed a budget for the repair work, and the damaged barriers were restored. However, barriers in the Virajpet area were recorded to be in good condition back in 2015. KFD should consider re-assessment of barriers in the area to understand their effectiveness,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

According to KFD officials, while no barrier analysis has taken place after the comprehensive analysis of 2015, the department is in the process of collecting a division-wise report on elephant barriers.

“We are in the process of collecting information on all divisions regarding the type of barrier and the status of the barrier to have a state-level understanding of their effectiveness. This report will also help us in allocating funds for the creation of new barriers and the maintenance of existing ones. The report should be ready in a month,” informed Mishra.

While KFD is working towards ensuring peaceful coexistence, it is time for a paradigm shift with private players contributing to the larger environment and wildlife conservation goals.
 
“To make a better sense of the unnatural death numbers, we need to have natality and mortality rates along with population and sub-population dynamics. Conflict-related deaths are accidental and unpredictable. However, these cases and deaths can be reduced to a large extent if private players lead conservation efforts and help the department in mitigating conflicts. Human-elephant conflict is related to land management issues and we need to drift away from the number game to focus on causative factors.” said Avinash Krishnan, DSConservation, A Rocha India.