Forest officials and wildlife rescuers in the city are a bewildered lot after a one-month-old blackbuck was rescued from a forested patch of Turahalli a week ago. The young animal succumbed due to head injuries at the Bannerghatta Rescue Centre on Saturday morning.

Usually sightings of a blackbuck, also called Indian antelopes, are very rare as it inhabits grassy plains and forested areas with perennial water sources like forested area adjoining Hoskote, Kolar, Mulubagal, Doddaballapur and the regions bordering Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, the forest officials said.

On October 9 (Saturday), a traveller identified as Mahesh spotted something like a deer alongside the Turahalli forest and the wild animal seemed to be injured, unwell and unable to move, defend or take care of itself. Mahesh informed a team of wildlife rescuers he knew and a couple of rescue volunteers came to the spot and identified it as a blackbuck, that was about a month old.

PS Ananda Nair, Rehabilitation and Facility Manager of Bannerghatta Rehabilitation Centre, told Bangalore Mirror that the blackbuck had multiple head injuries. “It was unable to suckle on milk and it looked like it had been chased, attacked and injured by dogs. It looked like its head had serious injuries internally and it could not consume any food,” Nair said.

A blackbuck mother would abandon its baby only if it has a large-scale deformity, but in this case, the baby was a healthy one, Nair pointed out.
 
“One of the possibilities is that some traveller had spotted the injured baby blackbuck on some road elsewhere and had brought it to the city to take care of it, but since he/she could not take care of it, they would have possibly abandoned it near Turahalli forest, off Magadi Road on the outskirts of Banashankari second stage. Other predators would have tried to attack and injure it,” Nair said. Almost for a week, the blackbuck was doing alright at the rescue centre, but on Friday night, its condition started deteriorating and it succumbed to injuries on Saturday morning, Nair said.