Primarily meant to take pictures of wildlife movement, the cameras are coming in handy as evidence catching poachers in the act
 
 Cracking down on poachers in various tiger reserves across Karnataka, state forest officials have a new weapon in their armoury—Cameras! Deployed to capture images of tigers to document their population, the camera traps deep inside the forests are also helping the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) catch poachers red-handed in the protected areas. Catching them red-handed was extremely difficult, but the cameras have now come to their aid in ensuring convictions.
 	  	As a result, in the past one year, increasing number of poachers are being caught within the vicinity of tiger reserves and national parks.
 	  	Sources in KFD revealed to Bangalore Mirror that in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary four notorious poachers were arrested based on camera traps while as many have been arrested within Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) limits.
 	  	Arrest of these poachers has also thrown light on other poaching cases resulting in more arrests.
 	  	According to a senior forest official, cameras are installed on either sides of the paths used by animals and hence are called camera traps. “The cameras are equipped with motion sensors which use infra-red signals to detect movement of animals passing between the cameras. Cameras are placed in such a way that it is almost difficult to locate them unless and until you see the flash. Sometimes, when poachers too pass through the trap, they are captured and recorded,” explained a top forest official.
 	  	Vasant Reddy, deputy conservator of forests, Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, said, “Poachers are hardly aware of the presence of cameras and go around the forests scouting for animals. As and when they pass before the cameras their images are captured with date and time. The cards will be recovered from cameras by the field staff to retrieve details to track down the poachers. 
 	  	 		Two notorious poachers have been arrested through camera-traps in the last one-year. Cases have been registered against them and trials are underway. We are sure of conviction due to sufficient evidence.”
 		 	 		Srinivasulu, conservator of forests, DATR, said, “Recently we have arrested four notorious poachers with the help of camera traps. Cameras have done wonders in locating poachers and catching them red-handed inside protected areas.”
 		 	

 	 		BUT TRACKING IS NO CAKEWALK
 		
 		 	 		However, tracking poachers based on photographic image is not a cakewalk. “Sometimes, cameras capture only half of the poachers’ bodies making it difficult to identify them. At times, though we track down poachers in their villages, they manage to escape and live in exile for months,” Reddy said.
 		 	 		Two months ago, forest officials arrested notorious poacher and sharpshooter Ganesha in Male Mahadeshwara limits. “He is known for killing elephants by aiming at their heads. The cameras captured him with a gun but only half of his body appeared. Luckily, there was a mole on one of his legs which helped track him down. Suspects from the surrounding areas were summoned and checked for moles on their legs,” said a range forest officer.
 		 	 		Similarly, Urdusamy, yet another poacher, was arrested near Kollegal a few months ago after a month-long watch on his hideout. “We were only a step away from arresting him and he got to know about our plans and fled to Tamil Nadu. But our staffers kept vigil at his village and nabbed him a month later. When the villagers demanded proof, we showed them the images,” said another forest official.
 		 	 		These arrests have also helped crack poaching cases of the recent past.
 		 	 		“Notorious poachers like Datta Harijan, Raju Krishna, Timmanna Narayana Gauda, Ratnakar Sawant were caught in the Anshi range couple of days ago. The images serve as greater evidence to establish their crime and help in convicting them,” conservator of forests Srinivasulu said.
 		 	 		Conservation researchers and volunteers in forests too are helping forest officials with images through camera traps. Sanjay Gubbi, noted conservation scientist with Nature Conservation Foundation set up camera traps to study leopards and found images of notorious poachers like Ganesha.
 		 	 		Gubbi said “Sometimes poachers and locals try stealing the cameras but when they cannot open the boxes they just smash them and all the parts are damaged.”
 		 	 		Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife), said, “Because of the photographic evidence, conviction also happens at court. Further, we have been recruiting more staffers to step up vigil even in non-protected areas.”
 		
 		
 		
 		 			THE CAMERA DISTRIBUTION
 			
 			 		 			Nagarahole Tiger Reserve: 500 cameras 		 			Bandipur Reserve: 200 		 			BRT Tiger Reserve: 80 		 			Bhadra: 50-60 		 			Dandeli: 50-60 		 			Cauvery Sanctuary: 15-20 		 			MM Hills Reserve: 15-20
 			 		

 		 			ABOUT THE CAMERAS
 			 		 			* Each camera, fully automatic, comes with a battery life ranging from 8 to 10-days. 		 			* The cameras are kept inside metal boxes protecting them from rain and sunlight.