Researchers are all set to release an app that lists various species of scorpions found in India
 
 	Zeeshan A Mirza and Rajesh V Sanap, research associates at the National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Bengaluru, are all set to launch a unique app called ‘Indian Scorpions eGuide’. The app, probably the first of its kind in India dedicated to the common man rather than the expert, is developed by Reality Pre Media Services.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Mirza says scorpions are an integral part of most landscapes, from dry habitats to wet rain forests, notably absent from the poles. India is home to over 120 species across 25 genera under six families and the number of species increases each year with more exploration across the country. 	
 	“If we look at scorpion studies in the country, the first was done in 1900 on arachnids of India, after that the Zoological Survey of India released a book in 1983. These two books are based on diagrams, not photographs, and the details are purely technical. Not many people can understand the book. Initially, we too thought of bringing out a book, but that would be expensive,” he said.
 	  	Mirza went on to add, “Given that scorpions have remained unstudied for a long time and only researchers have been involved in documentation of the diversity of these arachnids, it was important to make scorpions popular among naturalists and wildlife enthusiasts and nothing could have been better that an app that can be on one’s phone/tablet instead of in a bulky book. We had pictures of the most known species, and started working on the app. We compiled details for the app. The app covers 39 species in five families and 15 genera. With every update, we shall add more species and improve features. The IOS version has been sent to Apple, where it will be reviewed and is expected to be out within the next 10 days. The Android version will be launched by Nov 10.”
 	  	Rajesh added that the aim of launching the app was to popularise studies of scorpions in India. So far, it was restricted to researchers. “We are presenting the topic with pictures, so that people relate to the app. The app provides high-resolution images, basic details in identification, a bit of natural history, coloration and distribution. This app might serve as a start-up point for young enthusiasts to take up scorpion studies and also open new avenues for toxin research.”
 	  	Mirza and Rajesh have discovered and described 25 species of lizards, scorpions and spiders in a period of five years and are in the process of describing several more. Based on user response, more features like latest discoveries and so on will be introduced, they promise.
 	
 	
 	 		Scorpions
 		 	 		There are about 2,000 species of scorpions across the world. Scorpions are arthropods; they have eight legs, two pedipalps and a tail with a venom injecting barb. Scorpions have two venom glands that produce venom used in hunting and self-defence. Scorpions do not have bones; instead they have an exoskeleton. They prey on insects, arthropods, and in some cases, small vertebrates.