Inspired by the sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik, three artists from Udupi – Srinath Manipal, an artist at the Community Medicine Department of KMC – Manipal; Venky Palimar, a drawing teacher at Palimar School; and Ravi Hirebettu, an artist attached to the maintenance department of Kasturba Hospital – introduced sand sculpting in the coastal town almost 15 years ago. They have created about 60 sand art works over the years; that is about 3 to 4 sand art works per year. Together they are called Team Manipal Sand Heart.
 
 Srinath Manipal said, “What comes to my mind is depicted in the form of an art work. We keep thinking about how we can contribute without harming the nature. The message has to reach a large number of people and sand sculpting along the beach, where people gather in large numbers, has been an ideal method to spread social messages about drug menace, AIDS awareness and tobacco abuse. As an artist, the urge to create something new always exists and this was how we started looking for alternative eco-friendly art material to present our art,” he said.
 
 Among various sand sculptures created by the team, the largest has been a 40-feet crocodile at the Malpe beach that was created as a tribute to conservationist Stephen Robert Irwin also known as the ‘The Crocodile Hunter’ soon after his death.
 
 
 Srinath said, among all gods, Ganesha is an artist’s favourite as one can be very creative.
 
 “My father runs a canteen and he brings home loads of paper cups. I have been observing this for a very long time and wanted to do something unique out of the cups. That was when I thought of making Ganesha idols from paper cups. Since then, we have been experimenting and, this year, we sculpted a biscuit Ganesha,” Srinath said.
 
 The Ganesha idol from paper cups became a hit on social media and the team was called to display it in Delhi, Dehradun and Ballari.
 
 Eco-friendly sculpting is not restricted to Ganesha’s alone. At the recently-concluded Alva’s Nudisiri, a literary fest, the team sculpted an eco-friendly gorilla which is about 14 feet tall. The theme was protecting forests and wildlife. Jute and hay was used to create the gorilla. 
 
 “We generally consider topics such as AIDS, drugs and tobacco since we work in hospitals and are witness to the misery caused by these ills,” Srinath said.