Founder of the Reliance group Dhirubhai Ambani, Tamil film icon Rajinikanth, Art of Living guru Sri Sri Ravi Shankar and film producer and media baron Ramoji Rao have been chosen for the Padma Vibhushan, the country’s second highest civilian honour after Bharat Ratna, this year.
 
 
 	Indu Jain, chairman of Bennett, Coleman & Company Ltd, known for her social work under the aegis of the Times Foundation, has been named for the Padma Bhushan. 	The list of 112 Padma awardees announced on the eve of Republic Day includes 10 Padma Vibhushan awardees including danseuse Yamini Krishnamurthi, vocalist Girija Devi, oncologist Viswanathan Shanta, scientist Vasudev Kalkunte Aatre and US-based economist Avinash Dixit.
 	
 	  	Among the 19 Padma Bhushan awardees are actor Anupam Kher, tennis star Sania Mirza and badminton champion Saina Nehwal, Arya Samaj founder Swami Dayananda Saraswati, Chinmaya Mission’s Swami Tejomayananda, former CAG Vinod Rai, NRI industrialist Pallonji Shapoorji Mistry and former US envoy Robert Blackwill.
 	  	
 	The Padma Shri list, with 83 names, has achievers from diverse fields, regions and social backgrounds. Cine stars Priyanka Chopra, tipped to be the new face of the ‘Incredible India’ campaign, and Ajay Devgan are the prominent awardees, apart from director Madhur Bhandarkar and veteran actor Saeed Jaffrey, danseuse Pratibha Prahlad, singer Malini Awasthi, journalist Ashok Malik, adman Piyush Pandey and 26/11 prosecutor Ujjwal Nikam.
 	
 	  	Government sources claimed the 2016 Padma list was “highly representative in character” with four awardees each from the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes category and seven from the north-eastern states and 10 NRIs/PIOs/foreigners from a mix of 7 countries. Also, the list has 19 women. “Care has been taken to include farmers, social workers silently making a change in the remotest parts of the country and environmentalists,” said a senior government officer.
 	
 	  	The states, too, have been well represented, with 18 awardees from Delhi, 16 from Maharashtra, 12 from Uttar Pradesh, 11 from Karnataka, apart from 10 NRIs. “The ‘others’ category lists eight diverse fields; namely, spiritualism, architecture, environment conservation, culinary, advertising & communication, yoga, farming and wildlife conservation. We have recognised the contribution of agriculturists from regions like Vidarbha; for instance, Subhash Palekar has been conferred the Padma Shri for his ‘zero budget natural farming’ model,” said an officer.
 	
 	  	Four Padma awards are being conferred posthumously this year. The most prominent awardee is Dhirubhai Ambani, who is being honoured 14 years after his demise in 2002. Incidentally, the Padma scheme published in 2014 states that the award can be conferred posthumously in “highly deserving cases”, if the demise of the awardee has been recent, say within a period of one year preceding the Republic Day on which is is proposed to be announced. “But exceptions can still be made if those at highest level in the government feel the time-bar is not justified in most-deserving cases,” said an officer.
 	
 	  	Incidentally, though the list was largely accepted this year, there were at least four names that made it to the final draft list but had to be dropped at the last minute due to their own or their kin’s unwillingness to accept the honour. These names include Tamil writer Jayamohan Baguleyan Pillai; Shetkari Sanghatana founder (Late) Sharad Joshi; journalist Virendra Kapoor and Gandhian (Late) Narayan Desai’s family.