NGT registers suo motu case as ‘2 lakh acres of forest land encroached in Karnataka’

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has accused the Forest, Ecology and Environment department of Karnataka and Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) of large-scale encroachment of forest land in the state.
 
The tribunal sent notices to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden of the KFD in this regard.

This is after the principal bench of the tribunal registered a suo motu case on the basis of various media reports highlighting the issue.

“We have observed that about 2 lakh acres of forest land has been encroached and that there is a need to remove big encroachments on forest land around Bengaluru and other cities in the state. The news item (regarding encroachment of forests in Karnataka) raises substantial issues relating to compliance of the environmental norms,” noted the green court.

After the case is registered, the Forest, Ecology and Environment department of Karnataka has been granted four weeks’ time to file the reply before the appropriate bench of the tribunal.

However, notices have been issued to PCCF and CWW of the Forest Department for filing the response to the Southern Zonal Bench at least one week before the next date of hearing.

Over a month ago, the Forest minister of Karnataka, Eshwar Khandre, directed the forest officials to clear encroachments on the forest land on a priority basis. The minister had issued the direction in view of encroachment of large forest lands. Khandre had then highlighted that the majority of the forest land encroachments have happened in Shivamogga and Uttara Kannada districts.

Following the minister’s order to clear encroachments of forest land, a team of more than 20 personnel from KFD demolished an illegally constructed shed in the buffer area of Turahalli Reserve Forest near Kengeri.
 
The KFD cleared 6.5 acres of illegally encroached forest land and had recaptured the land by planting saplings of various tree species. In the last few months, the forest department had cleared encroachment from over 2,000 acres of forest land. However, the state forest minister had pointed out that more needs to be done.