By Saumyangi Yadav

City birder is studying change in wildlife habitats and patterns in and around Bengaluru by analysing old Kannada films

If you thought films were just for entertainment purposes, you may want to rethink that. A bird watcher from Bengaluru has been studying the change in wildlife habitats on the city’s outskirts with the help of old Kannada films, and will present his findings at a talk on October 8, on the occasion of Bengaluru Bird Day, at Bangalore International Centre (BIC).
 
Prashanth Badrinath revisited the wilderness areas of Bengaluru and its surroundings by browsing footage in Kannada film songs dating back to the 60’s and 70’s.
 
“These movies from the 70’s have been shot in and around locations that are now sought after and visited by birders. Since they come from a time when photographs were sparsely available, they gave us a glimpse into the past. We are comparing current-day photographs with old footage from these movies,” Badrinath told Bangalore Mirror.
 
He added that movie songs from 1967-2982 like Bayalu Daari, Naa Ninna Mareyalaare, Nagara Haavu were studied for the same.
 
“I have collated a lot of landscape photographs taken over the last ten years, and I will be using Google Street images to compare it with the old footage,” he explained.
 
He will be presenting his findings on October 8 at 10 am at Bangalore International Centre (BIC), Domlur on the occasion of Bengaluru Bird Day, an annual event celebrated by the birdwatchers of Bengaluru in honour of Dr Joseph George, who started the group birdwatching movement in Bengaluru four decades ago.
 
At the event, Dr HS Sudhira from Indian Institute for Human Settlements will also be presenting a talk about how an initial foray into birding eventually led to researching birds and subsequently mapping birds and their habitats. He will also draw upon efforts undertaken as part of the Bangalore Bird Monitoring program during 2006-07, mapping habitats, and land use land cover change studies.

 We are comparing current-day photographs with old footage from these movies– Prashanth Badrinath, environmentalist, bird-watcher 
“It is an open and free-of-cost event being held in association with Bangalore International Centre. There is also an open age quiz for the bird watchers and enthusiasts being held on the same day,” told Ulhas P Anand, a bird watcher and co-founder at EcoEdu that focuses on delivering quality environmental education through walks, talks, workshops, and camps.
 
 While it is the 8th edition of Bengaluru Bird Day, a physical event is being held after the gap of two years due to the pandemic, Anand informed.
 
The event will also cover a panel discussion moderated by Dr KS Seshadri about birdwatching habitats in the city, a few decades back and now, ow these places are now, the diversity and numbers found back then, and the challenges of doing birdwatching then and now.