Picture this: You go to a local swimming pool on a warm summer’s day, put on your 
diver’s mask and plunge in. As soon as you’re in the water, you take on the role of an underwater archaeologist, searching for a treasure chest!

German researchers have developed the world’s first augmented reality (AR) system for underwater use, where a diver’s mask is fitted with a special display that superimposes computer-generated graphics in the diver’s line of sight. 
Apart from applications in entertainment, the technology could also be used by professional divers in the maintenance of bridges, offshore oil rigs and dams.

“Augmented reality research has made enormous progress in the last few years, creating many exciting, albeit land-based applications,” says researcher Lisa Blum of the Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Information Technology (FIT). “We are the first to demonstrate an AR application designed for underwater use.”

Submerged use is a major challenge for technical systems. They must be waterproof and robust enough to withstand the high additional pressure of increasing diving depth.

The FIT system’s main component is a waterproof display in front of a diver’s mask, which lets the diver see the real underwater environment along with additional virtual objects. 

“Thus, a run-of-the-mill indoor pool may be visually upgraded to a virtual coral reef with shoals, mussels and weeds,” Blum says. 

A camera – fitted on top of the diver’s mask – is connected to an ultra-mobile PC that the diver carries in a backpack. The system detects underwater markers in the camera’s video stream, and tracks the diver’s orientation using onboard sensors. Combining the technologies, a visually-aligned representation of the virtual 3D scenes is generated on the mask’s display.

In the demo game, the diver is placed in the role of an underwater archaeologist searching for a treasure chest. The playground consists of six virtual ‘islands’ on the sea bed, each with its specific marine wildlife. 

The treasure chest is located on one of the islands, but it then takes a code number to open the lock. The elements of this number can be found in ‘magical’ mussels that hide in the other five locations.

“The user interface of this novel underwater game is highly intuitive and optimised for the swimming and diving player,” Blum says. 

In fact, it all works without any manual interaction devices, she boasts.

“For the player, our game combines the sensation of weightlessness under water with augmented reality, creating a unique exciting experience that may become a new special attraction for water parks,” she adds.