Campaign to make Hesaraghatta grassland conservation reserve has garnered about 75,000 signatures; Karnataka Wildlife Board meets today to discuss issue

A day ahead of the Karnataka Wildlife Board meeting on November 3, a signature campaign started by citizens to save Hesaraghatta grassland has garnered around 75,000 signatures in just over three days. The meeting will involve discussing a proposal to notify the grassland as a conservation reserve.

The campaign, christened ‘Save Hesaraghatta ’, was started on Sunday, and people were invited to support the cause by signing the proposal.

“The support we have received for this campaign has been overwhelming. We did not expect so many people to come forward over such a short period. We have got signatures not just from Bengaluru and Karnataka, but also from other parts of the country and beyond,” said Vijay Nishant, president of NGO Project Vruksha Foundation.

The campaign was supposed to run for 15 days, but had to be cut short after the wildlife board announced the schedule of the meeting recently.

“We had planned a longer campaign. However, since the meeting was announced, we had to quickly wrap it up. Over 70,000 signatures in just three days is a tremendous response and shows the citizen’s towards the issue. This is the last grassland of the city, and thus, it becomes everybody’s duty to preserve it and pass it on to the next generation,” said Saumya Shankar, one of the volunteers of the campaign.

The campaign organisers also met the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department on Wednesday and submitted the signatures.

“The PCCF (wildlife) has agreed to extend his support for this cause,” added Nishant.

Board meeting day
The Karnataka State Wildlife Board, under the chairmanship of Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai, will be meeting at 4.30 pm on Thursday to seal the fate of the grassland.

Conservationists and ecologists say they are expecting the board to take the right decision and declare the grassland as a conservation reserve.
 
“Any degradation to this fragile and unique ecosystem will surely impact the groundwater table as well as surface water availability in the region. We are already facing a severe 
environmental crisis due to ecosystem degradation. We need to wake up and make the right choices. We cannot afford to lose an ecologically important region such as Hesaraghatta which also houses a range of biodiversity,” said Dr TV Ramachandra, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science (IISc).
 
“We need not only to protect this ecosystem, but if possible, enrich it further,” said Akshay Heblikar, a member of Bengaluru’s Biodiversity Management Committee and founder of ECO Watch NGO.

The meeting was originally supposed to take place on September 5 this year to decide the grassland’s status.
 
However, the meeting was cancelled at the last minute.

Earlier in 2021, the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife had rejected the proposal to declare Hesaraghatta as a conservation reserve, but the Karnataka High Court later directed the board re-consider its proposal regarding the same.

 We cannot afford to lose an important ecological region such as Hesaraghatta which is rich in biodiversity– Dr TV Ramachandra    Center for Ecological Sciences, IISc


Curious case of misleading pamphlets

In the days leading up to the much-anticipated Karnataka Wildlife Board’s meeting to seal the fate of Hesaraghatta grassland, farmers from nearby villages were being bombarded with fake information, alleged environmentalists and activists in the area. While the momentum to declare the grassland as a conservation reserve has only been growing over the past few months, activists are miffed with pamphlets being distributed in the region with false news about the grassland and its status.

 “A group of people has been distributing pamphlets with misleading information about Hesaraghatta. They are provoking farmers and residents by telling them that once given protection, their cattle will not be allowed to graze,” said Chandan M, a resident of the area and volunteer. Activists fear that misinformation might lead to farmers’ protesting, hurting the cause. “The pamphlets being circulated claim that the grassland will be converted into a reserve forest, which is wrong information.

 A reserve forest has an entirely different definition and level of protection compared to a conservation reserve. The miscreants are also claiming that there is no wildlife or biodiversity in the grassland to be protected. This is manipulating people’s perception of reality,” said Vijay Nishant, founder of Project Vruksha, who had filed the petition to declare Hesaraghatta as a conservation reserve. Activists say the petition filed earlier to declare the grassland as a conservation reserve clearly states that it will be beneficial not just for the biodiversity in and around the area, but also for farmers and their cattle. 

It is the last remaining grassland habitat of Bengaluru, which also acts as a lifeline for farmers. Moreover, the 5,010 acre Hesaraghatta lake bed, its surrounding scrub forest, and grassland are teeming with biodiversity, making it critical to the water security of the city.

 “Hesaraghatta is biodiverse and a unique grassland ecosystem. It is also an important patch of land for farmers living in the vicinity. We always talk about trees in Bengaluru, but grassland ecosystems are equally important. This area should be kept intact,” said another city-based environmentalist.