A photo show on Ladakh
The photography exhibition, titled ‘Luminous Landscapes of Leh-Ladakh’, captures the breathtaking beauty of the region. Taken by wildlife photographer Prathap DK, the frames take the viewer on a visually enriching journey. While Leh-Ladakh is famous for its monasteries, high-passes and iconic lakes, Prathap has taken a detour from the norm to bring out a fresh perspective. The images showcase some of the iconic and lesser known landscapes, as well as vibrant lakes of Leh-Ladakh in an awe-inspiring way.

 WHERE: Sublime Galleria, UB City, Vittal Mallya Road
 WHEN: 11am-7pm, on till January 29
 CALL: 22221667

 A pool of talent
Watch Dhruv Visvanath, Plastic Parvati and Akrti in action as they perform at Gilly’s tonight. Visvanath, a seven-year-old musician is known for his unique style of percussive acoustic guitar playing, earning him the nickname ‘Guitar Spanker’. Plastic Parvati is the solo project/venture of Kolkata-based musician Suyasha Sengupta. The songs are conceptualised, written and parts of it are recorded in her quiet little bedroom. Her debut record, Songs About Lovers, has been produced, mixed and enabled by Miti Adhikari. It seeks to explore the masculine/feminine dynamic through sexuality. And finally, singer and producer Akrti’s sound reverberates her deep interest in the being and the earthly. Pulsating with ethereality, she employs trap and hip-hop beat undertones. 

 WHERE: Fandom, 1st floor of Gilly’s Redefined, 413, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 8pm, January 17 
 ENTRY: `300 plus `200 cover charge (payabale at the venue), insider.in
 CALL: 96064 43393 

Check out this seafood festival
Indulge in an array of seafood specialities at this food festival, which brings together the authentic flavours from the coastal city of Mangalore. The Konkan being a coastal region is known for its rustic flavours and different takes on seafood. The menu includes dishes like Bibbe Curry, Adgai, Chana n Jeev kadgi Ghashi, Jeev Kadgi Bajo, Dalithoi, Madgane, Phovu phaan, magge upakari, Podale Upakari, Kashi Halwa, Ashtami Undo, and Ponsa Payasu, among others.

 WHERE: NOOK, Aloft Bengaluru Cessna Business Park, Sarjapur - Marathahalli Outer Ring Road, Post, Kadubeesanahalli, Bellandur
 WHEN: For lunch and dinner, on till January 25
 CALL: 45101010

 How about some comedy? 
Red Rhino is bringing together three of Bangalore’s funniest stand-up comedians for a hilariously fun-filled night this evening. Rajesh Hinduja uses his humor to talk about the two things that baffle him — women and technology; Arnav Rao gave up his career as a lawyer to focus on stand-up. Now he just uses his public speaking skills to get people rolling with laughter; and Mayandi Kr is an IT professional who hates his job and his boss. But he’s found his office to be a hotbed of material for comedy.

 WHERE: Red Rhino - Craft Brewery and Inspired Kitchen, Uptown Square, Whitefield – Hoskote Road, Seegehalli, State Highway 35
 WHEN: 8.30pm, January 17 
 TICKETS: `350, insider.in

Go for this gig
Peepal Tree is a Bengaluru-based band that comprises Sujay Harthi on vocals, Tony Das on guitars, Praveen Biligiri on bass and Willy Demoz on drums and percussions. Their music can be described as Indian melodies sitting on funk grooves with overtones of electronica, and sung in Indian languages. This combination of elements makes for a very interesting new sound. Each musician in the band brings a wealth of experience to this new project, having been part of some of the most successful bands from India. Peepal Tree has collectively played more than 1500 concerts globally, in their other projects, and has been a part of the Hindi and Kannada movie industries. Watch them in concert tonight. 

 WHERE: Hard Rock Cafe, 40 St Marks Road 
 WHEN: 8.30pm, January 17
 TICKETS: `750 (includes `500 cover charge) bookmyshow.com

Happy shopping
Take out your shopping bags and make a list of what you want, because Sampoorn Santhe, the 10-day exhibition and Farmers Market, promoting local craftsmanship and sustainable living, is back for its 21st edition. Artisans and craftsmen from 19 states will showcase their wares in over 100 stalls. On display will be indigenous techniques, textures and designs which showcases a range of products that include textiles, soft furnishings, jewellery, accessories, toys, leather products, pottery, paintings, gifts and much more. Revel in a variety of fabrics, including hand woven Tussar, Akola, Chanderi, Jamdani, Ikat, Patola sarees and Tangalia craft from Gujarat, Kutchi, Rajasthani Pattus, Kalamkari, Akolo, Ajrak and Kanchivaram Prints. Take home traditional Phad paintings from Rajasthan, Dhokra cast metal and ironware, terracotta pottery, silver and metal jewellery, Bodo weaving from Assam, Chikankari from Uttar Pradesh and cane and bamboo furniture. There are also organic food grains, soaps, handmade paper stationery, oils and preserves. This year, there will also be Village Story Farmers Market, a community farming concept based in Bengaluru, which will feature a range of fresh organic vegetables and fruits, handmade cosmetics, millets and grains and other eco-friendly products including recyclable tableware and chemical free homeware. 

 WHERE: Manpho Convetion Center, Spectrum ground, Near Manyata Tech Park
 WHEN: 11am to 8pm, January 18-27 entry: Free

Dance away
Let DJ Daiwik and DJ Trement give you a dose of double the fun this Friday night. Music and dance lovers, head to this set by the DJ duo and start your weekend off on the right note. Also enjoy a great stunning view of the city and delectable pan Asian food. 

 WHERE: High Ultra Lounge, Rooftop, World Trade Centre, Malleswaram
 WHEN: 9pm, January 18
 CALL:45674567/ 8892306316

Sounds of peace
Let go of your worries – your expectations, disappointments and everything else bogging you down. In this restful evening, Deepthi Bhaskar, a trained classical singer, and Akash Narendran, whose singing is informed by Carnatic, bhajan and choral training, will take you through an hour of calm, singing lullabies in different languages, so that you can find some peace. 

 WHERE: MyBoTree, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 7.30pm, January 20
 Tickets: eventshigh.com