With wildlife conservationists on their toes, the issue of illegal resorts, homestays, hotels, and lodges operating within the enclosure of Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) tiger reserve in Chamarajanagar district is getting proper attention. After the regional National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) submitted a report to NTCA headquarters on illegal operations inside the tiger reserve, NTCA has now written to the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka to take appropriate action against the establishment.

The letter dated May 11, 2023, has appealed to the department to take action based on the report submitted by AIG, NTCA regional office regarding the presence of illegal lodges, hotels, and resorts in the enclosure of the reserve.

This happened after the illegal operations around the reserve were flagged by Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist in the area, through a written complaint. An NTCA team led by Harini Venugopal, assistant inspector general of forests, then conducted a detailed inquiry regarding the presence of illegal operations in enclosures of BRT and prepared the said report. In the report, NTCA highlighted that as many as nine resorts, homestays, and hotels are operating illegally from the enclosure.

“Since the time these establishments had started operation, tourism pressure had gone up. The BRT is an important part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve and connects the eastern ghats with the western ghats. It is an important habitat for tigers and elephants, and thus the illegal establishments must be evicted as soon as possible,” said Kulkarni. While the forest department always acknowledged the issue, other government bodies such as Karnataka Revenue Department and the tourism department failed in their duties, leading to mushrooming of illegal establishments, he added.

“In the case of BRT, while the resorts, homestays, and lodges are within the enclosure of the reserve, they are on private lands. Section 33 of the Wildlife Protection Act clearly states that such establishments inside an eco-sensitive zone require permission from the National Board of Wildlife. The forest department also conducted an independent inquiry and found irregularities concerning these tourism establishments. While the authorities had written to the revenue department requesting them to cancel the land conversion order and evict them, the revenue department failed to take action,” he informed.

In its report submitted to NTCA headquarters on November 28, 2022, the regional office also observed that since the area with illegal constructions is an extremely important elephant habitat and is part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, a monitoring committee must review the matter keeping the protection and conservation of 
elephants in mind.