Big cat out of the bag, forest officials ask AECS Layout residents not to step out alone at night

With a leopard being spotted near AECS Layout and Singasandra Layout, forest department officials have been asking people not to walk alone. Forest personnel have been patrolling the area and announcing over the public address system that people should not walk outside and that if they do need to go out at night, they should walk in groups.

A leopard was recently spotted walking in front of a car in Singasandra. A woman who saw the big cat said, “We were returning home around 10 p, on Friday when a leopard passed in front of our car. The leopard passed very close from one end to the other. For the last three days, people have been scared to come out in the evening. No one has even been coming out to turn on the street lights in the evening. We have been told that the leopard may have moved to another area. Forest personnel have been visiting the area and have cautioned us not to go out at night.”

Sharadamma, a resident of the area, said, they are scared to go out. “We wonder how a leopard could venture into the city. The streets here have less traffic, so many kids used to play cricket on the road. However, since the news of the leopard sighting, even kids have stopped playing on the road, and we are not allowing them to leave the home.”

What to do in face of danger
Experts say that leopard sightings in the city are not new. In previous years, big cats were spotted near Turahalli, Yelahanka, and Kengeri. They say that leopards have always been there on the outskirts of Bengaluru, but now people are noticing them more often due to the widespread use of CCTV cameras and the rapid spread of news (including fake news) on social media. Experts have advised people to remain calm and not panic. Leopards are generally shy, so they will avoid people. People should not attempt to get close to the animal to take pictures or videos. Leopards should not be cornered by mobbing around them, as this will make them panic and could lead to life-threatening accidents. If a leopard enters a compound or an apartment complex, it is best to leave it alone, and it will head back to wherever it came from.


  Leopards are generally shy, so they avoid people. People should not attempt to get close to the animal to take videos or pictures– Expert’s advice

Situation of conflict
Wildlife scientist Sanjay Gubbi has written to the Chief Minister stating that 50% of human-leopard conflict incidents occur in five districts: Ramanagara, Tumakuru, Mandya, Mysuru, and Hassan. However, the number of conflict incidents is also on the rise in Ballari, Koppal, and Kolar. Gubbi says that of the 27,418 revenue villages in Karnataka, human-leopard conflict occurs in over 700 villages and is increasing daily. Outside protected areas (national parks and wildlife sanctuaries), poaching of leopards’ natural prey such as chital, sambar, four-horned antelope, barking deer, black-naped hare, and jungle fowl has increased. Leopards shift their diet to domestic animals such as sheep and goats due to decreased natural prey outside protected areas. Gubbi also says that increased use of CCTV cameras and the recording of leopards on CCTV cameras are leading to the assumption that there is an increased occurrence of leopards. Similarly, the circulation of fake information on social media is also creating fear among people. He had earlier requested the State Government to start a curriculum of a minimum of one week of training on human-wildlife conflict in the Forest Watcher, Forest Guard, Deputy Range Forest Officer, and Range Forest Officer training schools.