Conservationist notices some men trying to fence land that is part of the elephant corridor

An illegal encroachment was made into an elephant corridor in Bannerghatta National Park on Sunday night when workers dug pits to put in markers to claim ownership of the piece of land. The land row dates back to 2011, when the land was put under the Revenue Department, but the latest act threatens to put wildlife in danger, open the floodgates to other such illegal acts and put paid to years of efforts by conservationists. 

A couple of days ago, conservationist Vishnu Narain, who is the managing trustee of Bannerghatta Nature Conservation Trust (BNCT), was on an early morning drive when he noticed something odd. A few workers with a tractor were digging pits to lay granite stones to construct a fence on land that is within the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP).

The piece of land that stretches 200 metres is in the middle of a crucial elephant corridor besides being close to a water body frequented by elephants.
Narain clicked a few photographs and reported the matter to both the Forest Department and the police.The land which is in the Eco-Sensitive Zone (ESZ) in survey no. 69 just exposes the extent of land-grabbing inside the national park. Some people have been gnawing into the area even with farming activities.

Conservationists say the ESZ area that spreads over 1,000 acres around the BNP has probably now shrunk to around 600 to 700 acres due to encroachment.
“This bit of land is being eyed because of its vicinity to the city and the land prices have shot up. These people sprung up from nowhere and the locals living here for twenty years don’t know who these people are, nor have they seen them earlier,” said Dr Nagendran, a conservationist with BNCT.

A senior forest official with the BNP told Bangalore Mirror that the said 1,000 acres is a deemed forest and grasslands/pastures meant for local farmers who can graze cattle there. “This land comes in the middle of the two and is indeed an elephant corridor. Since the land comes officially under the Revenue Department and the matter is under discussion since 2011 after the then DC Ayyapa wrote a letter to the forest department to bring the land under the forest department. But that has not happened yet,” the officer said.

Nagendran said as the land is still not with the Forest department, the encroachers can get a record called ‘paani’ from the Revenue Department by offering bribes. “Based on this paper, they claim ownership of the land and try to occupy it. Earlier encroachments were happening in the garb of quarrying, and since conservationists like Narain took the matter up seriously, there was a check and quarrying reduced,” Dr Nagendran says.

He said the encroachers have a bone to pick with the conservationists because the quarrying is stopped, so they are instigating a group of people to attempt another way to grab the land. “The land that falls within the jurisdiction of the Ragihalli Panchayat is deemed an elephant corridor named Ragihalli elephant corridor close to a water body where elephants come to quench their thirst,” Dr Nagendran pointed out.

After Narain’s call to the officials, the Range Forest Officer (RFO) Anekal came to the spot and informed everyone on the status quo - pending a joint inspection by the AC and DCF about the land ownership claim. The fencing work has stopped for now. “The land grabbers, led by one Anjanappa, have connived with some officials in the forest department. We have also learnt that Assistant Conservator of Forest (ACF) Venkatesh gave them a sketch and told them that they could go and occupy the land,” Dr Nagendran alleged. ACF G Venkatesh’s phone remained out of reach and his chief Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) Ravishankar told Bangalore Mirror that he was new to the department so not aware of the case. “I will have to go through this issue in detail and get back,” Ravishankar said. Conservationists have filed a complaint with the Forest Department and spoken to the Forest Minister Ananth Singh.

What is an ESZ
According to an ESZ notification dated June 15, 2016, of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the ESZ around any National Park is to be protected and activities such as cutting of trees and non-forestry activities in elephant habitats are strictly prohibited. The ESZ is a buffer zone that helps conserve biodiversity and this holds true for common lands such as gomala and kharab categories.