The number of tigers has a unique increase in population by 7.67% from 404 in 2018 to 435 in 2022, according to the latest report released by Eshwara Khandre, Karnataka’s Forest, Ecology and Environment Minister on Thursday. This report is an analysis of the All India Tiger Estimation exercise conducted in Karnataka last year.

The report highlights that the majority of the additional unique tigers were recorded in the state’s tiger reserves. Out of the 435 unique tigers recorded in the 2022 census, 140 were spotted in Bandipur Tiger Reserve, 149 in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, 39 in Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve, 26 in Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary and Tiger Reserve, and 19 in Kali Tiger Reserve. The remaining 57 unique tigers were recorded in other forest divisions. The population size outcome is expected to be higher than the estimate of the 2018 census.
 
Based on 404 unique tigers in the 2018 census, the total number of tigers estimated was 524.
 
According to the reports, the increase in unique tiger sightings can be attributed to improved spatial sampling, including the addition of adjacent suitable tiger habitats to the existing tiger reserves. Interestingly the majority of the additional unique tigers are from the tiger reserves, especially from Bandipur, Nagarahole, and Kali Tiger Reserve.
 
The 2022 census witnessed increase in camera trap coverage which enabled the recording of 66.86 lakh of tiger images in the 2022 census, up from 49.79 lakh in 2018.

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), experts believe that Karnataka is well on its way to becoming India’s ‘Tiger State.’ The encouraging rise in tiger numbers indicates a positive trend in wildlife conservation efforts, 

“Unfortunately, these days wildlife conservation has been turned into a show business and made look like a competition of numbers. What would be useful is to compare how many tiger habitats are lost each year or how many unnatural tiger deaths occur and use them as a measure of success. Wildlife numbers, including tigers, go through a natural cycle of ups and downs due to various factors. What we should be concerned about is unnatural deaths due to poaching, retaliatory killing, vehicular accidents, etc, and very importantly loss of habitat,” conservation scientists Sanjay Gubbi. Experts say, Nagarahole, Bandipur, and BRT, have reached their ecological carrying capacity for tigers, leading to a high number of human-tiger conflict cases.