Will remain in Parappana Agrahara till Dec 23, unless lawyer can bail him out
 
 Ravi Belagere, the editor of regional tabloid ‘Hai Bangalore’ who was arrested on charges of giving supari to kill his colleague Sunil Heggaravalli, has been remanded in judicial custody till December 23. The Central Crime Branch police produced him before a judge of first additional chief metropolitan magistrate court on Monday afternoon.
 
 Belagere may be taken into police custody again in another case that has been registered against him.
 
 Belagere was arrested on Friday based on the statement given by supari killer Shashidhar Mundewadi.
 
 He has been moved to the hospital ward in the jail and given a separate room. His daughter, Chetana, said she was not allowed to meet her father.
 
 Another plaint against Belagere
 
 Heggaravalli has filed a complaint against Belagere at Subramanyapura police station, alleging that Belagere had called him from police custody on Sunday night. Heggaravalli told the police that that he feared for his life since Belagere could call up some anti-social elements too if he called him so easily.
 
 DCP (Crime-2) Jinendra Kanaghavi is conducting an enquiry against police inspector Yathiraj BR, an ASI, a head constable and a police constable who were on duty on Sunday night. It is alleged that these four policemen allowed Madhu, who brought food, and also permitted Belagere to make calls.
 
 On cigarettes
 
 The home minister, who saw visuals of Belagere being provided a cigarette in the police vehicle while being escorted to the CCB office, has asked for a report on this too.
 More trouble
 
 The CCB police will give a report on finding deer skin and tortoise shell in his office when they raided it on Friday. The forest department officials may take up a fresh case against Belagere under Wildlife Act and investigate. If they register the FIR, they may go to court and take him into custody.
 
 Subramanyapura police may also take him into police custody on body warrant for investigation in the case filed by Heggaravalli, alleging of threat. There may be more cases registered against him for having connections with other notorious criminals.
 
 Badigar on the run
 
 The Police team that has gone to Vijayapura to catch Viju Badigar, an associate and brother-in-law of Mundewadi, is yet to trace him.
 
 Journalist Malagonda questioned too
 
 The CCB police team that is in Vijayapura called journalist TK Malagonda to a hotel and recorded his statement as Belagere had reportedly taken Mundewadi’s phone number from him. He was questioned about how he became friends with Belagere and other killers of Bheema Theera for almost five hours.