An increasing sense of alarm is building amongst green activists in the state and beyond, as unprotected corridors connecting protected zones in the Western Ghats continue to shrink, endangering 8migrating wildlife along the richly bio-diverse belt.
 
 A study conducted by the Centre for Wildlife Studies (CWS), Bangalore in the Western Ghats between December 2012 and March 2013, deployed cameras at 21 sites in Sindhudurg district, to observe the Sahyadri-Konkan corridor outside protected areas, connecting the Sahyadri tiger reserve in Maharashtra with Dandeli in north Karnataka. Its findings captured a plethora of wild dogs, leopards and sloth bears and myriad prey travelling through these zones, emphasising the importance of making corridors between protected areas a part of the conservation rhetoric.
   Jay Samant, ex-president of the Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS), said, “Satellite imagery of the Western Ghats has shown that the width, density and extent of the corridors has drastically decreased. With the number of wind power projects, agricultural expansion and increase in tourism, non-protected areas like these corridors are becoming increasingly vulnerable.” Chief conservator of forest (wildlife), State forest department M K Rao said, “Large animals require a continuous stretch of forest for movement. Tigers, wild dogs and even elephants use these corridors. Without these, animals stray into agricultural fields, causing man-animal conflicts. Bauxite mining, tapioca farming and rubber plantations are all putting pressure on the ghats’ environment.”
   Girish Punjabi, researcher at the Researchers for Wildlife Conservation that was part of the CWS initiative, said, “We undertook this project to understand if animals persist in traveling through corridors. Parks are like monoliths. People believe that there is no wildlife beyond the periphery of protected areas, but they do not understand how important corridors are. Without these, there is no gene flow, and inbred species can go locally extinct.” Activist Vinod Jain added, “Corridors are especially necessary in case of forest fires, as animals get trapped and have nowhere to escape to without them.”
   Environmentalists say wildlife management is too protected area-centric right now. Vidya Athreya, biologist, CWS, said, “Corridors fall on private land. People are aware of animals using this land, but it is nowhere in wildlife protection policies.”
    “Most of the corridors’ land falls under the revenue department and belongs to villages. Very soon, these areas will become conflict zones. The first step is to accept that such pockets exist and that wildlife cannot be restricted by political boundaries,” said Anirudh Chaoji, Director, Pugmarks Ecologix.
   Researchers suggest private land owners be integrated into the system to protect wild animals. Jain added, “The government should bear the expenses for land owners to come forward to protect wildlife. If people are building fences to demarcate land, they should leave a gap of some feet for animals to travel through easily.”
   “If animals are restricted to certain areas, they begin to breed with others born in the same litter and bad genetic combinations arise. The immunities of these animals are low, the probability of them succumbing to diseases extremely high,” added Chaoji.
   The Western Ghats are currently facing the highest anthropogenic pressures in the country. “Disruptive activities like mining and plantation fencing are harming wildlife. Conservation challenges are immense, since development is mostly unplanned and prolific,” rued Punjabi.   Satellite imagery has shown CONSERVATION CORRIDOR corridors drastically decreasing. With more wind power projects, agricultural expansion and tourism, non-protected areas are more vulnerable JAY SAMANTH, EX-PRESIDENT, BNHS