Citizens worried about govt’s plan to convert 4 reserved forests into eco-parks

The state government’s move to convert a large part of the four reserved forests in the City into conventional parks has not gone down well with environmentally conscious citizens. While some ask why the forest department is doing the Municipal Corporation’s job of creating public spaces, others are worried about the concrete structures the administration might build as part of creating eco-parks. The forest department, however, maintains that it would not pour an inch of concrete in the forest.

On Saturday, Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa announced that three forest-turned-eco-parks will be ready by June this year. While one more portion of the 400-acre Turahalli forest will be opened for public by April-end, parts of 102-acre Kadugodi plantation and 98-acre Machohalli forest too will be converted into public spaces by May and June, according to government’s plan.

This is not the first time the forests are being converted into tree parks or public spaces. Some of the forests where the public movement is allowed are: Turahalli tree park, UM Kaval Reserve Forest (Devika Rani estate), Sulikere tree park, JB Kaval tree park in North Bengaluru, Kadugodi tree park and Kumbaranahalli tree park at Anekal. The forest department has built watchmen sheds, toilets in these parks. While some are popular, others are not.

“We are destroying the last remaining lungs of Bengaluru. Aren’t we pushing the remaining flora and fauna of these forests to the brink of local extinction? Why are we not thinking of small mammals, birds, reptiles that thrive in these forests? If we push people into these remaining forests with walking paths, seating arrangements, paragola, toilets, drinking water facilities, parking facilities and later gym etc, no doubt these forests will turn out to be another Cubbon park,” a forest officer said, adding the senior forest officials do not dare to say no to the proposals.

It’s not the responsibility of the forest department to convert the forests into public parks. “All CA sites are sold illegally. Now, lakes and forests are being converted to public spaces,” he said.

  We will only make walkways and benches using natural resources. We already have around 130 such parks in the state­–Sanjay Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
Bhargavi Rao, inter-disciplinary researcher and trustee of Environment Support Group (ESG), said the essence of the forest would be lost the minute it is converted for human use. She also asked if the forest department will be using natural materials to build trails and benches here. “Currently we see extensive use of exotic plants, which are water guzzlers. Importance is not given to grow natural and local vegetation,” she said.

RTI Activist BM Shivakumar said the purpose of reserved forest tag is lost if public are allowed in. “The forests have been preserved for so many years. It’s our responsibility to leave them as they are for our future generations,” he said. He also recalled how the BS Yediyurappa-government in the past misled people by handing over 123 acre of land on Magadi Road to private individuals for creating an amusement park, a plan that was later dropped due to protests.

Sanjay Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), assured that no concrete will be used while creating public spaces. “We will only make walkways and benches mostly using natural resources. No exotic plants will be planted. We have about 130 such tree parks across the state,” he said.