By: Barkha Kumari 
 
 Rohan Chakravarty uses humour to save nature, and his weapons of choice are cartoons, illustrations and caricatures
 
 If animals, birds, insects, fishes or microbes had the means to talk to humans, most would complain: ‘This is our world as much as it is yours. So act responsibly. Don’t kill us for your greed or misplaced sense of superiority’. A few would sing praises too, for Rohan Chakravarty and his likes.
 
 Chakravarty quit his dentistry career in 2010, and later an animation firm in Bengaluru, to become a wildlife conservation cartoonist. A gorgeous tigress that he spotted bathing at Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary in Nagpur, his hometown, caused this ‘career switch’. So now his job, more so a pet mission, is to sensitise humans about the much-bigger and fascinating world of wildlife that is out there on land, in air, and under water – well over 1.7 million species; one that is dying off unseen and unheard due to man-made actions. 
 
 At a photography fest in the city next week, the Delhi-based award-winning artist will speak about ‘the importance of humour in conservation communication’, of which he gives an example: “In 2016, I published a cartoon strip on Pygmy Marmosets of the Amazon basin, online. They are the world’s smallest monkeys (can wrap around a finger), and that makes them a favourite of the pet trade, which for most part is exploitative. A few days later, a reader from Peru emailed me: ‘I was planning to buy a Pygmy Marmoset, but now I won’t. Thanks for highlighting the issue’.”
 
 Funny side up
 
 “There is always a funny way to tackle serious things” or at least bring attention to, reasons the creator of the Green Humour series of cartoons, illustrations and caricatures. His website is a proof to that. In one comic, you see a school of fishes likening a coral reef to the ‘best art installation’ and even the famous cabaret, Moulin Rogue. The excitement fizzles out as they reach the now-dead zone of the Great Barrier Reef, which looks like a horror film set. They feel sorry for the World Bank too, as it has become poorer with the loss of tourism and fishery avenues the Reef used to provide. In ‘What’s your scat score?’, a dung beetle takes on a challenge no food critic would take – to review the ‘delicious droppings of Indian mammals’. So a blackbuck sheds ‘glistening toffee-lozenges’, Sloth Bear ‘a crunchy assortment of bee remains and berries’, and Porcupine ‘a fruity-fibrous mix like a Cuban Cigar’.
 
 “You see, a lot of trivia about the wild and marine life is not palatable to laymen, not even to wildlife enthusiasts like me, and that has discouraged the common man from delving into their world. That’s because it’s riddled with jargons and heavy terms,” he says. “You and I are more familiar with tigers and sparrows than frogs and insects, because the latter have such complicated scientific names.
 
 So, as a cartoonist I break the jargons down to digestible terms, by adding visual humour, trivia, and jokes (‘writing is the most excruciating part’), and I am hoping I can bridge the gap between the scientific and non-scientific worlds.”
 
 If the gap was sealed in time, Australia’s Melomys Rubicola would be alive. Last year, these rodents became the first mammals to become extinct due to human-caused climate change. “If not for news, I would not have heard about them ever. If we don’t know about something, how can we save it?,” he asks.
 
 A sketch in time
 
 That’s why Chakravarty spends his time shining spotlight on everyday to exotic species in his sketches in newspapers, on web, on T-shirts, coffee mugs and pillows. Also on agenda are pressing environmental issues (from air pollution in Delhi, deforestation in Northeast,
 bleaching of coral reefs in Lakshadweep, to global warming). “The current Indian government is the most environmentally-irresponsible regime ever,” and he enjoys taking potshots at them. His cartoons on irresponsible religious practices, such as snake torture during Nag Panchami, or burning firecrackers in Diwali, have offended many, but never thrown him off track.
 
 So the 30-year-old won this year’s WWF International President’s Award for his efforts to inspire change and attitudes towards nature. His Green Humour is the first Indian comic strip to be distributed internationally. And there are only a few like him, who have biodiversity as their muse – “Rosemary Mosco (Canada), Rob Lang (the US), and Seppo Leinonen (Finland).” The wildlife conservation cartoons gained limelight in 1960s, thanks to the works of American artist Jay Norwood ‘Ding’ Darling. 
 
 On his must-draw list are insects/invertebrates (97 per cent of the animal kingdom), and cats of the world. “More than half my work has been about birds (he’s drawn all the 73 Indian raptors/predators), but hardly any on insects. I love birds. They are full of character and mischief. The Golden Eagle might be a deadly hunter, but its call sounds like a kitten’s (laughs). Then, a Greater Adjutant Stork has the gait of a pompous military officer, and to see them you have to go to the Boragaon garbage site in Guwahati. I did that in 2013, drove straight from the airport to the dumpyard.”
 
 Chakravarty gets his love for wildlife and the knack for communication from his maternal grandfather. “He came from a family of hunters, and hunters are the best naturalists. When he would talk about animals and birds, crowd used to build up.”
 
 And humour from his dog, Natwar Prakash, who had a pet name so apt, Naughty. “I am an introvert. I don’t have much of a social life. So while growing up, the only way I could gain a sense of humour was through him and his antics. He taught me how to laugh heartily. He introduced me to the world of non-human humour (sic).” Naughty is no longer with him and his family – his mother is an ex-journalist, father a footwear merchant, and brother a bat biologist, but sure he is proud of Chakravarty’s work. Naughty would sing praises for his human friend too.