The forest department has finally cracked the whip on Bangalore University by warning that it would take back the land unless it learns to manage the biodiversity reserve at Nagarabhavi and protect the land from poachers and sandalwood smugglers. 40 sandalwood trees carted away; 50 more hacked, left to wither   The warning follows Bangalore Mirror reports on poachers using snares to trap wild animals like peacock, jackals, wild rabbit and mongoose, and rampant theft of sandalwood from the campus. The forest department has also directed the university officials to form a squad to keep a vigil on the campus.  After sandalwood trees, animals under threat at BU campus &nbsp; The university officials have also been warned that cases would be booked against the security personnel and the officers concerned in case of any such lapse in future. “If the issue persists, we will be forced to take extreme steps to conserve forest and wildlife, which includes sending a proposal to the state government to take the land back from the university,” a source in the forest department told Bangalore Mirror.    “We have taken the recent incidents on the campus seriously and communicated our views to the officials concerned. If they fail to set things right, officials concerned will have to face stringent action,” said A G Appu Rao, deputy conservator of forests, Bangalore Urban.      Insiders involved Forest officials, who conducted an inquiry into the recent incidents of poaching attempts and sandalwood theft on the university campus, have found the involvement of some insiders in the illegal activities. “We have found that some students who had completed their studies long back, are still staying in the hostels and are hand-in-glove with poachers and sandalwood thieves. They are resorting to these illegal activities to earn quick money. An investigation is on,” added Rao.     The university top-brass said they are looking into the matter. “They (the forest department) should deploy guards on the campus. How can we guard entire 700 to 800 acres of land? It’s not an easy job and the issue has not just cropped up today. We are working on alternatives to protect the trees and wildlife inside the campus,” said university registrar Prof B C Mylarappa.