By Prakash VL

Half-kilometre stretch on Ittige Gudu Layout’s 5th Cross to have parking space, shops

Mysuru Zoo is the latest hot spot in the scenic town, and while authorities -- and the animals -- are happy that they are the centre of attraction, tourists are peeved at the parking problem that has cropped up. To solve this issue, the Karnataka Zoo Authority has planned to designate a ‘Walking Street’ for the visitors with the help of local residents.
 
Authorities say that every day, there are more than one thousand vehicles parked, especially in and around the Ittige Gudu Layout, creating more problems for the residents. So, the Karnataka Zoo Authority decided to create a parking place on the exhibition ground which is adjacent to Ittige Gudu Layout. A request was also submitted to Karnataka Exhibition Authority.
 
This half-kilometre stretch on 5th Cross of the layout consists of shops for food, local art, and artefacts. The street will start from the front of the zoo and extend up to the exhibition ground and will be decorated with flower pots and managed by the Karnataka Zoo Authority, and can be accessed by citizens from 9 am to 6 pm.
 
The residents can rent the space to traders and on the exhibition ground, there will be ticket counters for the zoo, and battery-operated vehicles will be arranged for specially abled and senior citizens.
 
Karnataka Zoo Authority President LR Mahadeva Swamy said, “The parking lot in front of the zoo has a capacity of 1,000 vehicles. Due to the heavy inflow of tourists, parking space has been allotted on the exhibition ground.”
 
A resident of Mysuru, MG Praveen added that with the authority planning to park the vehicles half a kilometre away, this will reduce the parking problems. 

Tuskers prefer farms to forests: Researchers
Elephants have adjusted to life in the coffee estates of Kodagu creating problems for the farmers. These elephants damage the paddy and other crops by settling on the farms.
 
Approximately 60 per cent of elephants in the Kodagu district live near coffee estates. This has impacted hugely on Kodagu’s economy and society.
 
Researchers at the Wildlife Institute of India who have observed the behavioural changes in elephants over the last 15 years say that because of the easy availability of food and water on the farms, they prefer these locations. They also stay on farms to avoid group clashes. For these reasons, even if they are sent to forests, they return to surrounding villages.
 
In another interesting fact, it was reported that women are often not willing to marry prospective grooms from elephant-occupied villages.
 
In the year 2020-21, 9,000 elephant-human conflict cases were registered, 22 persons died and Rs 6 crore compensation paid. This was the highest number of human-animal conflicts reported from Kodagu.
 
So far, 9,000 cases were registered against animals in Kodagu only. A Rapid Response (RR) team was formed to solve the elephant-human conflict. There are 29 elephants fitted with radio collars. This RR team will observe the elephant movements and inform the residents via SMS. When there is a danger, the staff will shoot in the air or use firecrackers to send them away.