Promising the same thing all over again! Well, that’s what tourism minister G Janardhana Reddy attempted during his trip to the US and the UK to promote Karnataka tourism.

The minister promised to start a night safari in the Bannerghatta National Park in Bangalore and requested investors to consider setting up infrastructure facilities. The announcement may have enthused his audience abroad, but not those 
back home.

“We have been hearing about this night safari concept for the last five years. The concept has turned out to be an empty rhetoric,” said Sumanth K N, a wildlife enthusiast. Since 2002, successive governments in the state have been coming up with proposals for night safari, but all in vain. Instead, the night safari has become a cliched catch-phrase to attract 
outsiders.

The idea was first mooted by K H Ranganath, forest minister in the S M Krishna government. He announced that night safari would become a regular feature in Bannerghatta National Park, but the idea was shot down by the central zoo authority citing insufficient forest area. The night safari concept was lying on the back burner till some sponsors from Singapore showed interest in it last year. But nothing moved forward.

The idea cropped up again last Saturday when Reddy tried to sell it to investors at Cheshire in the UK. But the question is: Is BNP ready for night safaris?

While the tourism department favours it citing the Singapore experience, forest officials say ‘No’. “ The idea is absolutely impossible as it would be against the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Moreover Supreme Court considers this invalid,” said a senior forest official. 

Even if the night safari has been planned for the biological park in Bannerghatta, the existing forest cover does not 
support it.

Another official, who too preferred to stay anonymous, said night safari is a distant dream. “Earlier, there was a proposal to start night safari. But as the area was small, it did not get the approval from the Centre. Night safari can be a reality only if the area is expanded and manpower is increased,” he added.

Reddy’s move has also angered wildlife activists. “It is not feasible. Night safaris are only suitable for animals in captivity. 
There has to be a proper habitat, but nothing of this sort is happening here. So it is easier said than done,” said an activist. On tourism department’s explanation of implementing the Singapore tourism model here, environmentalist Nagesh Hegde countered: “It is not that wherever you go, you see a trend and try to copy it. Every place has things unique to it. Proper planning has to be done before taking such steps.

So does that mean night safari in BNP is nothing but a bluff to attract tourists?