Safari plans inside Nagarhole Tiger Reserve’s buffer zone were dropped by Karnataka Forest Department after backlash from locals, wildlife experts

The Karnataka Forest Department has decided to drop the plan of making a safari inside the buffer zone of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve (NTR). According to officials from the department, the plan has been shelved after it drew flak from locals and wildlife conservationists.
 
The buffer area was added to the reserve to offset the pressure of tourism in the core habitat of the tiger reserve. However, since the time when the safari proposal was made, local people, including forest settlers, were in fear that elephants and tigers could be pushed into human habitation if the buffer zone safari begins.
 
While the proposed safari road suited the management plan by providing easy access to staff for prevent fires and control poaching, it did not go well with the essence of wildlife conservation.
 
“The proposed safari plan in the buffer zone of the reserve has been dropped. The zone was added to NTR in 2019 and we felt that using a fraction of the area for tourism can be a part of healthy conservation practices. However, the proposal received a lot of criticism and we do not want to go ahead with it,” said BN Niranjan Murthy, Chief Conservator of Forests, Kodagu Circle.
 
The department, however, has decided to take up a scientific study of the tiger reserve to calculate the carrying capacity of the area based on the current population of wildlife.
 
“We are exploring the carrying capacity of NTR through an extensive study taken up in the reserve area. Based on the outcome of this study, measures will be taken to 
improve the forest quality, which in turn will reduce human-wildlife conflict incidents,” he added.

“For instance, an elephant is a big animal that requires a large area and an abundant food source. We are working on improving the forest quality at Nagarhole by planting bamboo and other fruit-bearing trees,” he further explained.
 
The decision has been welcomed by wildlife researchers and activists. They say that the proposed buffer zone safari, if allowed, would have impacted the flora and fauna of the tiger landscape and the people living on the periphery of the forest.
 
Joseph Hoover, President of United Conservation Movement and former Member of State Board for Wildlife, told Bangalore Mirror that the department’s decision to drop the plan is an appreciated move.

Scores of elephants have settled in the coffee estates in that area and man-animal conflicts are escalating every other day. Four tigers have moved into coffee 
plantations, creating fear psychosis amongst estate owners and daily wage workers.
 
“If the safari roads are a necessity for forest and wildlife protection, it can be done through corporate social responsibility (CSR) contributions or revenue earned from the Tiger Foundation,” he said.
 
“We will assist the department in raising awareness and funds. Moreover, the safari ticket counter proposed to be constructed in Muthur would have obstructed the movement of elephants and other wildlife species toward the water hole in Gundpatnakere,” he added.


  We are exploring the carrying capacity of NTR through an extensive study taken up in the reserve area–BN Niranjan Murthy, Chief  Conservator of Forests 
Conservationists also pointed to the ecological footprint of such tourism activities, including all kinds of non-degradable waste generated in the area.
 
“It would have increased the load on resorts in the nearby area. In any eco-sensitive or protected area, it is more difficult to control the crowd and manage the waste generated,” said Ramesh Belagere, Wildlife Researcher, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.
 
“We have conducted a few cleaning drives in some of the protected areas in Karnataka and have found items such as sanitary napkins and diapers,” he added.