By Prakash VL

Environmentalists slam plan to introduce two more safaris at National Park

Two more safaris will soon be added to Nagarhole National Park. Currently, the safaris are organised from three sides of the park. With the addition of two, this will be one of the few national parks in the country to have safaris from five sides. Work towards introducing the two safars have already begun.

Forest officials said that one of the new safaris will be from Titimiti side (Hunsur-Gonikoppal-Thalassery road) and another centre will be opened at Muttur (near Periyapatna-Maldare road). If things go as per the plan, the new safaris (both in morning and evening) may kick-start in November-December this year. Forest officials said that many people travel from Mysuru to Kodagu and there were no safari entrances and hence the new safaris were planned.
 
Forest officials said that these new safaris have been planned as per the buffer tourism.

While the tourists have welcomed the move, the environmentalists are opposing this. Bengaluru-based Joseph Hoover of United Conservation Movement who is also a former member of the State Board for Wildlife said, “The Karnataka Forest Department is set to start a safari in the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve buffer zone to offset tourist pressure in one of India’s best wildlife habitats. The buffer was recently added to the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, expanding it from 684 sq km to 847 sq km. There are existing safaris at Kabini, Nanachi and Veeranahosahalli. But the department is ambitious to cater to more wildlife-centric tourists in Rajiv Grama and Lingapura. It will be an imprudent venture.”

Objections
He said the local communities, including forest settlers, have also objected to the new safari route, expressing their concern over elephants destroying crops in neighbouring estates and farmlands.
 
“Kodagu district has been a high risk man-animal conflict zone with elephants and tigers (there are four on the prowl) frequently sauntering into human habitations.

 Considering that tigers, leopards and elephants have been foraging into farmlands almost every day, it would be prudent to cancel the safari in the buffer zones ­–Joseph Hoover, United Conservation Movement 
Local people are also worried about the governments facilitating boating at Gundpatnakere where elephants, gaurs, deer, tigers, leopards, bears come to quench their thirst. According to senior forest officers, the government had approved the detailed project report under the Tiger Conservation Plan. Following this, construction of ticket counters and other amenities for tourists is set to start soon. The path to this area has been cleared inside the forest,” he said.

Conservation
He added that under the tiger conservation plan the government had approved safaris at Nugu wildlife sanctuary and at Gundre range in Bandipur Tiger Reserve. The proposal was shelved under public protest in 2020. 
“Considering that tigers, leopards and elephants have been foraging into farmlands virtually every day, the government would be prudent to cancel the safari in the buffer zone,” he added.