By: Niranjan Kaggere
 
 Ban on carrying personal cameras and camera-enabled phones is probable reason, but forest department officials refuse to relax rules saying census is not a free holiday in the wild
 
 The last time the forest department called for volunteers to count tigers across the big cat reserves in the state three years ago, it almost triggered a stampede. Students bunked college and techies applied for leave, to sign up. After all, the job was the stuff of excitement: A free pass into core forest areas, a chance to get close with animals in the wild and to camp in jungle lodges, no charge. 

 So when forest department officials called for volunteers about six weeks ago for a tiger census, it was stunned to receive only a handful of applications. The drop in numbers is being attributed to a decision to ban volunteers from using personal cameras and camera-enabled mobiles. These strict rules appear to have sapped volunteers’ ‘love’ for the tiger. Officials, however, are determined not to relax the rules. 

 	The census, carried out once in four years, is due to be held over eight days sometime in November-December this year. When a similar call for volunteers was made for the census in 2010, about 500 volunteers from various backgrounds, including students, techies and conservationists, had signed up. This year though, the forest department’s headquarters in Malleswaram has only received five applications. 

 	Sources say the decision to ban personal electronic equipment was made after the department suffered a bitter experience in the previous census. “Rather than observe and record their findings, volunteers were more bothered about clicking pictures on their mobiles and personal cameras,” a senior official said. “Almost all census work was accomplished by our ground staffers itself. The volunteers did very little apart from having a nice holiday.” 

 	Gayathriprasad S Prabhu, principal chief conservator for forests (wildlife) and chief wildlife warden of the state reiterated that tiger census is “not a joyride”. “We will not allow volunteers to carry cameras and camera-enabled mobiles,” Prabhu said. “The purpose of roping in volunteers is to ensure transparency. It is also to offer people a chance to observe life in the wild. The focus here is on observation and identification of wildlife. Volunteers, assisted by our staffers, are required to document their findings in charts given to them.” 

 	Prabhu revealed that counting the tiger population across the five reserves (Bandipur, Bhadra, Nagarahole, Dandeli-Anshi and BRT) in the state was hard work. Volunteers are expected to trek several kilometres every day, sometimes without food or water. If they cannot get to a lodge by nightfall, they are expected to sleep out in the wild. “Our ground staff are adapted to this work and do not mind drinking water from streams or ponds,” Prabhu said. “With conditions as severe as these, you cannot accommodate everybody. Moreover, if one wants to spend time taking pictures, why should the department sponsor such activities?” 

 	Although the department does not pay an honorarium, volunteers are provided with accommodation food, stationery and communication equipment. They are required to assist the department watchers, guards and foresters during the census on various transects. The department allots volunteers to various reserves and transects. 

 

 	SURPRISED BY THE SNUB 	Prabhu admitted that he was surprised by the drop in the number of volunteers. “I always wondered why tigers and forests fascinated youngsters and students. I’m sure our frontline offices in tiger reserves too have received hardly any applications. But it is still open and anybody interested can write to us on pccfwl@gmail.com. We have not yet decided on the number of volunteers needed for the programme. It depends on the number of transects that we draw across the reserves.” There is no test to be taken to become a volunteer. 

 	Praveen Ramaswamy, a techie and founder of Vanya Wildlife Trust, admitted that volunteers in the past had wasted the opportunity of imbibing knowledge on the eco-system and conservation issues. “Unfortunately, a majority of volunteers use the opportunity purely for recreational purposes,” Ramaswamy said. “Photography is one such recreation which diverts the focus. The purpose of volunteering which is collecting data is completely lost. Restricting the use of personal cameras is a step in the right direction. Moreover, the quality of the survey would improve further if a strict dress code of earthy colours or camouflage uniforms is enforced.” 

 

 	CENSUS DATES ON MONDAY 	Prabhu revealed that the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) and Wildlife Institute of India had directed the department to conduct a census between October and December and submit a report. The department will take a call on the actual dates of the census during a meeting on Monday (Oct 21). 

 	“The census cannot be held when the Legislative Assembly is in session since top staff will be required to be present at headquarters,” Prabhu said. “The government is scheduled to convene the Assembly sometime soon and we are awaiting exact dates. Once we know the dates of the Assembly session, we will finalise dates of the census. Our officers will meet on Oct 21 and decide on number of volunteers, transects and other issues.” 

 	Phase 1 of the census spans eight days and will include counting tigers based on their pug marks, droppings and sighting. In the second phase, the details and locations of these sightings are fed into the GPS network and in the final phase a comprehensive report is drawn up. This report is then submitted to the NTCA.