Pile-ups on Silk Board flyover ease after clampdown on stoppages; police ask volunteers to create awareness on phenomenon
 
 In a respite to commuters getting stranded in the IT corridor at the Central Silk Board flyover, the Madiwala Traffic Police have intensified the drive to disperse onlookers gathering to spot snakes in the vacant plot below. They are trying to ease things by deputing police personnel during peak hours. The police have also roped in BBMP forest cell volunteers for help. What causes serpentine traffic jams? Duh, (amorous) snakes 

 	“We are at it and have deputed extra staff during peak hours when traffic piles up,” Madiwala Traffic Police Inspector Ravi Shankar told Bangalore Mirror. “We have been controlling the crowd, which usually starts with one or two commuters stopping their two-wheelers and cabs first. Soon, others follow. However, now that we are ensuring that no vehicle stops, crowding is eliminated to a large extent.” The Traffic Police have been receiving complaints both in person and on the Bangalore City Traffic Police Facebook Page since the last fortnight. Now during peak hours, at least three traffic policemen are on the job. BM had highlighted the plight of commuters on Tuesday (What causes serpentine traffic jams? Duh, (amorous) snakes, BM March 4). 

 	Police have also sounded out the city wildlife rescue team to address the issue. “We have directed our volunteers to attend calls in the vicinity to create awareness that it is a natural phenomenon and not a ’spectacle’. This would help avoid people gathering on the flyover. The vacant plot in the KSRP premises below the flyover is a conducive habitat for snakes, and rescued snakes are also released there,” Sharath R Babu, environment advisor, BBMP forest cell, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	Commuters are breathing a sigh of relief. Many are of the view that the police action should continue for at least a month. “We are thankful to the police. But the crowding can be checked only if police are present on all days for at least a week, and subsequently on Tuesdays and Fridays for a month during peak hours. It’s on these two days that people gather in large numbers, citing superstitions,” Vishwanath Seetharam, a techie and a regular commuter, told Bangalore Mirror.