Malappuram (Kerala): A pregnant elephant died after a local allegedly fed her a pineapple stuffed with crackers, in Kerala's Malappuram.

 The incident took place on May 27 while the elephant was standing in water and forest officials said that it died standing in river Velliyar after it suffered an injury in its lower jaw.

"This is the second incident in this COVID-19 lockdown period that an elephant is dying of a broken jaw. In an earlier incident, an elephant died of jaw injuries near Kollam," Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) & Chief Wildlife Warden, Surendrakumar, IFS, told Mirror.

"It is common for farmers to kill wild boars by laying a trap of crackers camouflaged inside jaggery," he added.

A probe has been ordered to find the culprit and bring the person to book, Surendrakumar further stated.

Mohan Krishnan, a section forest officer, had posted an emotional farewell, for the elephant with photographs, captioned "apologies, sister, apologies." 

She might have come out of the forests in search of food for herself and the life within. But a tragedy awaited her. 

Untitled Carousel Celebs express anger over animal crueltyBollywood celebrities like Shraddha Kapoor, Anushka Sharma, Randeep Hooda among others have voiced against animal cruelty. 
Mohan Krishnan noted that despite the injuries she suffered she didn't hurt any inhabitants or destroyed properties she suffered, became emaciated without being able to chew anything and died. 


"First, we observed this animal on May 23 when we were informed by locals that an elephant has been roaming around in the private area of the forest. When one of our staff members went to see the elephant, it was observed that the wound in the lower jaw area was exposed. Later, for at least 24 hours the animal was trying to look for water and on May 24 we received information that the animal has come into river Velliyar," said Wildlife Officer, Silent Valley National Park.

 "Even then the animal did not take any solid matter and only took water. It was very weak so we called a vet, he was of the opinion that it may not be possible to revive back but will see what options are available. Later, we were told to observe the animal's behaviour," he added. 

 The Wildlife Officer said they later planned to take the elephant out of the river but by then she had collapsed. 

 The elephant was seen standing in the river with her mouth and trunk in the water, for some relief from the pain. The body was moved in a tractor to the forest where a postmortem was conducted and she was cremated.

-- With inputs from Agencies