Incidents of leopards venturing into human habitations have become commonplace not just in the city, but across the state. However, experts say that this is not due to a population increase of leopards, but a pointer to the shrinking forest space due to rapid urbanisation.

Bhaskar Rao, ADG of Police (Internal Security) tweeted on Monday, “People in Begur apartments are surprised that a leopard came... they built it right in the forest... now they will kill it or blame Man Animal Conflict...and the Forest Department.” 

Scientist Sanjay Gubbi explained, “With leopards’ natural habitats fast vanishing and natural prey such as deer, antelope, hare, porcupine, wild pig, being lost to hunting, they are turning to livestock. Safe livestock guarding practices are essential. If there are unfortunate accidental incidences of human injuries or deaths it has to be dealt in a different manner. 

However, if the injuries or deaths continue in the same location, efforts should be made to identify the individual leopard (which is quite a herculean task) and the animal has to be removed from the population. If we do not take a firm stand in such situations, aggrieved communities resort to extreme steps such as poisoning, torching or other means of killing every leopard in the area. It also leads to large-scale animosity towards wildlife conservation.”

He also added that spreading fake news and sensationalising information is harmful. “I remember, immediately after the VIBGYOR school leopard incident (February 2016), there were pictures of cheetahs (which are extinct in India) and images of footprints of dogs were circulated stating that leopards were still lurking around the school, creating panic. If a leopard is spotted, apartment associations and the general public can seek the help of those working with animals.”

Additionally, he also stated the importance of trying to co-exist with nature. 

He suggested that there should be interdepartmental cooperation so that suitable mitigation measures can be implemented. 

No sign of leopard

The leopard spotted in an apartment complex remained elusive on Monday too. Forest officials said that they surveyed an area of 8 km from Prestige Apartments but there was no clue of the cat. Around 10 camera traps have also been set up to keep an eye out.