In a night-long operation, the Wildlife SOS team and the Forest Department rescued a wild male sloth bear that was caught in a poacher’s snare near Chikkaballapur Range. The deadly trap was twisted tightly around the neck, leaving the bear on the brink of death. Wildlife SOS veterinarians worked for hours to try and save the injured bear but sadly the animal succumbed to the trauma and its injuries.
 
 With the growing number of incidents involving the use of deadly snares by poachers, another sloth bear was reported to have fallen victim to this barbaric hunting device near Narasimha Devara Betta in Chikkaballapur Range.
 
 The Wildlife SOS team at the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre received a late-night emergency call from Chikkaballapur RFO Vikram about a wild bear that was found trapped in a snare outside a cashewnut plantation and the snare cable had coiled around a branch making it difficult for the bear to even move. Under the guidance of Dr. Arun A Sha, the NGO’s Director Veterinary Operations, a five-member team comprising expert veterinarians and rescue personnel, along with eight forest officers, rushed to the location.
 
 The bear’s futile attempts to break free had resulted in the snare tightening its grip around the bear’s neck, causing it to suffocate. Time was running fast out but the team had to act quickly. After carefully tranquilizing the traumatized bear and cutting through the metal snare, Dr. Sha carried out a preliminary on-site checkup and applied topical treatment for the external injuries. As the extent of the internal injuries was undetermined, the animal was immediately transferred to the Wildlife SOS’ Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre for a more detailed examination.
 
 However, after four hours, the bear succumbed from the trauma and its injuries. Postmortem examination revealed that the bear had sustained tracheal damage due to tight snare around the neck region. Dr Sha said, “The bear was a male approximately eight years old. The internal injuries were extensive as the snare had ruptured the tracheal cartilage which had also led to oedema and emphysema. Despite our best efforts, the bear passed away due to the severe damage to the trachea and suffocation.
 
 Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder and CEO Wildlife SOS, said, “We are in shock and despair about the terrible fate of this bear. The snare was made out of clutch cable which is generally used for catching wild boars. This is the third incident this week where a sloth bear has been found trapped in a poacher’s snare and such incidents are occurring more and more frequently in the state. We are confident the Forest Department will be taking strict action against offenders.”