The past week has kept people on tenterhooks with numerous leopard sightings, especially in the periphery of Bengaluru. While citizens want the Forest Department to go for more intensive combing measures, environmentalists are calling for more training programmes to tackle the growing man-animal conflict. In fact, after leopard sightings near Turahalli, the department has had no luck in rescuing the elusive animal.

Wildlife Scientist Dr Sanjay Gubbi asked the state government to start a mandatory curriculum on human-wildlife conflict in Forest Watcher, Forest Guard, Deputy Range Forest Officer, and Range Forest Officer training schools. He has also asked for a minimum of three leopard rescue centres to be established in the state to treat and care for leopards that have been captured in emergency situations.

Populations of some wildlife species have increased after the implementation of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and other laws. “Based on our research, we estimate that there are about 2,500 leopards in the state, and they have been documented in 29 districts. These large cats survive in almost any kind of habitat, including large forests, small forest patches, rocky outcrops, and grasslands. They need about four kg of food per day, so they can survive on smaller prey, including black-naped hares, porcupines, wild pigs, sheep-goat, and domestic dogs. Due to these reasons, leopards can survive even in areas with high human density,” Gubbi said.

He said that more than 50 per cent of the human-leopard conflicts occur in five districts (Ramanagara, Tumkur, Mandya, Mysuru, and Hassan), but lately, the number of conflicts have also risen in Ballari, Koppal, and Kolar districts. These districts also have high levels of granite quarrying and mining, which has resulted in severe loss of leopards’ natural habitat. In areas where leopards lose their habitat, they shift to man-made habitat such as sugarcane fields, maize fields, and eucalyptus plantations.

Of the 27,418 revenue villages in Karnataka, there is an occurrence of human-leopard conflict in over 700 villages and is increasing by the day, he said. He also said that outside protected areas, poaching of leopards’ natural prey such as chital, sambar, and four-horned antelope has increased. “CCTV footage of leopards is leading to the assumption that there is an increased number of leopards. Similarly, the circulation of fake information over social media is also creating fear among people,”he said.

 He stated that there is a shortage of staff in the Forest Department, Hence, a separate division to handle human-wildlife conflict must be established.