Activists want backpacks scanned at access points after plastic and bottles were found in viscera of dead wildlife
 
 
 	The members of the Sahyadri Sanchaya, who are undertaking cleaning of the Western Ghats since April, have decided to request the Union government to monitor trekking activities at the Western Ghats.
 	  	Dinesh Holla convener, Sahyadri Sanchaya said, “Cleaning of the Western Ghats is a massive task. Every visit has a heart-rending story. While on the surface, we get to see a lot of plastic waste, especially mineral water bottles, soft drinks and food packets, as we go deep into the valleys we get liquor bottles hidden in the bushes causing huge damage to the vegetation there.” Holla recalled many incidents that indicated apathy from the visitors and pointed to animal distress.
 	 

 	TRASH TALK
 	  	Recollecting one incident, he said, “We were in a state a shock when we saw a stag bleeding and running away from us during a trek in Charmadi. We followed its footsteps and reached a riverbed only to find broken liquor bottles everywhere. In Chikkamangaluru, when the officials conducted a post mortem on a deer, they recovered about 6.5 kg plastic and one slipper. We have thus decided to approach the Union government and request them to monitor trekking activities in the Ghats.”
 	 

 	TUSKER TRAUMA 
 	  	Holla is only too familiar with the urbanisation of Charmadi and Shiradi on the ghats. He said, “We come across several elephant attack reports. But the fact remains that humans have destroyed the forests, and not the animals. Years ago, villagers of Banjaru male told us how the elephants used to go wild seeing brooms and human shoes. The villagers said the elephant corridors have turned into estates and whenever they see a broom and chappal, they assume that since humans are around, they would be chased out of the forests.”
 	 

 	DEAR DEER
 	  	Holla added that the government should also monitor illegal estates because these have led to the rampant killing of animals. Recollecting another incident from the forests in Chikkamagaluru, Holla said, “An estate worker used to be our local guide. One day, his son accompanied us to a trek and found an injured deer that was injured because of some glass pieces. It could not walk and the little boy started looking after it. Both of them were very attached to one another. The deer would come by everyday. When it went missing, the boy went looking for it. Soon, a cook pointed to a pile of the deer bones indicating the animal was being cooked. The child was very upset.”
 	 

 	Lessons not learnt
 	  	Holla said the government needed to increase the strength of forest officials and provide them with proper facilities. “It is important that trekkers must be accompanied by a local guide. There needs to be a check point where the forest officials can check the luggage to prevent liquor and cigarettes. Several people come only for entertainment, play loud music and party, which should be strictly prohibited. The Western Ghats should be a place where people come, understand, enjoy and learn about the Shola forests. Most of the rivers have their origin in the Western Ghats. We would also urge the government to provide a mesh cover at viewpoints so that people do not drop packets on the other side. There is also a need for bins and an entry fee like at most national parks,” said Holla.
 	 

 	Helping hands
 	  	Sahyadri Sanchaya has, so far, covered areas of the Charmadi Ghat, Bisle Ghat, Didupe, Kadama and Erumai Falls. Recently, at Sitanadi Falls at Agumbe, they recovered about four gunny bags of bottles. They have even installed a huge bin there. In the next five months, they plan to cover Kumaraparvatha, Kudremukh Gadaikallu, Kodachadri and Chamundibette. On an average, about 30 members participate.