Karnataka proposes changes in its policy; wants you to ‘experience’ life in the forest
 
 Karnataka is looking to move away from its tiger-centric wildlife tourism and draw attention to the subtleties of its wilderness – the flowers, trees, birds and butterflies. And to do this, the Karnataka Ecotourism Development Board (KEDB) is bringing changes to a 13-year-old wilderness (eco-tourism) policy.
 
 The first-ever discussion on ecotourism policy for Karnataka was held on Saturday, with various stakeholders resolving to adopt the major shift proposed. The event was organised by Bengaluru-based NGO Dharthi at the IIM-B campus here.
 
 The decision, which will be reviewed by a core group comprising experts, and tourism and forest officials, will finally be presented to the state government for ratification.
 
 Acknowledging that the present day ecotourism was largely centred around wildlife tourism with special focus on tigers, Vinay Luthra, chairman, KEDB, said it was high time that “we move towards a holistic approach that will include even more fascinating aspects of the forest”. “The tiger-centric ecotourism has increased stress on large mammals and we need to shift the focus on other mammals, birds, butterflies, insects, unique trees, and trekking, which are also part of ecotourism,” he said.
 
 The KEDB has also come up with a new mobile app ‘Myecotrip’, which helps tourists explore such possibilities across Karnataka forests, besides booking tickets to safari, choosing seats, buying tickets for zoo and booking forest guest houses in various parts of the state. The app will soon be released for public use.
 
 Calling for tourism without tigers, Dilip Kumar, Forest Director General (Forests), Special Secretary, said: “Rather than visiting the forests just to see tigers, people should visit these forests without an agenda and only to enjoy the beauty of the wilderness. More than driving on a safari, tourists must walk and see the vegetation, even the smaller mammals and birds, and enjoy it. This increased focus on tigers has done more harm to them than good. It is better that all of us leave only footprints and take away only memories.”
 
 Redefining the concept of ecotourism, the KEDB will allow trekking through various forests, identifying birds, trees, insects and butterflies besides spotting other smaller mammals. “Already, 11 eco-trails have been notified and in the near future, 20 more trekking routes will be identified and opened for the tourists. There is more to the forests other than tigers or elephants. Our new app will enable tourists to book guesthouses, select seat on a safari vehicle, buy tickets to the zoo and choose trekking routes. It will soon be launched for public use,” said Luthra.
 
 Aligned to pass through parts of the protected Kali Tiger Reserve in Dandeli-Anshi, the ambitious trekking trail, The Great Canara Trail, had ran into a major controversy. Development of trekking trail and setting up of civil infrastructure and creation of a trekking trail inside the Kali Tiger Reserve had attracted the wrath of National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA). Bangalore Mirror had first reported the violations in its edition dated 12 January 2017. The NTCA too had sought clarifications from the state government.
 
 Facing the heat, the government has now decided to realign the route of the trail to avoid passing through the Kali Tiger Reserve. “The Canara Trail is subject to final clearance from the KFD. However, the route will slightly be altered and pass through permitted tourism areas of Kali Tiger Reserve,” Luthra revealed.