This is a shop that most photographers, even wannabes, swear by. If you want anything and everything related to photography this is where you go. “Call Jayesh (the owner), he will get whatever you want,” is one sentence you hear repeatedly if you are looking for a hard-to-find equipment. When you get to Anand Rao Circle, ask anyone for Foto Circle and they will guide you.
   Here you can get: cameras for beginners to special accessories for professional photographers; studio lights, printers, tripods, video cameras and props – you name the brand and you will find it here.  If not, they will source it for you. Jayesh Mehta, proprietor of Foto Circle, welcomes the challenge of sourcing even the littlest of little accessories for a customer. “Nothing is too small or too big,” he says.
   Apart from finding Canon, Nikon, Panasonic and Sony, you will also get sports optics of Carl Ziess and Olympus, photo accessory products of Manfrotto, Hoya and B+W filters and Sandisk and Kingston products. 
   The salespeople are helpful (no, they are not nagging or irritating). They will guide you if you are a novice. They suggest cameras based on the customer’s budget and needs. Beginners are given tutorials about the camera as well. Entry level DSLRs like Canon 1100D cost Rs 29090 and compact cameras start from Rs 3209. To encourage upcoming photographers, Foto Circle also organises photo contests.
   This is like a candy store for wildlife photographers. We don’t fall under that category, but we still panted over the cotton, water resistant jackets with extra pouches; a must for wildlife photographers. The special bean bags that provide terra firma to cameras in uneven territory are also popular with wildlife photographers (Rs 980).
   Here, you can also get studio lights (Rs 22,500/set); range of backdrops, from plain to designer ones, canvas and hand painted ones starting from Rs 980; Roman Pillars, Queen Sheets (to give a Maharaja era look) and unique props sourced from places as far as Amritsar and Ludhiana. They also source specialized and increasingly rare products like 120 format, 35 mm format in slides and negative films. Bromide print papers and enlargers are available. Foto Circle is indeed a treasure trove for photographers or those interested in photography.
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coordinated by Jayanthi Madhukar