By Varsha Nataraj 
 
The sudden surge in the number of birds getting injured in the city has set off alarm bells, not because of the numbers that have been reported but because of the injured birds that go unreported and, sometimes, die. According to the People for Animals, an animal welfare organisation, the cases have drastically increased over the span of two weeks. The elevation is said to have promoted dread among the birds and animal rescuers. But what prompted the surge in the bird injuries in the first place?

Birds are injured due to the manjha used in kites’ threads. The threads are smeared with glass to make them sharp and to help cut off the opponent’s thread. This has injured many birds, cut off their wings and could lead to fatality as well.

In 2017, the National Green Tribunal (NGT) chief justice (retd) Swatanter Kumar had imposed a blanket ban on manjha made of nylon or non-biodegradable synthetic material. The use of manjha has been reported to have posed threat to humans, birds and animals in the past. It is also harmful for the environment.

“None of the laws imposed by the government is in effect. Manjha is still being sold in shops. Why is this not confiscated?” says Colonel Dr. Navaz Shariff, the Chief Veterinarian at PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre, an animal rescuer at People for Animals.

The team of People for Animal had carried out a crow rescue which was entangled in manjha on top of a tree at Vijayanagar on Friday. Over the last two weeks, more than 10 cases have been reported and rescued from manjha injuries.

“The victim species are mostly crows and black kites. But lately, the Black-Crowned Night Heron, Pond Heron and Barn Owls have reported injuries due to the same reason. It is very rare that these species get affected”, added Colonel Dr. Navaz Shariff, the Chief Veterinarian at PfA Wildlife Rescue & Conservation Centre.

A lot of times the injury is so bad that the birds can never fly again. They end up hopping on the ground and cannot be released into the wild.

As an alternative to manjha, the rescuers and animal conservatives say that soft cotton threads must be used to minimize the injuries. The laws must have to be made stricter to conserve the wildlife in the city.