A video of tourists cooking near Bhagamandala and dirtying the place has gone viral. This has hurt the sentiments of the locals, who have taken the issue up with the government and district administration, seeking action.
 
 Vivek Povaiah, social activist and an entrepreneur, said this temple should also be considered like the temples in other parts of Karnataka. Kerala too follows a strict policy. The locals who worship the lord are deeply hurt when tourist play loud film songs and shout inside the premises. “We are not against tourists, but the sanctity of the place should be maintained. Bhagamandala is not a tourist spot; it is a place of worship. Do not hurt the local sentiments, by converting this holy place into a picnic spot,” he said.
 
 A letter in this regard has been sent to Tourism Minister Priyank Kharge, Chief Secretary, Deputy Commissioner Kodagu, IGP Mysuru and SP Kodagu seeking action. The police need to be empowered to take action, he said.
 
 Sundar Muthanna, Bengaluru Co-ordinator for Coorg Wildlife Society, said, “If resorts cannot be built on the Tirupathi Hills, how can they be built on Talacauvery hills? Cooking by visitors to Bhagamandala has to be stopped. Food waste is being thrown into the Triveni Sangama where we take a holy bath. Stop all the constructions mushrooming on Talacauvery Hill. There is a need to separate pilgrims from tourists. Only those who bathe in Bhagamandala sangama should get tokens to enter the Talacauvery temple,” he said.
 
 Prashanth Chinnappa, a member and spokesperson of Clean Coorg Initiative, said, “While there is a set of tourists that visits Coorg to experience the culture, hospitality- and food, the other half comes with heavy baggage. It is being observed increasingly that in Bhagamandala area, mass tourism is destroying the ecologically sensitive geography especially by persons cooking outside by the road or the temple area, which is considered holy by the natives. They bring their LPG cylinders, cooking items and use every space to exploit it with unprecedented garbage disposing. Members from Clean Coorg Initiative have constantly made people pack their belongings as and when they come across such tourists. “Without heavy fines and punishment the problem can’t be addressed,” he said.