An ill-conceived operation to rescue a tigress that had strayed out of the Nagarahole forests, ended in a tragedy. The carelessly administered tranquilliser shots likely killed the young animal – the state’s second such casualty within a week. The tigress, by the way, was said to be a nursing mother of two cubs
 
 
 
 
 Has the success of Karnataka’s tiger conservation efforts made its forest officials cavalier with the lives of these big cats? An eight-year-old tigress died in the early hours of Tuesday while a team of forest officials were trying to ‘rescue’ it from the periphery of Nagarahole reserve forests, after it had strayed close to human settlements. This is the second such death in less than a week. A wounded eight-year-old tiger, rescued from Bandipur, had died last Friday.
 
 The panic-stricken forest department has now ordered for a high-level inquiry, comprising two officers from the veterinary department and an expert from the Hebbal-based Indian Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals (IAHVB).
 
 The tigress died after it was shot – three times – with the tranquiliser dart by veterinarians attached with the Karnataka forest department (KFD).
 
 Even though the KFD officials said the tigress had a broken canine and an injured paw, the deficiencies were certainly not life-threatening and it could have survived for another one or two-years in the wild, considering it was only 8-9 years old.
 
 Despite this, the department — acting on reports that it was repeatedly coming out of the forest area and moving close to human settlements — chose to capture the animal.
 
 Gearing up to capture the tigress, the forest department officials, with limited equipment, man power and no real crowd-control plan, embarked on the mission on the cold evening of Monday. However, their late evening operation, which went on till the early morning of Tuesday, went terribly wrong with the rescued tiger dying in their custody.
 
 A neutral team of experts was summoned to conduct the post mortem and ascertain reasons for the death. The experts have collected visceral samples and other body organs for further examination.
 
 WHAT WERE THEY THINKING?
 
 S Manikantan, Conservator of Forests and Director of Rajiv Gandhi National Park (Nagarahole Tiger Reserve), told Mirror that the details to the death will be known a couple of days later with the team has submitted its report.
 
 “The tigress was weak and had already killed cattle near Gundattur village in Antarasanthe Range, and had come out of the forests. It was always seen moving close to human settlements and anything could have happened. In fact, on Monday the tigress had chased a boy too on the outskirts of the village. So, there was a potential threat, and before the situation could go wrong, we decided to rescue and relocate it,” he said.
 
 According to Manikantan, the team, led by veterinarian Dr Umashankar, traced the tigress into a banana plantation and tried darting at it with tranquiliser. “At around 5.45 pm, they shot the first dart, but it fled the scene. A second shot was fired when it was trying to escape. Our staff searched for the tigress till midnight. Around 12.30 am, they discovered the animal and moved it into a cage and brought it to the main road close to Hudgur Gate. By around 4 am, it had died despite their efforts to revive it with antidote. It had broken canine and an injured paw,” said Manikantan.
 
 
 
 
 
 NO PERMISSION
 
 According to the department, the officials had no written permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden to carry out the rescue. Clueless on what to do with the tranquilised tiger (Mysuru zoo had declared that it would not accept any animal because of the bird flu outbreak), the staff had reportedly waited for nearly three hours at Hudgur Gate for further instructions from the higher ups. By the time they could decide on the further course of operation, the tigress had died.
 
 Chief Wildlife Warden BG Hosmath said he was in Gadag as part of public consultation and was told about the operation over the phone. “There was no way I could have given permission in writing as I too was out of station. What if something had happened if they were made to wait for a written permission? Situations like this would force officials to decide on their own and act accordingly. But to our bad luck that the tiger died,” he said.
 
 “The post mortem revealed that the big cat had absolutely nothing in its stomach, had broken canine and injured limb. Three experts were present during the process.
 
 It is very difficult at this juncture to say why the tiger died. Only after the experts submit their report can we reveal the actual cause of death,” said Manikantan.
 
 
 DRUG OVERDOSE?
 
 While the reason for the tigress’ death is yet to be officially confirmed, rumour has it that it was a case of tranquiliser overdose. A forest department official confirmed to Bangalore Mirror that the veterinarian had fired the tranquiliser gun three times, when the permitted dose is one. “The vet was also under tremendous pressure. Not only was tigress aggressive, there was also a huge crowd – even at that hour. Everybody was panic-stricken and they just fired at the tigress,” a senior official revealed.
 
 Sources said when the first shot was fired, the tigress escaped, was chased by the team, and darted a second time. Later, when they spotted the animal again, it was darted again to be moved into the cage.
 
 A video footage of the rescue operation shows a forest guard repeatedly jabbing the unmoving body of the tigress with a syringe to administer the antidote, trying to revive the animal. But it was soon dead.
 
 While many are arguing that the repeated darting could have killed the animal, which was already weak from not having eaten for over a week, top officials of KFD have refused to comment on the reason for the death.
 
 BG Hosmath, PCCF (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, said: “At this juncture, it is difficult to say who or what went wrong. I am not ruling out that veterinarians had gone wrong. The best of treatments even in ICUs go wrong. It is difficult to pin point the exact reason at this stage. They too had no option but to tranquilise it.
 
 Fortunately, the tigress, despite moving close to human habitat, was not poisoned by people. Something would have gone wrong during the operation, but if you look at it from the larger perspective, there was no alternative. Unfortunately, the tigress died during the process.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEEDLE HIT THE SPINE
 
 Meanwhile, sources, who were part of the operation, said the dart needle had hit the spine when it should have been aimed at a muscle. This was likely the cause of the animal’s death, though KFD officials refused to acknowledge it. While the KFD is yet to establish the identity of the tigress, villagers and wildlife activists have confirmed that the deceased animal was the famous ‘Backwater female’ that was repeatedly sighted along with her two cubs by safari goers. However, nobody during the operation came across the cubs, and the officials were trying to identify the animal.
 
 
 Using the tranquiliser dart in the wild 
 
 
 Darting a wild animal is often a challenge for veterinarians. Unlike captive animals, whose condition is known to veterinarians, wild animals are difficult to judge and this ups the risk.
 
 Dr Manjunath, who has darted several animals, gave an insight into the process.
 
 “Veterinarians, world over, use a combination of Xylazine and Ketamine in a ratio between 1:2 and 2:3. This is a common combination of drug and proven to be safe for administering felines. Sometimes another drug, Propofol, is also used, but very rarely. The dosage is proportionate to the body weight of the animal. For each kilo, one milligram of drug is administered. For a tiger that weighs 200 kg, the right dosage would be 200 mg of Xylazine and 600-800 mg of Ketamine. If the animal wakes up, we do a top-up with Ketamine.”
 
 According to Dr Manjunath, a tiger would take at least 15-20 minutes to fall after it is properly darted. “Once it falls, it would sleep for 30 minutes to 1 hour.
 
 Usually, tranquilisers are given on empty stomach. If the animal has anything in its stomach, it could get pushed up through the oesophageal wall and get into the lungs, leading to aspiration pneumonia. So, an animal is darted only when it is hungry. The injection is fired at the muscle,” he said.