By Ananya Kashyap
 
 
 It was found with limbs tied near Kodigehalli Main Road in the city
 
 A monitor lizard was rescued near Kodigehalli main road road on the Friday morning. The rescuers got a call from a nearby puncture shop owner stating that there was a sack that contained some sort of animal and all the animals were going near it. M Nagendran from Quick Animal Rescue Team who reached the spot, finally saved the reptile and it was handed over to the wildlife rescue centre in Bannerghatta.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Nagendran said, “I got a call at around 9.45 am from the puncture shop, telling me that they found a bag which could have an animal as there were many dogs that were going near the sack. I went there in ten minutes to find out that there was a monitor lizard inside. I immediately took it over to my place and opened the sack. The hands were tied and the reptile seemed pretty weak. Since the body was dry, I even wiped it with a wet cloth and dried it using a hair dryer. It seemed to be fine, but its limbs were tied.”
 
 “Monitor lizards are usually found in forests. So, this has definitely been brought from the wild. They bring it for its meat here and this is the second case we have got in one-and-a-half years. I think the people might have seen the cops at the check post and dropped it off on getting scared. We have handed over the monitor lizard to Bannerghatta..”
 
 Monitor Lizards have equal protection rights as that of any other animal and a person can be punished for poaching it. Nagendran has also got close to 45 calls and is being offered Rs.1,500 per kilogram of meat to which he has already spoken to the police about. He says this is used for medical purposes where it is given to women with backaches. A restaurant on the Andra Pradesh-Karnataka border is known for this meat.
 
 The team not just rescued the lizard, but also found an adult male peacock which could have been brought here for its meat. Nagendran says, “This was found in the basement of an apartment opposite BEL North gate. It is very surprising that we found a bird like a peacock there as even a crow doesn’t go nearby because of the radio waves emitted from their research centre. Only eagles usually fly there. We also know that this was for meat as all the feathers of the bird were missing. The bird was bleeding from its mouth and when we tried doing the CPR, we could smell poison, which is obviously a deliberate attempt by somebody to kill it. By the time we took it to the WRRC, the peacock passed away.”