Digital cameras have brought forth a great new brigade of photographers – the amateurs, semi professionals and the professionals. Budget constrictions make them buy what they feel is absolutely necessary. So, in case there is a chance to shoot wildlife, the thrill is obviously lessened if the necessary lens is not in your collection. This is where Progear Hire steps in. A venture by photographer Ashish Parmar, it has a collection of lenses and camera gear and accessories that can be hired for a day, a week, a fortnight or more. “I have seen this kind of an enterprise abroad and in the city as well but they are on totally different platform. Mine is simple: Whatever goes in making a good shot, we will will hire it out.” This means a professional could hire a lens suited for sports photography, a nature enthusiast can hire a tripod for his/her camera, you name it and Progear Hire has it, insists Parmar. The USP of the venture, however, is what Parmar calls as 'handholding'. “You can call me and tell me the destination you are going, the camera you have and I will suggest the right gear which is location and camera specific. Often, for amateurs, this is a huge plus.” Currently, Progear Hire has the top brands like Cannon and Nikon but he plans to introduce other brands which will also spell quality.
   How does the hiring work? Once you have figured out the lenses needed, you can either visit their website (progearhire.com) or call them up. At an appointed time, you can go to them and pick up the gear that you want to hire. Before taking the gear home, just sign a rental agreement. That's it. Parmar does not ask for a deposit even. Alternately, the entire process can be done online and all you need to do is upload the required documents and the gear is delivered home.
   In case you like the lens you hired, then you could even buy it. “But that's just a happy option,” says Parmar, “not a requisite.” The cost of renting out the gear will depend on what you actually want. From Rs 250 to Rs 4000, the rentals will be adjusted in terms the period hired. The longer the period, it will work out more economical. For instance, the latest in the market, a Canon 500 mm IS II that's about six and a half lakhs in the market can be rented out for about Rs 4000 a day. A Nikkor 50 mm f/1.8G AF-S lens that can be used for portraits, street and wedding photography in night and low light can be hired for Rs 325 for a day or for 7 days plus at Rs 275. There are cameras, lights, notepads, tablets and video equipment that will let you try out the equipment in case you need to buy them .
   As Parmar says, it is about trying out different lenses, cameras and accessories at convenience. In the process, it is also about creating good images. Progear Hire prides itself on being one of the few such enterprises that offers rentals without taking deposits. But it is their suggestions and inputs that will probably touch a photographer's heart.