The Karnataka High Court has taken a suo moto case on the rise in elephant mortality cases in Karnataka due to electrocution and other unnatural causes. HC exercised its jurisdiction based on an article published in the Bangalore Mirror on June 13.

The report highlighted that four elephants in the state have died due to electrocution in just the last month. Based on the report, the court has observed that elephants and other wildlife in the state and the country are assets. They deserve protection and care for their health and lives, and the authorities have corresponding statutory duties. “Whether inside or outside the sanctuary, the elephants and other wildlife would need care. Their safety is to be ensured at all costs by keeping vigil and taking appropriate measures. The forest and other authorities owe a statutory duty in this regard. Their exposure to electrocution or other unnatural causes of death has to be prevented,” noted HC on Friday.

The court has thus sent notices to the Union of India through the Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change; the Chief Secretary to the Government of Karnataka; the Department of Forest, Ecology, and Environment of Karnataka; the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest and Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka Forest Department; and the Divisional Forest Officer of Mysuru, asking the authorities to respond by putting forward facts and figures in the matter.

All the above authorities have been directed to submit their response regarding the steps and measures that are presently taken to ensure the safety and protection of elephants and other wildlife assets in Karnataka, along with ways that the authorities use to fix the liability of officers when such kinds of deaths of elephants and wildlife occur. Apart from that, the court has also sought clarity on steps proposed to be taken in the future in light of the repeated elephant deaths occurring and reported so as to prevent such instances of unnatural deaths. 

“Elephants and wildlife have the right to live in a safe environment, not to die an unnatural death, as they stand under statutory protection. The successive and repeated incidents of elephant deaths in the state in different areas due to electrocution or other unnatural causes is a serious matter to worry about. The report reflects that the incidents take place due to a lack of diligence on the part of the authorities concerned in charge of ensuring safety measures for the elephants in particular and the wildlife in general,” noted the HC order copy.

 Fell in his prime: Jumbo death leaves all shockedThe death of 38-year-old Ashwathama, a Dasara elephant, in Karnataka due to electrocution has raised concerns. The incident highlights the issue of jumbos dying from illegal power tapping. Conservationists emphasize the need for action to prevent such tragedies.

Citing the death of Ashwathama recently in Mysuru, the BM report also stated that Karnataka has 47 cases of unnatural deaths and lost 35 jumbos to electrocution between January 2021 and now (June 12, 2024).