A Rs 3-crore project is ongoing where a pathway, garden, parking area, sandpit, children’s park and other tourist attractions are being built 

The first official crocodile park is set to come up at Dandeli in Uttar Kannada district. The park is located 1.5 kilometres from Dandeli bus stand where the Kali River flows. Unlike the other wildlife parks, there won’t be any captive crocodiles kept for public viewing. Instead, a public gallery will be constructed where people can watch the Kali River. This place has been chosen because the sightings of crocodiles are more at that area where the crocodiles are found to rest on the nearby banks.
 
Three viewing decks have been constructed where more than 100 people can watch the river and if they are lucky, they can also watch the crocodiles. The project is taken up at a cost of Rs 3 crore. A local source said: “We have constructed a pathway, garden, parking area, toilets, sandpit and children’s park. We also have models of giraffe and deer as an attraction. There will be a gazebo, pergola, ticket counter and security shelter.”


 As the Kali River has a shorter course, the number of crocodiles may be more– Sanjay Gubbi, scientist 
Dandeli is one of the favourite spots for Bengalureans for both leisure travellers as well as adventure seekers. It has a number of places to visit and one of the favourite activities in Dandeli is to go rafting. However, many say that crocodile sightings are quite common in Dandeli. Many villagers say that the crocodiles enter during summer when the water is low. Recently, a video went viral where a crocodile was seen walking toward the village with many trying to crowd to take photos and videos of the reptile.


 . 
Senior scientist Sanjay Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror: “As Kali River has a comparatively shorter course, the density of crocodiles may be more. I feel that the sightings may also be because of the local feeding. Unless we do a scientific study, we cannot exactly say if the crocodiles near Dandeli are more than in the other areas. Wherever wildlife is being fed, we can see them coming out in the open. I recently saw a video of a crocodile entering a village with too many people surrounding it.
 
We need to understand that there should be no crowding when crocodiles or any wildlife enters human habitats. Instead of taking selfies or photographs, we need to let them return to their place.”