Wednesday’s decision of the Bangalore Club managing committee to drop the proceedings against senior IPS officer R P Sharma and close the matter has not gone down well with a large section of its members. Two members quit the committee immediately protesting against the decision. A meeting called in the evening to persuade them to withdraw their resignations went in vain. 

 	Since Thursday morning, members have been mulling moving a no-confidence motion against the club president and are exploring the options. 

 It was club president P V Jayashankar, according to sources close to him, who decided to restore peace and harmony in the club and to “move on.’’ The trigger to drop the proceedings against Sharma came from some of the top bureaucrats and a senior cabinet minister who convinced the managing committee that after all, “it was a fight between the security guard and the drivers and Sharma had no role in the physical abuse.’’ 

 	Soon after the decision, the social networking page of the club members was flooded with views and counterviews -- most of them lashing out against the committee for its decision. And by the end of the day, according to club sources, the comments had to be removed after a diktat came from the president. 

 	Sources close to Jayashankar said the president wouldn’t mind resigning from the post, if it comes to a no-confidence motion against him, as “he is not power-hungry.’’ “ Whatever decisions he has taken, it was done keeping the best interests in mind. The managing committee has been consulted at every stage. He is fed up answering the authorities such as police, excise, BBMP, forest, commercial tax et al, members and the media. He may not mind stepping down if somebody else can step in and find a solution to every problem,’’ the source added. 

 

 	FOREST SQUAD VISIT 

 Forest mobile squad officers too visited the Bangalore Club premises on Thursday and inspected wildlife trophies (taxidermy trophies) kept in the club. The trophies include antler, bison heads and stuffed cheetah besides other trophies. However, the club management produced documents pertaining to the trophies - a declaration and permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state. The officials said these papers would be verified to confirm the legality of the trophies.