See some photos
Photographer Shiv Gandhi’s maiden photo exhibition, ‘Scapes of India’, is based on picturesque Indian landscapes. The pictures are a rare collection covering nature including mountains, rivers and some mesmerising pictures of lesser-known travel destinations. Gandhi is popular for his collection of photos on all subjects, ranging from wildlife to heritage and monuments, as well as his tributes to painters Raja Ravi Varma and John William Godward.

 WHEN: 10am to 6pm, Till February 11 WHERE: RêVES Art Gallery, Marenahalli Rd, Jayanagar 8th Block CALL: 99019 31314 

 Share your stories
Do you have something to share? Have you been pouring your heart out on paper, or do you just want to bounce your writing off of someone? Write Out Loud is the perfect place to do just that. Every Tuesday they bring to you a heart-plucking session of poetry and good company. There is a theme every week and a featured poet. But if you want to read out or share something beyond the theme, that’s ok too.

 WHERE: Lahe Lahe, 80 Feet Road, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 7.30pm, February 5
 TICKETS: `100, bookmyshow.com

 Go for this show
Check out a retrospective of Harendranath Thakur’s paintings. His work encompasses tribal art forms, minimalistic lines, primitive culture and carries the essence and emotion of nature, life and faith. His works depict harmony, simplicity and peace through colour, form, and tribal and contemporary themes. He gets inspiration from the core of creation, complimented by the serene natural surroundings of Jharkhand. This exhibition showcases around 200 of his artworks, from drawings to landscape paintings and collage paintings, which explores his oeuvre of 
45 years.
WHERE: National Gallery of Modern Art, Manikyavelu 
Mansion, Palace Road WHEN: 5.30pm, ongoing, till March 3 
(Mondays and National Holidays closed)

 Time for jokes
This is a show where comedians will try some of their new material for the very first time so come and be part of their journey and witness their material being developed. You may recognise comedians Kjeld Sreshth, Aamer Peeran, Anand Rathnam, Joteen Patro, Somnath Padhy, Shamik Chakrabarti, Gautham Govindan, Kritharth Srinivasan, Ramya Ramapriya, Sathya Nandagopal and Rose Ann Joseph, who have performed in the past. Since the lineup is subject to change every week, you can expect some surprise guest spots from travelling comedians from other cities. 

 WHERE: Bistro Claytopia, 80 Feet Peripheral Road, 1st Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 8pm, February 5
 TICKETS: `100, bookmyshow.com

 How to reach an audience
Sage Tyrtle has been improvising in Toronto since 2010. A professional storyteller, she will take a storytelling workshop and an Armando workshop. If you’ve had that moment where you’re telling a story and you suddenly realise that everyone around is just waiting for you to stop talking, you will learn how to tell stories in a way that captivates your audience. The Armando Workshop will help you to tease out suggestions from true stories.
WHERE: Smart Studio, Tank Rd, Sindhi Colony, Ulsoor
 WHEN: 6pm, February 5 and February 6
 TICKETS: `1,000, 
eventshigh.com
 CALL: 9845236242