District going all out to sell itself as the ideal adventure destination
 
 Udupi will no longer be just associated with hotels, as the district is all set for a tourism makeover.
 
 
 
  An aerial picture of Udupi, from a drone photography show organised by two veteran photographers, Astro Mohan and Arun Mahendrakar, in Udupi recently
 
 As part of this makeover, the district is taking steps to promote adventure activities such as scuba diving, and will launch some units officially in October. At a meeting of the Tourism Development Committee chaired by the district in-charge minister Pramod Madhwaraj on Saturday, several tourism potential were discussed.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror on the sidelines of the meeting, Udupi district deputy commissioner Priyanka Mary Francis said they were considering several applications for setting up of scuba diving units. “Since the beaches have been given for maintenance and development to private agencies, it is not possible for the district administration to give a sub contract to another party. So the agencies will have to look into it,” she said.
 
 She said the minister had got funds to the tune of Rs 1 crore approved from General Thimayya National Academy of Adventure for procuring equipment required for scuba diving. “We are hoping to introduce the scuba diving in Kaup and Malpe,” she said. The in-charge of Malpe and St Mary’s Island beach development, Sudesh Shetty, said they have zeroed in on two agencies for the initiative and were confident of formally launching scuba diving units by October. Among other beach activities, parasailing has already been launched at Malpe. “We hope to reintroduce heli-tourism by April this year,” he said. Meanwhile, the district is also considering introducing sky diving and houseboats for tourists.
 
 
 Brand Udupi
 
 The deputy commissioner said that they are making all efforts towards branding tourism in Udupi. “We will conduct ideation workshops and also look for a suitable tagline. We have a skilled pool of students around us, especially in Manipal. By July, we hope to organise the workshops. We will also develop concepts for profiling various places. A brochure would be taken out and we are considering introducing hop-on-hop-off bus for city tours. We will be developing circuits — pilgrim and beach. Since we have a wildlife area, we hope to identify hike/trekking routes in the Kodachadri range,” she said