Kolkata: Altogether 96 animals died, including seven rhinos at Kaziranga National Park and Tiger Reserve, in the flood which hit parts of the state in the last few days. The death toll has reached 79 on Saturday and 26 districts are affected with River Brahmaputra flowing above the Jorhat, Sontipur, Tezpur, Goalpara, Dhubri, Barpeta and several other areas.

According to DFO of Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, 96 animals died and 132 have been rescued in Kaziranga National Park and 59 camps, out of 223, are affected inside the Park.

49 animals died due to drowning while 15 died under treatment in rescue centers. “The animals which died due to drowning include seven rhinos, three wild buffaloes, seven wild boars, two swamp deers, 74 hog deers, and two porcupines died in the flood. Among the Rhinos, three female and five male rhinos have died in various areas of the forest like Tinimukhuni Nala of Arimora
forest Beat, western side of Mori Difollo, and so on.

The Kaziranga Park authority said that 50 animals, including 46 hog deer were injured while 132 have been rescued by the forest officials, locals and rescue workers.

 A tigress had strayed to a house near Kaziranga and the forest officials tranquilized the animal and then took it to the rescue camp, after which it was released in the safer part of the reserve.

The Park authority tweeted: “A rhino has strayed out near Bandar Dhubi area at Bagori Range yesterday and is taking rest near NH37. The DRIVE OUT Operation is being carried out to guide the rhino to the park.”

A baby rhino, which got separated from its mother, was rescued by the forest workers and officials and was taken to a safer place by the staff of Kaziranga and Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) on July 16.

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal had visited the flood-affected areas of Kaziranga National Park on July 16. "The staff of the national park are committed towards the safety of the animals. So far, more than 80 people have lost their lives due to flood, erosion and landslides in the state," the CM had tweeted.