Identity theft and online impersonation has a new address - matrimony websites. A fake profile of classical dancer and popular South Indian actress Lakshmi Gopalaswamy is on the matrimony site Jeevansathi.com. The profile has a photograph of the actress as well and lists out the details regarding the actress, from her date of birth and caste to educational qualification and family details. What gives away its fake identity is the information in the ‘desired partner profile.’ The preference is for “Physically Handicapped from birth, Physically Handicapped due to accident, Mentally Challenged from birth, Mentally Challenged due to accident.”

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, the actress said that the profile was a fake and was not put up either by her or her family members. The profile however claims it was put up by ‘self.’ Initially, when Lakshmi Gopalaswamy was told about the profile, she said she was not interested in any marriage proposals. “Maybe my father has put up the profile,” she said. When told about the contents, she was shocked. “I am shocked and don’t know who has done it. Thank you for informing me. I will see that it is removed,” she said.

INSIDER JOB
The fake profile gives out some not so well-known details about the actress. It says that her father is a partner in a well-known business firm but not active at present and that her mother holds a doctorate in ‘Musicology’ and is a retired lecturer. It also mentions that her brother is a wildlife scientist who studied wildlife ecology in the University of Florida. Surprisingly such information is not even available on her Wikipedia page, which raises suspicions that somebody known to her and apparently nursing a grudge - perhaps even a jilted lover - must have done it.

When the Bangalore office of the Noida based website was contacted, they asked for the ID number of the profile. Afshan, the person who spoke to Bangalore Mirror, said that the profile would be deleted immediately. Surprisingly Afshan is the sole contact person for all the three local branches. The phone numbers for the website too are the same for their Jayanagar, Koramangala and M G Road Manipal Centre branches. Later, Afshan called to say that the actress would have to call in person and give a complaint before the profile could be deleted. Afshan also said that the particular profile has been active since April 2008 and no complaint has been received about it so far.

Incidentally, by not being able to recognise a well-known face, it shows how casual these websites are in screening or verifying information before uploading profiles in the public domain.

NOT SO ANONYMOUS
Bangalore born Lakshmi Gopalswamy, was a well known Bharatanatyam dancer before she got into Malayalam films. Her decision to act in Malayalam films was to be able to remain anonymous in Bangalore. But she soon acted in Tamil and eventually in Kannada films as well. She also hosted a few shows on television. Her last film was ‘Nam Yejamanru’ with Vishnuvardhan which released a few weeks ago. If you are still wondering if the actress is looking out for a groom, she is not. “I am not interested,” was all the actress had to offer.

Details in the fake profile
Age : 34 years
Height : 5’ 3”
Gender : Female
Religion : Hindu
Caste : Hindu: Brahmin
Mother tongue : Kannada/Karnataka
Marital Status: Never Married
Posted By : Self
Education : M.A
Occupation : Anchoring/ TV/ Films
Location : Bangalore, India
Annual Income : Rs.10,00,001 - 15,00,000
Resident status : Citizen
Date of Birth : Jan 07, 1975
Country of Birth : India
City of Birth : Bangalore 
Sub Caste /Surname: Smartha
Family Values: Moderate
Family Type: Nuclear Family
Family Status: Rich/Affluent
Father: Business/Entrepreneur
Mother: Retired
Brother(s): 1 brother
Sister(s): 0 sisters
Living with Parents: Yes 
Plan to work after 
marriage: Yes