In one of the most adventurous bird rescue operations in the city, a Brahminy Kite stuck for four days at a height of 175 feet on Chinese manja — a type of nylon thread used to fly kites — was rescued on Tuesday night. 

 	On Feb 1, a city-based NGO received a call that the bird was found trapped in a Nilgiri tree at 9th Cross, Wilson Garden. After the NGO tried and failed to rescue the bird, citizens informed BBMP’s forest cell on February 3. The cell’s attempts also fell flat. 

 	Time was running out for the bird. On Feb 4, the cell approached Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services Department, but the latter could not help as its only Bronto Skylift — the ladder used for emergency rescue operations — was sent for servicing. 

 	The Nilgiri tree where the bird was stuck was more than 200 feet tall and slippery to climb. With no adjacent buildings at that height, the rescue was challenging. Eight carcasses of birds in the tree found during the rescue operation proved the mission was risky. 

 	Sharath R Babu, environment advisor to BBMP forest cell, finally decided to seek the help of professional mountaineers who rehearse at Kanteerava Stadium. 

 	With mountaineers Madhu C R and Shivalinga M on board, the forest cell formed a core team. While Babu coordinated the entire operation, Prasanna Kumar, a wildife rescuer, took charge of commanding the operation from the ground. Jairaj, a mountaineer and wildlife rescuer, would guide the duo from ground as they were clueless about handling birds. 

 	By the time rescue operation began, it was 6 pm. A halogen floodlight was used to counter darkness. 

 	Jairaj said, “Madhu climbed the tree step by step and reached the top. As directed by us from the ground, he cut the branch the kite was stuck to. Next, he lowered the bird using the same rope he used to climb. He also noticed a Pariah Kite that was stranded in the tree and rescued it.” 

 	“By the time the Brahminy Kite was brought down alive it was 9.30 pm. The bird was very weak. It is now recovering at the Bannerghatta’s rehab centre,” said Prasanna Kumar.