By: Nitindra Bandyopadhyay
 
 
 De-nitrification requires reeds and plants around lakes; stone-laying around water bodies led to decline of population of open-water birds like ducks, pintails & shovelers 
 
 
 	Trying to restore lakes by lining them with stones to prevent erosion, makes for a pleasurable sight but it is also resulting in the decline of a once-thriving avian ecosystem around the city’s water bodies. Encroachment and pollution are acting as catalysts to the problem.
 	
 	  	Dr MB Krishna, a city-based ornithologist, said, “Much of the development of lakes follows a defined pattern, where a fence is put around the lake area. A soup bowl structure is made with a steep shoreline with stone pitching that removes the vegetation from the lake.”
 	
 	  	Birders in the city believe that compared to the 90s, there has been a decline of 80 per cent in both water birds and wetland birds. He said around 340 species of birds have been known to exist in the city, but less than half of that number exist today. 	
 	
 	Ulhas P Anand, a birder, said, “The design for lake restoration and rejuvenation that is being implemented in the city is a disaster. The current process of rejuvenation involves converting lakes into closed water bodies with concrete boundaries. This will lead to the slow death of the lakes.”
 	
 	  	Experts say that the life of a tank is in its shallows as many migratory birds live there. Due to stonewalling, populations of open-water birds like the ducks, garganeys, pintails and shovelers have declined. Stone linings have also resulted in steep shores affecting populations of shore birds like sandpipers, green marsh, spotted marsh and greenshanks.
 	
 	  	Krishna said that the only way to de-nitrify lake water was to grow plants around the water bodies to absorb the nitrogen. In absence of such plants, sewage water laced with nitrates enters the lake leading to algal bloom.
 	
 	  	He said these algae sucked the oxygen out of the water, and this was why we witnessed sudden spurts of fish deaths in our lakes during summers. The death of aquatic animals also affects the avian ecosystem. What we need is an overgrown marsh, as clean water is disaster for the environment, he added.
 	
 	  	The birders also feel that the soup bowl structure had resulted in the destruction of marshland where reeds used to grow. This, in turn, has resulted in the decline of reed birds. Besides supporting wildlife, reeds helps in reducing alkali, salt and nitrates from the water, resulting in restoration of lakes and controlling erosion.