Get set to embark on a 4,100-km bicycle ride to support and conserve wildlife and forest, an initiative undertaken by wildlife lovers and bicycle enthusiasts of the city starting from July 29. The ride will cover different forest locations across Karantaka.
 
The Wilderness on Wheels (Voice of the Voiceless), in association with Karnataka Forest Department, will host Tour De Karnataka that will allow participants to go the ride. In the first phase, riders can ride up to 4,100 km, which will be split into different locations and distance starting from 50km, 100 km and 200 km, to include unlimited bicycle riders. For the 300, 400, 500, 600, 800 and 1,100 km rides, only 32 riders will be allowed.
 
In the second phase, four riders will go throughout the states and union territories of India to cover the entire India.

The event will be flagged off on July 29 and will be go up till October 4 till the wildlife week. The ride aims to create awareness on the conservation of forest and wildlife and also to amend the animal protection laws in India for both Wildlife and Domestic.

Sandeep VS from Reroute Integrated Fitness, Wilderness on Wheels- Voice of the voiceless said, “The rides will range from 50 km to 1,100 km and will be fully supported rides. Participants have the option to be part of the complete event or select individual rides as per their convenience and be part of the much bigger cause.
 
The riders can give us their views on what changes can be done to protest forest and even wildlife, all of it will be considered and discussed with forest officials. In the second phase, the four riders will meet the Chief Minister of the states and discuss it with them.”

The team will cover important forest locations and will only ride to the reserves and not inside any reserves or protected areas. The locations planned for the rides are Bannerghatta National Park, Bilikallu Rangaswamy Betta, Avalbetta, Chikkaballapur, BRT Tiger Reserve, Bandipur Tiger Reserve.

Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, Bhadra Tiger Reserve and Anshi Tiger Reserve.

Last year, the Tour de Karnataka covered only about 2,300 km due to the pandemic.