After the tragic killing of a pregnant elephant in Kerala triggered a nationwide outrage, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Thursday assured that strict action will be taken against the culprits and people’s concerns will not go in vain.

In a series of tweets, he said that an investigation is underway and three suspects are in focus. The investigation will be jointly carried out by the police and the forest department. The CM also informed that the district police chief and the district forest officer visited the site earlier in the day.

“We will do everything possible to bring the culprits to justice,” Vijayan assured.

The death of the elephant shook the nation. The incident took place in Pallakad district where the elephant had entered into a village and ate a pineapple stuffed with crackers. The elephant suffered serious injuries on its tongue and mouth as the crackers exploded.

Vijayan further said that the Kerala government will also try to address the causes behind the increased incidences of human-wildlife conflict. “Having said that, we are saddened by the fact some have used this tragedy to unleash a hate campaign. Lies built upon inaccurate descriptions and half-truths were employed to obliterate the truth. Some even tried to import bigotry into the narrative. Wrong priorities,” he tweeted.

In a tragic incident in Palakkad dist, a pregnant elephant has lost its life. Many of you have reached out to us. W… https://t.co/qHpAGD1jAJ— Pinarayi Vijayan (@vijayanpinarayi) 1591266421000
Though the Kerala CM did not name anyone, earlier today Union Environment Minister Prakash Javadekar has tweeted saying that the Central government will not leave any stone unturned to nab the culprit(s). BJP MP Maneka Gandhi too targeted Kerala for not taking any action.

Central Government has taken a very serious note of the killing of an elephant in Mallapuram, #Kerala. We will not… https://t.co/20CqJnmwlR— Prakash Javadekar (@PrakashJavdekar) 1591240619000

Mallapuram is know for its intense criminal activity specially with regards to animals. No action has ever been tak… https://t.co/Qca5geGPDu— Maneka Sanjay Gandhi (@Manekagandhibjp) 1591166743000
On Wednesday, an FIR, under relevant sections of the Wildlife Protection Act, was filed against unidentified people in connection with the case.

Meanwhile, politicians, celebrities and people from different walks of life expressed shock over the incident and took to social media to express their grief. 

Untitled Carousel Ratan Tata condemns elephant killing in Kerala; says 'Justice needs to prevail'