(This story was first published in the Times of India on October 21, 2020)


GUWAHATI: Assam forest officials “seized” on Tuesday the engine of a goods train that had mowed down a mother elephant and her calf inside Lumding Reserve Forest through which the tracks pass, the first time such action has been taken by the authorities.


“The department shall not fail to take a tough stand against the Railways. The killing of elephants on tracks must stop forthwith,” Assam environment and forests minister Parimal Suklabaidya said.

Assam chief wildlife warden Mahendra Kumar Yadava said, “The killing of a female elephant and her calf by a goods train engine in Lumding RF on September 27 has been very vigorously pursued under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 against the railway authorities. The department instituted an inquiry under the act. Accordingly, a team of forest officials proceeded to Bamunimaidan Loco Shed on October 20 and seized the diesel loco engine (No. 12440). Earlier, the loco pilot and his assistant were suspended by the railways after an internal inquiry.”

Yadava added, “The Indian wild elephant (Elephas maximus) is a Schedule-I animal under the entry 12-B of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. Therefore, a forest offence has been listed against railway officers and employees of the railway authority under Lumding division of NF Railway for the killing of the two wild elephants, which is an offence under Section 9 of the said act and punishable under Sec 51 of the act, for onward necessary action.”

Yadava said the railway authorities have been informed through written instructions to restrict the speed of trains in areas of wild elephant movement inside Lumding Reserve Forest. He added that several decisions have already been taken to run trains at 30 kmph through the elephant corridor in Lumding Elephant Reserve.

Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR) chief PRO Subhanan Chanda said, “The Assam forest department wrote to us that it needs to inspect the engine, which was at Bamunimaidan railway yard (in Guwahati). After half an hour, the engine was released and we have put it back in service.”

“The railways has carried out its own inquiry and it has been found that train was overspeeding at that point when the mother elephant and her calf were mowed down. We have placed the driver and the assistant driver under suspension and initiated departmental proceedings,” the CPRO added.

Sailendra Pandey, PRO to the forest minister, said, “The train was used by the railways for carrying goods to its own project sites and its speed was so high so that it could not be stopped before the occurrence. When the forest staff of Lumding range rushed to the spot, they found the carcass of one female elephant, aged about 35 years, and of a male calf, aged about one year. The calf was dragged nearly a kilometre from the carcass of its mother.”

“On investigation, it was found that the Jiribam Cement Goods train, after crossing Lamsakhang railway station, hit the mother elephant and her calf while they, in a herd, were trying to cross the tracks. The calf was found severed into three pieces,” the PRO said.