Residents of area rattled by massive fire that claimed 10 acres of forest reserve 

For the second time in a week, a big fire erupted in the Turahalli forest reserve area on Wednesday evening. According to the officials from the Karnataka Forest Department, the preliminary report by the ground staff has clarified that the fire has gutted around 10 acres of the forest reserve.

“It was spread over 10 acres of the reserve area. However, forest staff could douse it in three to four hours and prevent further damage. While I have asked the ACF to prepare a report and submit it, most fire incidents are man-made and started off by miscreants. The area is open to the public and thus it is difficult to keep an eye on everyone entering. Moreover, considering this to be a hot and windy season, such incidents are expected,” said Chakrapani Y, DCF, Bengaluru urban.

While it was doused within a few hours, the locals say they are shaken as it was a massive fire, not seen over the last ten years or so. Moreover, the impact on the wildlife population inside the forest is a matter of concern.

“I have been living in this area since 2013 and have never witnessed such a massive fire. We are also worried about the peacock population as the reserve has a sizable number of these birds. In absence of any mechanism to monitor the impact of fire on the peacock population or other wildlife in the reserve, it is a wait-and-watch game,” said a resident of the area.

Locals say the fencing around the reserve is damaged at multiple places, leading to unauthorised access and encroachments.

Garima Prasher
“Turahalli is a vast expanse and the area that was lit on Wednesday is sandwiched between two human habitations. The forest department must repair the fencing around it as it has been tampered with at multiple places. The department must bring technological advancements to track unauthorised access. It is a reserve forest and proactive measures must be taken to safeguard it,” said Randhish, another resident.

Are we not ready to douse a big fire?
Some also raised concerns regarding the lack of up-to-date forest fire surveillance technology and training of forest department staff in fighting and controlling big fires. Karnataka Forest Department is currently using ‘detection software’ and high-resolution satellite imagery to detect forest fires.

The department should look at deploying thermal and optical sensor drones to spot fire incidents at night–Vijay Nishant, Project Vruksha
“The department should look at deploying thermal and optical sensor drones to spot fire incidents during the night time or in areas difficult to access. While such technologies are available in a couple of divisions, the Bengaluru division is devoid of them. Moreover, the department should also look at training the forest staff to bring the big fire under control,” said Vijay Nishant, founder, Project Vruksha.

However, when BM reached out to the forest department official raising this issue, he said, “We get alerts through the satellite technology which serves the purpose. While thermal sensors and aerial fire dousing technology might come in handy, we are managing well with the existing technologies.”