By: Aparna Anil
 
 
 Just like summer classes or group yoga sessions, high-profile communities in the city are now conducting sessions that teach people to cohabit with snakes. Thanks to senseless development that ate into the city’s green cover and ousted the beings from their natural habitat, there has been an increased number of snake-spottings in the city, prompting this course of action by residents.
 
 	
 	Understanding that it was high time they learnt to coexist with the rightful owners of encroached space, city groups like Whitefield Rising are trying to spread the message with initiatives like a seminar on ‘Snake cohabitation and safety tips’.
 	
 	  	“India is a country with strong wildlife protection ethos. We have to learn to live with snakes,” says Pradip Thaker of Whitefield Rising. “People who move in from bigger cities are not used to seeing snakes around. They panic and this often leads to many snakes being killed,” he says.
 	
 	  	The awareness programme comprises a detailed presentation, which briefs one on personal safety measures, venomous snakes present in the city, first-aid measures to be administered in case of snakebite and so on. Sanjeev P, a BBMP-authorised snake rescue and removal volunteer, presented the detailed tips for cohabitation and safety at the event.
 	
 	  	“We conduct eight to ten such programmes each year,” says Thaker, adding that a single seminar does not always change people’s mindset but over the years, they do see a change. “We conduct the programme in various gated communities in the Whitefield area, and we do find inspired champions who take up the cause,” he says, adding that the group has been conducting similar events for the past six years. “We have seen a gradual rise in the number of groups coming up with such awareness programmes and that is indeed a good thing,” says Sharath Babu, the honorary wildlife warden. “Now we see at least one such event every month,” he says. A similar programme is organised in Bannerghatta for next week, he reveals. “No snake attacks you until provoked,” says Naga Bhushan, a snake rescue and removal volunteer in the Whitefield.
 	
 	
 	The BBMP control room, which has 33 zonal volunteers, receives 30-40 snake rescue and removal calls every day during the months of monsoon.