Lake walkers emphasise on careful construction to safeguard flora and fauna

A collaborative effort between senior officials from BBMP and the Karnataka Forest Department involved a joint examination of Yelahanka Puttenahalli Lake and Bird Conservation Reserve (YPL). A consensus was reached, leading to the decision to install a 560-metre pipeline beneath the lake’s mud walk path. The inspection was led by the chief commissioner of BBMP, along with the Principal Secretary (Forests) and the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) from KFD.

“A decision has been made to lay down a pipeline under the walking path to divert entry of sewage into the lake. This turned out to be the only way out to protect the water body. Work has started on war footing and the walking path will be restored by BBMP soon. It will be a mud path and there will not be any inspection chambers on the walkway or inside the lake’s premises,” said Kumar Pushkar, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife), KFD.

SK Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) of Karnataka said the department will take up suitable measures to ensure that the bird conservation reserve maintains the perfect condition .“We have transformed this lake into a pristine waterbody with great difficulty over the years. We will ensure it is maintained so,” said Malkhede.

Slime & grime againPuttenahalli lake, spanning 37 acres in the North of Bengaluru, houses over 120 species of birds and was declared a bird conservation reserve in 2015. 
However, lake walkers have raised concerns stating that any work inside the lake premises must ensure no damage to the flora and fauna during the process. “Any work inside the lake premises must ensure that the sewage does not enter the lake and there is no damage to the flora and fauna during the process. It is also important that the movement of heavy machinery and handling and disposal of the earth are done with utmost care to avoid damaging the plants and other vegetation. Additionally, it should be ensured that the design of the work eliminates any long-term chances of sewage entering the lake,” said an occupant of the area who is a regular visitor at YPL.
 
Notably, the lake was home to over 150 species of birds before 2008. However, the numbers dropped to less than 50 species after an episode of sewage inflow in 2012. It went under rejuvenation and it took more than six years for the number of bird species to grow back to 135.

Locals highlight the risk of sewage influx threatening the lake’s ecosystem and its role as a bird sanctuary. With YPL as Bengaluru’s sole bird conservation reserve, both the government and citizens must prioritise biodiversity protection through enhanced precautions.

A decision has been made to lay down a pipeline under the walking path to divert entry of sewage into lake. This is the only way to protect the water bodyKumar Pushkar, KFD
 “Just when we felt that we are well on our way to bringing back the lake’s lost glory, we are facing the same sewage situation that we faced back in 2012,” said another citizen.