As the total number of coronavirus deaths crosses the 1,40,000 mark and supply chains lay fractured, productivity disrupted, wages for many remain in jeopardy and the global economy brinks on the verge of probable collapse, it is befuddling to read reports linking the birth of the deadly COVID-19 pandemic to the humble bat.

Did the flying mammal really bring the entire world to a grinding halt and onto its knees? Well, the short answer is, we're not sure yet. Researchers are still trying to decode how the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen (the virus that causes the disease COVID-19) jumped from animals to humans.
However, here's what we do know: Bats, the second-largest order of mammals after rodents, have been shown to carry a number of deadly infections, including rabies and viruses related to SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome), Ebola and Nipah. It is important to clarify that despite much conjecture, there is no concrete scientific proof, so far, that the COVID-19 has taken flight from bats. Additionally, according to Bat Conservation International (BCI), bats carrying coronaviruses in the wild, undisturbed by people, are not a threat to human health.

   (Image: Peter Neumann/Unsplash)

Bats often tend to get a bad reputation as they are associated with darkness and death in many cultures. In fact, the winged creatures play a beneficiary role in our natural environments by acting as pest controllers. They also pollinate flowers and disperse seeds enabling the sustenance of ecosystems. Even bat droppings act as a rich, natural fertilizer. 

So, to mark the occasion of International Bat Appreciation Day, let's take a look at why bats have been intertwined in the coverage of the recent coronavirus and clear up some common misconceptions that surround the flying mammals.

   (Image: Todd Cravens/Unsplash)

Ground zero and the 'spillover event'

By now, most of us are aware that the live 'wet market' aka a wildlife market in China's Wuhan, is believed to be the ground zero of the coronavirus pandemic. Live wildlife markets are places where live animals (harvested both illegally and legally), are stacked closely together in cages and slaughtered to be sold for food. 

Now, depending on who you ask, animals ranging from bats to pangolins are being blamed for the birth of the COVID-19 spread.
That said, wildlife species sold at live markets are diverse. Bats, rats, civets, snakes, birds, and many other species, alongside domestic animals such as chickens, pigs, dogs, are stacked closely together in stressful and unsanitary conditions which increases the chance that viruses can ‘spillover’ from one animal host to another and to humans. Pathogen spillover into novel hosts could potentially cause a disease outbreak and also lead to rapid mutation or increased virulence. 

   (Image: Jose Ignacio Garcia Zajaczkowski/Unsplash)

Bats are rabid rodents?

According to BCI, bats, like other mammals, can be infected with the rabies virus and some of them are. But the vast majority of bats are not infected. 
However, a bat that can be easily approached by humans is likely to be sick and may bite if mishandled. The easiest way to avoid mishaps is to simply avoid touching a bat (or any other wild animal) to eliminate the chance of being bitten. Bats are mammals, but they are not rodents. In fact, they are more closely related to humans than to rats and mice.

   (Image: Thomas Lipke/Unsplash)

Blind as a bat? Not quite...

For the record, the idiom 'Blind as a Bat' is as much of a misnomer as the 'Bats are flying vampires' myth. According to BCI, bats not only see as well as just about any other mammal, but most bats also use a unique biological sonar system called echolocation, which lets them navigate and hunt fast-flying insects in total darkness. Basically, the bat emits beep-like sounds into its path, then collects and analyzes the echoes that come bouncing back. Using sound alone, bats can see everything but colour and detect obstacles as fine as a human hair.

Likewise, there really are three vampire bat species (out of over 1,300 bat species) that feed on blood; only one targets mammals, BCI informs. All vampire bats are limited to Latin America. Oh, and they don’t suck blood, they lap it like kittens with milk. Not a very terrifying image, is it?

   (Image: Geoff Brooks/Unsplash)

Meanwhile, back home, researchers have found the presence of a different kind of coronavirus, bat coronavirus (BtCoV), in two bat species from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu, according to a study by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). Dr Pragya D Yadav, Scientist at the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune and also the first author of the study, has asserted that there is no evidence or research to claim that these bat coronaviruses can cause disease in humans. The study has been published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research.

All in all, it's important for us to note that bats carrying coronaviruses in the wild are not a threat to human health as long as they are undisturbed by people and that wild animals are best left alone, well, in the wild.