Redtapism doesn’t affect just you. A black buck and a spotted deer were allegedly confined in a dank and dirty toilet for several months because officials did not have the time to clear the files pertaining to the release of the animals. 

 	As per Indian Wildlife Protection Act , an animal must be released after 24 hours of capture. However, the black buck (protected under schedule I) and spotted deer (protected under schedule III) were literally jailed for much more than that. 

 	When Bangalore Mirror went to the place the animals were confined in, forest officials claimed they had been sent to Bannerghatta. Later, though they admitted to confining the animals, they denied any wrongdoing. 

 	Hoskote range forest officials have come under the scanner as both animals were handed over to the range forest officer there. While the spotted deer was rescued near MVJ medical college in February, the black buck was rescued in April near Nallal. 

 	“This is an insensitive act by local forest officials. By confining the mute beings for months, the law enforcers themselves have violated rules,” Sharath R Babu, former wildlife warden (Bangalore Urban,) told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	Experts say the detention has injected a potential risk to their lives as the animals have become domesticated. “They play with dogs and come if you show a carrot. This could make them easy prey for hunters and poachers,” Sharath said, adding that was a key reason for framing rules which clearly laid down the 24-hour timeframe for release of wild animals. 

 	The range forest officials, however, denied red tapism had resulted in suffering for the animals. “We haven’t kept them in violation of any rules. The authorities did not take the animals due to an outbreak of foot and mouth disease a few months back. They sought a medical certificate. We have got it and have written to the Deputy Conservator of Forests and Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,” said Harshavardhan, range forest officer, Hoskote, adding that the animals would be released as soon as the higher-ups gave their nod.