The crew of Puneeth Rajkumar’s new film has been accused of flouting heritage norms at Hampi
 	
 Throwing heritage rules and norms to the wind, the crew of Puneeth Rajkumar-starrer Rana vikrama has reportedly erected several temporary structures at the historic Hampi World Heritage Site. According to a source, the crew has been shooting at the heritage site despite being served an eviction notice to remove the structures by the Hampi World Heritage Area Management Authority (HWHAMA) after serious violations were found. 

 	 		Mirror has learnt that several sets have been erected at the Tungabhadra riverbed at Talavaraghatta, violating basic norms of the UNESCO-protected site. In April 2012, the crew of Rowdy Rathore, the Bollywood film starring Akshay Kumar and Sonakshi Sinha, was packed off following Mirror report on similar violations. 	

 	 		“This is a serious violation at Hampi. The crew has erected several sets in what could be called the core zone which is not allowed under any circumstances. They were allowed to use the space, but new sets have sprung up without our permission. It’s really doubtful if they can complete the shoot as scheduled,” said the source. Apparently, the crew started working at the spot from May 15 and lead actor Puneeth joined the sets on June 17. The shoot is expected to last another 10 days. 	

 	 		Authorities allowed the Ranavikrama crew to shoot on certain conditions. They have been barred them from using cranes inside the core zone and protected monuments, climbing or standing on monuments and erecting new structures. But the crew put up several structures, including 20 huts, a temple structure and a chariot.
 		
 		OFFICIALS’ OBJECTION OVERRULED 	

 	 		Mirror has also learnt HWHAMA recently served a notice on the crew to dismantle temporary structures. However, the shoot continued with Puneeth Kumar joining the sets on Tuesday. A heritage activist said the shoot is even affecting wildlife habitat since the site is frequented by otters. 	

 	 		However, when contacted HWHAMA said it would look into violations, if any. “The permission is granted with certain conditions. We will look into violations, if any and act accordingly,“ Dr R Gopal, commissioner, HWHAMA told Mirror.
 		
 		
 		CREW DENIES VIOLATION
 		
 		 			Denying any such violations, film director Pavan Wodeyar said all necessary permissions have been taken after paying the prescribed fee and deposit. “We have not flouted any norms. We have taken all permissions from respective authorities. Moreover, we are not hooting near the river, and are far away from protected monuments,” Wodeyar told Mirror.