By Prakash VL

BDA completes survey of elephant corridors in Bengaluru; next big challenge is clearing corridor encroachments to secure animal safety

Many Bengalureans may be unaware that an elephant corridor passes through the periphery of the city. But it exists and must be secured to protect wild animals.

The Bengaluru District Administration (BDA) has completed the survey of elephant corridors in the city. It is seen, the big challenge now lies in clearing the corridor for safe movement of animals. The district administration of Bengaluru conducted a survey of the surrounding areas of Bannerghatta National Park to clear the encroachments there and to develop an elephant corridor.

Bengaluru Urban deputy commissioner J Manjunath told BM, “We have conducted the survey in Shivanahalli village, survey number 69, for 1,000 acres around Bannerghatta National Park.
 
The survey map is submitted to the deputy conservator of forest concerned. Now, it is for the forest department to decide on the best possible ways to protect the elephants.”

Further, he said that Shivanahalli is a revenue village that can’t be evicted as people have been staying there for many years. “Now the forest department must decide on the next course of action.”

“We can’t evict them from their place. But we are in the process of freeing the encroachments. Agricultural encroachments can be removed immediately. We have identified an eco-sensitive zone within a 1-km-long radius of the elephant corridor,” he said.

Further, he said some activities are restricted in the area and they have controlled noise pollution there.
 
“We are thinking of not allowing vehicle movements at night like in Bandipur and Nagarahole. Prior to that, we have to identify alternative roads for commuters. If we can’t restrict vehicle movement at night, we are planning to make the roads safer for animals by putting signboards, speed breakers. We are making the Government lands to be used for colleges, hostels, waste processing units, and other utilities,” he said.

Earlier Namma Bengaluru Foundation and Project Vruksha Foundation met the deputy commissioner and requested the completion of the survey of 1,000 acres of the elephant corridor and freeing of the 232 acres of land to the forest department.
 
Urban conservationist and Project Vruksha president Vijay Nishanth told BM, “We have been striving hard to save Bannerghatta for a long time. We need to understand that Bannerghatta is one of the nearest jungles to the city and needs to be protected. The corridor is very important for the safe movement of animals. We have been discussing with the deputy commissioner to take this up on a priority basis. The corridor will be beneficial and the earlier it is executed, the better.”

Activists said there is a need to protect the corridor without damaging the environment. “It is very essential in creating the Ragihalli elephant corridor to protect the elephants. There is a need to develop the surrounding areas of the elephant corridor as a support for elephants and other animals.”
 
Namma Bengaluru Foundation general manager Vinod Jacob said, “The Bannerghatta National Park and the adjoining elephant corridor is a very crucial ecological and bio diversified space for Bengaluru. We had handed a petition to deputy commissioner Manjunath and requested him to fast-track the survey which they have completed. The land adjoining the national park and the elephant corridor must be cleared to ensure the wildlife is protected and there is no human-animal conflict in the area.
 
We hope both the forest and revenue departments will come together and find an amicable solution.”