By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 Winter is the season for migrants in Bengaluru. As habitats in the Himalayas and beyond start freezing, our city receives an influx of winged visitors from the north.
 
 
 
 
 Welcomed by relatively warm weather and plentiful sources of food, some choose to make this city their home for the next few months, while others take a short break before continuing their journeys further southwards. Like veteran tourists, they know where they want to go, and end up making their way to the same spot in the city year after year. These winter visitors reinvigorate the city’s wildlife kaleidoscope with their presence. Their distinct colours and unusual calls are a birdwatcher’s delight.
 
 Perhaps one of the most beautiful creatures to grace our city’s parks and woodlands in the winter is the Indian pitta. This is a colourful bird – with so many distinct hues on its body that it is called navaranga (nine-colours) in many Indian languages including Kannada. For me, its visual appeal arises from the way these colours are delicately patterned on its body, like a canvas painstakingly worked upon by some expert painter. Green dominates the pitta’s upper body and a gentle brown its underparts. Little daubs of red and blue decorate its ventral area. Its neck and throat are white and its bill, black, with pink streaks. A thick black eye stripe runs across its face like kajal on a dancer’s eyes. There is a science behind the colour scheme. The pitta is a ground feeder, spending most of its time hopping along woodland floors.
 
 All its bright-coloured patches face ground-wards. A predator, circling from above would see only green making the pitta indistinguishable from its surroundings.
 
 I have bittersweet memories of pitta sightings. My first was a few years ago in Bengaluru, around this time of the year. I was staring vacantly out of my study window when I caught sight of a pitta foraging around the compost pit in my backyard. I was able to point it out to a few of my family members before it flew away leaving me with witnesses to remind me that I was not dreaming.
 
 The other occasion when I saw this bird was in Dhanushkodi, the southern-most tip of the Indian peninsula. A group of local boys were on the prowl with catapults trying to bring down birds perched on bushes and trees. There was a burst of excitement as a little boy rushed in holding a gorgeously coloured bird – a lovely specimen of the Indian pitta, felled by his shot as it searched for a winter roost in his village. Indeed, this bird faces its gravest threat from human hunters who bring it down for its feathers and meat.
 
 In the village of Jatinga in Assam, every year a combination of natural phenomena causes young birds of several species including the pitta, to get disoriented and fly towards village lights. In the past, locals waited for this event to club down the confused birds with long wooden poles. Thanks to awareness-creation efforts by local forest officials this practice is on the wane now.
 
 The name ‘pitta’ comes from the Telugu word meaning ‘small bird’. Clearly the pitta’s association with south India goes back a long way. Which is the best place in Bengaluru to get a glimpse of this wonderful bird? Well-wooded birding hotspots like GKVK, Indian Institute of Science or Valley School offer you good sighting opportunities. Remember that you need to be really lucky to spot this elusive bird. Listen for the its distinctive two-whistle call heard at dawn or dusk, and then follow your ears to narrow down on its exact location. These beautiful birds have travelled thousands of kilometres to reach your city. Don’t miss the brief window of opportunity that the next couple of months provide, to get a glimpse of these vibrant visitors.A Vibrant visitor