Wildlife experts and officials clash over tourist access amid ecological concerns in Karnataka

With the onset of the monsoon, core zones of many major tiger reserves in the country will remain closed for tourism. According to a circular issued by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) a few years ago, a technical committee recommended the closure of tiger reserves for a minimum of three months, extending up to five months, considering aspects such as the breeding period of wild animals, especially tigers, the condition of forest roads during the monsoon, and the safety of tourists and visitors.

“Monsoon season is a critical breeding period for many wild animals, including tigers and other keystone species. The idea behind NTCA’s guideline is to allow animals to be stress-free and engage in these activities. It is an important aspect to consider for better ecological restoration. However, no tiger reserves in Karnataka are closed during the monsoon, giving preference to tourism over conservation,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

“Wherever the number of animals is higher, it should help. Traffic movement inside safari areas in Bandipur and Nagrhole is bound to disturb wild animals, especially tigers. Core zones should be closed,” said Rahul Bavaji, a wildlife activist.

However, officials from the Karnataka Forest Department say tourism zones in tiger reserves are better regulated in Karnataka. The department claims that the density of wild animals is higher in these zones compared to areas not open for tourism.

“An important aspect to consider is that tourism zones across all tiger reserves in Karnataka are much smaller. While nearly 25% of the tiger reserves’ areas in northern states are open to tourism, in Karnataka, we have less than 10% of tiger reserves open to tourists. Moreover, we have found that the density of wild animals in Nagarhole and Bandipur tiger reserves is better in the tourism zone, showing that breeding is not impacted due to tourism. This can be due to better protection and waterholes facility,” said an official from KFD.

Activists argue that tourism should be closed during the monsoon, also keeping in mind the safety of visitors. Rainfall transforms the landscape into treacherous terrain, and roads might become slippery, flooded, or prone to landslides, increasing the risk of accidents.

“The NTCA circular states that the period of closure has to be decided by state governments, based on local prevailing conditions. The issue of treacherous terrain and risk to tourists applies to parks in the northern parts of the country where forest roads become too swampy, and it becomes risky to venture inside. States in the southern part of the country do not close the reserves for tourism as the terrain is different,” said the KFD official.

Some experts point out that it is a tricky situation concerning the activities of eco-development committees in these reserves.

“Eco-development committees use revenue from tourism for various local development activities, including conservation. If we stop tourism for months at a stretch, it will impact these activities,” added Bavaji.