I run a finger down a rusty iron blade to the heavy silver hilt with lion Yali’s. DG Balaji casually says, “it is a 17th century, Mysuru dynasty sword…and that is a carved Ayurvedic medicine grinding stone, probably Hoysala, 13thcentury…will you have a cup of coffee?” all in the same breath.
 
 	The conversation is surreal because outside his shop on Avenue Road is a raucous present: Cycle bells, car horns, cursing pedestrians and high-pitched vendors. Inside is a well-preserved past. Stacked high from floor to ceiling is enough vintage memorabilia to send a magpie into a frenzy: Framed photographs, lithographs, vintage art and posters, radios, books, watches, enamelware boxes and bottles, old vinyl records, railway lanterns, table and ceiling fans, luggage, chairs, tables and in the glass cabinet, Edison Bell gramophone needles and a Japanese Mamiya folding camera. I am Alice lost in Wonderland, or rather, in Balaji’s Antiques, one of Bengaluru’s best kept secrets.
 	  	“My Telugu-speaking ancestors migrated here from Sidlaghatta over 300 years ago. They would donate generously to the Balaji Temple on Avenue Road.
 	
 	When my grandfather D N Seetharama Setty moved here, he requested the temple Trust for accommodation. All they had to offer was the 30-ft high temple chariot shed. It became the family home and the location for his famous Seethaphone Co. I was born there. Back then, two-way traffic on Avenue Road stopped when shops closed at 4 pm. We would run out to play while elders sat on kattes playing cards and chatting,” he says and adds that his ancestors minted coins for Tipu Sultan in the 18th century. 
 	  	The original minting machine was given to Dharmadhikari Veerendra Heggade’s museum in Dharmasthala. Over the years, Rare (the other name that Balaji’s Antiques is known by) has supplied the museum with one-of-a-kind exhibits that include a lock from Tipu’s Fort, Dakota planes, over 40 vintage cars, 2,000 cameras, wildlife from zoos and even a railway engine called Kaveri that his father DS Govindarajulu bought at an auction in Kolkata. “He slept in it that night to safeguard it so the parts would not get stolen. He then transported it back to Bengaluru.” I look around, enchanted. The Wonderland syndrome continues.
 	  	There are rich stories hidden inside these rooms. Each door opens out to reveal unusual collectibles. The second floor stocks furniture. I see a German WWI full body armour and helmet and a 19th century British lithography press. I am not surprised when he pulls out an original 18th century Thomas and William Daniell aquatint from a drawer. History is alive here, to hold and own.
 	  	The shop also supplied props to director David Lean’s iconic film A Passage to India. “He went through everything in great detail. The art department wanted to hire everything, but we insisted they buy. We agreed to take back only the books.” I then spot a collection of signed pencil sketch portraits by the well-known portrait artist, SN Swamy. An appreciative letter from the celebrated painter Rao Bahadur MV Durandhar (1867-1944) accompanies one.
 	He then takes out another envelope containing a faded letter from the German Consulate in Bombay to SN Swamy, dated 1939, ‘begging to return your sketch duly signed’ along with the original photo. I see the accompanying photograph and blink. It is a stern faced man with an unmistakeable moustache.
 	I look again just to make sure. The signature in black ink says ‘Adolf Hitler’. Even Alice’s adventures can’t match this one.
 	
 	
 	 		The writer is a cultural documentarian and blogs at aturquoisecloud.wordpress.com