Public consultation will be held to determine if grasslands can be declared as conservation reserve

The Karnataka State Wildlife Board has decided to conduct a public consultation meeting with locals and environmentalists in the area to decide the fate of the 5,000-acre Hesaraghatta grasslands. The decision was taken at the board’s meeting conducted on Thursday evening under the chairmanship of Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai.
 
The duty to conduct the public consultation has been entrusted to the Karnataka Forest Department. However, the members of the wildlife board can accompany the Forest Department officials for the public consultation sessions.
 
The decision to conduct public consultation has come amid political pressure from various pockets. While the momentum to declare the grassland as a conservation reserve has been growing over the past few months, there were protests organised against it as well.
 
“The government wants to go for the public hearing to ensure that both sides are heard. While the environmentalists have been demanding that the grassland be declared as a conservation reserve as soon as possible, all the concerns of locals should be addressed too. The decision should be made after listening to both sides. The consultation will put both the advantages and disadvantages of declaring Hesaraghatta as a conservation reserve under the scanner before making a decision,” said a source from the Karnataka State Wildlife Board.


The issue will be taken up again after the Forest Department submits a fresh proposal based on the opinions and recommendations that emerge out of the public consultation 
meeting. However, no date has been announced for the meetings so far.
 
Activists working in the area say the public consultation meeting, if conducted in villages surrounding the grassland, might paint a biased picture.
 
“The grassland belongs to Bengaluru and thus the viewpoint of people from across the city and also across the state should be taken into consideration. They must provide a provision for online suggestions and recommendations as well. A group of people has been distributing pamphlets to the villagers for many days now with misleading information about the grassland.
 
A consultation meeting with locals of the area will not be a good idea under such circumstances,” said a city-based environmentalist who has been in favor of declaring Hesaraghatta as a conservation reserve.

Sixth tiger reserve
The CM also announced in the meeting that permission will soon be accorded to declare the MM Hills Wildlife Sanctuary as a tiger reserve. With this, the sanctuary will become the sixth tiger reserve in Karnataka. Once notified, the reserve will be eligible for funds for the protection of tigers and other conservation activities in and around the area.