Raviprakash is first Indian in 26 years to win BBC photo award
 
 City techie SS Raviprakash has won the prestigious Wildlife Photographer of the Year (WPY) award organised by the Natural History Museum, London, and BBC Worldwide. He was conferred with a medal and a prize of £1,250 in the Amphibians & Reptiles category at the function in London on Tuesday night that was attended by David Attenborough and princess Kate Middleton. Mirror reported in July that Raviprakash’s photograph was among the 50 shortlisted for the People’s Choice Award. Raviprakash was surprised himself after winning the award in the main category which was evaluated by an international jury.
 
 Raviprakash’s photograph titled ‘Divine Snake’, of a green vine snake he photographed metres away from his home in Sringeri, won him the award. He was also a finalist in the People’s Choice Award for another photograph of a spider. “I am elated. The highlight of the event was the fact that legendary filmmaker David Attenborough declared me the winner. He was accompanied by Kate Middleton, the Duchess of Cambridge, on stage. I had the opportunity to meet him later too, and he appreciated my picture and congratulated me,” Raviprakash, an associate consultant at TCS, told Mirror on phone from London.
 
 Raviprakash, a self-confessed ‘weekend photographer,’ speaking of the ‘Divine Snake’, said it was one of his favourite images as it was shot just 10 feet away from his house. “When I told one of my friends, Vipin Baliga, about the award, he said people go all the way to Africa and Antartica to capture such pictures to win prestigious awards, but you have achieved this right in your backyard”. Raviprakash has become the first Indian since 1986 to win an award at WPY. This year, two other Indians also shared the honours. Sitara Karthikayan and Gaurav Narayan were declared finalists in the 11-14 years and mobile categories respectively.
 
 Raviprakash’s other photo, ‘Pure Magic,’ that of a spider’s web, also taken near his Sringeri home, was among the 50 shortlisted from among 40,000 entries for the People’s Choice Award.
 
 Raviprakash started photography as a hobby with the aim of using a camera his father gifted him for his birthday. He specializes in macro photography, which involves capturing small animals such as insects, worms and butterflies. “Macro photography can capture very colourful drama right in your backyard. As always photography has been a very expensive hobby, but macro photography is less expensive as we can cut down on the travel cost,” he says.