Ashwathama is the latest to fall victim to what conservationists are calling sheer carelessness on part of authorities

The death of 38-year-old Ashwathama, a Dasara elephant, on Tuesday, has once again sparked concerns over jumbos dying due to electrocution in Karnataka.

According to the elephant mortality report of Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), four elephants in the state have died due to electrocution in just last one month.

Apart from Ashwathama, who died in Mysuru, one elephant death was recorded from Chikkamagaluru, and two deaths due to electrocution were recorded in Madikeri.
Between January 2021 and now (June 12, 2024), Karnataka has lost 35 elephants to electrocution. Out of these, 12 cases were recorded in 2021, nine in 2022 and 2023 each, and five deaths have been registered this year.

Overall, 47 cases of unnatural deaths in jumbos have been recorded in the given period, which include deaths by gunshots, electrocution, road and train accidents, and snaring.

“Ashwathama’s death is a case of sheer carelessness. According to media reports, KFD officials have claimed that the elephant died after touching a solar fence, which is bizarre. How can an elephant die of a 12volt timer-based solar fence when it cannot even kill a pig ? Another claim by officials that Ashwathama died of a weak pancreas is also outlandish. It is a case of illegal power tapping. The department should work towards eradicating incidents of illegal power tapping to reduce elephant deaths due to electrocution,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Last year, the forest department convened a meeting with power-supplying companies to discuss the issue of illegal tapping of power lines. Officials then met BESCOM (Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited), HESCOM (Hubballi Electricity Supply Company), and other electricity supply companies in the state to understand the issue and ensure illegal tapping is stopped.

However, conservationists and experts working on the ground say not much has changed. “Electricity companies are not taking precautionary measures and we are hearing more and more cases of sagging power lines and illegal tapping every day. However, there is a High Court order on the issue, but rules are not being implemented by various line agencies. While very few cases of such offence are being registered, the majority never reach logical conclusions. There is not much of a deterrent,” said a wildlife conservationist.

Trouble in corridors
Recently, the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MOEF&CC), in association with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII), identified nine elephant corridors in Karnataka. Out of the identified corridors, one was found to be impaired and thus required immediate restoration to facilitate the movement of elephants.

The Ministry had also recommended that the state forest department notify seven of the nine corridors so that they are legally protected to prevent encroachment and development activities, which can be detrimental to animal movement. For the remaining two corridors, the Ministry has suggested eviction of encroached areas and habitat improvements, including removing invasive alien species, creating waterholes, and establishing fodder plots.

“Elephants are long-ranging mammals and are accustomed to using traditional corridors. However, these corridors also have highways, agricultural land, railway lines, and encroachment issues, leading to an increase in cases of unnatural deaths. It is time that these corridors are notified. Just identifying them is not sufficient,” added the conservationist.

Missing Romeo

By Sridhar Vivan
Animal enthusiasts are devastated by the passing of Ashwathama, a cherished elephant at the Mattigodu Elephant Camp in Nagarahole National Park. Known affectionately as ‘Romeo’, Ashwathama was adored by visitors and staff alike. His distinctive demeanour and behaviour endeared him to everyone. Much like the popular elephants-Abhimanyu, Arjuna, Drona, and Balarama, Ashwathama held a special place among elephants. His affectionate gestures, particularly towards women, captivated all who encountered him.
 
“A great example is the love story of Ashwathama and Lakshmi during the 2021 Dasara festivities. At the time, Ashwathama was in his prime, and it was his first time participating in Dasara. He ‘fell in love’ with 20-year-old Lakshmi, a female elephant, at first sight. Initially, Lakshmi was fond of Dhruvanth, but she was eventually won over by Ashwathama’s charm and began spending time with him. Their love story became a highlight of that year’s Dasara celebrations,” said an official. Their love story was a sensation, the official said. “Their strong bond created a dedicated fan base for Ashwathama, earning him the nickname ‘Romeo’. Standing 9.3 feet tall, 11.3 feet long, and weighing over 3,700 kg, Ashwathama was a majestic elephant. He possessed all the qualities of an ideal elephant, including a strong back and curved tusks, making him a perfect candidate to carry the golden howdah (Ambari) during the Dasara festivities. Abhimanyu, the elephant carrying the Ambari, is 58 years old and expected to retire in two years. Forest officials had high hopes that Ashwathama would take over this prestigious role.”