A police inspector from Bagalkot and his friends on Tuesday bludgeoned to death an assistant conservator of forest (ACF) for raising objections to his holidaying family entering and feeding crocodiles at a restricted area in Dandeli Forest Reserve in the Western Ghat region of Uttara Kannada. 
 
 According to sources at the Dandeli Forest Reserve, inspector Shivarama Naik from Bagalkot and his family members were camping at an illegal resort run by a local entrepreneur, Shivaram Patil, on the banks of River Kali. The group, using the influence of Aravind Chavan, their relative and a senior employee with the Dandeli Municipality, managed to enter the reserve forest area with a large number of crocodiles despite a ban enforced by the forest department.
   Upon entering the restricted zone near Dandelappa temple on the banks of Kali, the family and others began feeding chicken to the crocodiles, said K M Muthanna, an environmental activist. The forest department has banned entry of tourists into the reserve forest and feeding of crocodiles, as it would prompt them to attack the domestic animals and residents local villages, he said. 
   ACF Madan H Naik, who came to know about the breach, approached the group and asked them to vacate the place immediately. “The men were reportedly in an inebriated state and picked up a fight with Madan,” said Muthanna.
   Severely injured in his head, Madan was lying in a pool of blood when his wife and daughter rushed to the spot hearing about the fight. They were also assaulted by the group. Later, a couple of local residents and department staff rushed Madan to a private hospital at Dharwad where he succumbed to injuries on Tuesday night.
   Though the local police initially refused to book a case on the group that assaulted Madan and organisers of crocodile shows, later, under pressure from the local residents, they have registered a case against inspector Shivarama Naik, Aravind Chavan, Shailaja Chavan and Danabai Naik. 
   Protesting against the inhuman act and callousness of the police, the local residents also set fire to the resort that was organising illegal crocodile shows.   
   Illegal crocodile show According to sources at Dandeli Reserve Forest, the illegal resort, named Crocodile Valley, has been functioning on the banks of River Kali inside Dandeli Reserve Forest for the past couple of years. “The owner of the resort had been organising illegal crocodile shows by feeding them to woo tourists. Although the forest department had prohibited these crocodile shows, they were conducted surreptitiously by the resort staff,” said K Ullas Karanth of the Wildlife Conservation Society.
   Several conservation experts have termed the brutal assault and murder of the ACF as the handiwork of a gang of anti-social elements engaged in eco-tourism business along the banks of Kali River. “Habituation of wild crocodiles by feeding them is illegal and also potentially harmful to people of the locality. But this group, assisted by the local resort owners, not only entered the restricted area but began feeding crocodiles.
 Further, they attacked a forest official who tried to enforce the law. It is important that police and forest officials coordinate in their work to arrest 
 and punish these culprits,” explained K M Chinnappa, president of Wildlife First. 
   When Bangalore Mirror contacted senior officials of the forest department, they refused to comment on the incident. “I am not in the headquarters and will be able to comment about it only after I return on May 11,” said A K Varma, principal chief conservator of forest (forest force).
   Reacting to the incident, Uttara Kannada Superintendent of Police K T Balakrishna said, “Investigation is underway. We are trying to ascertain from where the mobile signals of the PSI were received to find out his location at the time of the incident.”
 
 
  The owner of the resort organised illegal crocodile shows to woo tourists