By Melvin Mathew

Mohan was bitten by a snake in 2013. He lost a kidney, suffered nerve damage and a stroke as a result. Despite all of the above, Mohan continues to serve the city and its wildlife — he is a snake rescuer.

In the event of a snake bite, animal rescuers like Mohan have no other option than to bear the medical expenses.

“If rescuers get bitten, they have to drag themselves to the nearby hospital on their own. The treatment will cost around Rs 2 lakh. At times, hospitals face shortages of anti-venom too,” Mohan told BM.
 
The volunteer snake rescuers on call go house-to-house and work 24X7. They play a key role in protecting the rich biodiversity of Bengaluru offering what is a selfless service. Now, though, these guardians of the city’s serpents are complaining that ‘ill-informed citizens are misbehaving with them’.

For the 1,27,65,000 people in Bengaluru, there are only 7-8 full-time snake rescuers. Whenever citizens sight the reptiles, the rescuers are called in to help capture and relocate the animals.
 
The rescuers told BM that they get more calls during the night than day time. As the city falls silent and ground vibrations subside relatively, snakes slither into houses/compounds in search of prey — mice, frogs and such . According to the rescuers, despite visiting homes to capture and relocate snakes, they still are an oft-ill-treated lot.


   .

“When safety is a major concern, the residents’ behaviour is quite alright. However, once the snake is safely rescued and bagged, residents start ‘treating us like tissue paper’. Some don’t even allow us to go through the same door; we have to use the backdoor. Often, we are told to climb over the compound wall to exit. At times, some refuse to give us water to drink from inside the houses,” said Prasanna Kumar, an animal rescuer working with the BBMP since 2006.

Another rescuer noted that some residents refuse to provide soap to wash hands after the rescue. People living in slums tend to show the deserved respect while it is the affluent in upmarket residential localities who don’t behave professionally with the animal rescuers, according to the rescuer.

Ever since the BMP turned to BBMP, large-scale urbanisation that followed destroyed the wildlife habitat; there has been an increase in the ‘conflict’ between humans and wildlife. The BBMP is understaffed in terms of animal rescuers for the population of Bengaluru. The small number of rescuers who are on call are not provided a fixed salary by any department and are paid an honorarium. “On an honorarium basis, we are supposed to receive Rs 13,000 per month but we haven’t received it for the past three years now. This is a high-risk job leaving no time for personal life. In case of a snake bite, we have to bear all the expenses,” Mohan told BM.
 

   .
Snake rescuers in the city are dependent on the generosity of the few to make ends meet.
 
Mohan questioned how officials getting such huge salaries in the city are unable to pay Rs 13,000 to an animal rescuer.

“We have demanded to increase the staff members from seven at present to 30 to cover the entire city effectively and to pay us fixed salaries,” added Mohan. 
BBMP special commissioner for lakes and forests B Reddy Shankar Babu said he wasn’t aware that honorariums were not being paid for the past three years: “As per my knowledge, the files are stuck at the finance department — I promise to get these processed before the new year.”


   We are supposed to receive Rs 13,000 per month. We haven’t received it for the past 3 years… In case of a snakebite, we bear all medical expenses...— Mohan, snake rescuer
However, the BBMP is now planning to recruit more personnel to address the issue of understaffing, though a tough task, considering the civic body needs to select individuals who are willing to dedicate their lives to animal rescue. “There is a thin line between rescuing and causing unintentional damage to animals. In collaboration with the wildlife warden, the selected individual will be trained, certified and appointed. The team will be working in full-swing within 2-3 months,” added Babu.
 
“If rescuers had come forward and informed the authorities, BBMP could have provided medical insurance and emergency care,” added Babu, reacting to animal rescuers having to bear medical expenses in the event of a snake bite. The BBMP is also planning to hire vehicles for animal rescue.