While tigers die in hordes, a leopard has taken the top spot. Do we savour the present or rue the past? That’s the dilemma
 
 Since Karnataka emerged as the ‘tiger capital’ of the country, the forests of the state have become popular targets for poachers. Even the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) had issued alerts on the migration of gangs of poachers down south from central and northern India. Despite the Karnataka Forest Department’s (KFD) vigilance, reserves are losing tigers every year. And the mortality rate is only increasing.
 
 According to the statistics made available by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), Karnataka stands second after Madhya Pradesh, as far as the number of tiger deaths per year was concerned. The count that stood at 7 in 2014 went up to 17 in 2016. And this year, just four months in, Karnataka has already lost more than 12 tigers for various reasons, including Prince, the most photographed tiger in South India. Interestingly, the neighbouring Tamil Nadu, which had the highest mortality a few years ago, has succeeded in bringing down its count.
 
 The data by the MoEF presents an interesting analysis of tiger mortality in Karnataka. Of all the reasons, only poaching and natural causes (includes ageing and internal fights) are the dominant factors listed. According to Anil Madhav Dave, Minister of State for Environment, Forest and Climate Change: “Analysis of tiger deaths across the country in the last three years due to poaching, excluding seizures, shows that the average number of tiger deaths due to confirmed poaching is 9 and the confirmed
 poaching cases in 2016 alone is 12, which is marginally high.”
 
 The minister also expressed concerns that reports of poaching appear to be slightly high because of more seizures resulting from concerted efforts of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), field formations by respective states.
 
 “While the number of seizures back in 2014 was just 10, it has gone onto become a whopping 22 during 2016!” the minister revealed.
 
 Even though the MoEF data reveals tiger deaths until 2016, Karnataka is already close to overtaking its previous year’s count in the beginning of the year itself. A conservationist based in Mysuru told Bangalore Mirror: “With just four months into the year, Karnataka has already witnessed an alarming number of tiger deaths. We have more than 12 deaths already. Be it the natural reason or poaching, the government has to consider the scenario more seriously and ensure protection of big cats who are critical to keeping the balance of the ecosystem.”
 
 
 
 
 
 Both the state and Central governments have brought in several measures and even sought technological intervention to bring down poaching. “The e-Eye system for improved surveillance has been put in place. We are in the process of preparing a national database of tigers to establish links with body parts seized and tigers dead.
 
 Coordination with Interpol has also been established for checking trans-border trade of wildlife products,” a senior official from NTCA said.