The sparrow population has dwindled due to rapid urbanisation in Bangalore. However, there is still hope. Environmentalists and even the common man can learn from 80-year-old Muniyamma, who is playing host to many of these birds at her Marathalli home, the art of bringing birds back into the city.   So impressed are the BBMP wildlife volunteers that they have decided to turn the granny’s home into a mini-sparrow sanctuary. “It is unbelievable as her house is full of sparrows,” Rohini Ghatpande, BBMP wildlife volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror. “We hardly get to see sparrows in the city, but the granny is an inspiration. We have decided to make a sparrow sanctuary at her place — something unusual in a city like Bangalore.”   With the city getting ready for the World Sparrow Day (March 20), it is indeed a welcome step.   Muniyamma, lovingly called ‘Gubbajji’, Gubbi being the Kannada name for sparrow, has housed sparrows in more than 10 nests made of cardboard boxes, while broken and cooked rice (provided by the granny) are their staple. They are constantly provided with fresh water to quench their thirst. The birds, which fly out of her home at the break of dawn, are back at the fall of dusk.   Muniyamma’s love for sparrows is also shared by her grandson Prem. While sparrows have made the granny’s home their own, during Diwali, they fly away because ofthe noise of crackers. Some, however, do come back. At any given time, there are 40-50 sparrows chirping in her dwelling.   Nurturing sparrows comes naturally to Muniyamma, who comes from a farming background. “I used to feed them ants while working in the fields. Later, they became a part of my life. I have seven children and these birds have been here for years. One bird starts living and it brings another after a few days. That’s how their numbers have grown over the years.”   The BBMP wildife volunteers, besides taking lessons from Muniyamma on sparrow conservation, have decided to add more boxes and a bird bath for the sparrows. This, they believe, will attract more birds. “We have launched a drive to bring birds back into the city. Our drive has gained momentum because of the granny. On the World Sparrow Day, Bangalore will have something to cheer about. We hope more people join the granny and participate in the drive to bring sparrows back in Bangalore.”   Sparrow conservationist Mohammed Dilawar says the granny is an example of the bond the older generations shared with sparrows. “It’s time the youth woke up and followed the footsteps of the granny to ensure sparrows are back in Bangalore, a city once known for its bird population,” said Dilawar, also the president of Nature Forever Society.   Those interested in participating in the BBMP campaign can contact Ghatpande at rghatpande@gmail.com.