By Iffath Fathima

Volunteers are now sending in water tankers to Turahalli forest to refill a waterhole

Summer has set in. The jungles are parched. Scarcity of water in the forests adjoining the city limits are driving wildlife out in search of water.
 
For instance, volunteers are now sending in water tankers to the Turahalli forest to refill a pond — the usual waterhole in the area — for the benefit of wildlife.
 
As waterholes dry up, wildlife struggle to survive in the harsh weather with no access to a drink of water. Cases of deer venturing out from the forest onto the roads adjoining the forests during summer are on the rise.
 
In turn, the deer are often attacked by stray dogs, which has led to the creatures getting injured. Some even die due to the sheer trauma.
 
=In order to assist wildlife, and help resolve the issue during scorching summers that have become the new normal, a volunteer organisation is now providing water for wildlife at the Turahalli forest.
 
Share Habitat started the initiative in the beginning of March this year and have so far sent five water tankers to the pond area in a patch of forest which wildlife are known to frequent. Each tank will provide over 20,000 litres of water, which will be sufficient for the wildlife in the area for some time.

Kapil Mavinkurve, trustee of Share Habitat said, “Helping the voiceless is not a one-time effort but a daily job. Especially during summer, food and water become scarce for wildlife as well as stray animals. We keep sending water tankers to help the voiceless creatures. We will continue to do it till June, until the monsoon sets in. We have seen wild animals coming out of forests during summer in search of water. This will help them stay inside the forests and help them to stay hydrated and safe.”

The volunteers are also on a mission to set up water bowls in the South zone of the city.
 
“During summers, we have noticed hundreds of cases of dehydrated birds falling to the ground. Dogs and cattle on the roads are exhausted too trying to find water, food and shelter. We are helping them out,” Mavinkurve added.
 
Rashmi Mavinkurve of Share Habitat added that during summer as the forest fires are common, the team has decided to donate powerful handheld blowers.
 
“To ease forest watchers and guards’ jobs in extinguishing forest fires this year, we have decided to donate a powerful handheld blower which works on petrol. The machine extinguishes the blaze in seconds avoiding further spread of fire. A single machine does the job of a 25-member fire brigade. With this machine, fire can be extinguished in minutes and stopped from escalating further. A forest can be saved as well as lots of man-hours including dependencies attached to manual efforts,” Rashmi noted.