It wants to build mini-hydel parks along the Cauvery that can doom wildlife
 
 The state government is all set to give the green signal to mini-hydel projects along the Cauvery River. These projects were long back rejected by the State Wildlife Board and the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD). The project is said to spell doom for elephants and other wildlife along the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, but the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Forest Conservation) has asked the Chief Conservator of Forests to reconsider the plan.
 
 Every time it is rejected, the project that is part of the expansion plan of the Pioneer Power Corporation is given a new name and pushed again.
 
 “The projects were first rejected in 2013 after a team of experts lead by Wildlife Board Vice-Chairman Anil Kumble submitted a report against the projects. The projects underwent a metamorphosis and assumed new names before its proposal was submitted again for approval. It was also rejected by a CM-headed Wildlife Board on September 11, 2015,” a former member of the Wildlife Board revealed.
 
 Documents accessed by BM also confirmed the government’s stand.
 
 Forest officials said though these projects are projected as different on paper, they are actually birds of the same feather. 
 
 Though the Shivanasamudra mini-hydel project (one of the names) in survey no 1 of Shivanasamudra village, Kollegal taluk of Chamarajanagar district, was rejected in 2015, Forest Minister B Ramanatha Rai directed IFS officers of the KFD to revisit the sites and submit a report. The team visited the site on December 17, 2016. Sources in the KFD told BM the officers had highlighted on the importance of conservation and left it to the discretion of the state government to give permission. After that, the project proposals were forwarded to CCF, Chamarajanagar, for reconsideration.
 
 “The land where the mini-hydel project is proposed to be built is adjoining the Sanctuary and an elephant habitat. The High Court ordered in 2013 that permissions for forestland diversion for projects that fall within elephant habitats, corridors and within the periphery of forests should be reviewed. The Elephant Task Force constituted by the HC visited this project and raised objections about its location due to the impact of the project on elephants. Hence, permitting this project is a contempt of the High Court orders,” a conservationist working in the Sanctuary said.
 
 
 An eco-sensitive issue
 
 The proposed projects fall within the eco-sensitive zone of the Cauvery Wildlife Sactuary. It needs clearances from the National Board for Wildlife and under EIA notification 2006. The projects are also inside an elephant habitat, so an Elephant Task Force consituted by the High Court too has raised objections to the project.