Forest officials seek immunity from SC/ST atrocity cases
 
 
 Forest officials, who have been cracking down against smugglers and encroachers, have made a unique demand to the state government: Immunity against atrocity cases filed against them. 

 "If we are to discharge our duties in a fair and fearless manner in protecting the forests, the state should frame guidelines that will provide us immunity against being booked under the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act," read a representation recently given by the Indian Forest Service (IFS) Association, Karnataka to the government. 

 	The demand stems from the fact that several offenders, including timber smugglers, poachers and encroachers, have resorted to filing ‘fake’ atrocity cases against forest officials who crackdown against them. Such cases have been on the rise ever since the forest department started cracking down on the nearly 2 lakh acres of forest encroachment. 

 	In the latest of such cases, an atrocity case was filed against deputy conservator of forests (Madikeri Wildlife Division) S Sivasankar during a meeting conducted to elicit response on the Kasturirangan Committee Report. 

 

 	Attacked in public 

 	"Not only was the official attacked in full public view, but was also charged with an atrocity case; he was also accused of insulting the modesty of a woman. The unprovoked and premeditated attack was a bid to intimidate the officer who had not permitted certain prohibited activities in the wildlife sanctuary," the association maintained. 

 	The regions where most atrocity cases are filed against forest officials are Madikeri, Bhatkal, Honnavara, Kumta and Nagarahole. 

 	Other places are Coorg, Chikkamagaluru, Hassan, and Shivamogga where most of the forest land is encroached by people belonging to the upper castes, sources say. 

 	In Dakshina Kannada and Belagavi, the opposite is true. 

 	"Whenever a case is filed against encroachment of forest land, a return complaint is filed against the forest official. Immediately, the officers are arrested. Most of the cases filed against the officers happen after they question persons about forest land encroachment," said Dr K N Murthy, IFS, Additional Principal Chief conservator of Forests and vice-president of IFS Association. 

 	Forest officers in Madikeri and adjoining areas face the maximum number of atrocity cases. 

 	“Many people here are used to cutting forest trees without legal procedures. Many of them have encroached forest land and have electric fencing all around their farm which hinders movement of elephants. All these reasons keep our officers on strict vigil which leads to false harassment and atrocity cases lodged against them”, says Murthy. 

 

 	10 cases per year 

 	On an average, ten atrocity cases are filed against forest department officials per year. More than 15 atrocity cases were filed against officers and later withdrawn after a compromise.