Believed to be between 60 and 150 million years old, born from the drift of an entire landmass, forged in volcanic eruptions and lava flows, the Deccan Traps are the planet’s largest basalt beds covering half a million square kilometres more than two kilometres thick. Their western slopes are the faulted edge of this enormous plateau. We know them as the Western Ghats. They stretch for nearly 1600 kms from the Tapi river in the north to Kanyakumari at the southern tip of the sub-continent. They are one of India’s three watersheds and are the catchment areas for major rivers which drain 40 per cent of India. 
 The geological history of the Western Ghats, and their position directly in the face of the monsoon, make for mind-boggling biodiversity, second only to the Eastern Himalaya. Together with the wet zone of Sri Lanka, the Western Ghats are one of the world’s greatest reservoirs of biodiversity, teeming with plants, mammals, birds, amphibians, over 300 globally threatened species. They are also one of the world’s eight hottest hot spots — areas of biodiversity under severe threat. Today, less than 10 per cent of the Western Ghats region holds primary forest cover.  
 What we have learned to call development — the unthinking stripping of forests and brutalisation of hills, excavation, clearing, concretisation — threatens the permanent destruction of the entire region. In March 2010, the Environment Ministry constituted the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP) under the chairmanship of Madhav Gadgil with a wide mandate. For over a year, the WGEEP studied the data, made field trips, spoke to stakeholders at various levels; and its report of August 31, 2011, reflects the Panel’s sense of alarm at what it found. 
 Page after page of the Report is a grim reminder of what we had once, and what we’ve so thoughtlessly squandered. ""This diversity has been in continual decline over the last century,"" it says, ""and more especially in recent decades, with many biological communities and types being almost totally eliminated."" It points to the incessant grant of licenses for mining and industry, the proliferation of incongruous urbanisation and contains damning indictments of forest department apathy and corruption. As the panel notes, regimes of go/no-go, all or nothing, hurt everyone: they are inflexible, thoughtless and uncaring and yield a ""development by exclusion"" and a ""conservation by exclusion"". Those most affected are denied development and excluded from conservation. Instead, the Panel proposes a tiered system (a ""layered, graded approach"") of ‘adaptive co-management’. The entirety of the Western Ghats, it suggests, should be classified into three zones in descending order of ecological sensitivity, the highest and most fragile zone alone demanding a hands-off policy; but that, too, subject to periodic review.  
 Though the report seems to make very sweeping suggestions — the recommendation that the entire length of the Western Ghats be brought under an Eco-Sensitive Zone Notification; the prohibition of conversion of lands to non-agricultural purposes, and so on — which will undoubtedly draw the ire of both government and industry, the case studies cited by the Panel provide ample justification. There is the horror story of Lote MIDC and the pollution of Dabhol Creek: industries pumping untreated effluent into the creek and into borewells contaminating ground water, missing compliance records, moribund supervisory bodies, fudged data, stifling of local protests, all under the benevolent gaze of regulatory authorities. The Sarpanch of Kotavale attempted suicide by drinking the water. ""He was rushed to Mumbai and saved, but there has been no abatement of pollution,"" the report notes.  
 The Report notes that 25 Gram Sabhas in Sindhudurg passed resolutions supporting conservation — including wildlife and biodiversity protection — and demanded that their areas be declared as eco-sensitive. These have been ignored. Other self-governing units that have taken the opposite line, founded on the mistaken belief that ecological protection will result in increased impoverishment. This apprehension is not baseless, for protectionist laws are vehicle of corruption and oppression, especially when they exclude those the laws are meant to protect. The Soliga tribes of Karnataka’s BRT Hills, for instance, were forced into destitution, beggary and worse by the mindless bans imposed by the Forest Department.
   This is the heart of it: bans don’t work. They drive matters underground, beyond the reach of law and regulation. (There’s some debate about whether the Supreme Court’s ban on timber operations has at all helped the economies and forests of our north-eastern states). Bans and prohibitions really serve just one purpose, and that is to make rich lawyers a great deal richer. The participation of local communities — now a Constitutional mandate — in conservation is the only method of ensuring development. As the report says ""not a blade of grass shall be removed from Protected Areas is as inappropriate as a complete disregard for pollution control laws"" elsewhere. The WGEEP report suggests a framework to escape this failed thinking, one that is backed by the Constitution and by a sense of justice: involve those most affected in conservation, for in participatory conservation lies their development. There seems little doubt that every government will oppose the WGEEP’s recommendations; there’s just far too much money involved in the status quo of development for the rich, conservation forced on the poor.