Poor rainfall in Dandeli this year has resulted in suspension of rafting activities; tourism takes a hit
 
 	Around 20,000 people visit Dandeli every year to take part in rafting activities. This year, however, has been disappointing for adventure enthusiasts, as authorities have not opened rafting activities yet. Reason: unprecedented drought in the state.
 	  	The Supa dam built across the Kali River is also low on water.
 	  	Dandeli is one of the very few places in the state where one can enjoy white-water rafting. In the last two months, visitors to Dandeli, especially rafting enthusiasts, have decreased as rafting activities have been suspended. 
 	  	A senior forest official of Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve (DATR) said rafting was supposed to start on October 1, but due to less rainfall recorded this year the water is not let to the Kali River from Supa Dam. 
 	  	“Dandeli tourism relies heavily on river rafting. Now, due to the ban, footfalls of tourists have decreased. Every year the Supa Dam used to be filled with 75 per cent of water but this time it has decreased to 30 per cent and that water is preserved for drinking purpose. Every year, from October to June 15, around 20,000 people visit Dandeli only for river rafting and they are charged `1,450 per ride,” said the official who did not want to be named.
 	  	The ban on rafting has also taken toll on many vendors living there. More people are now opting for Dandeli Wild Life safari ride. 
 	  	A rafting enthusiast, Ameet Joshi, a production head, said: “I had planned to visit Dandeli one month ago just to enjoy rafting. It was really disappointing when I went there last week. Forest officials said rafting activities were suspended due to less water. But some people said that recently a man died after falling into the lake while taking a selfie. That case was still in court and that’s why rafting has been banned. However, with no other option left we had to take a safari ride in the Dandeli forest which was not that great.”
 	  	A regular adventure traveller and a finance analyst, Mohan Barkur, said, “With our work stress, we decide to take a break and go to such places with a lot of expectations. And there is no better feeling than experiencing rafting in Dandeli along with your friends. But sadly this year there was no rafting due to less rainfall. Last year, we had a lot of fun rafting with a bunch of friends and the adrenaline rush from navigating through the water was exciting.
 	Authorities should notify on their websites if there have stopped rafting activities. There are a lot of adventure sports enthusiasts who travel so far just to experience rafting.”
 	  	Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve director K Srinivasulu said, “We have stopped rafting activities which is supposed to start every year in October. Due to lack of rainfall in the state, the water level in the Supa Dam is less this. There was no incident of someone falling into the river. Even if something like that happens that is not a reason to stop rafting. Even the number of tourists visiting Dandeli has not decreased because there are many people who visit the place for trekking, wildlife safari and other adventure activities.”