Five elephants housed in pitiable condition after the circus they belonged to was de-recognised; Animal Welfare Board pleads for quick action from forest department 

 	Five elephants being housed since June at Fun Fort, an old amusement park on the outskirts of Srirangapatna near Mysuru, are awaiting rescue and rehabilitation from their pitiable living conditions. This, after the Gemini Circus they were part of was de-recognised by the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) in June 2015 after an inspection, where it was found that they were not conforming to the standards required. Ever since, the animals have been housed in unsuitable conditions, resulting in them becoming malnourished and injured. 

 	When the matter came to light, a team comprising a PFA veterinarian, Dr Vibin and the MVS veterinarian, Dr Shantanu Kalambi visited the site, under the supervision of the RFO Mariswamy, Srirangapatna Range. Two inspections were conducted at the site ¯ an under-construction, litigated plot of land. The animals were housed in an abandoned building on the ground floor; adjacent to the site where the elephants are being housed, a large amount of construction material, including wood, metal pieces and debris has been stacked, which could be hazardous to the health of the elephants; the mahouts’ claims of allowing the elephants to roam freely and of cleaning the area three times a week were found to be untrue; the only feed being given was sugarcane tops and hay of low quality, stored in an unsanitary manner; there was no source of fresh water for the elephants and there was no bathing water provision present at the site. 

 	Suparna Ganguly, subcommittee member of the Central Zoo Authority of India, Ministry of Environment and Forests, for inspection of zoo and circus elephants and co-founder of CUPA, describes the animals as dehydrated, with parched skin and not enough water to soak in and no exercise. “This is the wrong place for them. They need to be moved out,” she says. Of the five elephants, one had sores on the right side of her shoulders, hip, flank and head and had severe cracks on her nails and signs of pododermatitis. Another showed signs of a slightly prolapsed rectum and the tissue appeared raw and mildly infected. The third had a chronic open abscess on her right flank. 

 	Ganguly says the forest department has given the circus owners permission to transport the animals and house them in any site of their choice until matters of ownership can be sorted out. According to the 2008 Project Elephant guidelines and the Captive Elephant Management rules of the state, the government must take custody of the animals and keep them in rescue at the Doddaharave Elephant Rehabilitation Centre. “This has been built using money from the Central Government allocated from the project Elephant fund for Elephant Rescue Centres. That is what the elephants deserve,” she says. She adds that there are precedents of circuses having voluntarily given up their elephants: “The Moonlight Circus gave up their three elephants eight months ago, and two circuses in West Bengal gave up their elephants to the state Forest Department, after which they were transferred to a forest camp in North Bengal.” 

 	“In this case, the circus owners want to transport the elephants to Kerala, where they have been registered. However, they have not received clearance from the forest department to do so and rightly so,” Ganguly says. “The fear is that Kerala doesn’t have a space for female elephants. If shipped there, they might be used commercially and sold into temples in Tamil Nadu or Maharashtra. Secondly, they have been bonded to each other over many years. Separating them would be like separating family. Thirdly, they are in poor health.” 

 In this regard, Vasudev Murthy, Honorary Animal Welfare Officer, wrote to the Chief Wildlife Warden of the Karnataka Forest Department on October 12 and offered assistance with the dietary and medical needs of the elephants and offered to appoint an officer to liaise with the on-ground staff to ensure their safety and well-being, until they are assigned to the Doddaharave Elephant Rehabilitation Centre. They have been assisted in this intervention by Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organisation in Delhi, which has been working on circus elephants for some time. When contacted, Dr Ravi Ralph, IFS, The Chief Wildlife Warden, Karnataka Forest Department, to whom the letter offering support was addressed, acknowledged that he had received the letter and transferred the matter to the District Forest Officer (DFO) in Mandya because it falls under his jurisdiction. The DFO Javed Mumtaz says he, along with a team, has visited the area and submitted a status report to Dr Ralph, who now has to take a decision on the matter.