This summer, would you like to adopt an elephant, a lion or a giraffe? The Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is making it possible and giving you visitation rights. This summer has been very bad for the Park. Due to the lockdown, funds have been hard to come by as there are no visitors. In a good season, the BBP earns a revenue of Rs 5 crore between March, April and May.

Says BBP Executive Director Vanashri Vipin Singh, “BBP gets the maximum number of visitors during summer holidays. This year, we had to stay shut. And even after lockdown, when rules are relaxed, we cannot open up as we will have to wait till the curve is flattened.’’

According to Singh, BBP needs Rs 3 crore per month to feed its animals and to pay salaries to the employees. “We have already sent a proposal to the state government to extend financial assistance to us,’’ Singh said. Recently, Minister for Cooperation ST Somasekhar, who is in-charge of Mysuru District, donated more than Rs 1 crore to Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens. The minister had collected a portion of the funds from donors of Yeswanthpur Assembly constituency. However, no minister or MLA from Bengaluru has made a similar attempt to help out the BBP. “Somasekhar should make a similar contribution for the conservation of wildlife at BBP. 

There should be no discrimination between Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens and the BBP. BBP authorities must utilise the funds available with the government,’’ said Arun Prasad, an animal activist.

While the park awaits assistance, Singh says they have launched an online campaign, appealing to the public to adopt wild animals.

“As of now, we have received a positive response from around 60 donors. We have received Rs 8 lakh from the donors till date. I am overwhelmed by the response. A non-resident Indian (NRI) from US has evinced interest in adopting an elephant,’’ she said.

 .
Those who donate Rs 10,000 to adopt an animal, will get a certificate from the BBP, a badge/cap or a t-shirt, a gift voucher for one-time zoo entry and butterfly park entry for five members valid for one year. For those who donate Rs 25,000, the BBP will issue a certificate, badge/cap/t-shirt, display of name in adoption board, a gift voucher for one-time zoo and butterfly park entry for five members valid for one year. For those who donate more than Rs 25,000, the BBP will issue a certificate, badge/cap/t-shirt and display of name on adoption board and in front of the adopted animal’s enclosure. The donors will be given a voucher for one-time zoo, safari and butterfly park entry for up to five people. All categories of donors are eligible to participate in conferences or workshops organised by the BBP.

One has to donate Rs 1.75 lakh to adopt an elephant, Rs 1 lakh to adopt a tiger, a hybrid lion or a giraffe, Rs 75,000 for a hippopotamus, Rs 50,000 for a zebra, Rs 35,000 for an Indian leopard, sloth bear, Asiatic black bear, and gaur. The BBP has fixed Rs 20,000 as adoption fee for a golden jackal, Indian grey wolf, striped hyena, dhole and wild dog. The minimum donation being accepted is Rs 2,000 and maximum is Rs 15,000 for other wild animals.