Helpline at Bannerghatta receives 120 calls in less than a month

In less than a month, the 32-member Elephant Task Force at Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) has received over 120 calls on its 24*7 helpline number. According to the officials from BNP, the majority of these calls are from farmers in the adjoining regions of the park regarding crop raids by jumbos.

“On average, the ETF helpline is receiving five to six calls daily. Any person living in the vicinity of BNP and facing human-elephant conflict issues such as crop degradation can call this number. Currently, we are attending to calls from a three- to five-kilometre radius of BNP. Most of these complaints are from boundary areas, as these are high-conflict zones. The helpline was set up on June 30, and to date, we have received more than 120 calls,” said Prabhakar Priyadarshi, Deputy Conservator of Forest, BNP.

The ETF, along with the helpline number, was set up to bring down the rising number of human-elephant conflict incidents around BNP. The 32-member BNP ETF team consists of one range forest officer, two deputy forest officers, five guards, and 24 outsourced personnel. The team, fully equipped with vehicles for quick response along with public address systems, crackers, and guns needed to drive the elephants into the forest, is also being used to spread awareness about conflict cases and ways to avoid them.

Officials say the helpline, along with the ETF, has reduced the response time during conflict situations considerably.

“The centralised system with better management and timely intervention has helped tremendously during conflict situations around BNP. Farmers and villagers are at ease since there is no confusion regarding approaching the concerned officials. The ETF is busy driving elephants into the forest areas during the night hours and raising awareness about conflict situations among villagers during the day. We have also printed pamphlets with the dos and don’ts of human-elephant conflict and distributed them among the villagers,” added Priyadarshi.

Conservationists say the helpline, along with the ETF, is a welcome move as many cases of human-wildlife conflicts have been reported from Bengaluru over the past few years.


   On average, the ETF helpline is receiving five to six calls daily. Anyone living around BNP and facing issues can call–Prabhakar Priyadarshi
Bengaluru has been grabbing the top spot across Karnataka when it comes to the number of cases of ex-gratia. Between April 2022 and March 2023, the city recorded as many as 8,329 cases of crop damage, cattle killings, human deaths, permanent and partial disabilities, injuries, and property losses. Out of these, while 1,107 were ‘cattle killed’ cases, a whopping 6,604 were crop damage cases. They also highlight that data from the helpline can be used to track elephant movements.

“Long-term data from the helpline can be used to draw the movement patterns of elephants,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.