Siddaramaiah-led state govt has removed chief wildlife warden BJ Hosmath holding him responsible for the forest fires. But little does the CM know that this officer won Bandipur Tiger Reserve its 50 acres of land from a former BJP MLC, who illegally built a resort there
 
 Caught off guard by the BJP’s diary bomb, the state government was all eyes just to evade any controversy ahead of the imminent budget session. But the raging forest fires in tiger reserves came as a bitter pill for the state government, which was desperately trying to diffuse the diary bomb.
 
 Concealing several of its lapses in preventing forest fires, officials of Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) were made scapegoats, and going a step further chief minister Siddaramaiah shunted out chief wildlife warden BJ Hosmath for failing to contain forest fire as a cover up act.
 
 But what the chief minister did not know was that the same IFS officer relentlessly took on the influential politicos who had grabbed close to 50 acres of forest land adjacent to the same Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 
 Contrary to Siddaramaiah’s understanding and thinking, the former PCCF (Wildlife) Hosmath has now won a crucial case against former member of legislative council and BJP’s spokesperson G Madhusudhan, who had not only bought agriculture land illegally but also violated the Karnataka Land Reforms Act by converting the land for non-agricultural purpose within a year of its purchase.
 
 Hosmath’s dogged fight, along with assistant commissioner Basavaraju, spanning more than six years, has not only saved Bandipur from land grabbers but also expanded Bandipur forest cover by another 50 acres.
 
 
 
 
 A fortnight ago, the regional commissioner’s court ordered the state government to demolish a resort belonging to the BJP leader Madhusudhan and recover the prime 50 acres of forest land.
 
 Battle to get back the tiger land
 
 The origin of the fight to reclaim the land for the tigers dates back to 1994 when former BJP MLC G Madhusudhan and others purchased an agriculture land in violation of law adjacent to Bandipur and set up a resort.
 
 The then chief wildlife warden UT Alva had also given a no-objection certificate to start open a resort by Madhusudhan and others.
 
 However, with the notification on Eco Sensitive Zone (ESZ) around tiger reserves, the KFD officials began to crack the whip on illegal resorts around Bandipur.
 
 Posted as chief conservator of forests and director, Project Tiger, and subsequently promoted as additional PCCF, Project Tiger, Hosmath discovered that these resorts were posing a threat to the tiger reserve and hampering the movement of the wildlife. Evicting such resorts, Hosmath sought the help of then assistant commissioner of Kollegal, Basavaraju, and found that not only the land was purchased illegally but also converted for non-agricultural purpose by violating the Karnataka Land Reforms Act.
 
 A case was filed before the regional commissioner seeking eviction of the resort and reclaiming of the land for Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 
 While Hosmath and Basavaraju successfully fought the case until their tenure at Bandipur and Kollegal, Hosmath pursued the case even after moving out of Bandipur as he was passionate about conservation and strove hard to streamline administration and management at both Bandipur and Nagarahole Tiger Reserves. On February 20, 2017, the regional commissioner, Mysuru, not only ruled that Madhusudhan and other parties have not only purchased land by illegal methods, but also violated the Karnataka Land Reforms act by illegally converting the agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose.
 
 
 
 Officials fabricated documents
 
 The regional commissioner, Mysuru, MV Jayanthi, in her order copy has stated that the respondents Madhusudhan and others fabricated documents facilitating the purchase of agricultural land. According to the order, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, “Respondents have purchased agricultural land at Mangala village in Hangala Hobli of Gundlupet taluk claiming that they own agricultural land at a village in Nanjangud taluk. However, the land claimed by them in Nanjangud is mentioned as government land and records had no mention of respondents’ name as owners of the land. Further, village accountant of the village had also confessed that the respondents had manipulated and exerted pressure through assistant commissioner to include their names in the records as the owners of the land.”
 
 Further, the order said, “The respondents had obtained permission to purchase the land in January 1995 under Section 80 of Karnataka Land Reforms Act –1961 for agricultural purpose. Subsequently, the respondents converted the same land in May 1995 for non-agricultural purpose to set up an international resort. As the Act forbids conversion of agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose in less than a year since the purchase of the land, the conversion made by the respondents is in violation of Karnataka Land Reforms act.”
 
 The regional commissioner opined that the assistant commissioner while granting permission failed to judge whether the respondents with a small land holding and meagre income of less than Rs 50,000 are capable of buying such a vast land. This apart, respondents did not obtain any permission to purchase agricultural land on survey number 20/59, 20/39, 20/36 and thus violating the section 79B and 80 of Karnataka Land Reforms act. Based on these violations, the regional commissioner MV Jayanthi has not only set aside previous approvals but also directed deputy commissioner, Chamarajanagar, to reclaim the land on the behalf of the state government.