The Jodhpur District and Sessions Court on Thursday dismissed a petition filed by the Rajasthan government that alleged that Bollywood actor Salman Khan had presented a false affidavit related to the Arms Act in the blackbuck poaching case.

After receiving a breather, the actor shared his picture on social media and thanked his fans for all the love, support and concern.

“To all my fans…thank u for your love support n concern. Khayal rakho apna n parivaar ka. God bless n loveee u too (sic),” he wrote.

As soon as the news broke, fans started rejoicing and showering the actor with love on social media. Late night on Thursday, ‘We Love You Salman Khan’ was also trending on Twitter.

Check out Salman’s post here:

To all my fans.. thank u for your love support n concern. Khayal rakho apna n parivaar ka. God bless n loveee u too… https://t.co/ndiPNKV8fT— Salman Khan (@BeingSalmanKhan) 1613065258000
According to ANI, Hastimal Saraswat, representing Khan, said that the Court rejected the plea filed by the state government. “We already informed the court in 2006 that we had not submitted any false information. It was nothing but to harass Salman Khan,” Saraswat told reporters.

The petition was registered against Salman presenting the wrong evidence in the court in the Blackbuck poaching case which stated that the actor said that his arms licence has been lost. However, the investigation revealed that the actor has submitted it for renewal in Bandra.

Untitled Carousel Salman Khan apologises for 'mistakenly' giving fake affidavit in blackbuck poaching caseBollywood star Salman Khan on Tuesday apologised for 'mistakenly' submitting a false affidavit in the Jodhpur session court in 2003, during his hearing in a case related to the poaching of two blackbucks in Jodhpur in 1998.
While on the other hand, another PIL earlier stated that the actor had submitted an affidavit citing the reason for not appearing to the court, which is an ache in his ear. But he was found busy in shooting.

However, the trial court has quashed both the petitions.

The lawyer representing the government said, “We have not received the copy of the judgment yet. After receiving it we will think if we want to take the matter to the High Court.”

Salman was booked under Section 51 of the Wildlife Protection Act for poaching two chinkaras in 1998. A trial court in 2018 had convicted Salman and awarded a five-year prison sentence him for the killing of blackbucks. The actor had challenged the trial court verdict in the Sessions court. His fellow actors Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, Neelam and Sonali Bendre, who were present on the spot along with him, were acquitted.

(With inputs from ANI)

Untitled Carousel Salman Khan confirms releasing Radhe in theatres on Eid 2021Bollywood superstar Salman Khan confirmed on Tuesday that his film, Radhe: Your Most Wanted Bhai, will be released in theatres on Eid this year.  ​​The actor stated that he wishes to help theatre owners and exhibitors by releasing his film on the silver screen.