Elephant mortality cases see reduction over last three years; from 62 jumbo deaths in 2021, this year in the same period only 49 fatalities recorded

According to data available with the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), elephant mortality cases in the state have reduced over the last three years. While the department recorded 69 jumbo deaths (both natural and unnatural causes) between January and October 2021, this number went down to 61 in 2022. This year, only 49 deaths have been recorded in the given period.

The number of elephants being electrocuted had also reduced marginally. As many as 11 jumbos were electrocuted between January and October 2021, and eight died due to electrocution in a given period in 2022. Between January and October this year, seven elephants were electrocuted.

“Although there is a reduction in elephant death cases by nearly 20%, this is not a significant drop. Natural deaths in elephants can be unpredictable, and they can easily surpass last year’s number over the next two months. The numbers show that the situation is stable, and at least there is no surge in death cases,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Electrocution concern
KFD officials say electrocution cases are still a matter of concern. As per the official data, out of 204 elephant deaths reported since January 2021, 37 elephants died of unnatural causes, and 26 of them were due to electrocution. “We are trying to create awareness among villagers and farmers to not put up illegal fences. The number of unnatural deaths due to electrocution and gunshots is our concern, and we are aiming to reduce these cases to zero. Although the number of deaths due to gunshots has reduced, electrocutions are still happening, and that is not a healthy sign. However, after the government has increased the ex-gratia amount in human deaths and crop damage cases, we are expecting electrocution cases to reduce soon,” added Pushkar.

In December 2022, the Karnataka government increased the ex-gratia amount in human deaths and crop damage cases. While a compensation of Rs 7.5 lakh was given earlier in the case of human death, it was doubled to Rs 15 lakh. Similarly, the ex-gratia amount for crop damage was doubled too. Where earlier a compensation of Rs 1,320 was given in the event of the loss of one quintal of paddy, this amount was increased to Rs 2,640.

The number of unnatural deaths due to electrocution and gunshots is our concern, and we are aiming to reduce these cases to zero ­–Kumar Pushkar, KFD
“Even a single elephant’s death due to electrocution is a matter of concern. The department must remove all illegal fences on priority and work in coordination with ESCOMS. While some work is happening in this direction, the exercise should be more rigorous and implemented strictly. Checks for illegal fences should happen regularly, on the lines of anti-snaring operations,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

The department must go looking for such fences rather than waiting for complaints. Patrolling should happen in association with ESCOMs so cases can be booked on the spot. Checks in high-conflict areas such as Kodagu, Hassan, Sakleshpura, Chamarajnagar, and Bannerghatta should be increased, he added.