CM approves it, forest officials fear Rana George wants to lord it over those he had an alleged tiff with, last July
 
 He is the son of the state’s home minister, K J George, but that evidently is not enough for Rana George. He wants to become a wildlife warden, specifically for Mysore region. This is not out of special love for Mysore, if forest officials are to be believed. They allege this is Rana’s ‘retaliation’ for being forcibly kept out of a prohibited area in Bandipur forests in July last year, Rana has applied to chief minister Siddaramaiah, seeking a post on the State Wildlife Board and a honorary position as wildlife warden, Mysore.
 
 This has upped the antennae of the state forest officials. ‘’All major projects in and around forests, affecting wildlife and its ecology, have to be cleared by the State Wildlife Board. With the board due for reconstitution, and the CM approving it, the home minister’s son who was denied permission to enter a prohibited area may become a member too. His selection should be made only after scrutinising whether his track record meets the requirements specified in the Indian Wildlife Protection Act,” a senior forest department official said. Rana told Bangalore Mirror: ‘’The allegation was made that time itself (during the visit to Bandipur). I had also given a clarification that I was not stopped. We went to the Kabini side. All three days, I had gone into the forest in a legal way.’’
 
 Rana said he has already served as a wildlife warden for two months, that too during the BJP government’s tenure and that he had done a lot of work in Chikmagalur, where he has coffee estates. ‘’Now, in Mysore we have properties and we have been doing a lot of work there. On that basis, we have made a request for that region. In Chikmagalur, there are two reputed organisations working as honorary wildlife wardens and as there is no point in disturbing them, I wanted to shift and render my services in Mysore.’’
 
 Rana said he had studied all laws on the issue and done four years of service as a warden. ‘’If the government is willing, they can nominate me and I will render service.’’ The CM certainly appears willing. He has put a note on Rana’s application for the post directing the principal secretary, forests, to immediately examine and take it up. This, in general, is officialese for ‘’this is approved.’’ “I'm not aware of it. I will look into the provisions when the matter comes before me and act on that,” S Sivashailam, principal secretary, state forest, environment and ecology department, said.
 
 A forest department source, however, clarified: “The home minister’s son’s application and the CM’s note is a strange development as anybody who wants can’t become a member of an elite board which has a pivotal role when it comes to forest, wildlife and ecology.’’ As per the Wildlife Protection Act (1972), three non-governmental organisations and ten persons who are “eminent conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists, including two representatives from the scheduled tribes’’ should be members of the wildlife board. As for being a wildlife warden, the person needs to have “genuine concern for wildlife conservation’’ and a “personal record free of involvement in any activity detrimental to the interests of nature and wildlife conservation,’’ among other things.
 
 Rana, in his application letter, says he is a director of the century-old Kelachandra group of companies which has coffee estates in Kodagu and Chikmagalur, rubber industry in Kerala and agricultural land in Mysore. “I’m a wildlife lover, and forest, wildlife, forest ecology, diverse flora-fauna, research and photography are my hobbies and profession. The forest department has acknowledged this and have been supportive to my following and understating of rules pertaining to forest and wildlife.’’ He reiterates his service as an honorary wildlife warden in Chikmagalur district and as a special police officer. ‘’Hence I hereby request you to nominate me as 1) Member, State Board for Wildlife and 2) Honorary Wildlife Warden, Mysore district,” he has said .
 
 Insiders say that renowned conservationists like Sanjay Gubbi, president of CUPA Suparna Ganguly and MP Maneka Gandhi’s People For Animals, were members in past. ‘’In this context, the CM’s tacit approval is strange and has more to do with power and status,’’ a conservationist said.
 
 CONSTITUTION OF THE STATE BOARD FOR WILDLIFE
 Chairman -- CM, Vice-chairman – Forest minister, 3 members from state legislature, 3 NGOs (Non Governmental Organisations), 10 persons with exceptional background in conservation, ecology and wildlife issues
 
 CRITERIA TO SCREEN INDIVIDUALS FOR THE ELITE BOARD
 The first criterion should be the individual or NGO’s track record in service of animals - wild. The kind of work which has been done has to be considered. Just being an enthusiast is not good enough to be part of a board, which gives direction to the state government in policy making, and makes recommendations.
 
 ..They should possess sound knowledge on forests, wildlife, ecology and geography of the state and laws pertaining to it. All development projects are scrutinised by board, and those on board have to evaluate and give objective directions to the state government. That is the kind of responsibility and in case the state government overlooks it or it doesn’t comes to its notice or there are any lacunae in its decision, it is the board with a sound knowledge of wildlife, environment and protection laws, which should bring it to its notice.
 
 Appointment of its members shouldn’t be a /political decision or %8....../influence driven but merit /driven.
 
 Suparna B Ganguly, former member, National Taskforce on Wild and 8Captive Elephants, and currently on the appraisal board of Central 8Zoo88 8Authority sub- committee