Once you start listening to Peter Cat Recording Company (PCRC) things around you go a wee bit hazy; You are taken back to the vibrant 50’s and 60’s where it was all about colours, love and bliss.  
 Antique music
 PCRC was formed in 2009 and consists of four members — one of those few bands in the country that plays Gypsy Jazz. Gypsy jazz is an idiom often credited to guitarist Jean ‘Django’ Reinhardt from the 1930s. Since the genre largely originated in France it is often called by its French name, ‘Jazz manouche’. Django Reinhardt and violinist Stephen Grapelli are the most famous Gypsy Jazz artists whereas Tim Kliphuis, Stochelo Rosenberg, Joscho Stephan and Angelo Debarre are some of the well known artists who play this genre these days. It is in this world of Gypsy Jazz that PCRC waltzes; PCRC was initially a solo project started by Suryakant Sawhney in San Francisco, eventually blossoming into a full blown band. “I attempted to start a band there (San Francisco) but we failed miserably due to everyone being broke all the time. I came back home and had a bunch of songs which I wanted to record and perform live. So I hooked up with these guys. Our first gig  was at a friend’s engagement party at the Air Force Station in Palam Vihar. Karan joined us later and replaced a drummer we had at the time named Caleb. Incidentally, Caleb also did most of the drum recordings for the album,” says Suryakant.
 
 Gypsy Jazz has to be handled with care or else it could be disastrous. Competing with western civilization is what inspired the band to make music, says Surya and they are one of the very few who in our ‘metal’ crazed country play this genre of music. 
 
 “Everything we play isn’t from the same genre.  Mostly we do what sounds good. In this case it seems like old big band music,” says Rohan. PCRC would like to christen their style as ‘antique music’, and “the sound is heavily inspired by 60s/70s Bollywood music, which was in turn inspired by American music of the 50s, such as big band music and soul. 
 Lyrically, we choose to write about prostitutes, deception, android artists and about films coming to life. Most of the themes I attempt to cover don’t quite make it since I’m no poet. I think it’s more based on imagery and word play than particular themes most of the time,” adds Surya who writes lyrics for PCRC. Their inspiration comes from various genres of music over the years. 
 What’s in a name?
 Wondering how they came up with the name Peter Cat Recording Company? “While hunting for dope in the meat market in Calcutta. It is a sheer coincidence that Murakami thought up the same name for his Tokyo Jazz bar — ‘Recording Co.’, and because I like long names and it sounds important, the band came to be called PCRC,” says Surya. 
 
 Rohan, Karan and Andy also have a metal band; the latter also has his own little Dub-step project whereas Surya is influenced by American Indie bands like Neutral Milk Hotel and old Bollywood music. ‘The sound of tape’ is what he loves. In 2010, they won at  the IIT Kanpur music festival Synchronicity, and were finalists at NLS Strawberry Fields. Apart from these, they played for 150 orphans at the Deer park in Hauz khas and did a concert for a foundation in Delhi aimed to create awareness about wildlife conservation among underprivileged children. 
 
 An ecstatic Rohan says, “We guys did a road trip from Delhi to  Chennai and back. So we stopped at major cities and did gigs.” The response to their music has been terrific, says the band. They get appreciated from across the spectrum. Also it cuts ice with the old audience as they recognise the music from their younger days. “We get old people to waltz to our songs. As far as an audience for this music, well, I think we’re trying to be some sort of international act in the long run because India can only offer so much to us as far as that goes,” says Surya. 
 
 PCRC released its debut album Sinema on January 1, 2011 and one of its songs ‘The clown on the 22nd floor’ has been selected as a part of Mercedes-Benz’s 40th compilation Mixed Tape - Anniversary Bliss. 
 
 The band was also voted as one of the five futuristic acts, way ahead of its time by Gibson guitars. Surya says, “We do plan to release a bunch of back catalog material consistently.” They have a three-city tour planned in October (Mumbai-Pune-Bangalore) followed by a closing leg (Calcutta-Guwahati-Delhi). PCRC, like the pied piper has managed to attract the attention of quite a few people to its music and they continue to do so. One has to listen to them to ‘know’ them, it’s one of the best things your ‘mind’ would have come across in a long time.
 
 
 PCRC Madness
 » “We love being profane.”
 » Andy never wakes up before 4pm
 » Surya owns 7 stray dogs.
 » Rohan can’t spell. He once misspelled “suite” as “sweet” during an important office meeting in front of all this seniors.
 » Karan/Boom dates a German girl who only dates Sardars. 
 For more on PCRC, you can visit http://petercatrecordingco.com