Activists have decided to take the Hesaraghatta campaign one step further and have organised a gathering on October 9 to demand that the grassland be declared as Greater Hesaraghatta Grasslands Conservation Reserve.

Hundreds of volunteers and activists are expected to join the meeting that will be held at Cubbon Park.

“We want to request the Chief Minister to declare the entire area of Hesaraghatta grasslands, scrublands and wetlands as Greater Hesaraghatta Grasslands Conserv­ation Reserve. We cannot let this lung space be turned into a concrete jungle. It should be saved at all costs,” said a prominent city-based environmentalist who has been leading the campaign.

Earlier in 2021, the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife rejected the proposal to declare it as Conservation Reserve. However, the Karnataka High Court later directed the board to once again consider the proposal.

“The government is supposed to declare it as a reserve, however, the delay in this decision is making us nervous. People living in the area are being misguided that the grassland will be converted into forest land if it is declared a reserve. We are trying to collect all the data and research details and educate the locals about the importance of the grassland,” said Chandan M, a resident of the area and a volunteer supporting the cause.

Interestingly, the board under the chairmanship of Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai was to meet on September 5 to decide whether the matter. However, the meeting was cancelled at the last minute. While the activists and environmentalists are waiting for the next date, they are only met with stoic silence.

According to Vijay Nishant, founder of Project Vruksha, Hesaraghatta is the last remaining grassland habitat of Bengaluru, which also acts as the lifeline of farmers living in the vicinity.

“It is the catchment area for Bengaluru and is teeming with biodiversity. It is one of the unique grassland ecosystems for cattle and farmers. We always talk about trees in Bengaluru. But grassland ecosystems are equally important. It is yet another lung space for the city,” said Nishant. Ecologists say the 5,010 acres of Hesaraghatta lakebed and its surrounding scrub forest and grassland are critical to the water security of Bengaluru.

“The grassland can sustain water for those living in that catchment area, as well as for the city. Grasslands help in recharging the groundwater. Around 50-60% of the rainwater can be infiltrated due to this swath of land. Thus, it has to be conserved without diluting any norms,” said Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Science, Indian Institute of Science (IISc).