Karnataka is one of 29 landscapes that has the potential to double tiger population, a recent study has stated 
 
 
 Tigers can make a roaring comeback, suggests a new study, which concludes that enough wild habitat remains to allow for the doubling of the global tiger population by 2022. The 29 landscapes, which have the potential to double tiger population, also include parts of Karnataka and Kerala, found the authors.Karnataka and Kerala, found the authors.
 
 “India is doing well in protecting tiger habitats. Protected areas in India have potential to double tiger population by 2022,” Anup Raj Joshi, research associate and programme coordinator of the Conservation Biology Programme at the University of Minnesota, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 The study says that the global population of wild tigers remains dangerously low at fewer than 3,500 individuals. As a result, countries harbouring tiger populations have committed to doubling the wild tiger population by 2022. To estimate the progress made toward the goal, the research team used Google Earth and Global Forest Watch (a tree cover loss alert system) to analyse 14 years of high-resolution global forest loss data across 76 landscapes, spanning 13 countries where tigers live. Among the 29 priority landscapes, 98 per cent forest loss areas were concentrated in just 10 landscapes, while 19 showed little change (1.5 per cent). Authors estimate that forest cover loss led to a decrease of about 400 tigers in the priority landscapes, over the study period (2001–2014).
 
 The analysis provides an update of the status of tiger habitat and describes new applications of technology to detect precisely where forest loss is occurring in order to curb future habitat loss.
 
 “In 2010, government officials, including four heads-of-state from the 13 tiger range-states, convened in St Petersburg, Russia, to agree on a global tiger recovery plan. The high-level meeting resulted in a commitment to double the wild tiger population by 2022. This is also known as ‘Tx2 goal’. There are 76 tiger conservation landscapes (TCLs) across tiger’s range.
 
 “A study by several of our co-authors found that there is enough habitat left in 29 priority TCLs to double the wild tiger population. Preventing further habitat fragmentation and loss is crucial to achieve this goal. However, monitoring tiger habitat at landscape level, which often extends over multiple jurisdictions, has been major challenge to the wildlife managers on the ground,” said Joshi, lead author of the study, which has been published in Science Advances journal.
 
 He further said, “The Global Forest Watch (GFW) provides global forest change data free on their website from 2001-2014 which is updated annually. We thought by adding tiger conservation landscapes boundaries in the GFW, available tools built in GFW can be used to analysing the status of forest, critical habitat for tigers within each TCL. This tool can be then used by both governments and civil society for monitoring tiger habitat in their landscapes. Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop a user-friendly and cost-effective tool for range states to monitor tiger habitat.”
 
 Considering that countries currently harbouring tiger populations are some of the fastest growing economies in the world, the researchers expected habitat the loss to be much higher than the observed 7.7 per cent. “The decline in tiger habitat over a 14-year period is open to several interpretations. From our perspective, it is remarkable and unexpected that only 7.7 per cent of the range was lost to conversion over the study period. Prior to undertaking the analysis, we predicted habitat loss to be much higher, as the 13 tiger range states represent some of the fastest-growing economies. Also, many of the South Asian habitats that dominate the 29 highest priority tiger conservation landscapes are surrounded by human-dominated areas supporting the highest rural population densities on Earth. As predicted, extensive loss among tiger landscapes occurred in areas of oil palm expansion,” he said.
 
 The paper says that what was most encouraging was that loss was less than expected in the 51 tiger reserves that serve as source sites in the priority landscapes. This, according to Joshi, suggests that if future habitat loss is prevented, the tiger recovery now underway in some range states will accelerate. The authors say that the conservation community must remain vigilant.
 
 
 WHY IS THE STUDY IMPORTANT?
 Doubling the tiger population by 2022 requires moving beyond tracking annual changes in habitat. The authors have highlighted near–real-time forest monitoring technologies that provide alerts of forest loss at relevant spatial and temporal scales, to prevent further erosion. The population could approach a trebling in the next two decades if essential corridors were restored in the most deforested landscapes, if priority landscapes suffered no further erosion, if state leaders implemented smart green infrastructure; and if essential “translocation and reintroduction programmes” are implemented, the authors say. 
 “Anyone with an access to internet can visualise and analyse forest loss and gain in and around TCLs. Policymakers can use this information to assign forested areas for concessions or infrastructure development, forest and park managers can monitor forest habitats at landscape level. Likewise, conservationists, advocacy groups and donors can monitor any forest management and restoration programmes for accountability and transparency,” said Joshi.