A wildlife group trains people and forests guards to reduce and control man-sloth bear conflicts

Bears are best when presented in cartoon series or books, as anthropomorphic characters, spouting sage advice. Baloo in the Jungle Book as the genial teacher won our hearts, but in real life, a sloth bear has the opposite effect. When encountered with a bear, most people run in the opposite direction and not break into a song on simple bear necessities.

This has been the case in the last decade in Karnataka, which has been plagued by man-animal conflicts, predominantly involving sloth bears. Though this is a direct consequence of rapid human encroachment into forested areas surrounding villages and crop fields, man and sloth bears are meeting more frequently than in the past. When a bear enters village, there is mayhem and as a consequence both sides suffer violent and brutal injuries. Sometimes the sloth bears are trapped and need to be rescued with compassion, treated and released back into the wild. Desperate situations naturally call for some pre-emptive action.

Wildlife SOS team, is one such group that works not only with foresters and forest guards but also with villages and residential areas to raise awareness on man-animal conflict. They operate out of the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre, and recently hosted a human-wildlife conflict mitigation workshop for foresters and forest guards of the Karnataka Forest Department at the Bannerghatta National Park in Bengaluru. The workshop which focused primarily on sloth bears in the state was attended by over 80 officers.

Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder & CEO, Wildlife SOS said, “In order to tackle the issues of human-sloth bear conflict, it is crucial to first understand this unique species and its behaviour patterns. Wildlife SOS works closely with the Forest Department in carrying out rescue operations throughout Karnataka and we are dedicated towards mitigating such incidents in conflict prone areas.”

The workshop commenced with an introduction to basic management techniques used by bear keepers and veterinarians at the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre, which is run in collaboration with the state Forest Department. The team shared various factors that come into play while carrying out rescue operations, how important it is to control the crowd, the dangers of bears that have fallen into wells and post-rescue treatment procedures for animals injured by panic-stricken villagers. They also demonstrated techniques of trapping and releasing sloth bears into their natural habitat.

B.K. Singh, Retd. PCCF (Head of Forest Force (HOFF) ) Karnataka said, “Human-sloth bear conflict is a serious problem across many villages in the state. Wildlife SOS has been able to share specific skills and provide technical field-expertise in the area of conflict resolution. We will also be organising similar workshops in villages that are exposed to such issues.”

Samad Kottur, Conservation Advisor at Wildlife SOS said, “This workshop was a good opportunity to learn more about conflict mitigation and other commonly faced issues while conducting rescue operations. We hope to conduct more of these sessions with the Forest Dept. in the future.”

The conflict management experts are making sure they follow the necessary protocols when dealing with sloth bear rescue operations. Dr Arun. A. Sha, Director, Research and Veterinary Operations, Wildlife SOS said, “Rescue operations involving sloth bears can be dangerous and need to be carefully planned to ensure the safety of the animal as well as people.”