Mirror found this undocumented ancient inscription on city’s outskirts on the verge of being the latest victim of urbanisation
 
 	

 	 		This is not the view an average Bengalurean is accustomed to: freely roaming peacocks, lush mango groves, arecanut plantations, occasional sightings of a shy leopard, wild dogs, or a pristine village life that goes at its own pace. And, so, when you see some of this on the way to Tavarekere on Magadi Road, you’d be forgiven for believing you’re not within the city limits – technically you still are.
 		
 		 	 		 On one such otherworldly trip, Bangalore Mirror found an ancient inscription — indecipherable to the unstudied eye and complete with its own legend — on the verge of being the latest victim of the ever-expanding city. 	 		
 		
 		All around Sulikere lake (or what is left of it) and Ramasandra village, the Bangalore Development Authority is marching ahead, flattening the terrain, building roads, culverts and ditches in preparation for the Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout. (The situation is similar in seven other villages in Yeshwanthpur and Kengeri hoblis.)
 		
 		
 		
 		 	 		Until recently, this place was considered a forest area, where humans and wildlife cohabited. And the inscription we found was a proof. It has an engraving of a man and a wild animal, a big cat. Today, the animals are restricted to a reserve forest a few kilometres away from the Sulikere village.The ‘development’ is pushing the local histories and legends out of the margins. Among them is this ancient inscription that now lies wedged between the fence of a private property and a road. Only the fear and apprehensions of a few locals who know about it have prevented it from becoming a part of a culvert or a boundary wall.
 		 			
 			 		 			The Hidden Treasure
 			
 			 		 			As with any inscription which is too old to be read and understood today by the common people, this one too has a legend. The old-timers here are averse to talking about it. One of them consented, but only on the promise that his identity would not be revealed. 
 			
 			 		 			He said: “This inscription is not alone. For many generations, this, and a few others connected with it, have been here. Even our grandparents heard the stories from their elders. If you go to the naagarakallu (snake deity carved on a stone) overlooking the lake, you will find two stone markers that point to another direction. Follow that direction straight and you will reach this inscription.”
 			
 			 		 			 The naagarakallu itself barely escaped becoming a part of the road that has been built on the lake bund. The two stones that they point to are on an unpaved path on another part of the lake bund. And as claimed by the local, you will reach the inscription if you take the route ‘pointed’ to by the markers. The villagers believe that if the inscription is deciphered, it would reveal the place of a hidden treasure. 
 			
 			
 			
 			
 			
 			 		 			Obviously, the inscription itself is the treasure. At a glance, it seems as if a part of it is missing. The top of it looks like it chipped off some time ago. But there are no signs of the missing portion. On the top are carvings depicting a man and a wild animal; either a lion or a tiger. Below that are 20 lines of writing which look like an old form of Kannada.
 			
 			 		 			However, there are no references to any inscription around these villages in published records.
 			
 			 		 			And, so this little piece of Karnataka’s history may soon be sacrificed on the altar of urbanisation – unless, of course, somebody wakes up to it.