Activists shocked by Forest Dept plan to shift out 60 monkeys who are destroying ‘expensive items’ in residential area

Animal activists are up-in-arms against an order passed by the State Forest Department to translocate a cluster of around 60 monkeys - all Bonnet Macaques from a residential locality in Vidyaranyapura. The order comes after a complaint from one Shashank Aikhya Resident Welfare Association on the Ambabhavani Temple Road and a recommendation from the BBMP Forest Cell.

The complaint office to the Deputy Conservator of Forests at the Bangalore Urban Division in Aranya Bhavan Campus in January this year states that these monkeys are becoming a regular nuisance in the area and are even indulging in destruction of the residents’ “expensive items”.

Based on their complaint, the Forest Department is said to have passed an order to translocate this group of Bonnet Macaques in a ‘scientific way’ as mentioned in the guidelines according to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, but these officials who passed the order are themselves unaware of wildlife conservation measures, say wildlife activists.

Relocating wildlife is illegal according to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, but these laws are being flexed and conveniently changed according to what a group of citizens want in the city, says Arun Prasad, a wildlife activist. 

According to an official memorandum by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), the BBMP (Forest Cell) has been assisting the public and Forest Department in handling man-animal conflict issues in the limits of BBMP for a long time, and hence an order was passed revising the proposal that was submitted to the government for delegation of powers vested with the Forest Department under section 5(2) of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, for further authorising the BBMP Forest Cell officials to rescue and translocate snakes, monkeys, to an alternate suitable habit within the limits of BBMP,” the order states.

But, it is never done within the BBMP limits and the monkeys are being translocated to the forested outskirts around the city where they would encounter territorial disputes and harm each other of their own species, pointed out animal activists.

“This is similar to the garbage problem in Bengaluru. People staying near areas where the garbage is being dumped have a problem with it while the place it has been cleared from claims it is garbage free. These so-called Forest Department officials and the BBMP Forest Cell members both have no idea what wildlife conservation is, evident by the decisions they take on such complaints,” Prasad said.


 Monkey see monkey doThe high court recently directed the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike and forest department to chart a plan to protect both the residents and monkeys, and ensure the macaques return to their natural habitat.
They just deal with problems and disputes whenever they arise in an ad-hoc manner and do not consider wildlife conservation, he said. “This is evident with the fact that no measures of awareness are conducted that with the people feeding the monkeys home cooked food and snacks the entire lot of monkeys living in urban areas have adapted, and that people are also responsible for this menace. There is no awareness created to prevent monkeys from accessing one’s private space by putting up a mesh preventing the monkeys from entering,” Prasad said.

But often, residents keep complaining that the monkeys sneak into their houses, steal food, meddle with water taps and water connections on the apartment terraces, or even change directions of the dish antennas, sometimes steal clothes put out to dry causing nuisance, and so a “unanimous decision is taken to translocate the entire group of monkeys”. Some residents worship monkeys and are sympathetic with them and so the monkeys are attracted to such crowds looking for their favourite food, he added.

 The forest department must initiate public awareness drives in cities to conserve urban wildlife and mitigate man-animal conflicts–Arun Prasad, wildlife activist
Instead of translocating or relocating wildlife such as macaques, the forest department officials should spend more energy, efforts and funds into spreading awareness 
as to how to coexist living with the urban wildlife safe and sound, an animal activist said. “Monkeys are territorial. Urban monkeys are used to city life so the forest department must initiate public awareness drives in cities to conserve urban wildlife and mitigate man animal conflicts by sanctioning funds for urban wildlife conservation awareness drives through forest department staff and wildlife NGOs. In view of the spread of Zoonotic diseases and Territorial Conflicts among wildlife species, shifting of urban wildlife to forests should be strictly avoided by the forest department and all orders issued for relocating urban monkeys must be immediately canceled by the Chief Wildlife Warden,” Arun Prasad told Bangalore Mirror.

The activists also demanded that the Forest Department and the BBMP forest officials work more in the way of spreading awareness rather than taking the easier way out by making decisions to relocate or translocate wildlife from one place to another.