Kabali has become biggest hit of all time, bigger than Sultan also. Tamil films are now mainstream and even their songs are not causing any Kolaveri with Hindiwallahs.
 
 Unfortunately, we Gujaratis do not yet have a blockbuster to offer Indians, nor do we have a film industry. I was depressed at this thought when I gave a missed coal to my friend, who is in the corridors of power. I cannot reveal his name but let’s call him Amitbhai. And here is the script of how our conversation went.
 
 Me: Boss, there are no Gujju hits. It’s filling me with sham.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Note to worry. I’m working on it.
 	
 	  	Me: You’re writing a Gujarati movie? Talk to me, boy.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Look, my plot revolves around a chaiwallah’s son.
 	
 Me: Sounds like Slumdog Millionaire.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: But in this case, he doesn’t make a million but becomes a statesman.
 	
 	  	Me: Slightly boring, but carry on.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: You think so? What about if I make him out to be dashing and heroic.
 	
 Me: Yes. Dashing and heroic Gujju. Gimme some of dat.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: As he child he swims with the crocodiles.
 	
 	  	Me: That’s more like it. Add some spy type stuff.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: How about if he has a secret message for the world that’s embroidered into his pin striped suit showed off on his manly chest?
 	
 	  	Me: Too ostentatious and a real statesman wouldn’t act so clownish. Make it more like Mission Impossible.
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: I was thinking he would do daring raid on the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
 	
 	  	Me: Wow, now we’re talking. Does he succeed?
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Of course not, but he gets five days of non-stop media. That’s as good as victory.
 	  	
 	Me: Quite so. Achcha, any action sequences? Or, is he only eating dhokla?
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Yes, he does shavasan and pranayam in public.
 	
 	  	Me: Eh? Why?
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Am figuring that one out. Perhaps to show how supremely fit he is.
 	
 	  	Me: All right then. Add some nice wildlife scenes also.
 	
 Amitbhai: You think so? What about some action around cows and slaughterhouses in Deonar and Chembur?
 	
 	  	Me: Could work. And where are you setting the main plot?
 	
 	  	Amitbhai: Amdavad of course. Much of the action will be around a gigantic statue.
 	
 	  	Me: Won’t that take time to make?
 	  	
 	Amitbhai: That’s no problem. We’ll get it from China. So what do you think?
 	
 	  	Me: It’s a riot.