A new pub is in town

Bangalore’s newest pub and lounge is all set to unravel the mystery in chemistry. Picture this, a lab flipped into a pub and lounge, dishing up cocktails and food. Here’s presenting Atomic Lab - the gastronomical science experiment done right. Adding a little creativity into classics, such as the Asian Bhel Puri – crisp fried noodles with a divine chilli garlic sauce and the crispiness of a bhel puri mix. If that isn’t enough to get your taste buds to crave, their Paneer Kurkure had us have a clean plate in a matter of seconds. Deep golden fried paneer stuffed with a green pickle treat & crushed papad. But wait, it doesn’t stop there. 

Can’t decide whether to hit Italian or go Desi? How does a Milky Way Naan-izza sound? A scene set in a space on the most sought after Lavelle Road, this new kid on the block is packing a punch – courtesy twisted cocktails, flavorful grub and a tasteful set up. Spread over two floors, the lower has a cozy pub vibe, perfect for a quick lunch, a drink after work or a catch up with the mates. The upper floor is lounge-themed with the necessary chemistry elements of course, keeping in line with the lab vibe. However the space quickly transforms into the perfect place to let your hair down and shake a leg. The menu is themed around the nutty professors handbook of secret recipes penned down through his numerous gastronomical experiments. The grub side of the menu features signature dishes, the noteworthy ones being The Milky way and Big Bang Naan-Izzas, Butter Chicken Chopsuey, Bolognese Chicken Wings and Coffee Creme brulee. The drinks menu brings the chemistry side to life with signature cocktails such as Dark Matter, Absolute Zero, Supernova and elemental shots namely, Oxygen, Carbon, Hydrogen and . 

 WHERE: The Atomic Lab, 25/5, Lavelle Road, Shanthala Nagar, 
Ashok Nagar 
 WHEN: All day
 CALL: 8073600717

 Indulge in royal flavours

Akheraj Deolia, founded by Rao Akheraj the grandson of Rao Chandrasen of Jodhpur and one of the 16th Istimirdari of Ajmer. The region has always been under the Sultanat of Delhi from the time of Prithviraj Chauhan and changed the hands from Mughal to British therefore all the Jagirs were independent and only reported to Delhi till 1956 when it became part of Rajasthan. Akheraj Deolia lies between the borders of Marwar and Mewar hence the cuisine been influenced by both the regions which includes use of makki, bajra, chana, moong, etc. Cubbon Pavilion presents a few of the dishes at this festival, which features the Laal Maas, Ker Sangri, Dal Bati Churma, Chakki ka Saag, Beetroot Ajwain Parantha, etc. 
WHERE: ITC Gardenia, Residency Road 
 WHEN: 7pm-11.30pm, December 9
 CALL: 22119898

 Get the big buffet

Check out the Global Lunch Buffets @ 20 Feet High. The Euro restobar offers juicy steaks, sizzlers, best of Texmex, wholesome burgers and pasta along with a whole range of in-house specialties of seafood and eclectic Euro-cuisine which includes the T-Bone, Hammered Steak, Chateaubriand, Chicken Steak and Chimmichanga amongst other Tex Mex varieties. Coupled with their collection of mocktails, cocktails and choicest of spirits, paired with classic rock music. Plus they have happy hours, ladies nights on Wednesdays and ‘Eat All You Can Wings’ on Tuesdays where you get a 50 per cent discount. 
WHERE: 22, Amoeba Complex, Church Street 
 WHEN: 12pm-11pm (Mon-Thurs);12pm-1am (Fri and Sat); 12pm-8pm (happy hours, Mon-Fri)
 HOW MUCH: `440 plus taxes (per person) for lunch buffet (Mon-Thurs); `475 plus taxes (per person) for lunch buffet (Fri-Sun) 
 CALL: 25582122

 Take an art walk'

The National Gallery of Modern Art, Bengaluru is hosting a gallery walk with art historian HA Anil Kumar who will take you through the ongoing exhibition – the JS Khanderao Retrospective. The exhibition showcases around two hundred artworks of Khanderao which includes drawings, portraits, landscapes, abstracts, and folk. This exhibition explores the practice of Khanderao for more than four decades as a painter and also exposes his remarkable contribution to the art field as a tutor, founder of the art institute – ‘The Ideal Fine Art Society’ - established in 1963 in Gulbarga. 
WHERE: National Gallery of Modern Art, 49, Manikyavelu Mansion, Palace Road 
 WHEN: 11.30am, December 9 
 CALL: 22342338

 Time for Xmas shopping

The Urban Solace Christmas Bazaar 2018 just got bigger and better with a larger range of exclusive products for gifting and decorating your home. On sale will be gifts, decorations, craft, sweets, and of course music and wine to go with the whole mood.
WHERE: Annaswamy Mudaliar Road, opposite Ulsoor lake WHEN: 10am-7pm, December 9
 CALL: 9845013055

 Go for this photo exhibition

Don’t miss the NA Perumal Memorial Award 2018 & Photo exhibition this evening. This award has been instituted by Focus Academy of Art and Photography. The expert jury has chosen wildlife experts Kripakar-Senani for the prestigious award. The exhibition will showcase the photographic works of the Focus Academy members. Renowned environmentalist Nagesh Hegde will present the award.
WHERE: Venkatappa Art Gallery, Kasturba Road 
 WHEN: 5.30pm, December 9 
 Entry: Free