The rescue and release of five rare animals on May 22 and 23 has given a new dimension to city’s wildlife quotient, reports Chetan R
 
 Wildlife volunteers say these rescue operations are a testament to the fact that wildlife is reposing faith in the city as a habitat. Though wildlife illegal trade cannot be ruled out as the source of a few species spotted in Bangalore, volunteers say most of the rescued animals are of local provenance.
 
 “These rescues are a delightful feast for us. It’s a pleasure to see them all right here in Bangalore. To ensure retention of more species of birds and animals, we are working on creating a conducive habitat for them in and around Sankey Tank. We can now locate over 70 species of different birds and their nesting there. While small animals like squirrels and snakes are released there, rare species are released into the wild,” Kiran Kumar D S, a wildlife volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 “We had some very interesting rescues in the past week. They were a reminder to the fact that green lung spaces still remain in Bangalore. It also sends out a message on conserving the wildlife,” said Sharath R Babu, advisor to the BBMP forest cell.
 
 Click here and see a slideshow of all the animals released 
 
 May 22: A slender loris, a nocturnal primate protected under schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, and sought after in the illegal wildlife trade under the moniker Liliput, was rescued at Kengeri. After the rescue, it was released the very next day into the wild. Binomial name:Loris lydekkerianus. They are nocturnal and emerge only at dusk. Mainly insectivorous.
 
 May 23: A peacock, which is also protected under schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, was rescued near Kamakshipalya. It was found in a vacant site at Kebbala. The BBMP forest team later sent it to the WRRC (Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre), Bannerghatta, for rehab. Binomial name: Pavo cristatus. The peacock is the national bird of India.
 
 May 23: A red sand boa, also protected under schedule IV of the IWP act, was rescued by BBMP forest cell volunteers near Arabic college in the city. It was released to the wild subsequently. Binomial name: Eryx johnii. This shy snake is timid too.
 
 May 23: The trinket, a nocturnal species which the rescuers describe as the handsomest among all snakes. It was rescued from Nagavara and released to the wild subsequently. Binomial name: Coelognathus helena. Total length 4.5 feet; tail 10 inches.
 
 May 23: The monitor lizard, an endangered species and protected under Schedule I of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, was rescued from Kodigehalli near Sahakarnagar. It was released to the wild subsequently. Binomial name:Varanus bengalensis.