Rescue centres across city gear up to spread awareness about dangers of Chinese manja, ahead of Sankranthi

As the harvest festival of Sankranthi approaches, various city-based bird rescue centres have beefed up activities to highlight the perils of using glass-coated strings for flying kites. The centres, through various campaigns, are promoting use of traditional cotton strings instead of glass-coated manjas. While some are doing so by organising cleaning drives in manjha hotspots in the city, others are reaching out to city schools and organising awareness sessions on the issue.

“We are conducting a ‘Kite vs Kite’ sensitisation programme for not only school children from across the city but also for corporates. Children and professionals are being told about how cruel Chinese manjas can get. When a bird is stuck in Chinese manja and tries to break free, the thread cuts through deep and many times breaks bones, rendering the bird flightless for life,” said Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA Wildlife Hospital.

Centres say they have upped their activities to raise awareness around the harmfulness of manja. Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC), yet another rescue centre in the city, says it has already reached out to more than 300 school kids and raised awareness about the issue.

Glass-coated Chinese manja can cause life-threatening injuries to birds
“We are also approaching housing societies to talk about the effect of Chinese manja and kites on birds. In January, we are planning to cover 200 more students. We are conducting skits using bird and kite models along with audio-video presentations showing real manjha accident cases. We tell them to avoid kite flying and celebrate with friends and family. But if they have to, they should use cotton thread and use open spaces with no trees and electric poles. Once done, kites along with broken threads should be taken back to their houses,” said Dr Nirupama Jaisingh, veterinarian at WRRC.

Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Center (ARRC) says it has mapped manja hotspots in the city and will be conducting cleaning drives at these places to drive home the message. As per ARRC, Austin Town, Ulsoor, Shivaji Nagar, Frazer Town, SK Garden, and surrounding areas are the city’s hotspots when it comes to the number of birds getting entangled in manjas and sustaining injuries.

Manja is a year-round problem. To address the root cause, we have been conducting manja awareness sessions at local schools and educating children–Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC
“Manja is a year-round problem and most of the cases that we receive are from the heart of the city. To address the root cause, we have been conducting manja awareness sessions at local schools and educating children. We will be conducting a cleaning drive during Sankranthi to educate people about the dire consequences of using manjhas and its adverse impact on wildlife,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC.

Mean manja

 The National Green Tribunal (NGT) banned the use, manufacture, sale, storage and purchase of glass-coated manja or nylon threads for flying kites via an order in July 2017 According to wildlife rescuers, birds such as black kites, crows, koels, barn owls and mammals like bats are commonly found entangled in these threads Flight feather damage, bone fractures and head injuries due to fall and damage to the neck and legs are the most common injuries sustained by these animals In the past, even two-wheeler riders have had narrow escape from death by manja