Earlier this week, for three days, I used a dry toilet for the first time in my three decades on this planet. All of my friends and family will attest to the fact that I’m completely unwilling to talk about any aspect of ablutions. I’d like to blame it on my upbringing but that isn’t the case: the goings-on of the digestive system were always casually discussed, even over family meals. I wasn’t brought up to think of it as dirty but I do. For my Malayali grandfather, there are two kinds of fruits and vegetables – those that cause gas and those that alleviate its effects. I thought I would’ve entirely suppressed this category of information but it has weaseled its way into my knowledge bank and firmly sits there.
 
 The using of this dry toilet happened in the middle of Anantapur District, the second driest district in India, which has had severe drought for the past five years. Tucked away in this wilderness, my college-friend M and her wildlife conservationist partner have made home while experimenting and researching drought-resistant farming techniques. While I’ve always known M on a personal level, and have fully experienced her ability to provide, preach and pamper first-hand, she continues to amaze me by extending herself in this manner at more than just the personal level. This extension from the personal to the public is just one of the ways that M and her family of social development activists live a radical life. Everytime I escape to this haven in the midst of Anantapur District, I come away trying to imbibe an iota of it into my life.
 
 It is here that one begins to understand that the doomsday prophecy is true: the wars of the future, which are closer than we think, will be fought over water. It is evidenced here in the protectionist attitude towards this element. At the edge of M’s home runs a canal that brings water from the River Krishna, which has recently seen some water. Instead of sitting down with the various traditional communities surrounding the area and figuring out the appropriate use for this water, the State is siphoning it out of there to feed other projects, protected 24/7 by the police so that it isn’t stolen. So, while I might have wanted a throne, even having enough water for a wash-up seemed like a luxury.
 
 I think that I thought dry toilets weren’t hygienic because I didn’t know better,
 
 I was convinced they’d stink but they don’t. It’s the pee that makes it smelly. All the advertising campaign in favour of spotless, sweet-smelling porcelain bowls has fooled me too. I was also politely told that humans are the only ones who audaciously throw their poo in clean water: no other creature does that, they instead bury it, putting mud over it, letting it go back to the earth as manure. One might go as far as to say it's a daily commitment to return to the natural world and even return the favour.
 
 This isn’t a directive to immediately make this a part of your life, instead perhaps it might prod you to be more mindful of your energy consumption and output. We should be looking at our failures in a more wholesome fashion – it isn’t the individual at the centre alone to blame and to be catalysed for action, it must be translated to more. Individuals might need to band together, reach a collectively-conceived consensus and proceed to demand structural changes of governing institutions. We can’t afford to live in our private bubbles of success anymore because soon it – fascism’s firm foot – will crush us all.
 
 How did using a dry toilet make me dump all this on you? It didn’t. Well, not the actual using of it - that takes a simple squat, which even Western Medicine has confirmed is the best way to evacuate your bowels. What then? I came to see that a city functions on not knowing, on remaining ignorant and being valued for having these blinkers on. No wonder we are pissed off to see garbage piled up on our streets, sewage overflowing, pot-holed roads - because someone we paid was supposed to sort all this out. Instead, in using the dry toilet, in the act of turning around, looking at my mess and sprinkling mud on it, I had actually cleaned up after myself, after a long, long time of complacency.