Govt notifies Yadahalli chinkara wildlife sanctuary spread over 96 sqkm
 
 
 	After initiating programmes for the conservation of leopards, tigers and other big animals, Karnataka is turning its attention to lesser-known species by official notifying vast forest areas as sanctuaries.
 	
 	  	The state government has officially notified the creation of Yadahalli Chinkara Wildlife Sanctuary in Bilagi and Mudhol taluks of Bagalkot district. The new sanctuary, spread across 96.36 sq km, will be the second sanctuary for antelopes in the state after Rangayyanadurga in Davanagere district that houses four-horned antelopes.
 	
 	  	The state wildlife board had previously okayed the proposals and recommended the declaration of the area as a wildlife sanctuary. According to the official gazette notification, Yadahalli is the only habitat for the endangered Indian Gazelle in south India. “Besides, the area interspersed with dry scrub forests also boasts the presence of critically endangered wolves, jackals, wild cats, striped hyenas and civet cats. The region is the only intact, vast and pristine stretch of scrub forests, and hence it is the need of the hour to maintain the pristineness of the area,” the gazette said.
 	
 	  	The state government has already notified dedicated wildlife sanctuaries for otters of the Thungabhadra river, bee-eaters conservation reserve at Melapura near Mandya and a hornbill conservation reserve at Dandeli. Sanjay Gubbi, noted conservation biologist and member of the state wildlife board, said, “Conservation has no barriers, whether it is smaller or greater species. Conservation of species like these is equally important for a balanced eco-system and KFD has taken the right step in that regard by declaring the areas as sanctuaries. All these years, these areas were a part of the forest division and have now been governed and controlled by the wildlife division of KFD.”
 	
 	 

 	‘Ooty of Dryland’ is now a sanctuary
 	
 	  	Spread across 100.48 sq km of area and covering three taluks - Chitradurga, Holalkere and Hiriyur, Jogimatti hill station too has been declared as wildlife sanctuary of the state. According to sources in the forest department, the Jogimatti forests are home to one of the few wild surviving endangered leopards besides sloth bears, porcupines, Indian jackals and jungle cats. With its contiguous single-block intersperse of hillocks and plains, the Jogimatti forest is known as ‘Ooty of Dryland’ in Karnataka.
 	
 	  	Clearing the long pending proposal of declaring Kappathagudda as a conservation reserve, the state government has notified the ecologically sensitive region as fresh conservation reserve. The hillocks spread across Gadag, Mundaragi and Shirahatti taluks, covering 17,872.248 hectares, is home to economically important tree species.
 	
 	
 	The hillocks have been referred to as Western Ghats of north Karnataka region. Alarmed by the degradation of the habitat by intense mining and renewable energy units, the government was forced to declare it as a reserve.