By P Ramesh Chander
 
 Authorities need to deal with this problem by using technology as an enabler
 
 Bellandur Lake is believed to be originally a tributary of the Dakshina Pinakini river (also known as the Ponnaiyar River).Water from Bellandur flows to Varthur Lake, ultimately joining the Pennar River. Currently, most of Bengaluru’s treated and untreated sewage is released into Bellandur Lake, severely polluting it, resulting in a depletion of wildlife in and around the lake.
 
 Thirty years of unplanned urbanization have taken a toll on the lake, now several species are gone from the area, including kingfishers, parrots, parakeets, wood pigeons, kites. As more and more large apartment complexes come up on the lakes shores, more such species will disappear.
 
 The impact of urbanisation has led this lake into some unresolved mysteries. Experts from Britain and Israel have visited to study the problem and they say that the solution is simple - stop pouring pollutants into the lakes. So why is the uninhibited sewage and chemical dumping from nearby industrial units not stopped? The commuters disappear into the froth and foam flying on to them from the lake.
 
 Despite all the above mysteries, I still have a dream for Bellandur lake as a citizen of Mahadevapura constituency. In the interest of the 4 lakh plus citizens of Mahadevapura, the authorities concerned have to up their service level and resolve this issue, keeping aside the benefits from the entities who are pouring pollutants. The army men who recently fought the rage of fire, to be allowed to take care of their larger responsibility than look into the civic issues. A clean and beautiful lake where we could do a morning and evening walk/cycling. A boating facility in here. A lake where boating race during school/college vacations could be organised
 
 This sure needs to be spoken about now. I just had a series of tweets go live on
 
 #DidYouKnow - Bellandur Lake, the largest of the 262 lakes and tanks in Bengaluru, receives about 40 per cent of the city’s sewage.
 
 #JustAsking - What is the status of the Rs. 800 crore promised to rejuvenate the lakes in Bengaluru?
 
 What we ask is problem solving at a war footing pace by using technology as an enabler to ensure this was indeed the last time we residents would have to go through a similar ordeal could be the first thing we could begin with.
 
 The writer is author of the book Three Pillars of Customer Relationship