Although entering water is banned at Sangam — confluence of Arkavathi and Cauvery rivers near Kanakapura — many visitors decide to plunge in
 
 When an IIT-Kharagpur student drowned in Sangam, the confluence of Arkavathi and Cauvery rivers near Kanakapura, in February this year, forest department officials reacted by banning people from entering the water. Now it appears the forest department has taken on more than it can effectively police. 

 Over the last three days, hundreds of tourists, a majority of them techies from the city, decided to picnic near the deadly waters. Several decided to even plunge into the waters. Forest guards were out in numbers, but visitors still entered the waters regardless of pleas and threats from forest guards. Forest department officials are now mulling stricter action against the ‘trespassers’. 

 Although fairly calm on the surface, the Arkavathi-Cauvery confluence has a strong undercurrent as well as a number of whirlpools. These traps have accounted for more than 100 lives in the last couple of years. The latest incident was the death of the IIT student whose body was never found despite efforts from the National Disaster Management team. Currently, due to heavy rainfall in catchment areas, the rivers are in spate making them even more dangerous. 

 	From near Sangam, there is a bus service to Mekedattu, another tourist area 4km away. To get to the bus, one must cross the Arkavathi in a coracle — a perfectly legal ride. But while many cross over, some of them take the opportunity to plunge into the waters from the other bank of the Arkavathi.  

 	Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) admitted that forest department staff had a tough time regulating the crowds over the weekend. “Many visitors are risking their lives,” Luthra said. “We try to stop people, but since the area is vast and the terrain difficult, it is impossible to keep everyone out.” 

 	Forest officials who were posted on the spot said, “We kept cautioning people from venturing into the water, but they refused to listen. We placed cautionary ropes in the water and even entry was regulated so that everyone had to take the coracle to cross the river. However, people tried to outsmart us by crossing the river in the coracle and diving in the waters from other side. Many of them were drunk and in no mood to listen to us.” 

 	The forest department is now planning stringent measures. “We are working on a plan to barricade the whole area. We also plan to deploy more men to regulate the crowds,” Luthra said.