Activists say heavy influx of visitors is wreaking havoc on its fragile ecosystem
 
 What if locals at a tourist spot doesn’t want visitors to come in regularly? That seems to the idea Coorg Wildlife Society is propagating. Col CP Muthanna, president, Coorg Wildlife Society, has put up a board at his property in Gonikoppal that reads: “Mass tourism destroying Kodagu. Please visit less often, Save Kodagu and Cauvery Campaign.”
 
 The board and the proposal may not have any legality, but it indicates the ecosystem of Kodagu is being affected because of unregulated tourism.
 
 Col CP Muthanna told BM, “Several factors are affecting Kodagu district’s landscape, environment, culture and traditions. Urbanisation has led to layouts, high-tension power lines, railways and so on. Tourism is turning out to be invasive and causing damage in many ways — garbage, stress on the water table, traffic and so on. Every good hill station been destroyed. After Ooty, Mussoorie and Shimla, now it is Kodagu’s turn.”
 
 Muthanna says he will approach the government to look into their demands.
 
 “A lot of damage has already taken place. We need to raise our voice and spread some awareness. We are trying to make some representations and suggestions to the tourism minister. In the past, the secretary from the tourism department, Centre, had promised to conduct a study on Coorg’s carrying capacity. We are losing a large number of trees in the catchment area in the name of urbanization,” he said.
 
 
 
 
 
 Col Muthanna stressed that they are not against tourism, but want tourism regulated. “In Uttarakhand, 150 passes per day are issued to the Gangotri Glacier. A similar system can be adopted in the district too. The government must stop issuing licenses for resorts and layouts, till the study on the carrying capacity of the district is completed. Waste management is becoming a huge issue.”
 
 The issue has been taken up with Chief Minister Siddaramiah and a representation was sent to Amitabh Kant, CEO, NITI Aayog. “We also held a couple of protests recently. I am trying to co-ordinate the Save Kodagu and Cauvery campaign. Several organisations and like-minded people are involved in this,” he said.
 
 Sundar Muthanna, Bengaluru Co-ordinator for Coorg Wildlife Society, said: “We need to regulate tourism. When vehicles enter, they need to pay a fee that should be shared with local farmers.’
 
 “Some suggestions include the conducting a study on carrying capacity of Kodagu district for tourism. Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru and College of Forestry, Ponnampet in Kodagu could conduct this survey jointly. The result of the survey should give us an idea of how many visitors should be allowed in Kodagu, especially to highly sensitive areas such as Bhagamandala and Irupu,” he said.