Experts urge government to look for long-term solutions as cases of human-animal conflict rise; 36,982 cases in 2021-22; Rs 2,741 lakh paid as compensation

Karnataka has recorded the highest number of human-wildlife cases in 2021-22 compared to the last four years. As per the data from the Karnataka Forest Department, 36,982 cases have been registered by the department in 2021-22, compared to 28,559 in 2020-21; 23,480 in 2019-20; 24,055 conflict cases in 2018-19 and 30,806 in 2017-18.

While the number went down for two consecutive years starting from 2018, it is climbing up again forcing the department to shell out a huge amount in ex-gratia compensation.

The total amount paid as ex-gratia in 2021-22 is Rs 2,741.70 lakh.

According to Vijaykumar Gogi, principal chief conservator of forest (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department, the quantum of money paid as compensation is increasing due to changes in the land use pattern. “Earlier, farmers were into subsistence agriculture, where their investment was low. With advent of new technology and government initiatives, they have started investing in various forms of agriculture along the forest boundaries. We cannot erect barricades all along the landscape, leading to higher compensation,” said Gogi.

From a genuine surge in the conflict cases in some areas to inadequate mitigations activities, and from an increase in awareness about the ex-gratia facility to change in the land use pattern, there are multiple reasons behind the surge in human-animal conflict numbers.

According to experts, while conflict cases involving carnivores can be permanently mitigated by creating barriers and taking up other measures that will discourage the animals to venture into human-inhabited areas, it is the herbivores, especially the elephants-related conflicts, which turn out to be tricky. “At least half of the human-animal conflict cases are that of human-elephant conflicts. The department has put enough measures in place to contain the jumbos, but elephants are smart animals and they come up with ways to breach these barriers,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

Daniel Sukumar Das, director, Wildlife Conservation Foundation says it is not the scarcity of food or water, but the encroachment of the forest corridors that is putting these animals into conflict situations with humans. “Elephants have been moving across South India’s landscape through the corridors. For ages, the forest belonged to the elephants. However, encroachment of corridors, especially in the forests of Hassan, has made the situation worse. The forest department should look at providing a safe passage to the animals between two forest areas,” said Das.

According to the forest department officials, Ramanagar, Hassan and Kodagu are some of the areas that are most vulnerable to the human-animal conflict in the state. Experts point to the recent change in crop use patterns in these areas as yet another reason behind crop depredation cases involving herbivores such as elephants.
“Crop depredation depend a lot on the land use changes that happened in recent years. Farmers are shifting from seasonal crops to annual due to various government initiatives such as irrigation facilities even on forest fringes. Thus, earlier while food was available for the animals only during certain months, now it is available all around the year. Farmers have also shifted to crops such as paddy, sugarcane and maize, and elephants love to feed on them,” said Avinash Krishnan, director, science and conservation, A Rocha India.

Ex-gratia is not the solution
Experts say paying compensation is an unscientific and superficial approach to solving the issue of human-animal conflict. Over the last five years, the department has paid Rs 9,815.85 lakh as ex-gratia compensation to those affected.

“All that compensation can achieve is to incentivise the farmers so they do not end up killing the animals. But it is not a permanent solution. Compensation paid in case of a life lost is understandable, but crop depredation is an every day occurrence and compensation is not viable,” said Das.

As per a report by the Karnataka Task Force, one way to resolve the human-animal conflict is through zonation of land. Land zonation implies that in certain areas only people should live, certain other areas should be occupied only by the animals, and in some areas, both can co-exist. Experts also said mitigation strategies should be futuristic. “Land zonation is the way forward in such cases. For instance, while in a landscape such as that of Coorg, co-existence will be unyielding, it will work beautifully in the case of Bannerghatta National Park. We should look at futuristic mitigation strategies instead of paying compensation. Private players interested in conservation values should pitch in with effective technologies,” added Avinash.


   .



Celebrating nature’s unsung heroes

World Ranger Day is observed on July 31 every year to commemorate rangers killed or injured on duty and to celebrate their work. Rangers, forest guards, watchers - they are known by many names and their work is extensive. They are the unsung heroes of conservation.

A ranger refers to a professional who is in charge of a range within a forest division. They are involved in the protection and management of forest areas, national parks, and wildlife sanctuaries. Their work includes patrolling, monitoring wildlife, combating poaching, engaging local communities, managing fires, and assisting with tourism. Patrolling is among their most crucial tasks.

Many of the anti-poaching patrols are carried out at night, with strategic planning of routes and deployment of staff to cover threat-prone areas. In those times, wildlife activity is also high. Despite threat from both poachers and animals, their love for conservation of forests and wildlife keeps them going.

Rangers are on the frontlines for mitigation and management of human-animal conflict in states with a thriving wildlife population like Karnataka (elephants, leopards). In such areas, they assist DFOs to make strategies to control human-animal conflict by putting up effective barriers like elephant-proof trenches, railway barricades, and solar fencing. Many Forest Department personnel have lost their lives or faced serious injury while trying to drive elephants towards forests or similar rescue attempts.

An important aspect of a Ranger’s job is visiting local communities and engaging people. A good Range Forest Officer has excellent knowledge of the villages falling within or near their jurisdiction.

Managing fires
Both natural fires and man-made fires occur in the forest. During the dry season, a large proportion of a Ranger’s time is spent in preventing and combating forest fires. In order to prevent such fires from spreading to large areas, they keep a close watch on the forest areas within their jurisdiction. In India, the end of ‘fire season’ by monsoon rains brings joy to all forest staff who catch their breath after several tense months.

Tourism assistance
Rangers are also involved in guiding tourists around national parks and wildlife sanctuaries - often in vehicles - as their in-depth knowledge of wildlife is perfect for awareness among nature lovers. Not only are they directly involved with the tourists, but also in designing tourist-routes. It is clear that a ranger’s work is vast and critical to ensuring a safe future for our natural areas. Many of these brave folk toil through dangerous harsh conditions, spending weeks and months away from their loved ones. Some do not have access to electricity or clean drinking water whilst on patrol. Rangers are truly nature’s real life-heroes.

—Prabhakar Priyadarshi, IFS 
(Views expressed in the article are personal)