Forest department sleuths, who are investigating the case after the recent arrest of six Haryana-based poachers from Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) wildlife sanctuary, have found that the gang’s targets were not only tigers, but otters too.    During raids, the sleuths recovered small traps used for hunting otters from their huts. The crime history of Jagadish, one of the arrested, which includes an arrest in Arunachal Pradesh with 15 otter skins, also helped the sleuths investigate on this front, said sources.   Otter skin is in demand as it is used to make purses, bags and other products. “We came across these small traps during the investigations,” a source told Bangalore Mirror. “They were hidden near their huts. They are very small compared to tiger traps. We learnt that they are used for hunting otters. We suspect they used to set these traps in Cauvery river. Fortunately, none of our otters or tigers have been killed.”   Officials of Kollegal wildlife range had arrested six poachers, said be from villages near Haryana border. They had set jaw traps called ‘Khadkas’ in the reserve forest to catch tigers. These traps were activated during nights. The gang also had a tracker who had mastered setting traps, slaying and de-skinning tigers.    “They usually set traps in water with things that otters feed on, like fish,” said the source, adding, But, poaching tigers was their priority.”   “Based on the information they gave after we took them to custody, raids were conducted and we found these traps hidden under stones. However, when questioned, they claimed that these were not for hunting and were used for some other purposes,” said V Mohan Raj, chief conservator of forests at BRT tiger reserve.   “Otter hunting is as serious as tiger hunting. A few species of otters are found in the Cauvery and covered under schedule I of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. If charges are proved, one has to face a minimum of three years’ imprisonment and a fine,” said Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert.