Smart City works are underway across BBMP limits — upgrading footpaths, storm water drains to name a few.

However, it appears the work is not that smart enough when it comes to protecting fully grown trees, according to environmental activists.
 
Unscientific ways, especially the haphazard digging of Bengaluru Smart City Ltd, the entity responsible, are damaging the taproots of large avenue trees, we are told — the primary reason for tree falls during monsoon season’s storms and rainfall, activists pointed out.

A resident of Vasanth Nagar, Ravi Narayanan, noticed recently that an earthmover (JCB) was digging the storm water drain in quite an uncaring manner - totally ignoring the roots of trees along Queen’s Road.
 
The primary root systems of huge trees along the stretch were being disturbed and damaged; this could lead to imbalance of the trees in turn resulting in the trees being uprooted during monsoon season.
 
Narayanan clicked photographs of the digging when the main roots were being damaged during the ongoing Smart City work.

After the residents in and around Queen’s Road took note of this unscientific work, tree activists went around and checked the Smart City projects being carried out at other places in the city such as near the Kanteerava Stadium, Silver Jubilee Park Road, Lavelle Road and elsewhere. They believe in the aforementioned places as well the work had damaged taproots of a large number of trees.

   .

Environmentalist and tree activist, Vijay Nishanth said, “they (Smart City) have to do the digging work scientifically by calculating the root-canopy proportion and take utmost care of the main roots which has to be left in place, undisturbed. If it’s damaged or cut, it would result in imbalance causing the trees to fall down immaturely.”

“This project cannot be called ‘smart’ as it does not understand the very meaning of a green city or garden city which Bengaluru is often referred to as. Smart City is not leaving any provision for trees or plants to grow in the lung spaces it designs during laying of footpaths. They have to re-check the design and give maximum space for plants and trees which would help walkers and cyclists in the future with shade,” Vijay pointed out.


   Workers have been instructed to guard roots using wooden planks…— Vinayak Sugur, chief engineer, Smart City

“Bengaluru Smart City Limited, the entity entrusted by the government to carry out long-term reliable beautification work cannot indulge in haphazard work in a non-scientific manner. The work has to be carried out in an eco-friendly way and care has to be taken not to destroy the environment in the name of infrastructure development. If the main roots of a huge tree are damaged on one side, the tree would lose strength and come down eventually in the future damaging infrastructure, property or even resulting in human/animal casualties. Trees in the city are home for urban wildlife and due to the unplanned and non-scientific works including digging and pruning, the so-called development work itself is putting urban wildlife at risk,” activist Arun Prasad told BM.

The Smart City project that started in January 2021 had a deadline of completion in six months by June, but it has now missed several deadlines and was finally planned to be finished by February this year. Office of the Deputy Conservator of Forests, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike, had written to the managing director of Bengaluru Smart City (Projects) in July last year stating that trees along the Inner Ring Road require to be pruned scientifically and their roots shall not be uprooted while the work is carried out. “Forest Department had written to Smart City with reference to an RTI application filed by environmental activist Dattatreya T Devare after he observed such unscientific works by government entities,” said Prasad.

Bengaluru Smart City (Projects) chief engineer Vinayak Sugur told Bangalore Mirror that workers have been instructed to safeguard the roots of trees while digging work is carried out.
 
“They have been instructed to guard and protect the taproots using wooden planks during the works. This could have been an individual incident which needs to be checked, and inquired into. Otherwise, all our major works have been finished on Queen’s Road,” Sugur pointed out.