Tunes from Africa

Madou Sidiki Diabatè returns to the city for a fusion gig of world, folk, west African, and jazz music. From Mali, Africa, the solo artist will play lesser known instrument called the kora or African Lute Harp. He started playing the kora at age three, and by the age of six, he was playing his first concert as a representative of the 71st generation of kora players in his family. He learned his art under his father, Sidiki Diabaté, a man generally referred to as the King of the Kora. 

 WHERE: Windmills Craftworks, 5B EPIP Zone, Whitefield
 WHEN: 9.30pm onwards, October 5-6
 ENTRY: `500 & `1,000 plus taxes, windmillscraftworks.com

 Go to an arts festival

Bengaluru International Arts Festival (BIAF) is back in the city for the 11th time to epitomise ‘celebration of harmony through arts’. On its roster are thought-provoking and well curated art presentations by artists from both India and abroad. On the first day, catch an A Capella performance, directed by Dr Suchethan Rangaswamy, and Megha, a fusion concert with Dr Suma Sudhindra on veena, Gerard Machado on guitar, BC Manjunath on mridanga, Prakash Sontakke on guitar and Karthik Mani on drums.

 WHERE: Chowdiah Memorial Hall, Vyalikaval
 WHEN: 6.15pm onwards, October 5-7
 ENTRY: Free
 DETAILS: biaf.co.in

 Go for this art show

Now here’s an exhibition that will delight all those who love wildlife. Titled Junglee – Magnificently Wild, it has mounted paintings of majestic wild animals – from tigers to leopards, elephants, deers and peacocks. The artists have resorted to an interplay of colours, moods and painting styles to capture the moments of birds and animals in their natual habitat.

 WHERE: Magnitude Gallery, 3rd block, Jayanagar WHEN: 10am onwards, till October 2018 (closed on Sundays)
 CALL: 9900117201

Listen to stories 

Back in the day, the best of stories were told and heard under the moonlight, in a setting that was completely informal, surrounded by people. Here’s a chance to sit down for one such intimate storytelling evening. To be conducted by performance storyteller Vikram Sridhar, you will get to hear stories of love, drama, action, friendship drawn from folklore, history, mythology and contemporary times of the Indian subcontinent. 

 WHERE: Atta Galatta, 5th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 8pm-9pm, October 5
 ENTRY: `200, eventshigh.com, bookmyshow.com or at the venue 
 CALL: 41600677

 Watch a dance show 

On the third day of Divya Kshetram, a classical dance festival, witness a Bharatanatyam recital by Ragini Chandrashekhar. In her show, she will depict Sri Krishna Temple of Udupi on stage. It will be followed by a Kathak piece on Shrinathji Temple of Rajasthan by Abhimanyu Lal. The theme of the fest is to take the audience through the serenity and sanctity of the sacred spaces around India. 

 WHERE: Seva Sadan Auditorium, 14th Cross, Malleswaram
 WHEN: 6.30pm, October 5
 CALL: 23347830