Members of the Society For Wildlife Education Adventure           
 Looking after an injured kite, that lost its nest due to tree cutting or rescuing the venomous Russell’s Viper in a residential layout... these are all part of the regular activities of this young group. While their peers hangout in malls during the weekend, this group of students spend many of their Sunday afternoons studying water snakes in the various lakes in the city.       
 
 They are members of the Society for Wildlife Education, Adventure, and Rescue (SWEAR), which was initially formed to help their teacher and guide, Prof Rahmath  Ataaz, Head of the Department of Zoology at Al-Ameen Arts, Science & Commerce College. Prof Ataaz has been rescuing snakes and rehabilitating other endangered animals for close to a decade. “I was getting calls for snake rescues from every part of the city and it got really hectic when a local search engine and business directory put my contact details in its list. So I trained some of my students, so that they could help out in rescue operations. Now there are around 15 of them, they have formed smaller groups among themselves and each group takes care of particular areas in the city,” says Prof Ataaz. In the last couple of years SWEAR has rescued close to 200 snakes, birds and other wildlife in the city, which is threatened by the ever-growing urbanisation and construction activities. “As tree cutting and construction activities have increased manifold, the number of distress calls are also greater than before. During monsoons, I sometimes get as many as 10 calls in a day and a few of these would be for poisonous snakes such as Russell’s Viper and Cobra. Recently we also rescued a Russell’s Kukri, a non-venomous snake rarely seen in these parts,” says Moula G A, senior member of SWEAR, who is now pursuing a post-graduate course in Applied Zoology and conducts rescues in HSR Layout and Electronic city. 
 LEARNING THE ROPES
 “When we first came in contact with Professor, we were too frightened of snakes and wouldn’t even go near them, forget rescuing the snakes. He first taught us how to handle snakes and other animals in the lab and then we went outdoors,” says another post-graduate student Zameer Ahmed. SWEAR is not just about saving, but also protecting wildlife in the city. They are also involved in biodiversity studies.   Inspired by the activities of SWEAR, a group of engineering students have also joined in to help in rescue operations — Ayman Ataaz, Sachin Pinto and Yash take care of Yelahanka area. They have rescued and rehabilitated an injured Kite and a striped Keelback snake recently. 
 
 A rare baby Red Headed Merlin (Falcon), which was being attacked by crows was rescued by SWEAR, but later died of serious injuries. “This happened near the Parachute Regiment in J C Nagar where numerous tall coconut trees were cut down for construction purpose. In fact, there are 20 different kinds of birds in the Parachute Regiment area, which has a dense growth of Silver Oak, Bamboo, and other trees. The birds include Barbets, Cuckoo, Pheasants, Drongos, King Fishers, Hoopoes, Barn Owls, Spotted Owlets, Doves, Hawks, and many more,” said Prof Ataaz.
 
 As long as the urban wildlife is endangered, this group swears to protect them.