It had been a while since I last toured outside Bangalore and my adrenaline was pumping for some action. After some deliberation, we finally settled on giving Wayanad a try. I was quite excited – this was our first trip with me in the driver’s seat! Our  first trip out of Karnataka and it was sure to be a great adventure!

Wayanad is close to the Karnataka border and is yet to pick up on tourism. So it’s relatively cheap and uncrowded, though all that may soon change, with the Kerala government  starting to realise its true potential. 

Kalpetta is the district headquarters of Wayanad, which also serves as an ideal place to cover surrounding places. Wayanad packs in everything – leisure places at Pookote lake, Kuruva dweep and Lakkidi viewpoint; adventure and trekking at Chembra peak, Edakkal caves, Pakshipatalam; wildlife at Tholpetty, Muthanga sanctuaries and a whole lot of waterfalls and honeymoon getaways in the form of ultra-luxurious resorts (tree-top cottages) at Vythiri.

February 29, 2008 

So, the new car and its new driver left Bangalore at 6 am, with three friends. We raced to Mysore Road, filled the tank with enough gas to cross the border and zoomed ahead. After our mandatory  breakfast stop at Kamat Loka-ruchi, we raced all the way to Gundlupet – pumping music emanating from our car. 

Though the road till Gundlupet is good, once you take a deviation to the right to reach Kalpetta, you come face-to-face with a 10-15 km stretch that’s  under repair. But once you enter Kerala, the road starts getting better. We were lucky enough to see a herd of elephants on this stretch, and one of them seemed to be in the mood to charge. But then, we were in no mood to stop, and so we raced ahead and reached Kalpetta by one in the afternoon (with stops of nearly 1.5 hours in between). 
We had booked a hotel from Bangalore itself with the help of my Mallu friend Joshua. We covered Pookote lake (ideal for kids and those keen on boating) and Lakkidi viewpoint for the day. The sunset view from Lakkidi was one of the best I had seen, and the numerous photographs I took provide ample evidence for that.

March 1, 2008

We had planned to cover Edakkal, Soochipara Falls and Meenmutty Falls that day but ended up going to Edakkal caves and taking up the unforgettable Meenmutty trek on the advice of our kindly hotelier. Among other things, Edakkal has on display some age-old rock carvings and a lengthy crevice between two rocks that was worth beholding. Then we decided to climb up the small peak over there, a mini trek that prepared us for our next adventure at  Meenmutty. 

Meenmutty Falls, which was supposed to be a four-km walk into the deep, ended up being one of my most misjudged as well as tiresome adventure treks into the estates. But once face-to-face with the falls, we just stood there – taking in all that natural raw beauty with our eyes. Just this sight made the difficult trek we undertook seem worthy. 

The crowd here was less than Soochipara Falls – probably because of the trek involved. And it was good to see such a clean natural environment. At four in the evening, in the cool water below the magnificent falls, were only the four of us. There was not a soul around and that itself was so enjoyable –  with the whole place for you to use as background for the customary photo session. Came back to our hotel for some much-needed rest; there was another eventful day to face ahead.

March 2, 2008

Checked out of Kalpetta and proceeded straight to Tholpetty sanctuary, which borders Nagarahole in Karnataka. Luckily, we managed to sneak in at 10 am, even after the gates were shut (it being a Sunday and all). 

So, the last jeep that entered the sanctuary had us in it – what a lucky foursome we were!  And the forest tour started.
Well, in the beginning it did look like it was going to turn a bit boring, what with just the customary deer and langurs strutting around. But then we noticed that the two jeeps in front of us had stopped in their tracks. Sensing something, we raced to the spot only to find a herd of elephants lingering behind some trees at a distance. 

Wanting to capture them in our cameras, we started clicking away furiously. But this only served to irritate  the herd – which 
came charging at us. Shocked by this sudden reaction, we scooted away as fast as we could, and only  after we reached safety did we realise that we had just undergone an experience that would remain etched in our memory for a lifetime.

But now, after three days of excitement and adventure, it was time to go back to our beloved city. We chose the Nagarahole route  because we did not want to go back the same way we had come. And though we halted at the  reserve to catch up with some wildlife, all we got to see were some deer and a lone tusker far, far away. The Nagarahole driveway had just been tarred and  numerous humps were strewn across it to prevent people from going above 40 kmph. 

Reached Bangalore by 10:30 pm with loads of memories, and a hope that we get to go back after the monsoon.

Santosh BS works for TNT, an MNC logistics firm based in Bangalore.

WAYANAD FACTS Places to see in Wayanad: Lots of them which ideally require four-five days to cover.
Footnote: Approximately 750 km covered in three days.
Places suggested: Lakkidi viewpoint, Edakkal caves and peak, Chembra peak, Soochipara Falls, Meenmutty Falls and Tholpetty sanctuary.
Ideal time: Avoid monsoons, November to March is ideal.
Language: Knowledge of Malayalam is a definite advantage, but English should do just fine.
Food: Typical Malayalee food at most places.

Sanctuary timings: 
Nagarahole - 6 am to 8 am; 3 pm to 5 pm
Muthanga - 6 am to 9 am; 3 pm to 6 pm
Tholpetty - 6 am to 10 am; 4 pm to 5 pm.