By Sudeshna Dutta

Today, on World Environment Day, don't miss this documentary on Karnataka's natural habitat, voiced by Sir David Attenborough

How much do we know about the wild habitat in Karnataka? Over the years, TV channels have showcased flora and fauna from all over the world. And now, to commemorate World Environment Day on June 5, Wild Karnataka, a documentary film produced by two filmmakers from the state, will be aired on Discovery Plus App and premiered on Discovery channel and Animal Planet. This film comes at a time when there's outrage over the tragic death of a pregnant elephant in Kerala after eating a pineapple stuffed with firecrackers.

Wild Karnataka was initially released in March last year, in collaboration with the Karnataka Forest Department. It focuses on the biodiversity that flourishes in the wild, as the state has some of the best forests in the world. Receiving a nationwide theatrical release in January 2020, the film appreciates the efforts of the people, government and the Forest Department of Karnataka, who are committed to saving some of the greatest natural history for future generations. "We wanted to highlight all kinds of habitat in Karnataka, so we broke it down to categories like rivers, rainforests, etc. We shot in over 25 different locations across the state and almost 50 per cent of the animals that we have featured cannot be seen at national parks. We wanted to break the notion of people since they associate Karnataka with only tigers and elephants," says Bengaluru-based filmmaker Kalyan Varma, who is also a wildlife photographer. He adds that there are striking sequences showcasing jungle cats and King Cobras in the backyard of someone's house, which he and fellow filmmaker, Amoghavarsha JS, captured along with his crew.

The documentary film takes you through places like Hampi's Daroji, Nagarhole National Park, Agumbe forests, Koppal and coastal regions of Karwar, says Amoghavarsha. "An exciting sequel in the film shows the time when we were following a group of otters in the water. A tiger was also present in the same location and we didn't know what was going to happen. In the end, the otters scared away the tiger. There are a couple of such intriguing incidents that we have captured on camera," he says, adding that the film was shot using 4K Ultra HD technology by a team of 20 camera persons using drones and 15 stationed cameras across Karnataka over a period of four years.

In a unique initiative aimed at raising awareness about the rich biodiversity of India and the need for wildlife conservation, actors are doing voice-overs in different languages. English broadcaster and national historian Sir David Attenborough took the lead in English, while Indian actors such as Rajkumar Rao, Prakash Raj and Rishab Shetty lent their voices in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu, and Kannada, respectively. Says Kalyan, "It was an honour to have Attenborough with us. While growing up, I used to admire him and so, getting him on board has been a lifetime achievement."

Kannada actor Shetty, too, could not resist being a part of this project. "I was excited to hear about Attenborough's collaboration with Wild Karnataka. Amoghavarsha requested me to lend my voice for the film, and seeing the stunning visuals, I could not say no. When I went to the premieres, I saw people whistling and enjoying the film. It was a different experience," says Shetty, adding that his home town is nestled in the midst of hill stations. "That's why, I felt a special connection with the docu-film," he adds.