The yearly Ganesh festival is over for humans, but the toxic chemicals from the hundreds of idols dumped in one of the largest city lakes could cause irreversible damage to the lake’s bird and marine population.    Hebbal Lake, home to more than 60 species of birds and aquatic animals, literally became a marine dump for hundreds of Gowri and Ganesh idols during the recent festivities. This, despite immersion being banned in the lake, the construction of a separate ‘kalyani’ (a smaller water enclosure) for people to immerse their idols, and the awareness campaigns carried out by civic agencies like BBMP and KSPCB.    The lake hosts resident birds like pond herons, kingfishers, egrets and cormorants, migratory birds like painted storks, grey herons and ‘pittha’, and aquatic animals like pond terrapins and flapshell turtles.   “Not just idols, other festival waste has made a mess of the lake. This is a huge threat to the lake’s birds and aquatic animals,” said Rajesh S, who lives nearby.    As if the general public’s callousness was not bad enough, officials too seem to be taking their obligation of cleaning the lake casually. While other lakes like Sankey, Yediyur and Ulsoor come under the supervision of BBMP, the Hebbal lake, which was earlier under the forest department, then with the Lake Development Authority (LDA) and was later leased out to the Oberoi group, seems to be nobody’s baby.    According to experts, the plaster of Paris and the lead-, mercury- and nickel-based paints used in the idols could be life-threatening for the lake’s aquatic life. “If the detritus is left unattended, it could lead to the death of the marine animals and the birds moving out,” said wildlife volunteer Adil Arif.    “The blame game continues between the LDA and the forest department. It is unfortunate that they are not acting immediately,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror.   However, LDA officials have denied any lapse on their part and have clarified that the festival debris will be dredged out within a fortnight. “The work has been entrusted to a contractor. If it is not done, we will act against him. However, we will ensure that the lake’s biodiversity is not affected,” Thimma Urs, assistant executive engineer, LDA, said.  
 
 FOOD CHAIN
  Noted environmentalist A N Yellappa Reddy said the pollution from the immersed idols would have a severe effect on the lake’s eco-system. “Besides, the lead from the idols will get into the food chain, and there will be long-term health implications like kidney ailments for humans, as people will consume fish contaminated with toxic chemicals. The Pollution Control Board or the LDA should act against the private lessee and issue them a notice for allowing the immersion of idols in the lake,” he said