Football fans, unite

Bengaluru FC’s official fan club West Block Blues is back with the third edition of Eddies, the annual award show that recaps on the best moments of the football season. The show will look back back on all the best and most heated moments through the matches, some fan-favourites, and some outright hilarious ones from the last season. The awards will be followed by a live performance by Maiden Voyage. 

 WHERE: Social, 7th Bock, Koramangala
 WHEN: 5pm onwards, July 28 
 ENTRY: `300, imojo.in

 Paint a Greek picture

Greece is a land of breathtaking ancient ruins, mesmerising beaches and abundant culture, and this painting party is calling you over to paint a summery scene from Greece. Sign up for this guided painting session, where an artist will teach you the skill of palate knife painting and basics about strokes and sketches, among other techniques.

 WHERE: Loft, Koramangala WHEN: 3pm, July 28 
 ENTRY: `1,700, instamojo.com

 Black and white beauty

Five Shades of Grey, an ongoing group exhibition of black and white artworks, is coming to a close today. Akhila H’s work revolves around mandalas and nature, Latha Kriti works are about nature,Amey Balwally’s works are an artistic impression of windows and its significance in our lives, Jeetin Rangher has done a satarical series, and Naiya Parkash works hark back to the older time. 

 WHERE: Gallery No 1, Chitrakala Parishath, Kumara Park East 
 WHEN: 10am–5.30pm, July 28 
 ENTRY: Free 
 CALL: 22261816

 Party till sundown

Sundowner parties are fun. If you don’t know what we are talking about, head do this Sunday Sundowner. Taking charge of the console will be DJ Shaiflai, who’s known for deep house, techno and electronica mixes. It was in 2018 when she enrolled for a DJ course at hone her talent and since then, she has already shared stage with industry bigwigs such as Stimming, Cinthie,Dizharmonia,Praveen Achary, Ankytrixx and many other homegrown artists. 

 WHERE: The Bier Library, 6th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 5pm-9pm, July 28
 CALL: 68180000

 All about elephants

Celebrate the contribution of ground forces in wildlife conservation. The event Rangers’ Elephants will screen The Unsung - A life at Bhadra Tiger Reserve, hold short talks about forests, elephants and more by forest range officers from Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, and a panel discussion about managing forest, elephants and other wildlife.

 WHERE: Rangoli Metro Art Centre, MG Roadf 
 WHEN: 6.30pm, July 28 
 ENTRY: Free 
 CALL: 22969265

 Watch a puppet show

In a not so far-away land, a plant sighting is a rare and exciting event. Pao, a seven-year old boy, and his cat, Bruce Lee, have befriended this plant. They must now protect it if they want to save the world. From sinister scientists to grumbling goons, every powerful grown-up in the city seems to be after the plant. Will Pao and Bruce Lee win the war against the scary adults? In the middle of this adventure and chaos he comes across the lost forest, the real home of the plant, hidden and thus safe from humans. That’s the premise of the play 1…2…Tree, directed by Anurupa Roy, India’s best known puppeteers. 

 WHERE: Atta Galatta, 5th Block, Koramangala WHEN: 3pm and 6pm, July 28 
 TICKETS: `250, bookmyshow.com