On Wednesday, amidst the beating of drums and spiritual music blaring from a loudspeaker, a female elephant named Shyamala walked up the Bannerghatta hillock to reach Champakdhama Swamy Temple. Her stocky feet were barely fitting into the shallow staircases carved out of the granite stone.

Shyamala was brought in from Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu to Bannerghatta Yuva Jana Kreeda & Cultural Dasara Samithi on October 3 to participate in the Dasara procession after obtaining a no-objection certificate from the principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF) and chief wildlife warden of Karnataka.

However, wildlife conservationists and activists say such treatment is akin to performance and not in line with guidelines mentioned under the Captive Elephant Management Rule of 2012.

“The elephant climbing stairs is a clear violation of the captive elephant management rule. We do not have working elephants anymore. We confiscated elephants from circuses saying they are made to do things they are not used to naturally. Climbing stairs is an unnatural activity for elephants. Wild elephants do climb steep hills, but they seldom do it in one breath. Elephants are known to have fragile hearts that can collapse when subjected to undue stress and strain,” said Daniel Sukumar Das, director, Wildlife Conservation Foundation.

Experts say traveling such long distances and participating in processions put elephants under a lot of stress. While one can transfer elephants under required permissions, there are many rules and regulations that need to be followed.

“I was shocked to see the steepness of the steps that the elephant was made to climb. This was unwarranted. This is akin to a performance for which you need a separate clearance. Moreover, why transport a jumbo from Tamil Nadu to participate in one event?” asked Suparna Baksi Ganguly, founder-member of Compassion Unlimited Plus Action.

While the NOC issued by the PCCF, Karnataka talks about various terms to be ensured by the owners and authorities concerned to safeguard the safety of the animal, wildlife conservationists say none of the terms make sense in absence of a monitoring body.
 
“The NOC has been issued under certain terms and conditions. One of the terms says that a satisfactory veterinary certificate has to be obtained and care should be taken during the religious festivities. It also says that crackers etc., are to be avoided to prevent any untoward incidents. Who was monitoring the event? How is the deafening drum beating during the procession different from bursting a cracker? Bannerghatta comes under Bengaluru urban captive elephant committee, which should have been on the spot taking a stock of the situation,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

According to a senior official from the Karnataka Forest Department, since elephants are not allowed to participate in the processions as per the government order, people request permission for elephants from outside Karnataka or elephants owned by temples or Mutts in Karnataka.