National Green Tribunal initiates suo moto case regarding construction of structure in core area of reserve; state replies alleged construction has nothing to do with tourism

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has registered a suo moto case in relation to a structure being set up in the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR).

The principal bench of the green court took cognizance of the matter based on a news report that appeared in Bangalore Mirror. In its December 28, 2023 edition, BM published a news 
article regarding concerns raised by wildlife activists and conservationists about some construction and infrastructure development activities in the core areas of the reserve. They had alleged that the construction was happening without approval from the authorities concerned.

After NGT’s action, the State of Karnataka clarified in front of the tribunal that the alleged construction has nothing to do with tourism but is a protection camp created by the Forest Department to prevent poaching and illegal felling of trees in the core area. Karnataka has requested 15 days to file a reply, placing on record the nature of construction raised in the area concerned.

When BM reached out to KTR field director Nilesh Shinde, he said, “It is a protection camp that will help in anti-poaching activities and effective management of wildlife. The camp being constructed will help in various other management aspects as well.” 

One too many?
However, conservationists said there already is an anti-poaching camp in the area that could be used by the department to keep a check on other illegal activities. “The department is changing its stance to justify the ongoing construction. Even if it is a protection camp, it has to be approved under the Annual Plan of Operation (APO). Moreover, the Barpali Anti-Poaching Camp is located hardly 500 metre from the new structure. What is the need for another protection camp?” said a conservationist. Activists have also underlined illegal tourism activities happening in the core area of KTR. They point at multiple online videos of Blue Waterfall in Anshi, in the core area of KTR, not a tourism site.

They also opine that the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has failed in delivering its statutory duty.
 
“There are hundreds of videos of tourists reaching this waterfall. Some of the videos also show tickets being issued to tourists for sightseeing. Moreover, the structure coming up is very close to the waterfall, raising doubt that it might be a ticket collection centre. Tourists are being allowed inside the reserve, which is illegal. NTCA should have conducted a field inspection when complaint was raised. Instead, it has been seeking reports from KFD. If NTCA had acted on time, such illegalities would not happen,” said an activist from the region.

KFD officials said they are aware of illegal tourism at Blue Waterfall in Anshi National Park, and action will soon be taken to prohibit tourists from entering the core zone.

“We are aware of the people entering the core area illegally, and we are working towards restricting this movement. The protection camp being built will help us in this too,” said Shinde.
 
In the past, conservationists have alleged that various illegal construction activities have been taken up inside the reserve area.

“We have been raising the issue of illegal construction for a very long time and have also submitted photographic evidence along with complaints to KFD as well as NTCA,” said the activist. BM has reached out to NTCA officials in the past. The officials acknowledged receipt of complaints and informed this reporter that NTCA cannot take any action unless the state government explains these activities through a report.