Pictures do more than inspire awe; they may inspire action. Coupled with talks aby authorities on nature and wildlife, this city event offers just that
 
 
 Photos tell stories. Photos of wildlife and nature, one would hope, inspire a love of the planet and encourage conservation. The third edition of Nature InFocus, Asia’s nature and wildlife photography festival, opening today, hopes to do just that. Envisioned as a platform for nature and wildlife enthusiasts to connect, share and learn from experts across the globe and engage in action-oriented programmes to create awareness on nature conservation, the festival was founded by wildlife photographer and filmmaker Kalyan Varma and photographer and explorer Rohit Varma, to put the spotlight squarely on conservation. 
 	
 The idea, says Rohit Varma, is to put communication, conservation and photos on the same platform, to “appeal to a larger audience” from previous years. “We want to get people who travel to look for ways of conservation and appreciate the magical biodiversity of India.” This, by hosting the exhibition, as well as talks by experts on subjects ranging from using ambient light to create stunning images (by Diinesh Kumble), to using storytelling to connect with the audience and therefore supporting conservation efforts (by Jenny Nichols).
 	
 	
 	 	
 	
 	
 This year, the scope has also expanded to include talks on new subjects such as marine conservation, as well as the inspiring stories of people such as tiger conservationist Hans Dalal, who, despite a disability, went from being a sound engineer to tiger conservationist and even works with tribals in Tadoba, composing music and giving them opportunities to improve their livelihood. And because no conservation effort is complete without the involvement of the local community, Jayamma Belliah and KN Mahesha will take you through efforts in Bandipur, wielding a camera for the first time.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 The exhibition itself features 18 images (selected from a mammoth 2565 images) across six categories (young photographers under 18; animal portraits; conservation issues; animal behaviour; wildscape and animals in habitat and creative nature photography), of which one winner will be selected from each category, eventually culminating in the selection of a winner for the NIF Awards 2016, on the closing day of the two-day event.
 	
 	  	If there was even an opportunity to get involved in the discourse of photography and safeguarding nature, this is it. Be there. 
 	 

 	Nature InFocus, July 8-9 at Indiranagar Club, 9th Main, 4th Cross, HAL II Stage. To register and for more info, log on to natureinfocus.in