&nbsp;       &nbsp;                                        Ashok Chaudhary                                                                     While the threat to country&rsquo;s wildlife from poaching has always received considerable attention, a potential threat to one of the heaviest flying birds in the world &mdash; the Great Indian Bustard (GIB) &mdash; went virtually unnoticed until four months ago when the global wildlife watchdog International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) placed the bird in the Critically Endangered category &mdash; the highest level of threat.
       
       IUCN has warned that if urgent measures are not taken, the GIB would be extinct within a decade. The current population of the species is estimated as low as 250 individuals. To avoid this, city-based nature lovers and ecologists have come forward with an action plan to save the rare fowl in a programme on the lines on the lines of the famous Project Tiger.
       
       Dr Pramod Patil, bird enthusiast and director of the Great Indian Bustard Foundation, told Pune Mirror, &ldquo;We have prepared an action plan to save the GIB which is now found only in isolated places. The plan will be submitted to the Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS), which in turn will present it to the Central government and Planning Commission. Since we were able to save tigers to some extent through Project Tiger, we are sure that Project Bustard will bring about similar results.&rdquo;
       
       The Maharashtra govt&rsquo;s recent decision to denotify 80 per cent of the land from the GIB sanctuary in Solapur district was surprisingly lauded by conservationists. The sanctuary, notified in 1979, was spread across 8,500 sq km &mdash; the biggest in the country. The area has now come down to 1,222 sq km, and the govt&rsquo;s decision was received positively, since it could stand as a solution to the eternal man-animal conflict it had birthed.
       
       Patil explained, &ldquo;The decision in 1979 was taken in haste and took much private land into its ambit. Because of human activity, bustards could not thrive there and since it was a protected area, people could not utilise it properly. This enraged them &mdash; instead of protecting the bird, they despised it.&ldquo;
       
       Now, with much of this private land gone, the remaining sanctuary lies in bits and pieces. As per a plan prepared by Patil and the BNHS, some part of this land is to be rented out to create core zones for the breeding of the birds. On the outer periphery of this area, cattle and agricultural activities will be allowed. &ldquo;Bustards live for 15-17 years.
       
       To create a core zone for their breeding, 434 hectares of land will be required. This will cost around Rs 15-20 crore. Till the government agrees to spend that much money, we have suggested leasing out some land to create a breeding ground. This has been done successfully in Nannaj in Solapur,&rdquo; said Patil.
       
       As per the Wildlife Act, five per cent of total land in any state has to be reserved for sanctuaries, which is why the Supreme Court directed the State government to create six more sanctuaries in lieu of the denotification of land from the GIB sanctuary. Yet only one of these, Mansinghdeo in Vidarbha, has been declared.
       
                                        M N Jayakumar                                                                     
       According to the ecologist, the dwindling numbers of bustards is mainly due to hunting as well as agricultural activities on the grasslands where they used to thrive. Since the bustard species is a good indicator of grassland ecosystems, conserving the bird and its habitat automatically means conserving a large number of dependent species in the same grasslands. As of now, this bird is found only in six states including Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
       
       In Maharashtra, only a pitiful seven or eight bustards can be found in Chandrapur-Varora, barely 25 in the Solapur-Ahmednagar belt and another seven or eight in the Nashik district.
       
       According to data on www.projectbustards.org, between 1809 and 1829 alone, Robert Mansfield, a British officer, killed 961 GIBs in the Ahmednagar district. In recent times, grasslands have been turned into Special Economic Zones for industries and agriculture. India has 550 million cattle and 50 per cent of them are solely dependent on grasslands, eating slowly but surely into bustard habitat.
       
       Yet, India has no grazing policy in place, nor any concrete data regarding grazing patterns. &ldquo;Most bustard habitats have lost their use because of the absence of a grazing policy. So, we have not seen these birds breeding for the last four years.&rdquo;
       
       According to Dr Asad Rahmani, director of BNHS, &ldquo;There has been an urgent need to start this Project Bustard on a long term basis, based on scientific recommendations of studies conducted by BNHS and the Wildlife Institute of India.&rdquo; He also suggested that the GIB conservation breeding programme be started with the help of national and international experts. &ldquo;Breeding bustards is not difficult, as has been proved in the case of the Kori Bustard and the Australian Bustard,&rdquo; he added.