Anitha Saran, a city-based writer and a relative of Shyam Saran, the former advisor to the prime minister, found children of a construction labourer playing with a snake kept in a bottle in her neighbourhood at Hadosiddapura in Bangalore South a few days ago. On enquiring how they had captured the snake and why it was being kept in a bottle, the kids replied it was a baby cobra and that their father was going to make medicine out of it.    Stunned, Saran brought the matter to the notice of the BBMP wildlife cell, and it led to the latter stumbling on a number of fake snake rescuers in the city. Instead of releasing reptiles in the wild, these fake rescuers capture and use snakes for their own nefarious purposes. Authorities, who say these people are a danger to wildlife, have ordered a crackdown on fake rescuers.   Cobras are a protected species under the Wildlife Protection Act and keeping them in captivity is a crime. The BBMP’s wildlife cell estimates that there are at least 50 fake rescuers operating in the city.    “We are constructing a house in the area and I found these kids of a labourer playing with a baby snake kept in a bottle,” Saran said. “When I asked them to release it, they refused and told me they would make medicine out of it. Some days ago I had found the labourer with the bottled snake. On questioning him, he told me a lot of rubbish and showed me a visiting card. He said he had a licence to capture snakes. However, I ensured the cobra was released immediately. I also alerted the forest cell sleuths.”   Wildlife sleuths, who rushed to the spot, found that the man’s card read ‘bar bender and ‘snake catcher’.   “We rushed to the spot and learnt that he used to rescue snakes in the area using the visiting card,” Mahesh M, a wildlife cell volunteer, said. “He rescued the snakes and then held them captive to be used for his own gain. We let him off with a warning after confirming that he had no other wildlife in captivity. There are others into this illegal business.”    Only 23 people have a valid licence to rescue snakes including cobras, rat snakes and others reptiles in the city, wildlife cell sources said. Sharath R Babu honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, however, said that it was an old problem that has resurfaced.   “We have launched a crackdown on unlicensed snake rescuers,” Babu said. “We had conducted a similar operation last year and had warned several fake rescuers. But there is again a rise in their numbers. They are a danger to wildlife and protected species. We have started collating information on these people. Too often people who face a problem call some random person instead of calling numbers officially listed by the BBMP.    “Those operating without a licence will be first warned and if they continue, they will be booked under the Wildlife Protection Act. Luckily, Anitha Saran was conscious about the mess and her alert has helped us take up this issue. We appeal to people not to entertain unlicensed snake catchers. They are ill-equipped to rescue wildlife and can endanger lives.”   If you come across unlicensed rescuers, inform the BBMP wildlife cell helpline at: 9880108801.