Sunday, August 12, was World Elephant Day. The world celebrated the pachyderms while India worried over the animals’ survival. 
Out of the 88 identified elephant corridors in India, 21 have railway tracks running through them. The knowledge of these corridors is passed on between elephants from generations to generations, thus walking through these corridors is a natural instinct for them. As the resources in their fragmented pockets become scarcer, these elephants are pushed to cross railway tracks in search for food often to meet their fatal end. It comes as no surprise then that since 1987 to July 2017, 266 elephants lost their lives. Between January and June this year, at least 15 elephants were killed, maintained Wildlife SOS, which has been running an Elephant Conservation and Care Center (ECCC) since 2010.

Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder and CEO of Wildlife SOS, said “It is now normal to open a newspaper and read horrifying news of elephants dying due to unnatural, anthropogenic reasons. This normalisation of unnatural deaths of elephants in India is alarming. The survival of Asian elephants today lies in the hands of us—conservationists, policy-makers, practitioners and local communities.”

Asian elephants (Elephas maximus) are listed as ‘endangered’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. “The population of Asian elephants has decreased by 90 per cent over the last century and with a population of 23,000 to 27,000 Asian elephants, India is the last stronghold of the species. The survival of the species is critically linked with its survival in India,” said Geeta Seshamani, Co-founder and Secretary of Wildlife SOS.
 
Among the major threats to the survival of elephants in India are poaching for captivity and human-elephant conflict. People for Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) India has been demanding a ban on elephant joy rides at the iconic Amer Fort in Jaipur. Recently, PETA activists in Mysore wore masks, chains and shackles to request authorities to ban the use of elephants for performances.

Another major crisis is the human–elephant conflict. As forests are being destroyed to create agricultural lands, incidents of crop-raiding, destruction of property and loss of human lives have escalated. According to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, about 489 human deaths caused by elephants were reported in India during the year 2017-18. Of this, 22 were reported from Karnataka.

However, experts feel such conflicts are avoidable. With scientific wildlife tracking techniques and community engagement and sensitization, a safe space for both farmers and elephants can be created.


ELEPHANT CARCASS FOUND IN BANDIPUR TIGER RESERVE

An elephant was found dead in Doddbargi section under Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Sunday. Speaking to BM, Head Of Forest Force, PCCF, Punati Sridhar said, “The elephant died due to illegal electrocution. We can’t just say poachers have done this as farmers too use electric fences to protect their crops from wild animals. The elephant might have been electrocuted by going near the fence and we are looking for the culprits responsible for this. Animal poaching has also increased and the carcass of a tiger was found recently. It had died due to electrocution by the poachers. We are forming a special team from forest department to search for clues. Hopefully, culprits will be arrested soon. We are taking precautionary measures to control the death of wild animals”. HD Kote Police Station registered a case under Wildlife Protection Act.