Vidyut Jammwal on a one-of-a-kind experience of working in Junglee and his passion for action films

Carving his own niche with versatile roles in Bollywood and doing what he does the best, action hero Vidyut Jammwal is all set to mirror a unique tale of friendship between a human and animal on celluloid with Junglee, a Junglee Pictures Production directed by Chuck Russell and produced by Vineet Jain and co-produced by Priti Shahani. 

                  Vidyut Jammwal: The elephant could be the next dinosaur06:36        
Slated to release on March 29, the action thriller revolves around a veterinary doctor, who upon returning to his father’s elephant reserve, encounters and fights against an international poachers' racket. "I am playing a vet who doesn't live in the place where he was brought up and has moved to Mumbai for a better future. He realises that he has got a home where he has his friends who are elephants, so homecoming is the prime idea of the film," Vidyut informs.

                 The competition I wake up to every morning is the sun. I make sure I beat the sun every morning. The sun never rises before I doVidyut Jammwal           
The compassionate human-animal bond in Junglee will leave you wanting more. In an exclusive conversation with Mirror, Vidyut shares, "I always had this in mind that we have to make an action movie for the whole family; for the women to love it and for the kids to enjoy it and Junglee is that movie. With Junglee, the mission is to make people aware of what we are doing to the planet. The ecosystem is completely messed up; the elephant could be the next dinosaur. In the next 15 years, if we don't take care, the elephant will be the dinosaur." 

Junglee is all set to take you on an adventure ride with Vidyut Jammwal playing the role of a vet, Pooja Sawant as Mahavat and Asha Bhat as a journalist. 

The elephants, who play an integral part of the movie, did play their charm and made everyone from the actors to the acclaimed Hollywood director of the movie, Chuck Russell, dance to their tunes. The film was shot in Thailand and the scenes involving elephants were shot in the presence of Thai crew members. 

                 Junglee will be passing the Rs 100 crore clubVidyut Jammwal           
Vidyut shares, "I got to know so much about this majestic creature. When you meet human beings and admire them for their looks people get happy whether it is real or not. With animals it is different. You feel the love. You can say anything because they don't understand words, but they understand what you feel and they don't like people who feel fear. They don't like people who are ignorant. So one of the things that I really experienced was emotions from within. You have to express it. If you feel love towards a creature he will feel it, you don't have to make an effort."

"The film is about protecting the wildlife and elephants. There is entertaining action in the film which is unique. First time in world cinema we have got animal flow where you see how every animal moves. I have moved like different animals. Junglee will be passing the Rs 100 crore club," he avers.

To prepare for the role, the 38-year-old actor learned animal flow style of combat and Kalaripayattu. The actor has performed several stunts himself. "I am aware about a lot of things about animals. My father was in the Army and I have travelled a bit around India and was lucky enough to know so much about animals."

On restricting himself to the action genre, Vidyut revealed that action is his passion and he thoroughly enjoys it. "I had come to Mumbai to become the action hero of the country and I have become one and I feel proud of it. I will continue doing things that will come my way; I will be evolving more and wanting to do more but at this moment I am loving what I am doing," he explains.

"After being a part of Junglee, I realised that I love this audience of kids, adventure and the family coming together to watch the film. So I will consciously make an effort to redo this, he adds.

So for an action star who does his own gravity-defying stunts, who does he consider as competition? "The competition I wake up to every morning is the sun. I rise before it. I make sure I beat the sun every morning. The sun never rises before I do."

                 The ecosystem is completely messed up; the elephant could be the next dinosaurVidyut Jammwal