Forest department says its order to control threat of wild boars is not a licence to cull or hunt them
 
 In a damage control measure, the state forest department, after drawing flak over its blanket authorization to kill (cull or hunt) wild boars - a first of its kind order to kill troublesome animals, now clarifies that the order was not a licence to kill but guidelines to ‘take local circumstances and the situation into consideration before taking up control measures’.
 
 This comes after a legal notice. Activists welcome the new version as the last one was considered alarming as the category of troublesome animals when it came to man-animal conflict also included ones protected under wildlife act - deer, leopard, black buck and sloth bears etc.
 
 This clarification – that there was no blanket authorization to cull or hunt wild boars has come in a communique from the forest department on October 7.
 
 Following an uproar by wildlife activists after the government’s order in October 2016 – allowing killing of wild boards (protected under schedule III of Indian Wildlife Protection Act), advocate KV Dhanajay raising concerns (that had been voiced by wildlife conservationists) had issued a legal notice, a move before moving court over the controversial order.
 
 Calling the order – to kill and hunt wild boars, unauthorized and illegal, he had questioned the manner in which the ‘order to kill’ had been issued by an undersecretary, while the authority is vested with the chief wildlife warden or an authorized officer under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act in certain conditions. The controversial October 2016 order had cited another order dating back to August 2010, which had empowered the chief conservator of forests (Project Tiger), chief conservator of forests or the conservator of forests or member secretary for Zoo Authority of Karnataka as authorized officers. Even going by this, an undersecretary didn’t fall in this category, Dhanajay had contended. Citing the lines from the October 2016 order, namely ‘wild boar that destroys crops may be shot at with a licensed arm or hunted down within the crop area’, Dhananjay in his notice had said, “Nothing more is left for future determination. The October 1, 2016 order, by itself, licences culling or hunting of wild boars. As such, it would be futile to claim that it merely stipulates further safeguards and that it does not allow hunting or culling of wild boars by itself. Its plain language readily allows hunting or culling of wild boars across Karnataka.”
 
 In damage-control mode
 
 Now it seems the state forest department has got into a damage control mode as it has clarified that it order was not a blanket authorization to kill wild boards.
 
 Fearing future consequences, activists had questioned the need for such an order to cull animals as part of man-animal conflict instead of working on a solution to mitigate issues arising out of wild boars. Besides forcing the species to go extinct, activists feared that such an order had set a bad precedent and could have a bearing in future in similar issues, and that elephants, leopards, black bucks and deer too were part of the man-animal crisis.