One Bangalore wildlife photographer said proudly that this city is a haven for their tribe. Before you ask where the forests are, let’s clarify, the city has easy motorable access to several nature reserves. Wildlife havens in the form of Billiranga Hills, Nagarhole National Park, Siddapura and Mudumalai Forest Sanctuary are all in comfortable driving distance.
 
 But it is Bandipur National Park that was once the private hunting ground for the Mysore Maharajahs of yore. Established in the 1930s, the national park was formed by including most of the forest areas of the then Venugopala Wildlife Park and sections of Bandipur and by 1985, the park’s size extended over an area of 880.02 sq km. Today, it has a total area of 1020 sq km. Brought under Project Tiger since 1973, Bandipur extends considerable protection to the diverse wildlife like sambars, chousinghas, chital, gaur, wildpigs and elephants apart from tigers, leopards and dholes. It serves as the central link in the seasonal migration of elephants from Mudumalai in the east to Nagarhole and Wyanad sanctuaries in the west and north west.
 	  	As part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (5500 sq kms), one of the largest conservation areas in India, Bandipur is significant 	in many aspects. It’s a smooth four-hour drive to Bandipur (215 km) along the Bangalore- Mysore highwa. Pit stops like the 	Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary or Srirangapatnam temple town can cause pleasant delays. Overnight stay can be arranged at some of the resorts and lodges around the park. Daybreak and afternoon drives are arranged by the Forest Reserve through the park and if lucky, you spot a tiger. 
 	  	Nearby attractions not involving fourlegged creatures include the Himavad Gopalaswamy Betta, the highest peak in the Bandipur National Park. There is the famous Gopalaswamy temple on the peak but it is the view from the temple compound that makes you catch your breath. In front, as far as the eyes can see, are rolling green meadows that make you want to run down them like Maria Von Tropp from the Sound of Music singing The Hills are Alive. . 
 	 

 	HOW TO GO:  	KSRTC buses from Bangalore to Bandipur are aplenty. Or drive.