Neither Udupi Krishna mutt, which owns him, nor the forest dept is ready to bear his rehab costs
 
 Elephant rescue and rehabilitation has become a costly affair for the state forest department after the Udupi Mutt washed its hands of Parashurama, a rogue elephant. The department has been forced to cough up Rs 50,000 a month for over a year now on his maintenance.
 
 Department officials have now sent a letter to the mutt expressing helplessness in managing such dues and asked the mutt to find a solution.
 
 “It has been a huge burden since the elephant was rescued and brought to the rehabilitation centre in Nagarahole range,” a forest official told Bangalore Mirror. “Every month, the forest department is spending close to Rs 50,000 which includes cost of feeding it and salary of the people who take care and train it, like mahouts. There are no funds reserved for the purpose in the government exchequer and the mutt, which owns it, should bear the expense. However, the mutt authorities have neither come forward to bear the expense nor visited to check how the elephant is,” he said.
 
 Twenty-six-year-old Parashurama was gifted to the Udupi temple by the state government during former chief minister M Veerappa Moily’s tenure. The elephant went on a rampage in January 2013 in Mangalore. Following this, forest officials from Nagarhole range were called in for the rescue operation. The elephant had also killed a mahout during the rampage.
 
 The forest officials rescued and sent the elephant to the rehabilitation centre. While transporting it to the centre, the mutt, said forest department sources, had paid Rs 70,000. After that, it never got in touch with the department.
 
 “This is the thirteenth month the department is looking after the elephant and has spent no less than Rs 5 to Rs 6 lakh till date,‘‘ the official said.
 
 “As per the provisions of Wildlife Act, we have sent them a letter on the expenses,” O Palaiah, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Mangalore, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Laksmivara Tirtha, Swamiji of Shirur Mutt, told Bangalore Mirror: ‘‘They sent a letter stating we have to pay Rs 2.39 lakh expenses incurred on the elephant. We have already paid Rs 70,000 out of that. As we have decided to give the elephant back to state government and requested another elephant for the Udupi Krishna Mutt temple, we have spoken to minister Ramanath Rai and have apprised him of everything. ‘‘