CAT CALL Sachin Rai, ace wildlife photographer, shot this three-year-old male tiger called Chabana at Bandhavgarh tiger reserve in 2010. He clearly remembers the “over-confident” big cat that sat right in the middle of the dirt track, stalking a deer which emerged from the grass and sprinted away. 
   A close look at the tiger and one can spot quills dangling from its right cheek. Rai says that it had killed a porcupine and injured itself. Chabana earned Rai the first prize in the prestigious D J Memorial photography contest in Coimbatore. “It was still looking to establish his territory at the time,” recalls Rai. “It was a magnificent looking cat but just three months later, it ended up killing a villager and was captured by the forest department and sent to Bhopal Zoo,” he says with obvious regret.
 
 What’s the Rao about?
 It is not every day or even every year that you see the Rao sisters get together and raise ‘sweet’ hell. Singer Suneeta Rao and her sister Arati Rao will be kicking up a storm at the September edition of Soul Sante with their sister act aptly called – Let’s kick-up a Rao. But the surprise element will be  12-year-old Kaya, Arati's daughter who is being coaxed by another Rao — Arti Rao (the lady behind Soul Sante) to perform with mamma and aunty (of course, it ain’t going to be a surprise anymore after you read this). Their performance will be the grand finale of the Sante along with the ceremonial fashion show. But additionally, this Sante comes with a condition by the organiser Rao, “No matter how beautiful they are, we don't want hair accessories from Bangkok to be sold by girls at the Sante... we want to go back to the essence of it being a platform for artists and artisans.” Rao has even managed to rope in Jay Verma, great grandson of Raja Ravi Verma to curate the art section. Here’s a toast to the Rao spirit!
 
 Musical madness
 On Sunday morning, Lagori the popular band in the city, posted on the social networking site that they would be shooting a music video of their song Boom Shankar and would love their fans to be a part of it. “So come over,” they said and sat…twiddling their thumbs wondering whether their fans would pay heed and drag themselves out of bed on a Sunday. So, one can only imagine the look on the faces of the band members when on Sunday they stood atop the Lee Store on Brigade road (where they were performing and shooting the video) and looked down. There were hundreds of youngsters gathered in support.
 
 “It is our first ever music video and we wanted to give a glimpse of the city’s amazing spirit so we chose Brigade Road but we had no idea that we’d get such an amazing response!” the band told the diarist. However, the rain gods played spoilsport and Lagori had to wrap it up after 30 minutes. They are still recovering from the shock, it seems!
   The Howard Hodgkin show
 London-based artist Howard Hodgkin, who has been fascinated by India for the past five decades, is exhibiting his private collection of Indian paintings at the National Museum Wales in Cardiff, UK. The show titled Visions of Mughal India: The Collection of Howard Hodgkin, comprises most of the main types of Indian court painting from the Mughal period (c. 1550–1850). They include the refined naturalistic works of the imperial Mughal court; the poetic and subtly coloured paintings of the Deccani Sultanates; and the boldly drawn and vibrantly coloured styles of the Rajput kingdoms of Rajasthan and the Punjab Hills.
   Hodgkin has been a passionate collector of Indian paintings since his school days and his collection has long been considered one of the finest of its kind in the world. In fact, at times he has devoted almost as much effort to developing his collection as to his own work as a painter.
 
 Speaking of the collection, the painter reflected, “I never bought paintings or drawings on the tempting but distracting basis of their topography, their school of art, their theme, period or style. I just wanted great art.
 
 Lost and found
 So there seems to be some confusion about the exact status of Om and Nandita Puri’s marriage. After washing a considerable amount of their dirty linen in public and filing for divorce, the couple seem to have found something to celebrate after all. Nandita confirmed to the diarist that she and her ‘estranged’ husband were in Bangkok on a holiday to spend quality time with their son Ishaan. Not only that, there are reports that she and Om celebrated their wedding anniversary in Goa recently, with a candle-light dinner on the beach. Nothing like love lost and found, eh?