By: Gitanjali Das
 
 
 CCTV captures the female leopard entering the flat with her cub last week; Rottweiler’s owners say they are unsafe
 
 
 	A female leopard snatched a 42-kg Rottweiler from a bungalow on Ghodbunder Road, Thane, last week, an incident that was partly captured on the property’s security camera.
 	  	The footage shows the leopard and her cub entering the compound of Santosh and Aarti Gupta’s bungalow in 7 Petals, Ovala, on the night of August 6.
 	
 	After some time, the mother moves towards the kennel of the Guptas’ one-year-old pet dog Cocoa, while the cub stares into the camera.
 	  	Cocoa’s partial remains were found after a two-day search in the forest behind the housing society. Terrified residents said that this was the fourth recent instance of a leopard snatching a dog from the neighbourhood. 	
 	A distraught Aarti slammed the Thane forest department for failing to install a fence on the forest’s perimeter despite repeated requests, and for not promptly responding to the family’s call for help after Cocoa disappeared.
 	  	The couple has not told their three-year-old daughter, Naisha, about the loss of their beloved pet, whose birthday was just days away.
 	  	“We have told her that Cocoa ventured outside and got lost, and we are looking for him. But she keeps asking us when he will come back home. Cocoa was a like a child to us,” Aarti said. “We could not give him a proper burial as his remains had severely decomposed.”
 	  	Aarti and her husband discovered that Cocoa was missing from the house on the morning of August 7. They searched the entire neighbourhood before checking the CCTV footage later in the day. They thought that someone had stolen Cocoa, but were shocked when the footage of the previous night showed two leopards in their compound.
 	  	Aarti alleged that they asked the Thane forest department to send a search team on Saturday, but officials said most of the staff was already busy or off for the weekend. “I told them that it was a matter of Cocoa’s life, but they were not bothered,” Aarti said.
 	  	The Guptas finally called the Resqink Association for Wildlife Welfare (RAWW). Pawan Sharma and Chinmay Joshi of RAWW searched the forest near the society till late on Saturday night, but to little avail. The only thing the volunteers found was some fur stuck to shards of glass affixed on top of the compound wall.
 	  	“Finally at 4.15 pm on Sunday, we found the dog’s carcass,” Sharma said.
 	  	Aarti said that since July, leopards had attacked three dogs in the nearby Cosmos society. There have been even more attacks on dogs in Pankhanda village, which is a few kilometres from the area.
 	  	“We don’t feel safe, but we don’t want leopards to be relocated. We only want authorities to take some steps to prevent man-animal conflict. There is no fence to separate the forest land from residential areas,” Aarti said. KD Thakare, deputy conservator of forest (Thane territorial), said that sometimes there could be a delay in the department’s response as it receives several calls for help.