By Esita Rani Mandal

Volunteers work to eliminate plastic bags in partnership with MITU Foundation

Last year India put a ban on the usage of plastic. Despite the ban, many traders are still using plastic bags. Hence, to create awareness, a group of individuals are reaching out to the traders and giving them cloth bags. Single-use plastic significantly contributes to pollution, litter, and harm to wildlife. In response to this global crisis, a team called ‘Bags in plastic out’ is encouraging vendors at markets around Bangalore to switch from plastic bags to reusable cloth bags. This sustainable solution aims to eradicate plastic bags and promote a more eco-friendly alternative. The harmful effects of plastic bags on the environment are well-documented. They are non-biodegradable, persisting in the environment for hundreds of years and polluting landfills, oceans, and other natural habitats.

Shaila Iyenger, founder of ‘Bags In Plastic Out’, explained, “Convincing each vendor in Malleswaram and requesting them not to use plastic bags wasn’t as easy as it sounds. Not providing plastic bags with the vendors’ products would cost the customers, and cloth bags were more expensive for them. Our team created cloth bags from old sarees and partnered with vendors to sell them alongside their products. The vendors give us the money they earn from selling the bags, which enables us to pay the tailors who make them. To encourage the adoption of cloth bags, we initially provided vendors with 15 free bags. This approach eliminates the need for plastic bags and promotes sustainable alternatives. Through various Facebook and WhatsApp groups, this team requests to donate old sarees from the community to make cloth bags. Iyenger mentioned the importance of explaining to vendors the significance of eradicating the use of plastic bags for them to accept the initiative. One way individuals can help eliminate plastic bags is by adopting the simple habit of carrying a cloth bag for shopping and errands. Keeping cloth bags easily accessible in the car or near the entrance of the house ensures their availability. Our initiative also includes giving 2-3 cloth bags to students, encouraging them to use them at home and reduce their dependence on plastic bags.”

Formed four years ago, the ‘Bags In Plastic Out’ team aims to eliminate the usage of plastic bags by requesting shopkeepers and vendors to refrain from providing them to customers. The team collaborated with MITU Foundation (Multiple Initiatives Towards Upliftment) to streamline the process. Every four days, volunteers visit Malleswaram to connect with vendors and persuade them to provide their products in cloth bags. The MITU Foundation assists in getting the cloth bags made, and the team delivers them to the vendors, using the proceeds to pay the tailors.

Kalau, a member of the MITU Foundation, said, “We also focus on eliminating plastic bags for sustainable development and collaborating with the team, which has made the process easier. Our focus is also on empowering women tailors through sustainable bag stitching for fair compensation.” “Slowly but surely, progress is being made. So far, we have sold 14,000 cloth bags at a cost of approximately Rs eight each,” said Ashok, volunteer.

Are you a resident of Malleswaram and surrounding areas? We’d like to hear from you. email: seena.menon@timesgroup.com