By Rachana Ramesh

With heavy rain in parts of Karnataka, travel operators stress on need to build dormitories for drivers

The Karnataka State Travel Operators’ Association has urged the state government to ensure that rules are implemented to make sure passenger transport vehicle drivers receive safe accommodation while on work.

K Radhakrishna Holla, addressing the matter on Monday, said, “It is raining heavily in the mountains of Karnataka. The resort owners have to provide safe restaurants and dormitories, to the rental vehicles and drivers, as per the orders of the Central Government. In Tamil Nadu, the Urban Development Department has already issued a circular. Like them, all the five-star hotels in the state of Karnataka should build dormitories for the drivers.”

The government of Tamil Nadu in June last year made amendments to the Tamil Nadu Combined Development and Building Rules, 2019, adding the following rule: “In cases of Hotels and Lodges, a dormitory with 1 (one) bed space (with moving area around the bed) for each car parking space required for the guest rooms in such Hotel/Lodge along with 1 (one) separate toilet and 1 (one) separate bathroom for every 8 (eight) beds or part thereof attached to the dormitory shall be provided exclusively to provide accommodation to the drivers of the guests.

 The dormitory may be provided either within the premises of the hotel or lodge or within a distance of 250 metres radius of the premises.”

Parking problem
A rental driver said, “Parking is the main issue. When we are allowed to park inside the premises of the hotel, it is often under an expanse of trees. We are required to sleep within our cars due to lack of accommodation. During harsh weather, if there is a case of tree fall or other instances threatening our safety, who must we hold responsible? While the safety of our vehicles is under risk, our life is also on the line.”

Holla added that in compliance with the Central Government’s tourism policy, five-star hotels in Karnataka must provide safe accommodations for passenger transport vehicle drivers.
 
“These accommodations should shield from inclement weather, wildlife, and potential hazards like snakes and scorpions. Safety should align with the Urban Development Department’s circular issued to hotels and resorts in Tamil Nadu,” he explained.