By Manoj Sharma 
 
 Officials who sedated a tiger in violation of standard operating procedure guidelines laid down by the tiger conservation authority say crowds also necessitated the action
 
 
 Nagarahole Tiger Reserve officials, who tranquilised the one-year-old tiger in Naganahalli village of HD Kote taluk in Mysuru district on Wednesday, have justified the act saying the tiger would otherwise have died as it did not possess the ability to hunt.
 
 
 
 The one-year-old tiger was tranquilised and captured by Nagarahole Tiger Reserve officials in Naganahalli village in Mysuru district
 
 The large cub may have recently got separated from its mother, which may have died, and that is why it was not capable of hunting down its food. Due to this, the tiger may have strayed into human habitat in search of small animals. But the wild cat was not able to do that either. A goat in the farmland the tiger was located in had survived an attempt of the tiger to attack and kill it with “merely a scratch”.
 
 It was some residents of the village who complained to the forest department that a tiger had been spotted in the area late on Sunday, in response to which the department formed a team of 150 forest officials assisted by two elephants to locate and capture the animal, as it could prove to be a “danger to humans”.
 
 Recalling the operation to Bangalore Mirror, Dr Umashankar, veterinarian of the tiger reserve, said the tiger stayed hidden in some scrub near the village for a long time as it had panicked because of the presence of a large number of people who had rushed to the spot.
 
 “It obviously had entered the village from the nearby tiger sanctuary in search of food, but the large crowd scared it. But we were caught in a state of confusion over the handling of the strong operation. Had the tiger been a litter older, it would have attacked the villagers because of the commotion,” he said.
 
 “It was a sudden decision of ours to tranquilise the tiger. As per National Tiger Conservative Authority (NTCA) guidelines, we must follow a standard operating procedure (SOP), which involves conducting the operation in the presence of the zilla panchayat members and personnel of a non-governmental organisation. We bypassed this in order to save the tiger,” he said.
 
 Another official of the NTR said the SOP guidelines ought to be little slackened a little bit, for they were actually “causing the death of wildlife animals during such operation”.
 
 “Delay in handling crisis situations could lead to the death of animals because of stress,” he added.
 
 The tiger was shifted to the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre in Kurghali in Mysuru. Speaking about its condition there, Kamala V Karikalan, director of Mysore Zoo, said, “The tiger is under observation. It has some injuries and rashes, for which we are treating it.”
 
 
  ‘Cull leopards to curb population’
 
 
 Forest officials recommend the population of leopards in India be closely monitored as their presence in urban areas is rising at a fast pace. A leopard litter of four cubs every 30 months is common, which results in their numbers increasing quickly, and when this happens in urban places, it becomes a “cause for concern”.
 
 And this has to be controlled, like they do it in Australia with kangaroos. Though it is their national animal, they cull a few of them. It helps in controlling the balance of wildlife. “This system should be implemented in India with regards to leopard population,” an official said.