Craft corner

To its long list of firsts, Bengaluru now adds a curated craft festival for kids, aged seven and above. Opening today, it has in store a host of delightful activities such as sand art terrarium making, clay modelling, modular origami, laser cut gift packaging and decoupage coaster making. Want more? Participants will get to take home what they create. On Day 1, facilitator Pooja Kothari will teach you how to make a sand art terrarium. 

 WHERE: Tsala Quilting Studio, Langford Town 
 WHEN: 3pm-5pm, October 8-12
 FEE: `4,250, eventshigh.com 
 CALL: 9880162266

Shades of fun

An art camp will introduce kids to the right techniques of calligraphy, typography, finger painting in acrylic, pointillism, sketching superheroes, coffee painting, decoupage, terracotta coiling, charcoal painting, block printing, as well as making paper sculptures, creating soft pastel art and more. The sessions, meant for kids in the age group of five to 11, will be conducted by Micky Sujan in two batches. 

 WHERE: Bloom & Grow, 5th block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 10.30am-1pm, October 8-12 (batch 1) & October 15-19 (batch 2) FEE: `3,000, bloomandgrow.in

Cartoon alert

Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist Signe Wilkinson is displaying some of her works for the first time in India. On display are her cartoons from over the years, revolving around US president Donald Trump to North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, the tussle between free speech and surveillance in the US, and the latest Brett Kavanaugh controversy. It was while working as a reporter in the US, where she hails from, that she began to draw the people she was supposed to report on. She then combined her interests in art and politics. 

 WHERE: Indian Cartoon Gallery, No 1, Midford House, Trinity Circle WHEN: 10am-6pm, till October 20 (closed on Sundays) CALL: 41758540

Nature in focus

Wildlife lovers are in for a special show. A newly-mounted exhibition, ‘Junglee - Magnificently Wild’ has on display paintings of majestic wild animals and birds, ranging from tigers to leopards, elephants, deer and peacocks. The colours, moods and painting styles have come together well to depict these creatures in their natural habitat. 

 WHERE: Magnitude Gallery, 3rd Block, Jayanagar
 WHEN: 10am onwards, till October 31 (closed on Sundays) CALL: 9900117201

Learn to make fast food 

Cooking is not as difficult or boring as you might think. And it’s a life skill too. So help yourself and sign up for this cookery workshop where you will be taught how to make pizza, samosas, wraps and other lip-smacking fast food. It will be a delightful evening for the participants as they will get to share and experience different fast food cuisines and take home some very useful tips and tricks for cooking, say the organisers. It’s open to all age groups.

 WHERE: Village Cafe, 12th Main Rd, Bhadrappa Layout, Hebbal Kempapura 
 WHEN: 2pm-5pm, October 8 ENTRY: `500 onwards, eventshigh.com

Go on a chocolate tour

Who doesn’t like chocolates? But how many can tell how their favourite bar of chocolate is made? Here’s the chance to take your chocolate craze a step ahead by joining a weekday chocolate tour with experts. Here, you will get a brief introduction to cocoa beans and other raw materials, you will get to be part of a tasting session, and you will get to make a few lollipops, truffles and chocolate rocks yourself.

 WHERE: Jus’ Trufs, Jakkur Road WHEN: 3-4pm, October 8 
 ENTRY: `900, eventshigh.com

Kolkata diaries

Take a ride through the bylanes of Kolkata this month, as this gastropub dishes out some of the most popular street food of the city with its food festival – ‘Next Stop Kolkata. From the Beadon Street Fish Roll to Girish Park-er Shoitan Deem, College Street Hing-er Kochuri to Chitpur Road Chicken Rezala, from Tiretti Bazaar Prawn Dumpling to Esplanade Mughlai Porota, Vardaan Market Moong Daal Pakodi Chaat to Elgin Road Pork Momos, Lake Market Chicken Kabiraji to Vivekanand Park Ghooghni … the menu is bound to keep everyone happy. And wash it all down with interesting cocktails, inspired by the flavours of Kolkata. 

 WHERE: Monkey Bar, 12thMain, Indiranagar 
 WHEN: All day, on till October 21 
 Call: 44114455

Chaat-erbox time

What is Mumbai without its chaat? This month, this bar and restaurant is offering a rather curious spread of chaat, inspired by the street food of Mumbai. A fun vegetarian menu is on offer, where you can check out treats such as the Sea Buckthorn Ragda (Pani) Puri, street-inspired Ragda Puri filled with SeaBuckthorn water that is a vitamin loaded super fruit from the Himalayas; The SodaBottleOpenerWala SPCP – Sev Puri Cheese Puri that is sev puri done their way with a delicious cheese sauce and spicy chutney; Puffed Amaranth and Lotus Seed Bhel, their version of the Bombay bhel with puffed amaranth, lotus seed, Cheeslings and sev; Ragda & Banana Pattice that is warm ragda and raw banana pattice served with sweet & spicy chutney and spiced yoghurt, and more. 

 WHERE: SodaBottleOpenerWala, Lavelle Road 
 WHEN: All day, ongoing 
 Call: 7022255299

From the west coast

It’s that time of the year when Goa turns into a hot spot for tourists from across the world. And to spice things up, Goan chef Selester, along with sous chef Gaurav Bansal, is hosting a Goan food festival at the restaurant. The buffet menu highlights mostly popular dishes such as the Goan fish curry, Prawn Balchao, Pork Vindaloo, Mutton Xacuti, and Bebinca, among others. Check this out. 

 WHERE: MoMo Café, Courtyard by 
Marriott, Outer Ring Road 
 WHEN: 7pm, on till October 12 
 Call: 9513653156

Passport to Germany 

The hangover of Germany’s Oktoberfest continues at this microbrewery. The occasion is the ‘Brew and Barbecue’ festival. From Weizenbier, the classic German wheat beer, to After dark, a roasted malt beer, Triumph’s Pale Ale, American Light Wheat and Farmhouse Ale, there is something for everyone to drool over. What’s a festival without great food? So, they are dishing out Hendl (Pork Sausages) roast chicken, grilled lamb chops, Schweinshaxen (Pork Knuckle), and a special Oktoberfest Splatter to fill you up.

 WHERE: Brew and Barbeque, 4th Floor, Soul Space Arena Mall, Mahadevapura
 WHEN: Till October 11
 Call: 39237373

Retail therapy

The festive season is upon us, so you will be looking out for interesting gifts to give or things to buy for yourself. You might then want to check out the second edition of The Handcrafted Edit, which will brings 14 handcrafted brands across the categories of womenswear, menswear, kidswear, jewellery, leather bags, personal care and home care on one platform.

 WHERE: Olive bar & Kitchen, 16, Wood Street, Ashok Nagar
 WHEN: 2pm-10pm, October 10
 Call: 9945565483

Stage lights

It’s raining dance and music festivals in Bengaluru, and the latest in this front is Laya Laasya Lahari 2018. Expect dance pieces spanning Bharatanatyam, Odissi, and Kuchipudi, a Hindustani vocal concert, and a talk. The show will be presented by Kala Sampada, Pracheen Kala Kendra Chandigarh, and ICCR Bengaluru.

 WHERE: Kincha auditorium, Bharathiya Vidya Bhavan, Race Course Road
 WHEN: 6pm onwards, October 13-14
 Call: 9845144299 (for RSVP)

Thinkers Inc.

The seventh edition of The Salon, presented by SocialWorks and Kerosene Digital, will take off this week. It aims to bring together communities of artists, illustrators, writers and thinkers to engage in conversation and discourse around important subjects of our time while exploring how art, innovation and culture can affect and drive change. Take a look at the speakers for the event: 
Manish Pole is a copywriter turned yoga teacher. Today, besides conducting yoga and meditation retreats, he also organises leadership training workshops.

A fascination with building things made Pallavi Nopany pursue engineering in college, but soon she realised that she wasn’t cut out for IT. She quit her job, and now runs a branding, packaging and publication design company.

A trip with complete strangers to the Burning Man Festival in Nevada made Vikram Ahuja realise his true calling in life – his love for travelling. Today, he runs a travel company.

WHERE: Social, No-46/1, Cobalt Building, Church Street 
 WHEN: 7.30pm-9pm, October 11 ENTRY: Free Call: 9632855858