Kolkata: Babu, the chimpanzee, who is the star attraction of Kolkata’s Alipore Zoo, bit the left index finger of the zoo director, severing a small part of it on Wednesday.

Asis Kumar Samanta, Director of Kolkata Zoo, had gone to meet the chimpanzee and feed him carrots, when suddenly Babu bit his finger. A small portion of his finger was severed. 

He regularly enquired about the inmates of the zoo and fed them. 

“Mr Samanta was very friendly with the chimpanzee. He used to go to his enclosure regularly and was very affectionate towards the chimp. A bit of his left index finger has been taken off and it cannot be fixed by plastic surgeons. Even if it is done, it will create further problems,” VK Yadav, member secretary, Bengal Zoo Authority, told Mumbai Mirror, adding that “Mr Samanta is fine. He has been asked to visit the hospital again tomorrow. The chimp is also good but this kind of incidents happen.”

   Untitled Carousel Watch: Man jumps inside lion enclosure in Delhi zoo; escapes unhurtA 28-year-old man jumped inside the enclosure of a lion in the Delhi zoo on Thursday, but escaped unhurt as the zoo staff acted quickly and tranquilised the animal, official sources said.      

Samanta was treated in MR Bangur hospital immediately after the incident, where his wound was cleaned and he was administered medicines and injections.

Samanta, known as a hands-on director, used to feed Babu and other monkeys as well. He has earlier been bitten by smaller monkeys.

Asked if the zoo authority is monitoring Babu and why he suddenly became aggressive, Alipore Zoo Deputy Director Piyali Chakrabarty told Mirror, “Babu is fine. We are not monitoring him. Mr Samanta is on leave. He is also doing well.”

Babu is 31-year-old and he was brought from Chennai in the late 1990s. He had lost his partner Rani a few years back.

However, zoo visitors are not allowed to feed animals. Under Section 38J of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, the zoo has put up boards at several locations, saying, “No person shall tease, molest, injure or feed any animal or cause disturbance to the animals by noise or otherwise or litter the grounds in a zoo.”

 Untitled Carousel Zoo at Aarey now more than double its sizeInstead of the previously proposed 100 acres, the zoo will now be spread over 240 acres after Dairy Development Dept agrees to provide land.