By: Hamish Mcrae
 
 
 The Supreme Court decision, even if it favours the challenge to perceived patriarchy in the barring of menstruating women from Sabarimala temple, will be a victory in the abstract, not in reality
 
 
 	Whichever way the Supreme Court decides today on the issue of the constitutional right of women between puberty and 50 years of age to overcome the religious prevention of their entry into the Sabarimala Temple in Kerala, it can be said with certainty that the ban will be dutifully observed by the faithful of the female sex in the future too. The legal decision, even if it favours the challenge to perceived patriarchy, will be a victory in the abstract, not in reality.
 	
 	  	For those of us born before the 1970s, Sabarimala is a new and sudden destination of the devoted. From a few hundreds, the number of devotees has now grown to about 100 million in a year, with the site attracting nearly 40 million of them — more than the entire population of Kerala — in the season between mid-November to mid-January. It is really difficult to see how women who believe in the deity and legend will be more persuaded by the Supreme Court’s judgment than of faith and tradition.
 	
 	
 	I’m quite fuzzy on the legend of Ayyappa, but understand that he is a celibate deity and menstruating women are barred from his precincts because they are considered to be polluting. And, since the temple cannot physically check whether the women are indeed menstruating, the temple board has decided to impose a blanket ban on the age group from 10 to 50 years. Women in that bracket are apparently asked to stop at the base camp, but provided accommodation till their companions make the trek up the hill to the temple and come back down. 	
 	  	Let me confess here that I’m, personally, indifferent to the legal outcome. I have never been to Sabarimala. Nor, for that matter the Tirumala temple at Tirupati or any of the other holy temples of pilgrimage. But, without getting into any argument of legality and rights, I must say it can be very messy to settle questions of faith with legal interventions. We must remember Lalu Prasad Yadav’s famous query on the Ayodhya issue: “kaatha hai?” because Advani’s band of the faithful were saying the place belonged to the deity Rama. That is a legal question and it cannot be answered.
 	
 	  	The issue has already moved into awkward territory. One of lawyers who is fighting for the cause of women in the menstruating age group, who may wish to defy the ban by the temple board to exercise their right to worship Ayyappa, has complained to the Supreme Court that he has received 500 phone calls of a threatening nature after the court opined on January 11 that the temple ban appeared to be unconstitutional. Advocate Naushad Ahmed Khan, who is reported to be president of the Indian Young Lawyers’ Association (IYLA), told the court that some callers are threatened to blow up his house if he did not withdraw his petition. So, could he?
 	
 	  	No. Mr Khan, it appears, has a predicament, even if he now wishes he had never got into this story, for he filed this petition 10 years ago. “Let people know this that once a public interest litigation (PIL) is filed and entertained, you cannot withdraw it,” the SC bench of Justice Dipak Misra and Justice N V Ramana has declared. The consolation offered to Mr Khan is that today (Monday) the court will also decide on the kind of security that can be offered to him for his pains on behalf of the women banned by the temple. For now, Mr Khan has been given security by the Delhi police.
 	
 	  	The SC bench has put even the Kerala government to a hard test. It has asked the government whether it can tell for certain if women of the said condition have been prevented from entering the temple for the last 1,500 years. The temple board has humbly submitted that its memory does not go back beyond 50 years. The court had also asked: “Why can you not let a woman enter? On what basis are you prohibiting women entry…What is your logic?” The temple board cannot answer that question because the problem is in legend: rooted in patriarchy, perhaps, but also in faith. Not logic.
 	
 	  	Meanwhile, there is, perhaps, a more serious threat than patriarchy that is present and growing at the 1,500-year-old Sabarimala. The temple zone is in the Periyar Wildlife Sanctuary and the popular pilgrimage poses a serious environmental threat.
 	
 	
 	However, this year, there is some happy news. It has been widely reported that ‘Mission Green Sabarimala’ — an initiative backed by government agencies, corporates and Kerala’s largest women’s SHG Kudumbashree — has managed in this season to get over 200,000 devotees to pledge that they will not dump their clothes in the river after ritual bathing. They will dispose of them in waste bins. Besides, the government is making efforts to enforce a ban on all plastic containers around the temple area.
 	
 	
 	Officials estimate that every devotee leaves behind 250 grams of plastic at the site, fouling it up in season 2014 alone with 8,750 tonnes of plastic, in the forms of bottles, food wrappers, use-and-throw raincoats and carry bags. Distressing reports of trash in the sanctuary, choked water channels and traces of plastic in digestive tracks of wild animal carcasses moved authorities to impose the ban.