The state’s forest department finds itself in a Catch-22 situation, courtesy a roving tiger that has spread panic in the Virajpet area of south Kodagu district over the past few days. The department is under intense pressure to permit its shooting down, but its top honchos are holding firm, hoping the situation will be defused with the tranquillisation and capture of the animal.
 
 According to sources in the forest department, the tiger has been seen in the vicinity of some villages in the area for the past few days and has already killed 24 cattle. When Virajpet MLA and assembly speaker K G Bopaiah visited the area recently, the locals requested him to obtain the forest department’s sanction to shoot it down.
 
 Taking stock of the groundswell of fear and anger, Bopaiah has asked the principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) to issue permission in this regard as per the Indian Wildlife Act. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Bopaiah said, “The tiger is our national animal and killing it is a serious offence. But there is a provision in the Wildlife Act (rule 11-A) to kill it if it has attacked humans or poses a threat to human life. However, the locals are panicky. So far, the tiger has not attacked any humans and has targeted only livestock. Forest officials have tried over the past three days to lure it into four cages they have set up, but have not succeeded.”
 
 But principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) B K Singh is unbending. He said, “There is no question of giving permission to kill the tiger. We will only tranquillise and capture it. We have been trying our best in this direction. We have deployed three teams to carry out combing operations in the area. Each team has a veterinarian, a sharp-shooter 
 and a forest officer.”
 
 One of the teams was mounted on Dasara elephant Abhimanyu, but has failed to spot the tiger.
 
 Echoing local sentiment, a planter from Srimangala, on the condition of anonymity, said, “We have been seeing how they are going about it for the past four days around Konangeri village. The area is interspersed with coffee estates and it is harvest time for coffee planters. If these officials start combing the area on elephant back, won’t it affect our crop?”
 
 
 What the law says
 Section 11 of the Indian Wildlife Act of 1972 provides for the killing of wild animals in certain cases. The chief wildlife warden concerned may, if satisfied that the wild animal specified in Schedule 1 has become dangerous to human life or is so disabled or diseased as to be beyond recovery, by order in writing and stating the reasons permit any person to hunt such animal or cause such animal to be hunted. Further, the wildlife warden needs to be satisfied that the animal cannot be captured or tranquillised.