The photograph that won K A Mandanna (below) the bronze at the Mercedes-Benz 15th FIAP Nature Biennial World Cup          
He is among the many naturalists who, given the opportunities their work throws up, have taken to photographing wildlife. Among other things, he also collaborates with documentary film-makers.

The 29-year-old Mandanna picked up a camera just four years ago, but has already notched up several awards. However, his work got worldwide  recognition when he won the bronze medal (print section) in the individual category at the recent 15th FIAP Nature Biennial World Cup. The photographs show wild dogs hunting a sambhar. He explained that this award-winner happened in March 2007, when he was staying in a hut beside a stream inside Eravikulam National Park in Kerala. 

On hearing unusual animal cries, he quickly picked up his camera and stepped outside. In the distance, he spied two wild dogs hunting down a sambhar. “I went closer. The tall grass provided a perfect camouflage and I got to shoot an entire sequence of pictures over two hours,” he says.

What, according to him, are the attributes to succeed as a wildlife photographer? Mandanna replies, “First, you have to know the essentials, namely all about lighting and composition. Then, you have to be familiar with animal behaviour, especially how fast and in which direction an animal is likely to move. Also, immense patience. And, good luck.”

His photographs and other images that were submitted for this competition –– from 32 countries –– will be exhibited in 
Bangalore from October 7 to 12 at Karnataka Chitrakala Parishat. The 10 Indians who represented India in the print category were Anil Kumble, K A Mandanna, Chetan Rangaraj, V S Kashinath, Sharath R Jois, Babi Nobis, S Mallikarjuna, Vijay Cavale, Vikram Huilgol and K N Yogish. 

In all, 250 print images and over 250 projected images (transparencies that can be projected onto a screen) will be on display. Each of the five jury members will be showcasing three of their own images.

The event is being held in India for the first time, says M N Jayakumar, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Member-Secretary of the Zoo Authority of Karnataka and chairman of the Organising Committee of this edition of the World Cup.

Italy won the highest prize, ie the World Cup, in the print category while India came second, winning the gold medal. In the individual awards in the print category, Babi Nobis won the silver medal and Mandanna  the bronze. In the projected images category, India was represented by 17 photographers and won the premier award, ie the World Cup.