Bannerghatta Biological Park is a zoological treasure no visitor should miss
 
 Bannerghatta National Park is one of the icons in Bengaluru which every citizen here should be proud of. The reason is simple: the city hosts a national park, which comes under the country’s national parks lists. Bannerghatta National Park situated after the NICE road on Bannerghatta Road, was a far-off land for tourists and Bengalureans then. But now, it has a full-fledged commuting service.
 
 There was a time when urbanization could have eaten up Bannerghatta road, from Dairy Circle to the zoo. Then it was a complete canopy of trees, which would give you the feel of travelling few kilometers inside the forest. The Bannerghatta Biological Park has been an integral part of Bannerghatta National Park and emerged out as an independent establishment during the year 2002. It is in order to meet the growing demand for eco-recreation, eco-tourism and conservation, on an area of 545.00 hecatres of forest culled out from the National park. Later, the area was extended to 731.88 hectares.
 
 It has different units such as zoo, safari, Butterfly Park, and rescue centre for the conservation of captive animals.

Read Also:
1012 turtles worth Rs 4 crore rescued 
 
 BBP gives an opportunity to Bengalureans to understand wildlife in an atmosphere of recreation. The famous Champakadhama hills inside the Bannerghatta National Park is also very rich in flora and fauna. To make this possible, a mini zoo was created in 1972 which then became a biological park by 2002.
 
 What everyone craves for are the loan and tiger safari rides in BBP. This activity is carried out by BBP in the midst of the natural forest called Ragihalli Reserve Forest, 4 km away from the zoo which is connected by an asphalted road.
 
 The BBP also has a Herbivore Safari which is believed to have developed during 1970s but opened to public view in 2002.
 
 The safari areas are barricaded with a stone wall along with the additional support of solar power fencing and Elephant proof trench (EPT). The vegetation in the safari is more favourable to herbivores round the year as a large number of fodder species such as bamboo and pangasius are interspersed across the vast area that includes water bodies. The Bear Safari is another beauty to watch as there are 77 (31 male + 46 female) bears in this facility. The safaris are conducted on rotational basis. The zoo in the park also serves as a picnic spot. The Butterfly Park too is something no one should miss. The park has maintained a garden for butterflies and a research and captive breeding laboratory too in the premises.

Read Also:
The vanishing act