Priceless works by the late taxidermist Edwin Joubert Van Ingen — vintage collections, including original mounted animal trophies, a few pieces of ivory and hide — could be rotting in his locked home, fear Mysore Police. With the trophies not tended to for the past four months, the rains and the damp weather could wreak havoc with them.   A day before he died on March 12, 2013, Van Ingen had lodged an FIR at Nazarbad police station, alleging that a person was trying to usurp his properties. Following the taxidermist’s death, the said person moved court to get the FIR quashed, claiming he is an adopted son of Van Ingen and the latter had willed his properties to him.   As no deadline has been set for the disposal of the case, the concerned police have decided to write to the court to allow wildlife experts to carry out regular maintenance of the trophies that are valued at close to Rs 100 crore.   “We don’t know how long the case would prolong. The priceless works of Van Ingen cannot be ignored till such time,” a senior police officer handling the case told Bangalore Mirror. “The house has been under lock and key for close to four months now. The trophies are in urgent need of maintenance, even more so during monsoon months. We will appeal to the court for its permission to allow experts from the forest department to carry out periodic maintenance. It will be done strictly under our supervision, and we will be answerable for anything untoward happening.”   Experts says such leather works have to be cleaned regularly to prevent the formation of mold — a type of fungus that forms from dampness.   Van Ingen’s other properties — his sprawling house on a two-acre plot and a 270-acre coffee plantation in Kerala, are worth around Rs 300 crore. The world-renowned Dutch taxidermist, whose family had migrated to Mysore, had his mounted trophies and stuffed animals adorning the palaces of erstwhile royals and on sale at auction and art houses all over the world. The family’s studio — Van Ingen & Van Ingen — was set up in Mysore during the 1890s. Animals killed by the royals were sent to the Ingens who converted them into trophies and stuffed animals.   On March 12, Van Ingen died without an heir. He was 101. With the trespassing controversy surrounding his properties, the police have seized his house.    Museum is keen  The Regional Museum of Natural History (RMNH) in Mysore has evinced interest in procuring the registry that Van Ingen had maintained about his works. It says it will be crucial to establish the density of fauna which existed during that period, some 100 years ago. But, until the case is settled, the museum cannot access any records.   RMNH, however, has an alternative. British anatomy professor and researcher Dr Pat A Morris, who has done a comprehensive research into Van Ingen’s life and works, and subsequently brought out the book, Van Ingen & Van Ingen, Artists in Taxidermy, is said to have 90 per cent information of Van Ingen’s records.   “Morris is ready to share with us the facsimile and digital format records of Van Ingen’s works,” John Thomas, taxidermist at RMNH, said.    “While researching for his book, Morris gathered a lot of data about Van Ingen’s registry, which maintained records of what came in and what went out (hunted animals that were brought to the taxidermist and the final product). This could be useful for an analysis of animal wealth. Morris is very meticulous is maintaining the records and has a good relationship with the museum.”