The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) regularly conducts water quality analysis of the lakes in the state.
 
In Bengaluru, water quality analysis of 106 lakes is undertaken. However, ecologists and lake activists have observed that the state pollution board has not been actively releasing data on its website.
 
Even until January last week, KSPCB had released the classification of water quality and national water quality monitoring programme report only till September 2022.
 
There was a lag of about three months of data. But as on January 23, the reports available showcased data from April 2022 to November 2022.
 
Activists complained about the delayed data and pointed out the necessity to upload it on time as the BBMP lakes department can get an overview of lakes and speed up developmental works.
 
“A month ago, there was a RTI meeting at the KPSCB office wherein I had questioned the data lag; the officials pointed out that 

during Ganesha festival many samples were taken and sent for testing, and hence the delay. However it’s been long since the Ganesha festival is over; yet the updating of data is quite late. No doubt, KSPCB carries sample testing religiously and sends the results to the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB); but why isn’t it uploaded on their own website on time. The portal allows the public to access the data; the BBMP can get a clear view on which lake needs assistance. If the data of September is shown in January, then the water quality would have worsened much more,” lake activist Raghvendra B Pacchapur said.
 
As per the KSPCB report, water quality analysis of 278 lakes was done in Karnataka until November. In Bengaluru, water samples from 106 lakes were tested; data from April to November showcased Class D and Class E categories of lakes. In November, over 66 lakes were in Class D and 37 lakes in Class E. Class A waterbodies qualify for drinking water quality, class B lakes qualify for outdoor bathing, Class C category lakes can be sources of drinking water but with water treatment followed by disinfection. Class D lakes qualify for propagation of wildlife and fisheries; water from Class E lakes qualify for industrial cooling, irrigation and controlled waste disposal.

There are over 32 other parameters to check on the water quality of lakes such as chloroform level, dissolved oxygen, salinity, PH level, biochemical oxygen demand and others, which are not showcased on the website.

“It is important to put out the results of all the parameters. For example, the dissolved oxygen is one of the main parameters which shows how much oxygen is dissolved in a litre of water. The BBMP and other departments can get a fair idea on which parameter needs more attention and focus on its maintenance thereafter,” Pacchapur added.


 We will check with the laboratory why data isn’t being updated on time… uploading results of all parameters will take a lot of time– KSPCB official
Some of the lakes that fell in Class E category include Kalkere Lake, Doddanekundi Tank, Sadaramangala Lake, Garudacharpalya Lake, Ulsoor Lake, Madiwala Lake, Hulimavu Lake, Singasandra Lake, Jakkur Lake and Narasipura Lake.
 
“The data is directly uploaded from the central laboratory where the samples are sent. We will check with the laboratory why data isn’t being updated on time. Meanwhile, uploading data of each parameter is quite the task as there are 278 lakes in Karnataka; putting up the results of all the 33 parameters will take a lot of time. Hence the classification in class category can easily showcase the condition of the lake,” a senior official from KSPCB said.