Sudden death of kites raked up a controversy, triggered panic about the possible outbreak of a new virus
 
 Drawing curtains over suspicion surrounding the mysterious death of more than 80 kites on the outskirts of Tumakuru, the toxicological report by the Regional Disease Diagnostic Laboratory of the veterinary department has revealed that there were no traces of poison in the visceral samples of the birds. Following the negative results, forest officials and activists have attributed the death to high-tension power lines in the area.
 
 The sudden death of more than 80 kites on the outskirts of Tumakuru last month had not only raked up a controversy but also triggered panic about the possible outbreak of a new virus among the avian population. Bangalore Mirror had reported the tragic incident in its edition dated May 31, 2015. Follo­wing the report, the forest department had taken samples of the dead kites for examination at the Regional Disease Diagnostic Labo­ratory of the veterinary department at Sira in Tuma­kuru taluk.
 
 The report, delivered to the forest department a few days ago, has revealed that there was no trace of any toxins in the samples. “Tests were conducted for hydrocynic acid, Zinc phosphide, Organo phosphorous and Organo chloride. The tests revealed negative presence of these compounds. Hence it has been proved that the deaths were not due to any toxic material,” Amarnath M V, deputy conservator of forests, Tumakuru told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 T V N Murthy, honorary wildlife warden, Tumakuru opined, “The deaths may have been due to the high-tension power lines passing through the area. As the area was being used as landfill with corporation personnel dumping the city garbage, there were hardly any trees for kites to nest. Even though there are a few Nilgiri trees in the vicinity, it is difficult for these large birds to nest in those trees. The kites may have sat on the lines. When the birds nosedived due to electrical shock, they sustained head injuries resulting in their death. We have urged the DCF to write to KPTCL authorities to change the alignment of the electric lines.”
 
 Activists and locals alleged that there have been more incidents of kites dying due to electric shock at the same location.
 
 Related Story: Kites die in droves in Tumakuru