Two small islands in South Asia’s first marine biosphere reserve have sunk into the sea primarily as a result of coral reef mining, experts told BBC. The islets were in a group in the Gulf of Mannar, between India and Sri Lanka.
 
 The Indo-Pacific region is considered to contain some of the world’s richest marine biological resources. The group’s 21 islands and islets are protected as part of the Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park, covering an area of nearly 560 sq km. Illegal mining
 Fishermen had indiscriminately and illegally mined invaluable coral reefs around the islets of Poomarichan and Villanguchalli for many decades, said S Balaji, chief conservator of forests and wildlife for that region of Tamil Nadu state. “The absence of any regulations prior to 2002 led to illegal mining of the coral reefs, which came to an end when environmental protection laws were enacted,” he told the BBC Tamil Service.
 
 Balaji said rising sea level as a result of global warming was also a factor behind the islands’ submergence.
 
 But this was questioned by Simon Holgate from the Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory in Liverpool, UK, who said observations showed that the sea level in the region had been rising slower than the global average. “I think that global sea level rise had little impact on the disappearance of these islands and it must be due to other reasons, possibly the mining of coral reefs,” Dr Holgate told BBC News.
 
 Though these islets were only 10-15 feet above sea level, their submergence sounded an alarm bell about the danger many more small islands faced in the long run, according to Mr Balaji, who is also director of the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve Trust (GOMBRT).
 
 The Gulf of Mannar was chosen as a biosphere reserve by the Indian government in 1989 because of its biological and ecological uniqueness, and the distinctive socio-economic and cultural profile shaped by its geography. 
 
 Most of the 21 islands are uninhabited, and the corals were mined for use as a binding material in the construction industry, as they were rich in calcium carbonate.
 
 Rich biodiversity
 The biosphere reserve is a storehouse of about 3,600 species of marine flora and fauna. Many more wait to be studied, said Deepak Samuel, marine biologist and project associate with the Energy and Environment Unit of the UN Development Programme (UNDP). “The Gulf of Mannar is a unique reserve with ecosystems like coral reefs, mangroves and seagrass. It is a nursery for shell and fin fishes, which means the entire breeding and juvenile raising takes places in these three ecosystems,” he said.
 
 Studies have proved that this gulf is home to 117 species of corals belonging to 37 genera, and 13 out of the 14 species of seagrasses in Indian seas. The area has also been famous for pearl harvesting for over 2,000 years. It is also the dwelling place for many endemic species, notably the dugong or ‘sea cow’.