Neetu and Sameer outside the high court on Thursday                 
“I couldn’t sleep as Neetu was in custody. Only the shawl she had given me was with me. I spent three days remembering the time spent with her. I knew the case would come up before the judges only after 11 am, but I couldn’t wait,” Sameer told 
Bangalore Mirror.

These two childhood sweethearts had eloped earlier this month. The incident had threatened to snowball into a Hindu-Muslim row. But the high court came to their rescue. On Thursday, it ruled Sameer and Neetu were free to lead a married life as per their wishes.

After Neetu reunited with him, the only thing she said was, “I am sorry, mom and dad.”

CLASSMATES FOREVER
Sameer and Neetu, both 21, have been classmates since first standard. They are now both in final year BBM. Good friends all this while, they fell in love when they were in PU.

Earlier this month, their parents learned about their affair and objected to it. It was Sameer’s father Abbas who informed Neetu’s father Ramlal about it. Ramlal confined Neetu to the house and fixed her marriage with a relative in Rajasthan. The wedding was scheduled for May 22.

ESCAPE TO ABDUCTION
On May 3, Neetu ran away the house with the help of a friend. Sameer left home without informing anyone, and the duo eloped in his car and hired a paying guest accommodation for the night.

To their horror, the PG owner locked them up suspecting their intentions and demanded Rs 5 lakh for freeing them. But they were in no mood to yield to a blackmailer. When he went to give them food, they beat him up and escaped. The two went to Mysore, ‘abandoned’ the car and took a bus to Ooty.

Meanwhile, Ramlal had filed a case of kidnapping with the KG Halli police and filed a habeas corpus petition in the high court.

POLICE ON HEELS
As Sameer was using his cellphone, the police found he was in Ooty. They searched many hotels there, but could not find the duo. They were making their way back to Bangalore in a bus. Cops gave them chase but a freak incident helped them escape.

The highway through the Bandipur wildlife reserve closes at 7 pm. While the police, with Ramlal in tow, were following the bus, some wild elephants made their way across the road and the forest officials shut the road for traffic. An angry Ramlal slapped a forest guard and was fined Rs 8,000.

NIGHT IN FOREST
Sensing trouble, Sameer and Neetu got off the bus. Little did they realise the road had been closed and spent the night in the jungle. The following day, they managed to reach Hosur.

With the help of a Muslim NGO, Neetu converted to Islam and changed her name to Sara, the name that Sameer used to call her by, which means ‘angel’. On May 19, they got married, and Adil, Sameer’s friend, signed as witness on behalf of Sara.
On May 23, they surrendered before the KG Halli police. Neetu was presented before the high court the next day. By this time, the duo leaked a video (recorded on cellphone) to the media in which they sought its help to live together.

CONVERSION CHARGE
In the court, Sameer was accused of forcibly converting and marrying Neetu. When her opinion was sought, she could not recall the full name of Adil (the witness to the marriage) and said she didn’t know what was written in the conversion papers as it was in Urdu.

Neetu, however, said she had converted and married on her own accord. The court sent her to remand home for two days.

On Thursday, Neetu was presented in court again. The division bench headed by Justice K L Manjunath heard the matter again. Neetu told the court she wanted to go with her husband. The court ruled she was free to go with Sameer as they were not minors.

Sameer’s father Abbas said he would not discriminate against Neetu on grounds of religion and his family was wiling to accept the marriage.

Neetu said, “I don’t have enmity with anyone, including my family. I am here because I love Samir and I want to lead a good life with him.” 

ONLY POSSESSION
Neetu gave Sameer her shawl when she was being sent to the remand home. It was the only thing she had taken from her home when she eloped. He wore it around his neck for the next two days. He would never let go of it anytime.

FORGIVE ME, DAD
Neetu’s parents were present in the court on Thursday. Ashok, with whom Neetu’s parents had arranged her marriage, and his mother, were also present.

As the court read out its verdict, there was jubiliation for Sameer and his family, but Neetu’s parents and relatives left in a hurry.

Neetu, speaking outside the court, said, “I am happy I can go with my husband. At the same time, I am sad that I had to hurt my parents and relatives. Please forgive me, dad.”