“Tourists want to get the real stories behind the objects they are looking at,” said Lady Penelope Street, founder and director of Narrowcasters which set up the audio guide system.

And that’s what the audio guides do in seven different languages – English, Kannada, Hindi, French, German, Italian and Spanish. If you choose English, you have the voice of Roshan Seth taking you on a discovery of the Palace. We decided to revisit the heritage structure and came away with some fascinating nuggets of history. 

We learnt, for instance, how Chamarajendra Wadiyar, Maharaja of Mysore, bought the original property in 1873 from the first principal of Bangalore Central High School, Reverend J Garret, from his personal funds. The main building, a rich mix of Scottish Gothic and Tudor architecture,  sprawls across 45,000 sq feet. It took two years to build and cost about  Rs 1,98,158. 
Of course, all this knowledge comes at a price. A tour of the palace will now cost you Rs 175 (Rs 350 for foreigners), up from Rs 100 (and Rs 200).

From hunter to chairman of wildlife board

The Wadiyars loved their sport, especially hunting. In 1954, the current Maharaja’s father, Jayachamaraja Wadiyar, told Camilla Koffler, a Sports Illustrated journalist that he had personally killed 300 tigers. He had also shot a similar number of elephants, mostly rogue ones. 

There’s a story often told about how he was once out driving when an elephant charged at his car and it flipped over. The Maharaja miraculously survived the onslaught, sprang out and cocked his double-barrelled Purdey, killing the animal with a single shot (He was also passionate about cars – he had a 1948 Rolls-Royce Silver Wraith built specially for him and also ordered six Bentleys!)

Displayed at the entrance is the head of one of the many elephants he had shot. Trophies from elephant hunts can be seen in other shapes too. There are stools made from elephant feet (in pic) and even a vase made out of an elephant’s trunk. So, OK, if you are an animal lover, here’s some salve. Jayachamarajendra Wadiyar eventually gave up shooting and became the first chairman of the Indian Board of Wildlife!