KPCL has been prohibited from commissioning its power plant in Yelahanka due to ‘total disregard’ for environmental laws when the plant was built

The Supreme Court has ordered a status quo on the commissioning of the Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd’s (KPCL) gas-based combined power plant located in Yelahanka.

The apex body gave this direction while dealing with an appeal by the Yelahanka Puttenahalli Lake and Bird Conservation Trust to cancel the Environmental Clearance (EC) of the project. Post this interim order, KPCL now cannot commission the said power plant or perform any activity which is detrimental to the environment.

According to the trust, the 370 MW gas-based power plant has been built with total disregard for environmental laws. “The wall of the power plant is built against the lake bunds, preventing the movement of water, and the water channels have been filled up with concrete. However, the EIA report submitted by the KPCL is silent on these issues, and despite being a prohibited activity, the project proponent is proceeding with the establishment,” said a member of the trust.

The trust alleges that the data provided in the environmental appraisal process by KPCL to obtain the EC is misleading. The plant is located within 500 m of Puttenahalli lake which is a “Bird Conservation Reserve” declared under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and the EC can only be obtained by the MoEFCC. Moreover, the trust members also pinpoint that the clearance was issued by the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) without conducting a mandatory public hearing session.


 A '˜Bhopal-like' disaster waiting to happen in Yelahanka?It might sound too alarmist, but residents of New Town say thick smoke from KPCL plant located nearby has been coating walls and floors of their homes, and it won't be long before it clogs their lungs
“The power plant is being established in an area where no pollution control measures are possible. Due to the paucity of land, immediately adjacent to lakes and residential areas, a green belt cannot be created around it,” said the trust member.

The trust had earlier challenged the grant of environment clearance (EC) to KPCL by the (SEIAA) before the Karnataka High Court in 2020 and had subsequently reached out to the Supreme Court. The apex body had directed the Trust to approach the National Green Tribunal. “We challenged the legality of the EC, but the NGT rejected our plea a month back, seeking cancellation of the EC.
 
After this, we filed a statutory appeal before the Supreme Court,” informed the member.