A 10-ft python was rescued in Kadugodi; it has been handed over to the forest department
 
 A gigantic Indian rock python was rescued around 10:30pm on Tuesday near the Sri Sathya Baba Ashram in Kadugodi. The large snake — around 9-10 ft long — was first seen crossing the road across the Whitefield area by local residents.
 
 Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) volunteers had received calls about the python sighting for the last one week but it was rescued only on Tuesday after a resident immediately got in touch with snake catcher.
 
 CS Nagabhushan, a volunteer of BBMP wildlife rescue team, said, “Locals called us as soon as they spotted the snake on the road. By the time we reached, it had already climbed a compound wall of a nearby ashram. We rescued it from there. We have handed it over to the forest department.”
 
 On Tuesday morning, the the python was taken to a rehab centre for a health check-up. “The doctor said its health condition is very good and it was not been in captive. We suspect it has been transported through train or truck. It needs more greenery; it cannot survive on food it gets in city. So it should be left in the forest and not in a zoo,” Nagabhushan said.
 
 According to forest department officials, spotting the python in urban areas is quite a rarity. “The snake probably would have come here from some adjoining farms or transported from another place. It had just eaten; hence it was a little slow. It is non-venomous, and we heard it is in very healthy condition. We shall give the animal rescue volunteers permission to release it back into the wild,” said an official.
 
 Repeated calls to BBMP wildlife volunteers on a big snake wandering around Whitefield area had made the volunteers suspicious about a python in the vicinity.
 
 BBMP wildlife advisor Sharath Babu R said chances of snakes travelling in trains are high — there are a lot of trains that stop near the temple area in Kadugodi.
 
 “It could have strayed from the train coming in from Western Ghats or Bannerghatta area. Once in the city, this python was feeding on street dogs. It is very common for pythons to feed on stray dogs in cities,” Babu said.
 
 Earlier, many pythons have been rescued in areas like Kengeri and Kanakapura Road.