With no signs of April showers, Agumbe, called ‘Cherrapunji of the South’, is staring at a severe water crisis that could threaten its biodiversity
 
 
 
 	Agumbe in Shivamogga district – which enjoys the sobriquet “Cherrapunji of the South” – has gone dry thanks to deforestation, excessive sand mining and the prevailing drought conditions. 
 	
 	  	Reeling under effects of climate change, Agumbe – at an altitude of 2110 feet above sea level – attracts lakhs of tourists throughout the year and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site in the Western Ghats. But it recorded very low rainfall last year. And with delayed showers, Agumbe, with an annual average rainfall of a whopping 8,000 mm, is staring at a severe water crisis. 
 	
 	  	It continues to wait for rain although we are heading towards the fag end of April.
 	
 	  	Last year, Agumbe received just 5,000 mm of rainfall – the lowest ever in the area.
 	
 	  	Experts say this is because of manmade issues such as deforestation and excessive sand mining in the surrounding regions.
 	
 	  	Vijay Kumar, assistant conservator of forest, Thirthahalli taluk, told Bangalore Mirror, “The delay in arrival of April showers has led to the perennial water sources going dry. The weather is extremely hot and dry. The absence of the periodic rainfall has had an impact on the climate.” 	
 	
 	Kumar said the need of the hour is to control sand mining. “The sand bed has to be conserved if there has to be water in the river bed,” Kumar said. “Encroachment of forest land has to be stopped. Vegetation on government land is also being destroyed. There is no water flow in the Malathi River tributary of Tunga River. Some water is found only in pits here and there.”
 	
 	  	Despite these alarming shortfall of rain to the tune of 30-40 per cent in this area, government officials say there is no reason to panic yet.
 	
 	  	“For people of this region, the source of water is open wells. There is no alarm or reason to panic yet. We have not received a single complaint from this region stating that there is scarcity of water,” Shivamogga deputy commissioner VP Ikkeri said.
 	
 	  	However, the worries are not only about access of water to people living in the area. Agumbe is a known repository of a variety of medicinal plants and plant biodiversity as it is located in the tropical rainforests.
 	
 	  	The Foundation for Revitalisation of Local Health Traditions (FRLHT) recorded 371 plant species in the Medicinal Plants Conservation Area (MPCA) at Agumbe, of which 182 were medicinal.
 	
 	  	The MPCA was established in 1999 to protect the important medicinal plants of the region. But with the rains beginning to give up on Agumbe, how these medicinal plants would be preserved is anybody’s guess.
 	
 	
 	
 	 		ABOUT AGUMBE
 		
 		
 		 	 		» Agumbe lies in the West coastal region of South India in Shivamogga district of Karnataka, and is 357 km northwest of Bengaluru. 
 		
 		 	 		» It is 24 km from Shringeri and 55 km from Udupi on the west coast which is also the nearest big railway station. 
 		
 		 	 		» The nearest airport to Agumbe is at Mangalore which lies at a distance of about 100 km. 
 		 	 		
 		» The elevation of Agumbe is 643 metres above sea level. 
 		
 		 	 		» The Mani reservoir lies to the North. Agumbe is near the Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary and the Kudremukh National Park.