In yet another case of animal casualty on roads criss-crossing through wildlife corri dors, a black panther was found dead on Friday near Khindwadi Village on the Satara-Karad highway in Maharashtra. According to forest department records, the panther, a two-and-a-half year old male, was the lone surviving leopard in the area.
 
 	“We got a call around 9:30 in the morning, informing us about a black panther lying on the highway. We rushed to the spot only to find it dead. A post-mortem revea-led it had been hit on the hind side as the spine had got severed at the place where it meets the legs, damaging the nerves,” informed MN Moh-ite, the assistant conservator of forests, Western Ghats, Satara. Black panthers are rarely spotted in the area, he said. “They are leopards that are black in colour owing to some genetic mutation.
 	
 	However, their next generations turn out to be regular leopards. The one that died on Friday was the only one recorded from that area. Besides this one, there are a couple of black panthers in Kolhapur and Ratnagiri,“ added Mohite.
 	  	The black panther belo-ngs to the Panthera species, the same family as tigers, lions, leopards and jaguars. While panthers in Asia and Africa are regular leopards of the Panthera pardus variety, those found in North and South America are jaguars of the Panthera onca group.
 	  	On September 2 last year, Mirror had reported on frequent animal hit-and-run deaths along the highways. Despite this being one of the major threats to wildlife in the country, then information and broadcasting minister Prakash Javadekar had quashed Wildlife Institute of India’s recommendation to build overbridges and underpasses to allow smooth movement of animals across National Highway 7 in the Pench­Kanha tiger forest land scape, calling it “impractical” and “un-executable”. According to Mohite, “A year-and-a-half ago, a leopard had been found dead after being hit at Khindwadi itself, which shows that there are animals frequently crossing the highway in the area. There is an urgent need to make underpasses and overbridges for wildlife while building highways.”