While the mining ban breathed new life into the flowering fields, tourist onslaught and weather fluctuations are undoing the good
 
 If you were to drive along the Karnataka-Goa border now, you would be treated to a visual delight with the countryside bursting in a riot of colour. Conservationists say there are at least a dozen ‘flower valleys’, especially at Khanapur (Belagavi district) and Joida taluks (Uttara Kannada district). But, they also warn that this pretty picture might not last too long if things remain the same.
 While the mining ban breathed new life into the flowering fields, tourist onslaught and weather fluctuations are undoing it, with experts reporting rapid shrinking of the verdant green spaces.
 Around 5,000 flowering plants are endemic to the Western Ghats. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red Data Book, 150 are endangered, 102 are vulnerable, and 250 are rare. With flowering season generally between October and December, the countryside offers a view of some of these. There are varieties from the Balsaminaceae family, Graham’s groundsel flowers (which gives a yellowish appearance to the land), beaded grass (which gives a white appearance), Karvi, which flowers once in six to seven years (interestingly, these have flowered extensively this year), Striga and others whose varied hues transform the landscape into a picture postcard.
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Bagalkot information officer and conservationist Manjunath Sulloli said, “There is a need to create awareness on these flowering valleys/grasslands which are facing threats both from tourists as well as the weather. There has been steady decrease in rainfall along with increase in temperatures. I have been doing research in these areas for the past two decades and have found that the space has been shrinking very fast along with reduction in density of flowers.”
 Sulloli said he had discussed the issue with forest officials who say that a number of measures will need to be taken. Firstly, there need to be curbs on trekkers and tourists entering these valleys. Besides, the issue of cattle grazing, which is also playing a part in its decline, will need to be addressed.
 Speaking to Mirror, chief conservator of forests Vijay Mohan Raj said, “Most of these flowering areas come under forest zone. We have a general policy of not touching high-altitude grasslands. The same policy applies here too. We generally refer to these areas as ‘sadas’ (a Marathi word referring to lateritic grassland).”
 Forest officials said they have already started implementing protective measures at Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary where trekkers are warned. Signboards will also be installed at gates and local villagers will be restricted from taking cattle inside.
 
 
 FLOWER SHOWS ELSEWHERE
 
 * The most popular Valley of Flowers in Himalaya is located in the Nanda Devi biosphere spread across 87.5 sq km. * Maharashtra, too, has its own version located near Satara and spread over 1,000 hectares. It takes its name from the Kaas Pathar (as it’s known locally) and is home to a wide variety of flowers.