Ramadevarabetta aka ‘Ramgarh’ of the blockbuster Sholay fame, is also the country’s first vulture sanctuary. Now, however, this iconic area is facing a new threat, one that comes from the skies.
 	
 	  	In what activist Vijay Nishant calls “the worst form of trespassing”, drones used by a film crew were found flying over the protected Ramadevarabetta in Ramanagara, posing a danger to Long-Billed Vultures, under threat of extinction. The drones were being flown without valid permissions, sources alleged. Sometimes, as shown in the picture, they come close to the vultures, posing a threat to the birds.
 	
 	  	The birder community and sources, who also photographed the drone-vulture encounter, fear that even a single bird-hit could chase these birds away from their habitat.
 	
 	  	The incident has raised concerns as what was once a habitat for thousands of birds in the area has seen the numbers dwindle to just six. Officials of the forest department, however, maintain that there was no concrete evidence to support that number. After declaring 346.14 hectares rocky terrain as a vulture sanctuary in 2012, the forest department is fighting an uphill battle to conserve and save the species. The crew, whose details are yet to be ascertained, was photographed by a few wildlife enthusiasts shooting in the vicinity on June 8, who saw one of the birds having a close encounter with a drone.
 	
 	  	“The damage could have been disastrous. If one bird is hit, then the whole family could migrate. There is a sighting of only four birds, though six are said to exist, including a juvenile, in the vicinity,” a source said. The presence of a film crew and drones has shocked experts. “A full-fledged film crew had come into the area and we don’t know what they could do to it,” a source told BM. When BM tried to ascertain details of the crew, about whom even officials are clueless, it could not be traced. 
 	
 	  	“If they had something to do with the forest, they should have taken the permission of the Deputy Conservator of Forest; and if it was out of the forest area, they should have taken the permission of the Ramanagar deputy commissioner, but they didn’t,” another source said.
 	
 	  	Wildlife enthusiasts, who witnessed the film shooting and the drones flying, alleged the crew spoke in Kannada.
 	
 	  	“They were found flying drones all day. They may come back and resume shooting. This is shocking. Forest officials should wake up as it’s an alarm. These birds are very sensitive. The male and female are loyal to their respective partners. They are said to lay one egg a year. In case of the death of one of their partners, the other one lives alone for the rest of its life. Such things are a potential threat that could result in them moving away from the vicinity,” the source added. “The vulture population has come down by almost 99 per cent. The number was about two thousand. The birder community is upset,” another source added.
 	
 	  	
 	
 	  	Drones flown, despite a country-wide ban
 	
 	  	The drones were flown in violation of a country-wide ban. The drone was flown very close to a nest of these vultures, which is alarming. “DGCA rules prohibit the flying of a drone without permission, across the country -- be it private or forest area. There should be an authorisation letter,” the source added.
 	
 	 

 	Forest officials have no clue
 	
 	  	The forest department, which has the role of monitoring the sanctuary and forest area, claimed to have not permitted any crew to shoot in the vulture sanctuary. The brass said that action would be initiated against whoever violated the norms by entering and flying drones without any authorisation in a sensitive area.
 	
 	  	“Nobody has taken permission. We will act on the information provided. I will initiate action against them as I have not given permission to anyone. Everything is prohibited in these areas without permission. Some people had come for my permission. I had asked them to come with a detailed documentation on what they intended to do. I had asked them to contact PCCF wildlife as the entire area is wildlife area. They went back and didn’t turn up. Nothing of that sort [flying drones] has been brought to my knowledge from my ground staff,” Dr G Manjunath, Deputy Conservator of Forests said.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	WHITE-BACKED VULTURES WERE HERE
 	
 	

 	 		The area was also a habitat of the white-backed vultures. But all of them have disappeared over the past five years. While the long-billed vulture nests in cliff faces, these white-backed vultures nest in trees, mostly coconut trees. The coconut trees in the area caught a disease and were cut. Some birds died after feeding on livestock that had died of poisoning. From then on these birds are said to have migrated away from the area.
 		
 		
 		 			CAN YOU FLY A DRONE?
 			
 			

 			 				The DGCA, in October 2014, issued a public notice stating that till the time regulations - Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) on certification and operation of civil use of UAS (Unmanned Aircraft Systems) are issued, no non-government agency, organization or an individual should launch a UAS in Indian civil airspace for any purpose whatsoever. A recent draft policy states that it could be done only after registering drones and flying permits from the DGCA.