It&rsquo;s time courts need a better system of stand-ins                 There was a time not very long ago when the summer vacation was about six weeks. It has been gradually reduced to the present level but each reduction draws bitter complaint. Court vacations are a legacy of British rule. In those times, there were at least some good reasons for long summer breaks. Judges and barristers sailed home to England and the route, via Aden, took time. 

Some lawyers used that break for remarkably adventurous activities. In 1889, the New York Times carried a wonderful story about John Duncan Inverarity, a renowned barrister practicing in Bombay, and his encounter with a lioness in Somalia. 

Inverarity — Bombay born and bred, of Scottish ancestry — was also a big game hunter. In Berbera, he shot a lioness but, to his misfortune, did not make a clean kill. In the ensuing fracas, he was twice badly mauled by the wounded lioness before his two Somali companions killed her. Undeterred by the cat’s attempt to bring his practice to a premature close, Inverarity then photographed the kill, dressed his 16 wounds with carbolic acid, rode back to Berbera (managing “only” six hours a day) and sailed off to Aden where he was examined by a resident surgeon and found to be in good health. 

Now that we don’t have to set sail for Blighty (luxury cruises don’t count) and can’t go off shooting wildlife, the rationale for these extended vacations seems indefensible, especially when you look at the mounting case arrears. In 2002, Arun Jaitley, then the Union Law Minister and himself a senior advocate of the Supreme Court, answered what was described as his easiest question in Parliament. He said it was not feasible or advisable to reduce these vacations because of the “taxing” nature of work. That was an odd thing to say and, since then, the calls for reducing court vacations have continued to grow. Retired judges, parliamentarians, bureaucrats and ministers all point to the mounting arrears: over three million cases in the High Courts and, as of 2002, about 20,000 in the Supreme Court. Add to this the more ignoble traditions of our system — charging additional fees for appearances in the vacation, and only taking cases that are really ‘urgent’ — and we have a real problem on our hands.

Possessive as we are about our vacations (PILs against them have been filed and routinely dismissed), we lawyers are unable to come up with a single convincing reason why a vacation should be collective. It’s insulting to every other profession to say that lawyers need breaks because they work so hard. Doctors work hard too, and so do engineers, architects, chartered accountants, film stars and dabbawalas. They all take time off. They just don’t do it together. Imagine the entire medical fraternity going on holiday en masse. Some lawyers might be slightly inconvenienced, but only slightly: courts adjust, and perhaps we need a better system of stand-ins, like a doctor’s locum. Besides, judges and lawyers frequently take off even when courts are in session (I was recently told that a matter would have to be adjourned because my opponent was going to America for two months).

Judges are the ones who really need time off. Their work demands it. Our judges are possibly the most hard-pressed in the world. After listening to lawyers for five hours, judges must collate and analyze arguments, sift through the record, read further, write judgements. This cannot be easy — it’s probably like writing a thesis or a monograph on a daily basis — and it needs time for reflection. Judges do use their vacations and perhaps the leave to which they are entitled to complete their work. But surely all judges do not need to be on leave simultaneously. 

In America, courts close for a few public holidays and Christmas. For the rest, judges work on a rotating roster and schedule their work accordingly. 

There are, today, about 41,205 civil suits pending trial in the Bombay High Court, 3,034 of which are prior to 1989. The earliest is of 1968. No lawsuit should take more than 12 to 18 months to trial. The case for vacations is non-existent, and is simply wrong. Its backlog has now brought the judiciary to a tipping point. Unless we do something radical, we risk a crippling loss of faith in the judiciary.