The seven-year-old will be sent to Mysuru Zoo or Bannerghatta Park 

The elusive tiger in Karnataka’s Bandipur reserve forest, who was believed to have killed two persons, was finally captured on Sunday afternoon, concluding the search operation that went on for five days. 

The tiger which was spotted in Bandipur forest by a team comprising Soligas and forest officials, was first tranquilised and then captured. The search for the tiger had started after it had killed Shivappa (a resident of Chowdahalli) a few days ago. Following this, there were widepread protests in the nearby villages, where villagers demanded the killing of the tiger. Forest officials said that the same tiger had killed its first known victim, identified as Shivamadaiah, in the same area in mid-September while he was returning to his village with two bullocks.

Karnataka: Forest officials capture tiger that killed elephant calf in Bandipur00:32 
 The tiger is said to be seven years old and will be either sent to Bannerghatta National Park or the Mysuru Zoo. In the initial days, the forest department had limited success despite the search operation team included four elephants. Meanwhile, the tiger had killed the calf near the safari in a 10km radius of Melkamanahalli village (in the jungle). Forest officials had then said that killing of the calf had helped them in knowing its whereabouts. The tiger has devoured 14 cattle in the past two months. 

The state Forest Department had finally obtained a camera trap picture of the tiger early on Saturday. One of the camera traps in Mel Kamanahalli captured the tiger in the last few days, providing help to the forest officials. The Forest officials have also credited the sniffer dog Rana for zeroing in on the tiger’s whereabouts. 

The search teams, comprising of forest guards, vets and Soliga tribals, are of the view that the tiger is the same that has killed two people since September, after matching its stripes. Soligas, adept at hunting bare foot, are from the Biligiri Ranganathaswamy temple wildlife sanctuary, about 170km southwest of Bengaluru. 

Soligas are good at searching big cats and at following the trail left by leopards and tigers. Meanwhile, the villagers demanded that the forest department conduct forensic analysis to confirm if the tiger which was caught was the same one which had killed a farmer from their village. Forest minister CC Patil confirmed that the captured tiger was the right one.