In less than a year, since it was declared as a tiger reserve, Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Wildlife Sanctuary has become the target of poachers from across the country. Forest officials of Kollegal Wildlife Range on Saturday arrested six poachers from the tiger reserve who hail from Himachal Pradesh and reportedly have links with the cross-border wildlife trade mafia.    The gang, which includes a woman, are residents of villages along the border of Himachal Pradesh and Haryana. During interrogation, they revealed that they were sent by Balcu and Periya, two notorious tiger poachers of north India, with instructions and route map.    Field director (Project Tiger) B G Hosmath said,“They pitched a tent on the periphery of the tiger reserve along with other nomadic families and began selling plastic flowers. These tents were the base unit.”   The poachers repeatedly trekked through various beats for the last one week to study the topography of the forest and movement of tigers. “They were hiding in a narrow cave in a valley to avoid detection but our we caught them. They confessed that they have set-up three jaw-traps, locally called as ‘khadka’, to catch tigers. They took the officials to all the three locations and the traps were recovered,” Javed Mumtaz, DCF, Kollegal, said.   The arrested have been identified as Jagadeesh (30), Rothas (20), Jaler Singh (45), Pappu (30), Lakumichand (26) and Bimla Devi (30).    The jaw-traps were activated only during nights. “They (the poachers) used to camouflage themselves during day time in nearby areas. Once the tigers are caught inside the trap they used to blind the animal with a sharp object then hammer it to death,” said an assistant conservator of forest attached with Kollegal wildlife division. Forest officials said each member the gang is an expert tracker and knew how to set up traps, slay and de-skin the animal.   The team which caught the poachers was led by the BRT director, assistant conservator of forests, Yelandur, range forest officer of Kollegal and included the ground staff of Kollegal forest division and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary