Turtle smeared with toxic red colour rescued in Coles Park

We often see street dogs covered with coloured powder during the festival of Holi. The dry colours contain chemicals that are harmful for them. In a similar incident, a turtle was recently spotted by a morning walker in Coles Park with its entire shell coated in red colour.

He reached out to the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC), after which the latter sent a team to rescue the animal. Upon examination, they saw that the Indian pond terrapin had been daubed with a thick layer of ‘gulal’ powder. As Gulal contains synthetic dyes and fine particles like corn starch and mica dust, it can trigger severe skin, ocular, and respiratory irritation.

Subiksha Venkatesh, Rescue Manager, ARRC, said, “We had to wash off the colours at the earliest by putting minimal stress on the animal. We massaged the shell and body with different materials like oil, cornstarch, and petroleum jelly. It was later washed off with a mild ‘dawn’ soap at different concentrations. Multiple washes were needed.”
 
The powdered colours can cause skin allergies, rashes, and even blindness in animals. The presence of lead in these colours can also act as an accumulative poison.
While there is not much awareness about turtles in the city, many who spot them and bring them home to keep as pets, which can cause harm. “During heavy rain, the turtles in lakes and ponds often get carried away by the overflowing water. When people find such stranded animals, they often try to move the animal to a ‘better’, which can have a devastating impact on it. Turtles are wild animals and are illegal to be kept at home as pets.” Subiksha said.

.
These animals suffer from multiple diseases and deficiencies caused due to incorrect diet and environment.

Divyaraj S, Rehabilitator, ARRC, said that turtles make seasonal movements from one water body to the other, during which they face many risks like getting crushed by cars or dog attacks. “Both, freshwater turtles and terrestrial tortoises face depleting water quality in wetlands due to industrial effluence, garbage, and habitat loss due to rapid urban development. Grasslands and even wetlands are still categorised as wastelands and not given adequate protection.”

After passing the sink test, which is usually performed to rule out buoyancy disorders, the rescued turtle was released back into its habitat.


We had to wash off the colours at the earliest by putting minimal stress on the animal. We massaged the shell with different materials ­–Subiksha Venkatesh, ARRC

What to do when you find a stranded turtle

 Safely pull over and stop traffic on both sides if needed Even if it appears dead, make sure it’s not by pinching the back leg and checking for reactions Visually check the animal for any injuries.  If you notice the animal is injured, reach out to the nearest Wildlife Rehabilitation Centre for help immediately If the animal looks okay, carefully pick it up by holding both sides between front and hind legs. Do not drop it Do not relocate or release them into water without consultation
Difference between turtles and tortoises

 Turtles are aquatic species, and tortoises are terrestrial species Tortoises have more rounded, ridged, and dome like shells, while turtles have flat and more streamlined ones that are soft and smooth (only slightly ridged in some cases) to enable swimming Tortoises are primarily herbivores, while turtles are omnivores