Top reasons to visit capital of Andaman & Nicobar Islands

As the capital of the Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Port Blair is generally considered by the sun-worshipping traveller as merely a point of transit as they head towards their dream beach. And, while it definitely isn’t the prettiest island of this archipelago, what it lacks in beauty, it more than makes up for in history and culture. It’s a great place at which to get used to the rather laid-back pace of island life. You can choose to laze around and do nothing, sample the different types of food, or even spend leisurely afternoons exploring the museums here.

For its intriguing history: Port Blair has played an important, if often forgotten, role in India’s history, and the Cellular Jail National Memorial does a good job of showcasing that fact. It’s housed, as the name suggests, in what was once a British prison. Don’t miss the sound and light show, which includes narrations by the very people who were once incarcerated here.

For its great day-trip options: If you don’t have much time, you can just make Port Blair your base, and go on day-trips to surrounding islands for a taster of the Andamans, or the outdoors on Port Blair itself. The nearby Ross Island is worth visiting, as is the Mt Harriet National Park.

For its fascinating cultural experiences: The Andaman & Nicobar Islands positively burst with unique culture. A respectful way to explore it is by spending a few hours at the Anthropological Museum, arguably the best museum of the islands. It has in-depth information about the tribes of these islands.

For its laid-back vibe: It might not have the most renowned beaches, but when you’re on any island, you must take it slow and easy. You’ll feel fresh as a daisy afterwards!

For its great shopping options: You can pick up beautiful – and legally collected shell-jewellery and shells at Andamans Handicrafts Emporium here on Port Blair. You’ll also find bamboo and cane furniture, wooden carvings and other knick-knacks that will make the perfect gifts for your friends and family back home.

  .
Places to see and things to do

Ross Island: Take a short boat ride (approximately 15 minutes) from Port Blair to Ross Island. Here, you will find the ruins of British-era buildings.
 
Corbyn’s Cove Beach: Spend some time at Corbyn’s Cove Beach, located just a few kilometres from Port Blair. The sandy shores of the Corbyn’s Cove Beach is just the right place to sit back and relax and maybe enjoy the sunset.

Snorkelling and scuba diving: Explore the vibrant underwater world by indulging in snorkelling or scuba diving. Head to popular spots like North Bay Island, Havelock Island, and Neil Island, where you can witness beautiful coral reefs and a variety of marine life.

Explore Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park: If you have time, take a boat to Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park. Discover the stunning biodiversity of the region, including coral reefs, colourful fish, and rare marine species.

Havelock Island: Take a day trip or stay overnight at Havelock Island. The island is known for its stunning beaches like Radhanagar Beach and Elephant Beach. You can go trekking in the forests, or simply relax.

Visit Chidiya Tapu: Chidiya Tapu is located around 25 km from Port Blair. It offers breathtaking views of the sunset, and is a great birdwatching destination. Chidiya Tapu has a very interesting and rich wildlife. 

(Femina and TOI)