The multitasking medical student, Poorvaprabha Patil, is involved in numerous initiatives at the university and outside
 
 Poorvaprabha Patil, a second-semester student of Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, is representing Asia-Pacific region at the second Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) for Sustainable Development Goals at the UN headquarters in New York. The two-day meet began on May 15. She is the only delegate selected from the region for the meet.
 
 “It’s my vast experience which has earned this trip for me. Being the only one to be selected from the Asia-Pacific region makes me happy,” said Poorvaprabha. She hopes to put to good use the valuable experience she gains at the UN meet. The four other representatives at the meet are from the US, Brazil, Egypt and Canada. 
 
 Her ability to be a part of different organisations at the university and elsewhere speaks volumes of her versatility. In the short time that she has been at the University, Poorvaprabha has been involved in a number of different activities. She is a research intern with the Student Research Forum (KMC-SRF), Manipal; a member of the Volunteer Service Organization, Manipal; a Member Red-X, Manipal; a member, Cutting Edge, Manipal; a member of the Bioethics committee, Manipal; a graphic designer, MTTN, Manipal; head of graphic design Scientia Medicina, Manipal; executive committee member of Indo-German Metabolic Meet (IGMM), Manipal; and also a member of the KMC’s student council.
 
 And if that’s not all, she is also a member of community service at Jyoti Eye Care, Ratnagiri; a core volunteer of Wildlife Survivors, Ratnagiri, an NGO working for protection and conservation of wildlife, operating in the coastal regions of Maharashtra. She has been actively involved in the activities of the NGO and has rescued hundreds of animals and birds and nursed them back to health before releasing them into the wild.
 
 As a campaign community leader for United Nations Foundation, Poorvaprabha has actively participated in and conducted gender equality and women’s empowerment awareness campaigns in 2015 and 2016. She is also the country ambassador for HIFA (Healthcare Information For All), Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. HIFA (Healthcare Information For All) is a global social movement to improve the availability and use of healthcare information in low- and middle-income countries. It has 16,000 members. She is a also a national-level player in rink and road skating and has participated and won at the various horse-riding competitions organised by the Amateur Riders’ Club.
 
 “She has won laurels for the university and we are extremely proud of her,” said Manipal University Vice-Chancellor Dr H Vinod Bhat.