The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species and Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, has drawn up International Light Pollution Guidelines for migratory species. The recommendations include reducing light pollution, conducting environmental impact assessments, and employing best practices in lighting design such as managing light time, colour, and intensity, and minimising light spill.
 
The guidelines also include specific measures like avoiding lighting within a 20-km radius of wildlife habitats and managing existing light pollution to protect migratory species and their ecosystems.

According to city-based experts and animal rescue centres, Bengaluru, like any other metropolitan city in the country, experiences light pollution issues which can lead to significant behavioural and physiological changes in migratory birds. Artificial lighting, even from a distance, can disorient birds, causing them to collide with structures. They said among various reasons leading to injuries in birds in the city, rescue cases of head injuries due to collisions are reported to be high.

“There has been an increase in high-rise buildings with bright lights and glass panes in the city and night lights have become brighter.
 
We get many cases of birds dashing against window panes of tall buildings. These injuries point towards the possibility of birds being disoriented due to bright lights and colliding. We must bear in mind that Karnataka is an important migratory route for many bird species such as Geese, Coots, Ducks, and Amur Falcons and thus work towards reducing light pollution in the city is critical,” said Dr (Colonel) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, People for Animals (PFA).
 
Experts BM spoke to said artificial light diverts migratory birds from their desired paths, affects their roosting behaviour, and increases stress hormones, potentially reducing their reproductive success.
 
Overall, it disrupts the circadian rhythm of birds leading to higher health risks. Many underlined that migrating birds depend on the stars, moon, and celestial lights to navigate at night and are thrown off course by the blinding lights of the cities leading to exhaustion, collisions, behavioral changes, and death.

 .
Although some countries have adopted lights-out programmes for migrating birds, awareness around light pollution in the city and across the country remains low.
 
“It is estimated that a million birds die due to collisions with illuminated buildings every year with nocturnal migrants like Indian Pitta being the worst affected. Preserving darkness holds immense conservation value for both wildlife and us.
 
Fortunately, it’s a relatively reversible issue compared to climate change and fossil fuels, and everyone can contribute.


 It is estimated that a million birds die due to collisions with illuminated buildings every year with nocturnal migrants like Indian Pitta being the worst affected— Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC 
Simple steps, such as using only necessary lights, directing them downwards, choosing warm-coloured lights, and using thick curtains in homes and offices to shield light, can help reclaim natural darkness,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC).

The CMS guidelines also outline the negative impacts of artificial lighting on other species, including mammals, reptiles, and fish, with specific examples like delayed reproduction in Tammar wallabies and the failure of clownfish eggs to hatch under constant light.