Caught in the confusion whether to kill the ‘man-eating’ tiger spotted near Khanapur in Belagavi or capture it, the state forest department has finally given the order to kill the tiger! 
 A day after a tiger killed a 23-year-old pregnant lady at Jamboti village near Khanapura taluk of Belagavi district, the forest department bowing to pressure of political leaders and locals has given the order to kill the tiger, invoking a special law under the Indian Wildlife Act. 
 	  	The decision to kill the tiger is seen as first of its kind in the history of the department in Karnataka. Though the department contemplated killing the ‘man-eater’ at Chikkaburgi near Mysuru, it decided to capture and relocate the big cat. 
 	  	Confirming the move, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra said, “We have ordered the tiger killed as a last resort. We will try our best to capture the tiger, if that does not happen we will kill it.” 
 The department has also come under intense criticism from the local MLA, MP and others. Prakash B Hukkeri, Belagavi MP, ordered local forest officials to kill the tiger at the earliest. 
 	  	Accordingly the forest department has formed 10 teams to take part in a search operation. The teams include both forest and police personnel. 
 	  	“The teams have three DCF-rank officials, 2 SP-rank officers, five ACF- and RFO-rank officials and KSRP constables, forest watchers, and guards. Two expert veterinarians, Dr Sanath and Dr Prayag, equipped with tranquiliser guns to shoot the tiger. A mobile squad of forest department officials has also been put on high alert.
 	  	Angry villagers, after a pregnant woman was killed by a tiger, attacked police officials and foresters in Belagavi. Refusing to cremate Anjana, the victim, villagers from Jamboti and Mudagi village began pelting stones at forest officials and police officers. As many as eight constables were injured in the incident, and it was only after the arrival of Belagavi MP Hukkeri that the villagers agreed to cremate the victim’s body. 
 	  	Sources in the forest department revealed that the Belagavi DFO, Ambadi Madhav, was manhandled by Khanapur MLA and MES leader Sanjay Patil for the inordinate delay in capturing the big cat. 
 	  	Meanwhile, forest officials have no clue whether it was the same tiger that was captured near Chikkamagalur or a different one. 
 	  	“The released tiger was fitted with a radio collar and there has been no trace of radio signals in the area. However, we are verifying other evidence. A special team has been summoned from Bengaluru to capture the tiger as well,” a senior forest officer from Belagavi told BM. 
 	  	In November, a tiger in Chikkamagalur’s Bhadra Tiger Reserve strayed into a coffee estate and killed a 25-year-old woman. Later it was captured near Padaravalli and released into the forests of Khanapura in Belagavi amidst protest by the villagers.