There is a rich presence of marine mammals off the state’s coasts waiting to be discovered, says researcher Abhishek Jamalabad, a marine biologist.
 
 	
 	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Abhishek, 24, said, “In just seven months of working in Karwar and covering a small area of sea off this coastline, I have sighted five species of marine mammals, and there are records of at least six more. It is clear there are a lot of marine mammals in these waters that need to be discovered.”
 	
 	  	He says in most of the shallow coastal regions along the coastline, the most commonly seen marine mammal is the Indian humpback dolphin (Sousa plumbea). It is fairly easy to identify – a robust grey animal with a long snout and a very conspicuous hump under its dorsal fin. The other marine mammal that inhabits these waters is the finless porpoise, a comparatively shy species that is inconspicuous in appearance and habits, and is often hard to spot even if present in an area. “In addition to these two common inhabitants, there have been single or a few sporadic records of other species found live and dead in the region; these include reported records of spinner dolphins, Risso’s dolphin, a rough-toothed dolphin, Cuvier’s beaked whale, sperm whales, dwarf sperm whales, killer whales, and apparently frequent but often unreported sightings of large baleen whales. On the few surveys I have conducted further offshore, I have sighted Bryde’s whales, pantropical spotted dolphins, and a very large group of Indo-Pacific long-beaked common dolphins,” he said.
 	
 	  	At Abhishek’s study site in Karwar, fishermen have actively started reporting marine mammal sightings to him, often even with information such as water depth, GPS coordinates and videos. “I have received some incredible sighting reports supported by evidence from fishermen, and they have become an integral part of my research project,” he said. The network website www.marinemammals.in has a database where anybody can submit sighting records.
 	
 	  	Regarding some of his memorable experiences from his field work, he said, “Humpback dolphins are a very adaptable species. I have noticed in my study area that they are habituated to approaching boats and feeding off fishing nets, and their behaviour around nets and their responses to various locally used mitigation measures are very interesting to observe from a research point of view. Finless porpoises, which I have come across now and then, are another fascinating species, thanks to their elusive nature – many sightings comprise only a few glimpses, after which they seem to disappear without trace.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	Need for dead marine mammal examiners
 	
 	  	Marine mammals are listed under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. While this aids their conservation, one hassle often faced by researchers is obtaining immediate permission to examine dead marine mammals that wash ashore. “The permission we receive to examine them in one region is not valid in another, and as a result we have been forced to let go of some very valuable knowledge regarding rare species that wash ashore. If a network of personnel certified to conduct such examinations can be established, or if a provisional permit valid across regions could be made easily and quickly available to researchers, volunteers and local veterinarians at such times, it would surely take our knowledge of Indian marine mammals a step ahead,” he said.