Study by scientists shows that MM Hills has registered presence of 10-12 tigers
 
 	In a move that could boost tourism in the state, Karnataka may soon get a new tiger reserve. A recent scientific analysis by a group of animal scientists has documented around 10-12 tigers in Malai Mahadeshwara (MM) Hills and two adult tigers in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. The research led by state wildlife board member Sanjay Gubbi was carried along with 15 others. The report mentions the tiger numbers in the dry forests in the confluence of Western and Eastern Ghats in Southern India.
 	  	Gubbi said, “These areas are protected and for a very long time people had no clue about the wildlife habitat in these areas. Camera traps were deployed at 809 locations resulting in a total camera trapping effort of 11,268 trap days. Each camera trap unit was deployed continuously during day and night. Out of the total photo captures that we obtained, we were able to identify 11 unique individual adult tigers and three unique cubs. In MM Hills, we found one female with three cubs, confirming reproduction in the area. This was highly encouraging.”
 	  	The density was estimated around 0.66/100 sq km for MM Hills Wildlife Sanctuary, but since only two tigers were documented during the sampling period, no statistical analysis could be taken up due to a low sample size. “This is a very good number considering this is almost one per cent of the country’s tiger population. This is more than that in several tiger reserves in the country. We also documented individual tigers that were common between the Doddasampige-Yediyaralli corridors connecting the two protected areas. Thus there was an urgent need to protect this corridor,” Gubbi said.
 	  	Tiger population was estimated to be 2,226 in the last year with Karnataka leading the way with 406 tigers across the reserves. The study has indicated that the tiger population could be doubled in the next five years in this area if suitable funding and protection is accorded. The area can hold nearly 150 tigers, study says. 
 	
 	
 	ABOUT AREA
 	
 	 		Malai Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary (MM Hills) spread across 906 square kilometres was notified as a wildlife sanctuary in May 2013 and Cauvery was expanded to the current size in 2011. These two are protected areas and are part of the Greater BRT Tiger Reserve that includes Biligirirangaswamy Temple Tiger Reserve, Bannerghatta National Park and Satyamanagalam Tiger Reserve and North Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary in Tamil Nadu.
 		
 		
 		Other highlights
 		
 		 			* First ever documentation of the ratel or the honey badger for Karnataka state in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary 		 			* 27 large and small mammalian species including wild dogs, sloth bears, Indian fox, Pangolin, rusty spotted car, Gaur, Sambar, four horned antelope, Madras tree shrew 		 			* Several poachers apprehended including the notorious Saravanan