A luxury resort in Rwanda has a unique business model where the people living in the area own the business and reap the benefits, says Sudha Pillai
 	
 	​7000 feet above sea level, on the edge of Parc National des Volcans (where five volcanoes rise up to 15,000 feet) in Rwanda — a country where 800,000 men, women and children were killed in 100 days, and the future, a despondent darkness — sits Sabyinyo Silverback Lodge, a luxury lodge, an emblem of hope; a motif of what a group of people can do to change ordinary lives — for the better.
 Sabyinyo Silverback Lodge is built and operated by The Governors’ Camp Collection, a 40-year-old company operated by a group of shareholders, and which comprises seven award winning luxury safari camps and lodges in Kenya and Rwanda. It was built in partnership with the African Wildlife Foundation and its partner in Rwanda, the International Gorilla Conservation Program. But right in the beginning, it was decided that the ownership of the lodge would rest with a community trust to be set up specifically to receive rental and other income from the lodge, which would be used to drive socio-economic development and conservation initiatives in the area. A community trust, SACOLA, was established.
 	  	 In May 2006, agreements were signed; in June 2006 construction of the Lodge began; in August 2007 it received its first guest; in September 2007 SACOLA began its mission.
 The SACOLA Community Trust projects range from creation of vegetable gardens for a community farming project to reconstruction of a local primary school for 1,600 students; rural electrification project; construction and maintenance of local roads; building of homes for refugees from the genocide; construction of the Community Cultural Centre; protection of water dispersal systems and erosion control; construction of a small amphitheatre; construction of water tanks and water collection points for the community; construction and repairs of a buffalo wall along the park’s edge to protect farmers’ crops from marauding buffaloes; initiating a one-family-one-cow program, which provides cows to poor people in the local community; construction of two villages which house 126 formerly destitute farmers — the village provides houses, water tanks and plots of land to people living close to the edge of the national park who are being resettled within the framework of the park extension project and creation of carpentry and other micro-enterprise workshops for the community. In addition, the Lodge also contributes to the conservation and preservation of the Mountain Gorilla and its fragile habitat and to the wildlife conservation project in Gishwati Forest, 50 km away.
 	  	Sabyinyo Silverback Lodge is an illustration of the seamless amalgamation of socio-economic development (of the public and the private), conservation of nature and the collective consciousness working at rebuilding a country, one community at a time. “It is a first of its kind enterprise for company,” says Ariana Grammaticas of The Governors’ Camp Collection. The Lodge itself — the design,
 	architecture and the premises on which it operates — can be “described in one word as thoughtful,” says Grammaticas. 
 The Lodge, set in 11 acres of land, comprises five cottages, two suites and one family cottage. They are stone buildings with Rwandanese terracotta tile roofs and feature large sitting areas, fire places, stylish bathrooms finished with Venetian plaster and verandahs with dramatic views of the Virunga Volcanoes and the surrounding lowland farmlands. The close relationship between the Lodge and SACOLA can be explored in the Community Awareness room in the main lodge building, or by visiting the various projects run by SACOLA.
 	  	“Hope is like a road in the country; there was never a road, but when many people walk on it, the road comes into existence,” wrote the celebrated Chinese writer Lin Yutang. Sabyinyo Silverback Lodge is ‘that’ road of hope for some of the communities in Rwanda.
 	  	www.governorscamp.com