One or two mobile phones are found in each podu or tribal settlement. “But we must climb up a tree or a hill to make telephone calls,” says Bommaiah, a leader who is a link between the tribes and the outside world.

Indeed, technology has penetrated deep enough to connect tribes from Biligiri Rangaswamy Hills in Chamarajnagar district, but they are way behind in joining the mainstream of society, partly due to their own reluctance.

NO WATER, ROADS
Soligas live in pathetic conditions in tribal settlements like Mannukai Podu, 60 km from BR Hills, Gombe Gallu Podu and Kere Bimba Podu, both about 15 km from BR Hills. They look civilised in their attire, but are from it. They have no proper drinking water or roads. They wait for hours or walk miles together to get emergency health care.

These podus, which are hamlets located near water streams, are inaccessible. One needs to walk at least 12 km to reach a podu. These streams, the podus’ only source of water, would brim during rainy season and dry up during summer. The tribes depend on water stored in small pits during summer.

RAY OF LIGHT
Kerosene lamps are their source of light in most podus. However, solar lights presented by NGOs are lighting their huts in Gombe Gallu, Kerebimba and other podus.

Podus are surrounded by coffee and orange plants - one of their sources of income. The tribals also work in nearby tea estates owned by the Tata Group. “We get Rs 120 as daily wages in the estates. In addition, we harvest 100-150 kg of coffee. Apart from these, we don’t have any other source of income,” said Shikari Madegowda, chief (yajamana) of Gombe Gallu Podu.

KNOWLEDGE POWER
Literacy is gradually sweeping through these podus or settlements. There are no regular schools here. 

However, with help from NGOs, informal schools have been set up in some podus. Mahadeva, a tribal who has studied up to PUC, is conducting a bridge course in Gombe Gallu Podu.

Their health is a cause of concern. Many are malnourished and anaemic. “They require good health care and proper living conditions,” feels Malleshappa, the founder of an NGO and who has been declared by forest department as a ‘honorary wildlife warden’.

AWAIT GOVT HELP
Despite these problems, the Soligas prefer to live in the forests. They are prepared to sacrifice ‘comforts’ of the 
forest only if they are offered a proper rehabilitation package. “It is not possible to shift them to urban areas. But we can shift them to the fringe areas of the forest,” says Malleshappa.

He says if the forest deparment comes out with a proper rehabilitation plan for tribals willing to come out of the forest, their friends and relatives will also follow suit. “Each tribal family is entitled to two hectares of land and Rs 10 lakh under the rehabilitation package. But it should be implemented properly,” he says.

Now, the ball is in the forest department’s court.

A HILL TRIBE
Soligas are a tribe that inhabits the BR Hills and associated hill ranges in southern Karnataka, mostly in Chamarajanagar district, bordering the Erode district of Tamil Nadu. Most of them are concentrated in and around the BR Hills in Yelandur and Kollegal taluks of Chamarajanagar. Their number is close to 20,000, although the population in and around BR Hills is only 2,000.

They speak Soliganudi, an ancient form of Kannada. Their main source of income is harvesting and sale of non-timber forest produce like honey, nellikai (gooseberry), bamboo and paasi (lichen).