Human-wildlife conflict cases double in 5 years in Karnataka; Bengaluru tops ex-gratia cases list

The total number of human-wildlife conflict cases in Karnataka has doubled over the last five years. According to the official data, while 19,120 conflict cases were recorded in 2018-19, this number has surged to over 40,000 in 2022-23. In 2019-20, 23,480 cases were registered, followed by 28,559 cases in 2020-21 and 36,982 human-wildlife conflict cases in 2021-22. These cases include crop damages, cattle killed, human deaths, permanent and partial disabilities, injuries, and property losses.

The incidents of human deaths and permanent disabilities in the event of such conflicts have registered a surge too. Merely three cases of human casualties and permanent disability were recorded in 2018-18. However, in 2022-23, this number has gone up to 190.

According to the officials from Karnataka Forest Department, the majority of the cases of human-wildlife conflict are that of property damage, cattle kill, and crop loss. The department attributes these cases to the increase in the number of big cat populations and app-based payment of ex-gratia.

“The number of tigers and leopards has increased in the entire landscape. This is leading to the dispersal of these big cats in villages located at forest fringes. Moreover, we are also witnessing elephants moving to forest areas that are yet to be barricaded. Last, but not least, the department has a robust online system for farmers to apply for ex-gratia in case of any human-wildlife conflict incidents. The system allows us to inspect and verify the claim as soon as they are registered and transfer the compensation to their bank accounts directly. Before this system was introduced in 2018, not many people were coming forward to claim ex-gratia. Now they are aware of the system, which works at a much faster pace,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Ex-gratia triples
With the surge in conflict cases, the compensation paid for wildlife-related losses in the state has tripled too. While the Karnataka Forest Department paid Rs 1,227 lakh in 2018-19, the ex-gratia amount paid by the department in 2022-23 has reached Rs 3,413 lakh.

In December 2022, the state government increased the ex-gratia amount in human deaths and crop damage cases.
 
While a compensation of Rs 7.5 lakh was given earlier in case of human death, it has now doubled to Rs 15 lakh. Similarly, the ex-gratia amount for crop damage has been doubled too. Where earlier a compensation of Rs 1,320 was given in the event of loss of one quintal of paddy, this amount is now Rs 2,640.
 
In the case of permanent disability, an ex-gratia of Rs 10 lakh is paid to the disabled person, and in the case of partial disability, an ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh is paid. A monthly pension of Rs 4,000 for five years is also given along with the ex-gratia to the family of a person killed by wild animals and for permanent disability caused by wild animals.
 
However, wildlife conservationists say the increase in compensation would have been beneficial if it had a positive impact on wildlife mortality. “For instance, when it comes to elephant-human conflict, ex-gratia is justified if the number of elephants dying due to unnatural causes such as electrocution would have gone down.
 
This would have implied that we have mitigated the issue. However, this is not the case in Karnataka,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Experts say the need of the hour is to increase areas under patrol and constitute more rapid action forces.

“The department has come up with motorable roads in various areas such as DB Kuppe in Nagarahole and Bannerghatta National Park.
 
Such stretches should be constructed in other high-conflict areas too. The department can obtain an NOC for such development work under the Wildlife Protection Act.
 
Moreover, the teams that patrol on foot are too small to drive away elephants inside the forest in case they spot any. While the rapid action force is available in high-conflict areas, smaller areas contiguous to high-conflict zones also need to be watched closely,” said Belagere.

Bengaluru tops the chart
Bengaluru has been grabbing the top spot across Karnataka when it comes to the number of cases of ex-gratia. Between April 2022 and March 2023, the city recorded over 8,000 cases of crop damage, cattle killed cases, human deaths, permanent and partial disabilities, injuries, and property losses.

“Majority of the human-wildlife conflict cases in Bengaluru circle are reported from Ramanagara district. The area is adjacent to Bannerghatta National Park and Cauvery wildlife sanctuary.
 
The majority of these cases are of big cats preying on cattle in villages located on forest fringes. This is because a high leopard population in this landscape is high,” said Pushkar.