From the Modern day Noah to the Croc Hunter, the late wildlife expert Steve Irwin was accorded many epithets. But it’s the extraordinary manner of his death — from a stingray attack — that made headlines. For the family he left behind, however, it’s more important to carry on his legacy at the 1,500-acre Australia Zoo in Queensland.
   Seven years after his death, his wife, daughter and son will take you through their plans for the zoo, which houses more than 1000 animals, from Asian small clawed otters to red-collared orikeets, on a show called Steve Irwin’s Wildlife Warriors , which will air on Animal Planet in September.
   Turning it around
 Life took a drastic turn for Terri in September 2006 when her husband died off the coast of Queensland when a stingray pierced his chest. Irwin was supposedly the only fatality from a stingray attack to have been ever caught on tape; he was just two months into laying the groundwork for his pet project, the Australia Zoo. The young widow, who had accompanied her husband on several wildlife expeditions, has since been working to realise his dream. Initially founded by Steve’s parents in 1970, the Beerwah Reptile and Fauna Park was renamed the Australia Zoo and is today one of the largest conservation parks in the world, employing over 500 people.  Funded in part by the money raised by videos of Terri and Steve’s encounters with wildlife over a decade, Australia Zoo goes beyond the ambit of the Beerwah Reptile and Fauna Park and Steve’s penchant for reptiles, safeguarding all species of animals. “My wonderful team is like family. Through the show, we want Steve’s mission to live on and remind us everyday what we have signed up for,” says Terri, over email. Like father, like family
 Bindi who has imbibed Steve’s love for animals was just eight when she lost her father. The now 15-year-old acknowledges that she probably spent more time playing with baby animals than toys as a toddler. Naturally, little about four-legged creatures scares her today. “It was so much fun to travel with my family and film with wildlife,” she says, recalling her extensive travels with her parents. She clearly misses her dad, and ruminates, “I learnt so much along the way, and getting to spend so much time with Mum and Dad was very special. Those film shoots gave me memories that I will carry with me for the rest of my life.”   A star in her own right, Bindi has been in the spotlight since the age of two, appearing on talk shows with Ellen Degeneres and Larry King, and even had her own Emmy-nominated TV show called Bindi: The Jungle Girl on Discovery.  Instead of spending time on after-school homework, this little animal-lover prefers working on the Crikey! Magazine (a quarterly magazine brought out by the Irwins) and the Zoo after school. She and her brother Robert are often seen traipsing across the zoo catching lizards and playing with tigers. Philosophically, she asks her peers to make the most of their youth. “Many kids my age feel like they don’t have a voice, and have peer pressure bearing down on them. It seems that we all want to grow up quickly and forget to enjoy life now.”  An abiding love affair  
 For now, it is the zoo that is paramount  in the lives of the Irwins, whose day begins and ends with the furry creatures. “Our morning begins with the chorus of elephants, tigers and birds. Living in a zoo ensures we have crazy experiences every day,” says Terri, fondly.  Just last week, their Sumatran tiger Kaitlyn delivered three cubs, the first to be born at their zoo. Sadly, just a few days prior, a terminally ill koala bear passed away due to a prolonged illness. “Every time we lose an animal, it’s like losing a brick from the house,” says Terri, with angst. “When people think about ‘conservation’ they imagine woodland creatures. But ultimately it is about us. Every footprint we leave on the Earth will come back to haunt the generations to come.”   Her concern has a personal back-story — it was their mutual love for animals that brought Steve and Terri together in 1991, when she met him at a wildlife park in her home town of Oregon. True to their passion, a year later, instead of taking a honeymoon after their wedding, they embarked on a crocodile rescue mission. That’s how the famous Crocodile Hunter  series was born.  Now, Terri sees the same unbridled enthusiasm and sustained passion in Bindi and Robert. “Living with Steve certainly instilled a passion for wildlife in the kids. I work to support their love for wildlife and, in Bindi’s case, singing and dancing as well. Robert is very knowledgeable with dinosaurs, so when he wanted to be involved with publishing dinosaur books I was more than happy to help. Bindi and Robert make me proud every day. They are striving to make the world a better place and inspire others to do the same,” says Terri.  Say no to animal products
 Terri hopes that the show will inspire people to be more conscious about wildlife. “The best thing you can do to help the environment is to never purchase any wildlife products. I don’t want snakes turned into boots, bags and belts, or go to a restaurant and see shark fin soup on the menu.” The show will also give viewers a peak into what exactly transpires in the zoo. “It’s incredible to watch what the team does behind the scenes. You’ll see everything from wildlife rescues to jumping crocs in far north Queensland,” she adds. For Bindi, it is about staying true to her father’s spirit. “My parents taught me to follow my instincts, to be strong and always believe. If you do that, you will be able to undertake and accomplish anything. My father was a brave man, and I hope to be like that all my life.” Even as Steve rests peacefully in the Australia Zoo, there is a sense of calm and purpose as his family strives to inch closer to his dream of preserving wildlife. “Steve loved all creatures and had immense passion for animals. He was courageous and feared no animal. I believe in encouraging kids to believe in themselves, make decisions and work as a team to ultimately become wildlife warriors,” concludes Terri.