One of India's cutest superstars, R Madhavan celebrates his 50th birthday today, and people say he is ageing like fine wine. His fans, who were in love with his chocolate boy image, are now drooling over his salt and pepper look. Madhavan has done a majority of roles in Bollywood and Tamil movies but has appeared in films from seven different languages.

He started his acting career in 1996, with advertisements and smalls roles. But, his major breakthrough came when Mani Ratnam cast him in Alaipayuthey, which was a Tamil romantic drama, in the year 2000. It was the first time that ace filmmaker Mani Ratnam had cast a newcomer in a lead role. Alaipayuthey became a massive success because of the realistic portrayal of love and life after marriage and AR Rahman's amazing soundtrack.
The film put Madhavan on the map as the industry's chocolate boy. 

 R Madhavan. Photo: Instagram/actormaddy

But the movie that put Madhavan as Bollywood's chocolate boy was Rehna Hai Tere Dil Mein, which released in 2001. He has received accolades for his work both in the Tamil and Hindi film industries.

On his 50th birthday, let's have a look at some of Madhavan's best movies in Bollywood and Kollywood

1) Rehna Hai Tere Dil Mein
RHTDM holds a special place in every Madhavan fan's heart, for his innocence that reflected on-screen with his lead Dia Mirza. The movie is a remake from Tamil movie Minnale, which had Madhavan in the lead. From college gang fights to wooing Reena, Madhavan aced his performance. One would agree that there were some issues with his character, but when Madhavan cried in Sach Keh Raha Hai Deewana, we cried with him.

 

2) Guru
R Madhavan plays the role of a strong-minded journalist Shyam Saxena who exposes the reality behind Guru Bhai's (Abhishek Bachchan) corporation earning huge profits. But, his chemistry with lady love Meenu (Vidya Balan) makes us fall for the chocolate boy again!

3) Alaipayuthey
This Mani Ratnam film revolves around the story of two individuals in love who elope and get married, but realize marriage isn't a cakewalk. Madhavan went on to win the Filmfare award for Best Male Debut – South in that year, while Rahman won Best Music Director. The movie became such a huge hit, it was remade in Hindi.

 

4) Three Idiots
A masterpiece by Rajkumar Hirani, the movie revolves around the friendship of three best friends in a top-notch engineering college and their life after that. Maddy plays Farhan, who is in love with wildlife photography but chooses engineering in fear of his father. In the movie when he cries and says, "Abba Nahi Maanenge", a lot of us felt that!


 A still from Three Idiots
5) Kannathil Muthamittal
Another Mani Ratnam movie, Kannathil Muthamittal is a war drama from the lens of a young girl in search of her biological parents and finds her mother in the war-zones of Sri Lanka. Madhavan and Simran play the character's foster parents in the film. It is said to be R Madhavan's best performance to date. The movie went on to win six national awards

 

6) Rang De Basanti
Just R Madhavan's entry in this movie was enough to make us fall in love with him. Maddy plays Ajay Singh Rathod, a flight lieutenant in the Indian Air Force, who dies due to a crash. His friends, who loved him dearly just want to know the truth, but end up getting killed too.
Maddy's role was small but left a lasting impact on his fans. 

 

Some of Maddy's other great performances were in the movies Tanu Weds Manu, Sala Khadoos, Anbe Sivam, Run, and Aayutha Ezhuthu.