Research hopes to study captive animals to understand how their ailments can be tackled with proper nutrition

Sloth bears are considered to be of significant ecological and cultural value in India and play a crucial role in maintaining the balance of ecosystems. However, according to wildlife experts, there are major health risks for captive sloth bears that include cholecystitis, hepatitis, cholangiocarcinoma, and inflammatory bowel disease that are often associated with poor dietary practices and inadequate nutrition. With regard to this, a research proposal has been submitted to the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) by a set of experts to carry out nutritional therapy for cholecystitis and hepatitis and developing a therapeutic diet for captive sloth bears.

The proposal was spearheaded by Dr Navaz Shariff, People for Animals Wildlife Hospital, Bengaluru, along with Charles T Robbins, School of the Environment, Washington State University, Mehrad Ghazi Mirsaeed, Fam-Ara Pajooh Company, Pardisan Wildlife Rehabilitation, O Lynne Nelson, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Travis G Vineyard, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, 3900 Wildlife Way, Cleveland, OH and Troy Tollefson, Mazuri Exotic Animal Nutrition, Land O’Lakes.

Shariff told BM, “Studies have found that about 65% of deaths of sloth bears in US zoos between 1905-2015 and 48% of deaths in European zoos between 1960–2000 were primarily due to biliary adenocarcinoma; 15% of deaths in US zoos were due to various gastrointestinal diseases. Based on previous research, we have developed a new diet for captive sloth bears. We would want to evaluate the diet to improve their well-being. We have sent our proposal to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) in KFD to allow us to carry out the study.”

According to the proposal, the sloth bears’ diet, which consists predominantly of ants and termites, contributes to the control of insect populations, aiding in the regulation of pest species and health of forest ecosystems.

Dr Shariff said, “Our primary objective is to propose a new sloth bear diet that should provide a healthy mixture of macro and micronutrients that will maintain a healthy liver, bile ducts, and gastrointestinal tract. Unlike past diets that have generally been high in carbohydrates and low in fat, the new diet based on the previous sloth bear preference study is low in digestible carbohydrates, high in fat, and moderate in protein. This new diet is based on over two decades of studying the nutritional needs of sloth bears, brown bears, polar bears, and giant pandas.”

While they are still waiting for the KFD’s approval, the team is hopeful to get a positive response. Dr Navaz said, “The study would be carried out for three years. We will carry out the medical examination of sloth bears first and segregate them into the healthier ones and those having diseases and needing a change in their diet. We will monitor them for three years.”