Dr Ullas Karanth, a leading tiger conservationist, says their research shows that the density of tigers in Bandipur-Nargarhole is very high, leading to territorial wars within the area. Old and weakened tigers like this one get pushed out of their home ranges
 
 A tiger that was sentenced to die by the state government was captured alive on Thursday. A life saved, a great victory for conservation measures in the state, one would say. But, a leading conservationist suggests that keeping such tigers in captivity may not — certainly in the long term — be a very wise move.
 
 Dr Ullas Karanth, director of Bangalore-based Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) and a reputed tiger conservationist, believes that the 12-year-old tiger captured on Thursday on the periphery of Bandipur Tiger Reserve had turned man-eater precisely because of the efficacy of conservation measures. The tiger, called BPT 117 by WCS which tracked it through its cameras for the last 10 years (see box on page 5) had lost four of its claws and was also injured in an attack on a porcupine.
 
 Scientists at WCS have been studying the dynamics of tiger population for over two decades across the state and the findings of their research suggest that the population of tigers at Bandipur-Nagarhole is high — perhaps a little too high for the good of the big cats.
 
 “Our research shows that the density of tigers in Bandipur-Nagarhole is as high as 10 to 15 tigers per 100 sq km,” said Dr Karanth. “This is because of high rates of reproduction and an abundance of prey. The increased population naturally results in high mortality rates. About 20 per cent of tigers in the region are lost every year. This is part of natural tiger population dynamics.”
 
 Much of this mortality, Karanth said, is because of a battle among sub-adults to find new territories. Old and weakened tigers are usually pushed out of their home ranges by aggressive — and stronger — sub-adults.
 
 Population density of tigers is linked to density of prey (deer etc) at an approximate ratio of one tiger to 500 prey. When densities reach high levels — 10 to 12 — about 20 per cent of new tigers are added every year due to reproduction. Since tigers are territorial animals, this leads to more aggression and competition and consequently more injuries and maiming. “The tiger that was captured on Thursday would not have survived much longer in the wild as it has already reached almost the full lifespan of 12 years,” Karanth said.
 
 It is this battle —one that appears to have been ignited only recently — which is pushing tigers into being man-eaters. However, while it is common for displaced tigers to make new homes on the periphery of forest areas, Karanth strongly indicated that it would be “completely wrong” to construe all tigers as man-eaters and a danger to humans.
 
 “Tigers preying on humans are very rare and to portray all tigers as being aggressive to humans is not accurate at all,” Karanth said. “Most tiger attacks occur when tigers are cornered or mobbed by crowds. These animals cannot be considered man-eaters in any sense of the term.”
 
 What then is the solution? There are as many theories as conservationists, but Karanth said, “In Karnataka, dozens of tigers and possibly even a larger number of leopards reach this stage in their life every year and some of them get into conflict situations. It may not be a practical long-term solution to capture all of them live and to house them in zoos beyond their usually lifespan in the wild. These animals suffer great stress when kept in captivity and there limits to how many such tigers and leopards that can be held in captivity. Shooting such man-eaters is perhaps preferable.”
 
 Karanth said the delay in addressing the threat of the man-eater did generate great anger among local residents. “This may undermine public support for conservation measures. All these issues should be carefully thought through and a sound policy should be put in place before passions aroused by this particular unfortunate incident are forgotten,” he said.
 
 
 Captured tiger was monitored for more than a decade
 
 The WCS, which maintains a photographic database — stocked using camera trapping method — of tigers across the state, claims that the tiger rescued from H D Kote on Thursday was identified as BPT-117.
 
 BPT-117, a male tiger, was first camera trapped at Dodda Dasana Katte Road in Moleyur Range on March 30, 2004. Considering its size and appearance at that time, it was assessed as a three-year-old. The tiger was camera trapped 10 times between 2005 and 2013. The last photograph was shot on May 11, 2013 on Sollegundi Road in Gundre Range.
 
 In the last 10 years, the tiger was photo trapped within a range of 33 sq kms. Scientists suspect that the tiger may have been evicted from his range after May 2013 by a more vigorous rival.There is some credence in the theory of weakened tigers being evicted from their territory as the Mysore Zoo had rescued about four tigers between August and December last year.
 
 According to B P Ravi, chief conservator of forests and executive director, Mysore Zoo, some of these rescued big cats have been housed at Mysore and others were sent to Bannerghatta Rescue Centre, Bangalore.
 
 The zoo officials have requested the state government to allow them to keep BPT-117 for breeding purpose at Mysore Zoo as it has lost four claws and is unlikely to survive in the wild.