Wild things 
 
 
 Spotted in the wilderness of Nagarhole were attractions of the starry kind — Saif Ali Khan, Kareena Kapoor, Soha Ali Khan and her husband Kunal Khemu. The actors spent the weekend at conservationist Saad Bin Jung’s resort The Bison. Connected to Saif and Soha from their father’s side, Saad and his wife Sangeetha played host to the Nawab and his family. "We are a family that loves wildlife and of course, the trip included safaris. Whenever they (Saif and family) are in Bengaluru, they like coming here and spending some quiet time," Sangeetha told your diarist. After the relaxing getaway, Bebo and co left on Tuesday afternoon, heading straight for the airport.
 
 
 
 Idol workmanship 
 
 
 He’s known to reduce celebrities to caricatures but that usually garners Prasad Bhat more praise than criticism. This time round, the founder of Graphic Curry (which, incidentally, turned five yesterday) has drawn inspiration from one of his favourite filmmakers in Bollywood — Anurag Kashyap. The detailed artwork with references to films such as Gangs of Wasseypur, No Smoking, Dev.D and Black Friday has evidently evoked much excitement from Kashyap. "I have made artworks of celebrities before but this is the first time I added film references because of how much I idolise his work. This piece has been in the works for the last couple of months and I finally managed to put it together,” says Bhat, who presented Kashyap with the caricature a couple of days ago. Apparently, the director has expressed interest in collaborating with the caricaturist in the future. Looks like someone knows how to curry favours.
 
 
 Not just skin deep
 
 People usually mistake Blossom Kochhar (who belongs to the top pyramid of beauty experts in this country) for a fortune teller. That's what she told the diarist when she was in the city recently. Apparently, the lady with an enviable complexion and a genial personality can look at a person's face and pin the right type of personality on to them — apart from telling them whether they have oily or dry skin or their T-zone needs some TLC. Not many know that Kochhar studied in St Josephs in Bengaluru and was a "very fat child". She was nicknamed "billboard". But then, it seems, Kochhar didn't take it to heart and even today considers it "all a big laugh". The diarist thinks Kochhar missed her vocation — she would've made a fine yogi!
 
 
 Tailpiece
 
 What captivated the diarist was the soulful look in the eyes of a woman with an angled head on the cover of the book SHE. Created by a bunch of wonderfully talented women — it contains verses by Kavitha Rajasekhar, art by Shan Re, design by Mista Roy, edited and conceptualised by Sandhya Mendoca — the book will be released on Woman's Day in a gallery — owned by a woman; and the proceeds will go to an orphanage. Take a bow ladies.