A rogue bull on rampage for more than five weeks was pinned down by BBMP’s animal husbandry department
 
 If a bull scare in October lasted for less than 10 hours, another raging bull has been threatening residents of Magadi Road and surrouding areas for more than five weeks. The bull, said to have been ‘left to God’, had become aggressive since mid-November and would charge at people at will. Finally, the BBMP caught up with the angry animal on Wednesday and used a blow dart to sedate it for transportation.
 
 The matter was taken up by the BBMP last week when it was brought to the notice of the department by Hanumanthe Gowda, councillor, Herohalli ward. The councillor wrote a letter to the department requesting them to act on it as soon as possible. "We are glad that they finally did something about it. While it has not injured any person, it would attack bullock carts and horse carts and also killed some of the animals. This had caused widespread panic. Some residents would worship it as Basavanna from a distance and would shoo away anyone who would try to capture it," he says.
 
 Volunteers and experts from BBMP sought the bull’s whereabouts for over a week. They kept going back to the place until they spotted the bull and caught up with it. The bull was cornered at a ground with gates on all sides, which were locked to prevent it from escaping. Still, when the rescue team visited the place on Wednesday, they found that one of the gates had been broken after the bull barged right through it.
 
 In an operation that began at 6 am and went on till 11.15 am, the team tried to corner the bull and sedate it many times before a vet, Dr Arun Shah from Wildlife SOS, was roped in. He suggested using a blow dart to sedate it, which worked.
 
 Capt Dr Chandrashekhar BR, assistant director, animal husbandry, Rajarajeshwari Nagar zone, BBMP, says, “This is a bull which belonged to a temple near Kunigal. He was causing quite a scare among the residents.” The story doesn’t end there: the sedated bull started heating up and the stomach started to bloat. The revival process was started but it took three hours for the bull to regain its senses. Then began the tedious process of shifting it inside the pickup truck that had come to take it away.
 
 Weighing over 300 kilos, the bull was still in a dazed condition when the rescue team managed to heave it into the truck and it was taken back to the temple. Chandrashekhar says: "We think the bull was behaving in that manner because it was in a crowded city. We think if he is kept in a calm place such as the temple premises, he will not behave in this manner and won't cause anybody any harm.”
 
 A source said: “We have found that in November, some thieves tried to steal some cows and along with that they attempted to steal the bull. When he put up resistance, they injured him with a sickle. The bull responded by hating humans. He stopped responding to the woman who used to feed him. He would recognise her voice, but would react violently when she came close. A few days later, he escaped from the premises and was found later near Magadi road."