Minor fire brought under control in 2 hours, but forest department points to sabotage again

The BRT Tiger Reserve’s tryst with forest fire this summer continues as the reserve recorded yet another fire incident on Saturday. According to officials from Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), the fire has gutted a little over 12 acres of area on a hillock in Bylur wildlife range of BRT Tiger Reserve.
 
“The fire was on top of the hillock and was not major. It was restricted to the ground and brought under control within a couple of hours. There has been no biodiversity or habitat loss,” said BRT Tiger Reserve DCF and Director, Deepa J Contractor. The repeated and deliberate act of setting the forest land on fire so far has destroyed acres of forest land in BRT in this fire season alone.

Wildlife conservationists and activists in the area say these incidents are sabotage and an act of revenge by disgruntled villagers, probably KFD on ground staff and those in illegal possession of forest land.

“BRT administration works towards winning the confidence of locals. While some activities in this direction are happening, more needs to be done. Some higher officials are not willing to meet locals, leading to disgruntled villagers and frequent fire incidents. For instance, officials at Bandipur have managed the situation with locals well leading to fewer fire incidents. But the majority of these incidents are sabotage and acts of revenge by those who are in illegal possession of forest land,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board of Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

However, BRT officials say it is a unique reserve and thus situation is different compared to other tiger reserves in the state.
 
“BRT is unique because of the presence of 16,000 people living inside the reserve. Moreover, this year there has been exceptional due to the unprecedented dry season. We have not received rain since December, allowing miscreants to put fire repeatedly. There is a lot of fuel on forest flood leading to fire being triggered even due to smallest of spark,” added Contractor. Officials say a large number of repeated fire incidents are deliberately done by those who are in illegal possession of forest land. Notably, there has been an ongoing Lokayukta case since 2016 to clear the dispute over land ownership and to establish a forest area in BR Hills.

  The fire was not major. It was brought under control within a couple of hours. There has been no biodiversity or habitat loss– Deepa J Contractor, DCF and Director of BRT Tiger Reserve 
A survey conducted to ascertain the same has recently been completed and notices have been sent to illegal grantees. Officials say the number of fire incidents has gone up since.

“These illegal grantees are well-connected people who are trying to change the map. When the department has refused to give in to the pressure, they have resorted to setting forest areas on fire. Notices to claim 150 acres of forest land, based on the outcome of a survey conducted by the Forest Department in association with the Revenue Department, have been sent recently and fire incidents have picked up after that,” informed Contractor.