KIOCL not only staked a claim over demised land but also allowed commercial activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd (KIOCL) has suffered a major setback in claiming rights over demised mining land in the heart of Kudremukh National Park, and for allowing commercial activity inside pristine forest area. 
 
 
 The state government has ordered the deputy commissioner of Chikkamagalur to initiate action to take back buildings and other infrastructure from the mining area, which will be handed over to the forest department. It has also ordered the chief wildlife warden to take action against the joint venture of KIOCL and Alvas Kudremukh Nisargadhama for running commercial activity in an eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) of the national park.
 
 
 Hearing the petition filed by Wildlife First Organisation, the High Court had ordered Additional Chief Secretary (ACS), forest, ecology and environment to hear the matter and pass an order.
 
 
 Further to the HC directive, TM Vijay Bhaskar, ACS, passed an order last week directing the revenue department to dispossess the revenue lands held by the KIOCL for handing over to KFD and Chief Wildlife Warden to take action against the promoters of health resort for functioning within the ESZ area.
 
 
 Sources in the forest department told Mirror that the issue popped up when KIOCL sold a part of its leased property to Alva’s Kudremukh Nisargadhama to set up a luxury health resort, even though its lease period had expired, and doing so would disrespect Supreme Court order.
 
 
 The move had angered conservationists who were already struggling to safeguard a fragile ecosystem damaged by mining. “The decade-long struggle resulted in the total ban on mining and the eviction of KIOCL by 2005. However, the company continued to occupy the land illegally by moving various curative petitions, which were rejected by the courts. The illegal occupation was also in violation of various SC orders on wildlife and forest laws,” said a conservationist working in the Kudremukh area. 
 
 
 The ACS said in his order: “The patta lands and the revenue lands that are enclosed by the Kudremukh National Park and that continue to be in possession of the KIOCL are falling within the 10 km of ESZ, as determined by the MoEF. Since the guest house and quarters fall within a distance of 10 km from the inner boundaries, they are within the ESZ of the national park. In the absence of no environmental clearance, it is held that the issuance of work order and entering into rental contract is violation of the guidelines issued by MoEF. Hence, the Chief Wildlife Warden has to take necessary action as per the law for violation of ESZ rules.”
 
 
 Expressing happiness over the order, Praveen Bhargav, Trustee, Wildlife First, said: “Our objective was to save the Bhadra River and these areas are only a catchment area that drain into the river. Damaging these forest areas would have caused immense damage to the river, which is vital to the Western Ghats. It was a collective fight… We are already in the middle of a severe water crisis and we have been seeing what is happening to Cauvery. Had we allowed mining in the area, the river would have been dead by now and previously too the same concerns were raised by the revenue officials. We urge the DC to initiate necessary and time-bound action to dispossess KIOCL from the entire portion of the demised mining area. We also urge Chief Wildlife Warden to immediately seal
 
 
 Alva’s resort and stop all commercial tourism within the park.”
 
 
 Meanwhile, KIOCL officials said there was a permanent injunction against taking back the possessed land. “We are aware of the ACS order and he has directed the DC and the forest department to take further action. We are awaiting a response from the KFD and thereafter we will respond over the issue,” a senior official of the company said.