By Melvin Mathew

... is revenge, experts say stressing on need to build rapport with villagers

The forest department must vigilantly watch out for forest fires as they’re a recurrent problem. Wildlife experts said these fires are usually man-made and only one per cent might be caused due to accidental reasons like lightning, burning of cigarettes or friction between dry trees.

According to the experts, the fires are a direct result of conflict between forest officials and villagers and criminals. The forests become a victim of this animosity in the form of ‘revenge-fire’.

‘Revenge-fire’ is often started by disgruntled individuals who intentionally start it in inaccessible areas which often leads to uncontrollable fires.

“Some people seek vengeance against officials for strict forest protection measures or for curbing illegal activities... Sometimes it results from internal rivalry too,” said former director of Bandipur Forest, T Balachandra.

“When we caught the miscreants behind the 2019 fires, they confessed they were setting fires to draw attention to the damage caused by tiger and elephants walking into villages and the lack of help from the forest department,” said retired forest official Sridhar Punathi.

To mitigate fires, forest watchers are employed from nearby villages by the department. The seasonal employment has turned into a major source of revenue for these villagers and any delay in employment also results in ‘revenge-fires’.

Apart from revenge fires, other human interventions like cattle grazers burning dry grass to fasten the growth of green grass, fruit gatherers burning litter around trees 
and honey collectors using smoke to collect honey are also some causes.

Experts said those behind ‘revenge-fires’ also incorporate science into their plan. “They take into account wind speed and peak days... Usually, the spots chosen will at least take 1-2 hours to reach and by then the forest fire would have spread beyond control... and the miscreants would have fled. Spots with a lot of litter are chosen and it is executed using elephant dung and incense sticks,” said Punathi.

Experts suggest the only solution to protect forests is to build an effective rapport with villagers.