With few humans on roads, wildlife is reclaiming its space

There is a spurt in the number of wild animals straying into newer habitats, including villages on the forest fringes, especially during the Covid-19 lockdown, said the forest department. This could be due to the unusual quietness as there is little to no traffic on the roads around forests, said wildlife activists. While animal observers said that wildlife is reclaiming their space, forest officials are worried that the animals are now prone to poaching. Animals are not only venturing out from Bannerghatta National Park on the outskirts of the city but also from other districts in the state, said forest officials.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) Sanjay Mohan told Bangalore Mirror that there is a spurt in wild animals venturing into newer land patches and among these, leopards, chitals (spotted deer) and sambars (large deer), wild boars, hares and peacocks are the most common. Forest officials said that the wild animals’ neighbourhood has become quieter and the bolder species would be interested in exploring what is around, and possibly build a corridor for its followers, who are not that bold enough. “This trend is also found around forests in Kerala and Tamil Nadu,” said a senior forest official. Villagers in Madikeri, Shivamogga, Bidar, and Chikkamagaluru spotted big cats, elephants, and leopards in the forest fringes.

A resident of Rajarajeshwarinagar, Priya spotted a herd of deer before Ugadi, when the shops and schools were shut down. The deer were from the Turahalli patches. “We saw around five of them in our area for the first time. I took a photo on my phone of them grazing,” she said.

“Conservation of forests and its wildlife is also deemed to be a part of essential activities and hence all our staff and field forest officials are on duty,” Sanjay Mohan told BM. The forest officials said that these animals are vulnerable to hunters who are on the prowl, especially during these times when they can easily catch them. 

  We saw around five of them (deer) in our area for the first time. I took a photo on my phone of them grazing–Priya, Rajarajeshwarinagar resident
The forest department vigilance squads have been instructed to increase the frequency of patrolling, especially around suspected poaching zones and also collect information from villagers about straying wild animals getting trapped in human settlements. Recently, a leopard was found trapped inside an empty poultry farm at a village in Sulibele near Doddaladamara. The forest officials had to tranquilize the one-and-a-half-year-old leopard. It was then rescued and brought back to the national park.