By Iffath Fathima

In past three months, 400 birds entangled in manja were rescued 

Of late, Bengaluru has been witnessing an increasing number of birds entangled in abandoned manja thread used in kite flying.
 
Even after a ban on manja, avians are often killed or have their wings clipped after coming into contact with the thread which is often invisible to the creatures while criss-crossing the urban scape.
 
Hence, the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre’s (ARRC) wildlife rescue service has now set up a hydraulic bucket to reach the ‘often-unscalable/unreachable’ heights in the canopy and rescue trapped/injured birds.
 
The addition of the truck helps in faster bird rescues while prioritising the safety of the birds and rescuers alike. The vehicle is equipped with a hydraulic machine with a retractable bucket; rescuers could stand inside the bucket and reach out to the branches. Depending on the height of the rescue in point, the machine could be set accordingly, to either go high or stay low.
 
The truck is dedicated to all creatures that were killed by the manja thread. “There are times where rescuers can’t scale greater heights. The hydraulic bucket helps in reaching up to 40 feet high. Though the rescuers could climb trees or reach out by using other equipment, there are instances where the rescue gets quite difficult. We need to ensure rescues are safe and smooth too,” said Jayanthi Kallam, executive director, ARRC.

 . 
On an average, ARRC rescues 7-8 birds entangled in manja during peak season, but sometimes the rescue volume may go as high as 15 rescues per day. In the past three months, ARRC rescued 1,000 birds, out of which 400 were entangled in manja.
 
“It is not how people think — that after rescuing, everything’s fine. The bird goes through a lot of struggle if it is injured or dehydrated. While it is stuck in the manja, 
the bird struggles as often it hangs upside down for days. Some eventually succumb. There are times when a bird dies and its chicks are orphaned; they die too without food,” said Kallam.

Kallam pointed out that while the use of manja has comparatively come down, it has not vanished altogether. “In July last year, we saw 500 cases of rescues concerning kite manja; now the numbers have dropped. We need to see it further diminishing. We carry out drives in shops to check whether the owners are still stocking up manja thread; it has relatively come down though. Only a few shops are still selling it. People should take note of the fact and say no to manja, which would save many birds from injuries and death,” she added.