The erstwhile royal family must meet all guidelines if it wants to use an elephant for the baraat
 
 
 	The erstwhile Mysore royal family seems to be feeling the pinch of the guidelines issued by the ministry of environment and forests regarding elephant.
 As part of their longstanding royal tradition, the Wadiyar family has applied for permission to bring an elephant named Jaya from Tamil Nadu for the wedding of the niece of Maharajkum-ari Kamakshi Devi (late Srikantadatta Narasimha-raja Wadiyar’s sister) with the prince of Rajkot on January 21 and January 22 in Bengaluru.
 	  	The application of the family — which has a custom of using elephants at the baraat —is being vetted thoroughly by Karnataka’s forest department to see if it meets the MoEF guidelines.
 For the record, the forest department has not given permission for elephants to be brought to Bengaluru in the past year. To deny permission, it has cited Section 40 (2) of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act which says no person shall acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport any animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II… except with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden (CWW) or the authorised officer. Citing the same section, the CWW of Maharas-htra had on December 8 passed an order banning movement of elephants on foot in urban areas in Maharashtra.
 	  	The Wadiyars have attac-hed a permission letter gra-nted by the TN forest dep-artment. The office of the Governor of Karnataka has also recommended that the state forest department consider granting permission. However, a forest department official said, “The proposal is not considered so far as it doesn’t fulfil MoEF specifications. Though the Raj Bhavan has endorsed the application, rules won’t be bent. Till date, the application does not meet MoEF specifications.”
 	  	Vinay Luthra, CWW and principal chief conservator of forests, told Bangalore Mirror: “Our stand is very clear. We will give permissions as per the guidelines issued by MoEF, which state that the elephant must have a renewal of ownership certificate that was issued in the last five years. After inspecting the place where it will stay in the city, and ascertaining whether it will get adequate food and security, we will consider the application. If the applicant meets all the requirements, permission will be granted, otherwise no.” 
 Deepak Urs, a close associate of Maharajkumari Kamakshi Devi, is pursuing the matter with the forest department. He is confident that permission will be granted. He said, “It’s not that the elephant will be walked on the road. It will be in the palace. We are trying to get a fitness certificate, a veterinary certificate and other documents for the elephant we are planning to use. In case we do not get it (permission), it will be unfortunate. The family will then use cars.”
 	
 	
 	 		MoEF GUIDELINES ON ELEPHANTS
 		
 		 			No elephant should be made to walk for more than 30km; vehicle should be used for transportation over 30km
 			 		 			 The animal should get 12 hours of rest for every 12 hours of journey by truck
 			 		 			Each elephant must be ensured a minimum floor area as specified 
 			 		 			a) weaned calf (height below 1.5 m): 5m X 2.5m  		 			b) Sub-adult elephant (height 1.5 to 2.25m): 7m X 3.5m 		 			c) Adult elephant (height above 2.25m): 9m X 6m 		 			d) Cow elephant with unweaned calf: 9m X 6m
 			 		 			Each elephant should be fed thus
 			 		 			a) Below height of 1.5m (weaned calf): Not less than 100 kg 		 			b) 1.5m to 1.8m: Not less than 150kg 		 			c) 1.81 to 2.25 m: Not less than 200kg) Above 2.25m: Not less than 250kg