By R Prashanth Vidyasagar
 
 Stri Svara, an innovative music project by city youths, is bringing together artistes from across the world to the forests of br hills, and all via crowd-funding
 
 When it comes to music, spoken language has little value. And Arun Sivag and Subhash Gowda, founders of citybased social sector youth organisation Treeonz, are tapping into just that.
 
 The two are bringing together women artistes and musicians from around the world to connect, collaborate and create. This unique project, Stri Svara, will see this women work with the Soligas of nique project will be bringing together women from various backgrounds, to work with the women of the Soliga tribe from BR Hills.
 
 The 18-day project will have musicians residing at BR hills as they discover each other’s cultures, interests, music etc. This workshop will culminate in a five-day concert in Bengaluru and Mysore, which will begin on September 23 in the city.
 
 Stri Svara comes with a twopoint agenda. One to create a social impact and a sense of equality among women irrespective of their backgrounds, and the other is craft a new wave of original music. The international musicians taking part in this project are Sara Illana (Spain), Larisa Ljungkrona and Maja Swedén (Sweden), Shirjana Thapa Pariyar (Nepal), and Jenavieve Varga (USA). The participants from India Kalyaani Sakkarwal, Sangeetha Ravindranath, Simran Ayyana, Amarapali Shinde, and Radhika George joining forces with the Soliga participants Bhagya, Kavya, Manjula, Padma and Uma. The organisers have G Malleshappa, honorary wildlife warden of the four wildlife s a n c t u a r i e s i n t h e Chamaranagara district (BR Hills, Bandipur National Park, Malaymahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary, and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary), to thank for playing a pivotal role in shaping this project.
 
 Malleshappa not just shares a great rapport with the tribals but has contributed enough and more towards the conservation of forests, and help develop the local communities there. “He is the one who told us about the rich culture of the tribals of BR Hills, and how music plays an important role in their lives. That is what got us interested in starting a project for women musicians,” says Sivag.
 
 Though fabulous on paper, putting together a project such as this requires funds. So the duo took to crowdfunding via Milaap to raise the required $10,000 (`6.7lakh approximately). So far they’ve managed to raise about $3,000 (`2lakh approx). “Stri Svara will allow the participants to come across diverse musical approaches through workshops facilitated by experts focusing on cultural engagement, collaborations, and modern technology. As an impact we are looking forward to the formation of a bond between urban and rural India with the rest of the world in terms of music and empowerment of women musicians,” says Malabika Brahma, curator of the project. Ljungkrona, one of the musicians from Sweden, adds, “I cannot wait can’t wait to go to B.R hills meet the Soliga women, experience their music and nature there” says Larisa from Sweden.
 
 
 The tribal women who are part of this initiative have grown up with music as part of their lives. “We have never learnt music professionally, and this is an opportunity to see how professionals work; we are a bit nervous as this can be quite challenging.
 
 We also look forward to presenting our songs and learning theirs,” says Padma. Another interesting albeit tiny part of this project is that the host families, who will be taking care of the residents of the projects, will be paid for their services.
 
 This could pave the way for many others to use music as an effective tool to not just build a bond with vanishing arts and tribes but also to support them as and when possible. Collaborating artistes on this project include city-based rapper Karthik Sundar aka Gubbi and Sanjay Khyapa from Kolkata, whereas singer/ actress Vasundhara Das will function as a mentor.