By Reya Mehrotra

Monkey menace has reached epic proportions, say residents who have to use water guns, laser beams and nails on walls to keep themselves safe

At any time of the day, Sai Colony in Whitefield remains mostly deserted – not unlike a conflict zone. In fact, residents usually don’t walk out of their homes unarmed. Water guns, laser beams and small sticks are always kept handy. The tension here between humans and monkeys – both long-term residents of the locality – is palpable. But things have come to a head now, say residents.

Ashish Mohanty, a resident of Sai Colony, told BM that he had to send his ailing father to a relative’s place in Orissa because he got allergies from monkey faeces and urine falling on their house.

“My father is a cancer patient and catches infections easily. 

I live in one of the houses in the corner of the society where the most number of monkeys reside. 

They defecate outside our houses, sometimes even inside our boundaries. We are vulnerable to all kinds of infections, especially during the monsoon as it gets mixed with water. They also defecate in our water tanks,” he says. Mohanty says a number of people have relocated because of the monkey menace. Others are doing what they can to protect themselves. “I have covered the back of my house completely with green shade now.” 

Residents say that monkeys here are ferocious and growing in number. They’ve been around for almost a decade now. But what bothers them most is that their houses are perpetually covered in faeces and urine falling from above. As a preventive measure, many houses in the colony are now huge asymmetrical hidden structures, covered from top to bottom in plastic tarpaulin and green shade.

NOT SOLUTION YET

The residents have long been requesting the BBMP and other authorities to relocate the monkeys to nearby forests. But that hasn’t worked.

Most monkeys, they claim, are found at Sathya Sai Baba Gokulam ashram that also has a Hanuman temple.

A resident, who stays at the corner-most house in Sai Colony, near the Sai Baba Gokulam water tank, has sleepless nights and an injured arm, because of the monkeys.

“I stay alone with my 76-year-old mother. I have not been able to work as I am afraid to leave my mother alone with such ferocious monkeys around. My nights are spent shooing them away with water guns and laser beams,” she said.

ORIGINAL RESIDENTS?

Decades ago, Sai Colony was a forest area, was originally a place where monkeys and other animals lived, however, as the area developed many animals were displaced.

Apart from the ashram, a private paying guest (PG) accommodation in the colony is another resting, breeding place of monkeys. The PG premises, in fact, has piles of monkey faeces. The residents have been complaining to the PG owner for a year now, but instead of helping, he threatened them with dire consequences.

A resident says: “We have been asking the BBMP and local leaders to help relocate the monkeys; but nobody takes notice. At least three people from our colony whom I know have moved out because of the problem.”

However, the PG owner, on repeated requests, did install thorns/nails around the boundaries of the PG to keep monkeys away. But even this hasn’t helped much.

“Monkeys snatch our bags sometimes to find eatables. A few days ago, a friend of mine visited the temple to offer some fruits. A monkey snatched all the fruits from her and kept it in front of the idol in the temple. I stay in Sai Colony extension so there are fewer monkeys near our homes as compared with the houses near the ashram. It is only when we visit the temple that we come across them,” says Suganthi Rajesh, a homemaker. 

OTHER AREAS TOO

Not only Sai colony but even Golden Blossom Apartments in Kadugodi nearby has monkey menace. In the last four years, the situation had become so tense that many people refused to rent or buy houses in the apartments. The residents took charge and increased the security and the situation has somehow been brought under control this year.

Suman Nagpal, a property dealer who stays at Signature Tower, Golden Blossom Apartments, says: “Signature Tower has the most number of monkeys in all the apartments in Golden Blossom. Since our security guards started bringing langurs and tightened security, there are fewer monkeys this year. 
The problem had become so common that whenever people came to buy or rent a flat here, many would refuse witnessing the monkey menace.”

SO, WHAT’S THE SOLUTION?

Wildlife experts are against the idea of relocation and say depriving them of their habitat would not solve the purpose. Anindya Sinha, primatologist, National Institute of Advanced Studies, says: “There have been very few cases where people have caught infection because of monkey faeces. In many parts of our country, people do share areas with monkeys. If the case is severe, people must use window meshes and make sure that homes do not become food sources for monkeys. Windows and doors must be kept closed so that they don’t steal food from homes. Domestic waste must not be kept in the open. You must not try to shoo them away by throwing stones at them as this would only provoke them. A good practice is to not make eye contact. Relocation is a bad idea as they might return or not be able to adjust in the new surroundings.”