Glass-coated Chinese thread used to fly paper kites is bringing down real ones

The skies are getting crowded during the pandemic. This is because kite flying has become quite the obsession with few opportunities for other forms of entertainment. But the down side of this is that the Chinese manja thread used in kite flying, which is often coated with finely powdered glass, is lethal to birds. While the glass coating is used to cut the thread of the opponent’s kite, birds have become collateral damage in this game of kites.

Rescue volunteers say there have received 110 SOS calls in the last 10 days related to birds trapped in ‘Chinese manja’, called so because this manja is imported from China.

On Thursday, at around 11 am, wildlife activists got a call that a crow had been entangled in manja thread at the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) premises, at a height of about 50 feet above the ground. Ladders brought by fire personnel did not help them reach the crow. On Thursday, a kite was rescued at Cubbon park while a crow was rescued from Malleswaram.

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Rajesh Kumar, an honorary wildlife rescuer from the BBMP Forest Cell said, “It has been a challenging time for us as we have been rushing to various parts of the city to rescue birds. Many children have taken to flying kites, especially now. And despite the ban on the glass-coated manja, they use it to fly kites. Manja is a silent killer. Since September 1, BBMP has received 110 calls, with north and west zones accounting for 25 cases each, followed by 20 cases in East zone, 15 each in south and Dasarahalli zones and 10 cases in Bommanahalli.

Kumar said that the National Green Tribunal has already banned the nationwide usage of manja. The state government too has banned its usage since 2014. Yet, it continues to be used. According to him, more than 120 people have died in the country after they were cut by manja thread. “In Bengaluru, many birds including mynah, owls, black kites and pigeons have become victims of Chinese manja. Last week, we received a lot of calls from Rajajinagar and Malleswaram from where white-cheeked barbets, barn owls and black kites were rescued.”

Kumar also added that parents need to monitor their kids as these manja threads can injure their kids too. “We know that birds are in danger but children can become victims of manja injuries too. It’s better to use cloth threads instead of nylon, glass-powder coated manja,” he added.