By Garima Prasher

More and more kids are opting for nature camps and outdoor sessions to mitigate isolation and the damage done by lockdown learning

The covid-19 lockdown and subsequent isolation felt by many school-going children has led to a boom in nature-based courses and animal therapy sessions in the city. Many are opting for education camps and animal sessions which involves teaching children outdoors, usually amid nature.
 
“The increase in demand for nature camps and forest trails has more than doubled now. While we used to have about 15-20 students in every forest camp and around 40-50 students per course, it has now gone up to around 50 students per camp and over 150 students per course,” said Jai Sharma, National Geographic-certified nature and wildlife educator.
 
According to Jai, the pandemic has taught us the importance of nature and being outdoors. Parents are recognizing the need for the children to understand the same and are enrolling them in such classes.
 
“Understanding nature and how it works is the need of the hour. Parents are motivated. They have realised the importance of nature and want their children to have this understanding as well. We educate children while on outdoor camps and nature trails. Although, for very young children, we have been conducting virtual live forest trips and teaching them the importance of biodiversity and nature,” added Jai.
 
The covid-imposed hiatus has also pushed children towards outdoor activities with animals, including horse-riding sessions.
 
“We have been getting children in the age group of 5-12 for horse riding classes in good numbers. There are some bolder parents who are sending their kids with all covid-19 precautions in place. They say that children are bored being at home,” said Subhadra Cherukuri, founder partner, Wag-ville, an animal therapy centre in the city.

  Parents have realised the importance of nature and want their children to have this understanding as well–Jai Sharma, nature and wildlife educator 

Parents happy 
Parents say that these outdoor programmes are opportunities for the children to mingle with other kids after being isolated for two years.
 
“The children were isolated for the last two years. My son always had interest in extracurricular activities and used to go for skating and chess sessions before the pandemic struck. However, it all came to a grinding halt, and he was locked in for the longest of times. We got to know about a nature-based course and decided to enrol him for the classes. I thought he would get an opportunity to mingle with other kids. The camp turned out to be very beneficial and informative. For him, it was like a lease of new life,” said Rohini Poornachandra, a parent.
 
According to Srinivas Patnaik, another parent, the outdoor activities and nature courses during the lockdown period have helped children explore various aspects of nature. These sessions acted as ways for the kids to connect with nature, gain knowledge and stay curious about how our ecosystem works.
 
“My daughter was always interested in nature. After a few months of attending a couple of nature trails and forest camps, she has developed interest in observing moths and birds in our backyard. She has also started observing butterflies and their interaction with plants and other animals,” said Patnaik.