A forum of environmentalists across Karnataka on Friday has highlighted the reluctance of the state government in addressing poaching issues in the Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple (BRT) tiger reserve and Bandipur tiger reserve.
 
In a press conference organised by the United Conservation Movement, the members raised the issue saying while multiple letters have been written to the government over the last few years to probe a poaching case that took place seven years ago, no action has been taken so far.
 
UCM members allege that in 2015, a tiger was shot dead in Tamil Nadu, and its body parts were recovered from the BRT tiger reserve in Karnataka. A forest offense case was filed and the accused that were caught with tiger body parts red-handed were produced in a local court in Chamrajanagar. However, the accused have been set free.
 
“The accused managed to move the case to Madras High Court citing the reason that the tiger was shot in Tamil Nadu. After some time, the Madras court disposed of the case stating it is infructuous. Post that, we have been writing to the Karnataka government for years to take up the case at Karnataka High Court and ensure that the accused are put behind the bars. We were told that the Forest, Ecology, and Environment Department of the state government is looking into the matter. However, no action has been taken so far,” said Joseph Hoover, president of UCM and former member of the State Wildlife Board.
 
The forum also alleged that while no action has been taken against poachers and their accomplices in the given case so far, farmers and forest settlers in the areas have been arrested frequently for similar or lesser offenses.
 
“We lost a national animal and its body parts were discovered with the accused. We have written multiple letters to the chief minister’s office but to no avail. The Karnataka Forest Department has also not taken any action due to some pressure. At the same time, when they catch a tribal who has snared a deer, the person is immediately put in jail. We want the government to look into the matter and support the Forest Department along with honest officials. It is the government’s prerogative to act and pursue this case afresh in the Karnataka High Court,” said Hoover.