Public figure says she had rescued monkey, would release it when its injuries are healed

High drama prevailed when rescue volunteers of the People for Animals (PfA) Hospital went to rescue a Bonnet Macaque that was kept confined at a house belonging to a film director and actor in Banashankari recently. The volunteers had received information that a three-year-old monkey was kept chained to a grill in the house, and even videos were circulating on social media of the monkey wandering in the surroundings with the chain from its waist.

As soon as the volunteers reached the house, they learnt the house belonged to Roopa Iyer, a public figure, film director, actor, choreographer and model, who objected to them taking away the monkey. The volunteers had to call up their seniors who informed the local Chennammanakere Achukattu police who escorted the volunteers and managed to successfully rescue the monkey and take it to PfA near Kengeri.

However, Iyer said she too has been running a trust for 17 years where her volunteers and she had rescued several injured animals, treated and rehabilitated them and released them into the wild. She called up the district commissioner and the forest officials she knew and there was pressure on PfA to hand over the macaque to her.

However, the chief vet surgeon of PfA Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff escalated the matter to the Member of Parliament (MP) Maneka Gandhi who rang up the forest officials (an ACF and an RFO) who had asked PfA to return the monkey and reminded them about the norms according to the Wildlife Protection Act. “The monkey was kept captive - chained on its waist for at least three months. The place where the monkey was tied up was full of filth. According to the Wildlife Protection Act, it is illegal to keep the monkey captive,” Navaz said.

Iyer visited the PfA hospital at least twice to see the monkey. “Once she was allowed to see the monkey and she fed it with dried fruits which we would not allow, but when she arrived the next week, we did not allow her,” said a staff from PfA.

Iyer told Bangalore Mirror that she too was a wild animal rescuer. “This is not the first time I am rescuing a monkey. The monkey was injured and it used to roam around in our colony. I had kept it captive until it recovers after which I would leave it with other monkeys near the temple or a forest,” she said. She insisted that has been doing this for a while and that it was not mandatory that all the rescue activities have to be carried out by PfA. “There are other NGOs and veterinary hospitals where rescue and rehabilitation can happen,” Iyer said. “There are several complaints against PfA, including mine which we will submit to the authorities soon,” she claimed.