Karnataka bids fair to be the spoilsport among Indian states in matters of conservation. Putting a spoke in international and national projects aiming to conserve its own heritage and wildlife resources has become something of a habit for its bureaucrats and political leaders. In recent times, the state government has opposed inclusion of the western ghats in Unesco’s list of world heritage sites, and has stonewalled the western ghats ecology authority proposed by the Centre. Last year, it invoked the wrath of the Centre when it allowed mining in some blocks of the Bandipur and Chamarajnagar reserve forests. 
 Now, chief minister D V Sadananda Gowda has gone where his own officials would not have dreamt of treading. He has announced that Project Tiger in the Kudremukh tiger reserve has been axed, and has written to the Centre to drop Project Tiger in the contiguous Bhadra reserve. This, despite Karnataka currently basking in the national and international limelight as the Indian state with the largest population of the grandest of the big cats.
 
 On Monday, the chief minister told a public meeting at Kuppalli in Shimoga district that people living within the Bhadra and Kudremukh reserves “should not worry about the Project Tiger”. He reportedly said, “The government has given up Project Tiger and I have personally written a letter to the Centre to drop the project. People need not fear that their livelihood will be affected by the project.” When Bangalore Mirror sought his clarification on the issue after he inaugurated the R-Day flower show at Lalbagh on Friday, Gowda declined comment.  
 Forest officials are incredulous at the import of the chief minister’s statement. A senior forest official said, “Whatever be the pressures, we will ensure that the area remains a tiger reserve. As things stand, the number of tigers is on the rise, and if we give up the project now, it will end up in a conservation fiasco like the elephant corridors that the state has not been able to consolidate. We will convince the government and the chief minister of the importance of retaining the Centre-approved reserve.” 
 While the welfare of tribals and other dwellers in the Bhadra-Kudremukh area is being cited to justify the government’s pull-back on Project Tiger, conservationists see a political motive, given that the Udupi-Chikmagalur Lok Sabha by-poll is around the corner. It is suspected that the chief minister’s remarks were influenced by pressure from BJP MLAs of the Malnad region, which falls within the tiger reserve. 
 A Congress leader said, “Earlier, the government said ‘no’ to the world heritage site tag for the western ghats when the rest of the country was all for it. Now, when the Centre is willing to grant more funds for tiger conservation, the government is adopting a negative stand. They are afraid that eviction of people from these protected areas would endanger their vote bank. They must not think only in terms of electoral politics but from the conservation point of view as well.” 
 A leading Bangalore-based conservationist and researcher on tigers said, “It could be because of the vested interests of local MLAs. But the government should not let it affect conservation efforts. Project Tiger will benefit the state both in terms of additional funds and a growing reputation at the national and international levels. If they do not want a heritage tag for the western ghats, well and good. But they should not turn down Project Tiger in the same way.”
   The Bhadra tiger reserve was formed way back in 1951 by the then Mysore government as the Jagara Valley Wildlife Sanctuary. In 1974, after a meticulous survey, additional areas were added to it and the area was renamed the Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary. Last year, the Centre approved the inclusion of the Kudremukh National Park in the Bhadra sanctuary and brought it under Project Tiger as the 41st tiger reserve in the country. However, there has been no Central notification on the Kudremukh inclusion so far. 
 
 
 Karnataka’s loss
 » Declaration of Project Tiger would ensure funds from the Union Government » Staff salary, maintenance of the area, development of surrounding villages is covered within the funds » Ensures no financial burden on the state » No forcible eviction of tribals from the core area