‘Kookaburra sits on the old gum tree, merry merry king of the bush is he…’ we sang as our Matador van wheezed and groaned up the steep inclines of the Nilgiris. We were too young to realise we weren’t anywhere near Kookaburra territory, where the strange alien looking trees we were seeing came from. We weren’t old enough either, to realise that as pretty as the old Eucalyptus plantations of the Nilgirs looked, they stood on virgin forest land that the British planters had cleared for them. 
 
 
 Eucalyptus trees were first planted up in the Nilgirs on an experimental basis in the 1850s. They’d already been planted in other parts of the world for their timber value, though. They took to the milder climes of India with relative ease and soon became hugely useful as a hardwood supply for railway sleepers. The Nilgiris experiment rapidly spread to other parts of India. The forest department too, promoted Eucalyptus plantations extensively until the 1990s, touting them as the best cash crop that could be raised on barren and fallow land. There are distinct advantages to planting Eucalyptus trees, of course. They are quick revenue for a poor farmer who can’t grow much else on his or her land. A one hectare Eucalyptus plantation can yield close to a hundred tonnes of timber in eight years, compared to say, a teak plantation that needs at least thirty years to come to full maturity.
 
 
 The downside however is that they are hungry, thirsty trees that suck up all the ground water, killing off most of the natural flora around them. Back home in Australia, Eucalyptus trees have symbiotic relationships with a host of insects, birds, bats and possums. Australia’s cuddliest marsupial, the Koala, spends its entire life on the branches of Eucalyptus trees, subsisting almost entirely on their leathery, aromatic leaves. In India, however, the trees are of little use to the natural fauna. This makes a Eucalyptus plantation a zoological desert of sorts, causing long term damage to the wildlife around.
 
 
 But as reluctant as I am to admit it, I do have a soft corner for these stately trees. I feel sorry that they are treated so poorly in India, being axed down for timber at a moment’s notice, with no respect given to the years they spent growing where they were forcibly planted. The aromatic leaves and bark of the trees remind me of my childhood, my school yard and the plantations around my home in Andhra. Their straight white trunks standing tall against the other trees around them, are a beautiful sight to behold. 
 
 
 So are their feathery white flowers, shaped like tiny little powder puffs, that rain down passers below. 
 
 
 If all these facets of this ancient Australian tree appeal to you, then plant one in your yard and watch it grow into a huge towering tree in a matter of years. Or at least, visit a tree at a nearby plantation and give it the love and respect that it deserves.