Transport dept makes 30km/h the speed limit in protected areas

Accidents affect not just humans but animals as well, but animals are have hardly any legal immunity from speeding vehicles. Realising that the state has been losing too many animals to accidents, the transport department has put a spoke in the wheel of speeding vehicles, especially around protected areas of the state. 

Following a petition by the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), the transport department has ordered that no vehicles should operate at more than 30 km per hour in and around the protected areas.

Even though the order has been strictly implemented in Chamarajanagar district where maximum number of National and state highways intersect forest areas, soon the order will be applicable to rest of the protected areas across the state, according to sources in the KFD. Interestingly, Sanjay Gubbi, member of the State Wildlife Board had submitted a detailed proposal to the KFD after collecting details of animal casualty across Chamarajanagar. Based on Gubbi’s study, the KFD had urged the transport department to come out with an order reducing the speed limit.

Acknowledging the move, C Jayaram, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, said that it will be followed in all protected areas. “The density of vehicles has increased alarmingly in recent times. Similarly, the wildlife population has also been on steady rise. We have the highest population of tigers and elephants in the country besides salubrious population of herbivore and omnivores. But none of us realise that amidst shrinking habitat of the wildlife, animals’ lives are at risk and continue to race with each other especially while passing through the wild. This has resulted in frequent road kills forcing us to work with the transport department to curb such trend,” Jayaram explained.

Interestingly the buses belonging to Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) have also been involved in road kills killing several deers, snakes and other mammals. Taking note of damage caused by KSRTC buses, members of the Vanajagruthi Wildlife Team —Santosh and Mahadevaprasad - petitioned the divisional controller of KSRTC to instruct all buses plying through forest areas to operate at 30-km speed. Accordingly the KSRTC has also instructed all its buses not to cross the speed limit while passing through forest areas.
Acting on the petitions, the transport department and KSRTC have now reduced their speed limits to 30 km per hour on Gundlupet-Ooty Road (NH-67), Chamarajanagar-Hasanur Road (NH-209, Gundlupet-Sultan Bathery Road (NH-767), Palar-Gopinatham Road and other roads leading towards Tamil Nadu and Kerala cutting through dense forests.