By Harish Kumar Tunga

Necessity is the mother of all invention. And scientists are proving that, time and again. This time, scientists at Zonal Agricultural and Horticultural Research Station, Brahmavar, Dakshina Kannada, have been working on advanced humanoid scarecrows which can turn 360 degrees.
 
These humanoid creations have sensors fitted at the neck. These sensors can quickly identify any suspicious movement in the nearby areas and alert the speakers which will create the sound of lions or other carnivores to scare away the intruders. The humanoid will also have a torch where the flashlight will be beamed across so that the intruding animal feels that it is not actually a scarecrow but a real human. This humanoid will be powered by solar power and can keep a tab on four thousand square feet of area. The centre’s scientist Dr Shankar said that they had come up with a cost-effective solution as they were getting repeated complaints of animal attacks in the farms.
 
Fake tigers to scare away monkeys
 
With monkey menace spreading all across the state, many of the residents are now going for tigers to safeguard themselves as well as produce. While some are going for paper tigers, others are relying on tiger-shaped stuffed animals.
 
Many houses in Bengaluru and Kolar district have also kept an image of a tiger as the monkey menace is at high. Officials of the Mutts say that these stuffed animals do the trick.
 
Sriharsha, a college student living in the city’s outskirts said: “Most of the residents here have been buying stuffed animals like tigers. We keep them on cars, terrace and farm lands. Believe it or not, it seems to be working for us.”
 
Meanwhile, a meeting was held recently in the Maland region on how to tackle the monkey menace. Following suggestions from experts, the villagers in and around Mudigere taluk have been putting up tiger banners all over. The banners are printed in such a way that the tigers are shown attacking the monkeys and they claim that it has met with initial success. The local coffee growers too have said that as their coffee produce is about to be harvested, monkeys have become villains and now they are scared of losing their harvest. They say that the monkeys which were earlier in the forests are now moving toward farmlands.
 
However, scientists differ. “Studies show that the stuffed animals and tiger posters have limited success. We have told people that it should be sparingly used. The monkeys are very observant. If they continue to see these posters or animals, they may initially feel that it is a real tiger and escape. However, if this continues for a long time and by chance, they touch these posters or stuffed animals, this may be of no use.”
 
Rajesh, a wildlife rescuer from Bengaluru, said: “We receive three to five calls in a week over monkey menace. In the IT capital, we see bonnet macaque species all over. Usually, they move around in a group with an alpha male or female running the show.”