Believed to have been used by Chatrapathi Shivaji to scale enemy forts, these lizards are now being caught from forest stretches of Karnataka and neighbouring states to meet the growing demand of bizarre human needs.This incident has further escalated the illegal trading of monitor lizards in the city.

In the third recorded case in three months, four Bengal monitor lizards were rescued by the Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Forest Cell and CID Forest Cell sleuths in Banashankari police limits on Sunday morning.

Acting on a tip-off, the officials planned an undercover operation to nab Sandesh and Chandra from the Hakki Pikki tribe. Posing as buyers, two officials scheduled to meet the duo at Banashankari where they were arrested with possession of the animals. On interrogation, they claim to have brought the reptiles into Bangalore from Hosur in Tamil Nadu, according to B Jayaram, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Bangalore South.

Also seized from the duo were tail hair of wild boars, a bottle of monitor lizard blood and fake deer testicles that also have a huge market in the illegal trade circles. Illegal trade of wildlife especially, monitor lizards in the city has become rampant, “There are still not enough measures to curb this flourishing trade.”said Sharath Babu of the BBMP Forest Cell.

Jayaram explains “We need to strengthen the staff and security measures need to be upgraded to put a tab on such illegal activities. The forest areas are vast and covering every inch, without faltering, is something we are battling to achieve. We do have the CID Forest Cell and CoD, among other forces that are working in this regard.”

Then isn’t that all the more reason why such slip-ups cannot be allowed? “These tribesman are extremely knowledgable about the forests and don’t restrict themselves to one place which makes it difficult to catch them,” he said.

This is the third such operation this year. The previous two included:  A raid on a dhaba in Chikkaballapur (January) that served the meat.The team recovered 12 monitor lizards.

The team nabbed members of the Hakki Pikki tribe (early September) who were attempting to sell three monitor lizards at Kaggalipura range in Kanakapura.

In August, a monitor lizard was rescued by the BBMP Forest Cell from a house in Malleswaram. It was presumed that the reptile, brought in to the city for meat, must have slipped out from its captors.

The condition of the monitor lizards will be determined by wildlife veterinarians at a city wildlife rehabilitation centre that they are being shifted to. After necessary treatment and required rehabilitation, Jayaram says they will be released when deemed to be fit by the department experts.

What are Monitor Lizards

Bengal monitor lizards (Varanus bengalensis), Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, grow upto a total maximum length of 1750 mm or 5.74 feet with their tail constituting most part of the length (1000 mm). Also known as common monitor lizards, these are cold-blooded reptiles that store a lot of fat in their tail which enables them to go without food for a long period of time. Olive green or brown in colour, they are at times, seen to have black spots on them and found in deserts as well as evergreen habitats. Widespread in the forests of Karnataka, these burrow dwellers who are also excellent swimmers, feed mostly on snake and bird eggs.

Myth or Reality?
“Myths such consumption of this meat providing super-human powers or that the blood serves as Indian viagra has opened out a market for monitor lizard parts. Their skin is also seen to be used in certain musical instruments,” says Sumanth Madhav, a rescuer with BBMP Forest Cell.