Govt has, in principle, agreed to connect Byrapura and Shishila with a 24-km-long road
 
 	The fragile ecosystem of Western Ghats in Karnataka stands at the precipice of destruction it would seem. Unlike the previous onslaughts of mining and power projects, this time the state’s evergreen forests are facing the axe over a proposed road project. 
 	  	Putting at stake hundreds of acres of untouched evergreen forest, several endangered species of flora and fauna, the government has, in principle, agreed to connect Byrapura (Chikkamagalur) with Shishila (Dakshina Kannada) with a new 24-km-long road as an alternative to the overwhelmed highways through the Shiradi and Charmadi portions of the Western Ghats.
 	  	Even though the project, which will connect the coast to the hinterland is still on the drawing board, unrest against the project is brewing across the serene and calm Malenad area of Karnataka, particularly in Chikkamagalur and Hassan districts. 
 	  	The work on the proposed project is likely to gain momentum after the local body polls and is strongly opposed by green activists and conservationists as it would lead to an ecological catastrophe at a time when the country is pledging its support to the war on climate change. 

 	Government is keen,not green
 	  	 The demand to connect Byrapura with Shishila is not something new; in fact it’s been around for over four decades. Local leaders and various lobbies that thrive in these areas have been exerting pressure on successive governments to convert the existing tiny pathway between two villages into a full-fledged highway, thereby easing the pressure on the Charmadi and Shiradi ghat highways. Source in Mudigere revealed that the pathway was predominantly used during the Raj by locals when there was no access?  to motorized transport.  	Confirming the government’s move to build the road, Mudigere MLA Ningaiah BB told Bangalore Mirror that both the PWD and forest ministers have given assurances in the House that the government supports the project. “The PWD has directed its officials to prepare a detailed project report in this regard and submit the same at the earliest. After the polls, both ministers have agreed to inspect the area in person. Even minister for Sports Abhaya Chandra Jain who represents Moodabidre has also supported the project. When I raised the issue in the recently-concluded assembly session, both the ministers expressed their support for the project,” Ningaiah explained. 

 	Alternative to existing roads
 	  	Explaining the need for an alternate road, Ningaiah said, “There are already two routes through Shiradi and Charmadi ghats. Traffic on both stretches is beyond capacity. Especially, when the Shiradi road was closed to be upgraded there was too much of traffic on Charmadi and frequent accidents involving children, women and senior citizens have been widely reported.  	“With rumours about the stretch again being shut for various reasons since January 2016, Charmadi will face the brunt. Hence, there should be an alternative road to accommodate the traffic and the exiting pathway between these two areas should be developed. If not for heavy vehicles, then at least for LMVs, the project must take off. Initially, it has been estimated that the entire project would cost less than Rs 50 crore. But in turn it will reduce the travel distance between Mudigere and Ujire by 29 km.” 

 	No impact on forest area?
 	  	While green activists and conservationists have expressed shock over the project and strongly criticized the move, local leaders and the government is confident of convincing protestors that there will be no adverse impact on the ecosystem.  “There are two alignments, and both of them leave low impact on forest areas. At the most about five to 10 acres of forest may be affected by the project that too along the fringe. With the road, it will only add to the development, which is inevitable. Once the road is laid, tourism and business will get an impetus. People would come to see the beauty of the forests. More than anything, the people of three districts will benefit from the new route. I am aware of the unrest and will convince all of them. We too are born in forests and are aware of their importance. We are hopeful that even the z protesters will join hands with the government,” Ningaiah said. 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	 

 	Five years of controversy 
 	  	The road project courted controversy five years ago when a similar decision was taken at the time. DV Girish, a naturalist who had previously fought against the Kudremukh mining project and is now against the road project, said, “The decision will spell disaster for the unique flora, fauna and fragile ecosystem considered to be rare on this planet. The entire stretch is a reserve forest. More than 50,000 trees will be axed. In fact, in 2010, earth movers cleared forests for three to four kilometers, widening the existing path. However, the work stopped after villagers and locals strongly protested by flocking to the site in large numbers,” Girish explained.  	Taking a dig at thriving lobbies behind the project, Girish said, “The project is nothing but the result of lobbying by the timber and contract lobbies. While timber traders find it easy to gain access to the forest to cut trees on the pretext of laying roads, the contractor lobby feels secure that once the road is laid, it will frequently milch money in the name of asphalting, upgradation, etc. Already there is a power corridor and MRPL pipeline along the periphery. Now, if the road comes through, then god only can save such a rare ecosystem.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	 

 	A false distance 
 	  	While the government and local leaders are trying to convince people and protesters that the project will reduce travel time, nobody is buying the theory. In fact, some activists have trekked the route and measured the distance. Their observation has revealed that the project will only reduce the distance by three to four kilometers! “Currently the distance between Mudigere and Dharmasthala via Charmadi Ghat is 50 km. If you go by the proposed theory, from Mudigere to Shishila it should be 25 km and from Shishila to Dharmasthala another 20 km, adding up to 45 to 46 km. Even if you agree that the travel distance will come down by five km, then one should ask at what cost?  	“Why would you axe and destroy such a fragile ecosystem for just a five-km reduction in travel time. Can’t it be covered using the two existing roads? Why is the government keen on wasting Rs 50 crore
 	of the tax payer’s money on such a disastrous project, that too when it is reeling under a financial burden,” asked Girish. 
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Veeresh G, Chikkamagalur-based wildlife conservationist said, “The area receives an annual rainfall of more than 300 cms. How can one take up a construction project in such a wet place? By cutting trees and ploughing through the forest the small streams and rivulets that drain into Nethravathi River are affected. At a time when people are upping in ante against Yettinahole, isn’t the government aware of the destruction caused by laying a new road? Fortunately, the forest department has not yet given its consent for the project.”  	Activists and conservationists have already petitioned to the government about the impact of the project on forest and local area and planning to aggravate the protest in the coming days.