It was an impulsive decision. With lots of cajoling from the kids, a lean on from the wife, Independence Day holidays to encourage, and the hope of a receding recession and better salary increment, we decided to indulge in a holiday in the hills. We Googled for a quaint place and zeroed in on Bison Country, a home stay in Coonoor, set amidst tea gardens, sholas (tracts of forested land) and a full blown reserve forest.  

We reached Bison Country and settled into Horns - our cottage. A quick check on ""What's on Offer"", we came across Hoofs, Stocking, Den, Raliah Cottage, Pasture - our dining area. With real low clouds drifting through our bay window we settled in for our two-nights-three-days stay. It was a true home stay, very unintrusive, yet exceedingly warm. A small trek behind the property had us navigating through tea bushes, a thick shola. At times we were gripped with an are-we-lost thought, but a quick reference check on the mobile tower on a nearby crest gave us the assured feeling.  

The evening was spent around a bonfire with our hosts — the old colonel kept us enthralled with his anecdotes from Sri Lanka, J&K, Indonesia, and Philippines. We even got to pit our vocal chords against his wife Ruksana at karaoke.  

The next morning we got our camping chairs, walking sticks, packed lunch and headed to Raliah Reserve Forest, a nice pleasant 30-minute walk. As forests go this one has a thick growth and in pristine condition. Jungle fowl were out early to get to the proverbial worm. We even saw the butt end of a mother and her piglets, disappearing in the undergrowth. Located in the reserve forest is a lake, a source of water for Coonoor. At the end is Raliah Dam, constructed by the British in 1930s. As if on cue, a pair of Malabar Squirrel with their rich chestnut coat, scampered in the canopy above us, supposedly to greet us, more likely looking for scraps for snack. We managed to keep our excitement under control when we spotted a herd of Bison drinking at the lake. Their sheer size was awesome and the intervening 300 yards was a comfort. Between the stocking legs we also saw a young calf.

We spent three hours slowly walking around the lake, happy in the thought that we had spotted all the wildlife but had yet to come across a single human being. After a slow lunch on the lake side, lubricated with canned beer, we left our squirrel hosts lots of snacks and moved ahead to return on a different route. This one was unchartered and in single file behind the colonel we crashed through tea bushes, skirting the forest. It was tough going. The tea stumps drawing an occasional scratch till we struggled on to the hill overlooking Bison Country and the Wellington-Kotagiri road. We spotted a herd of bison about 300 yards on our right grazing between the tea bushes. After getting in our breath, soaking in the sight from this vantage point, we descended, at times on all four, over shale and loose rocks. Two hours later we walked into Bison Country, exhausted but extremely pepped up with our experience. What a day it had been - never had imagined that we would see all the wildlife, lunch out next to a lake in a thick forest surrounded by frolicking Malabar Squirrel, hear the occasional pop of the carp coming in for a bubble.  

Tired but not yet through, we challenged the kids at carrom, the glow of the setting sun sharply in contrast with the dark hill side and the tea surrounding us. We were then finger-led through the night sky, the Cassiopeia and Great Bear were familiar names now. We even had a peek at Venus through the telescope. The toast of the evening was dinner - French Onion soup, Chicken Supreme, topped with hot bread pudding. The kids, however, were not finished yet. They quickly collected the DVDs from Stocking - reception library - and late into the night Spiderman was swinging from building to building much like Tarzan would have in Raliah Forest.  

A gentle nudge, smell of hot coffee, woke me to the plethora of sound - birds chirping, hen crackling, ducks quacking, a distant call of the barking deer looking for his mate. To top it, our herd of Bison from the previous day, were there on the hill opposite. We took turns to watch them through binoculars while sipping our coffee.  

Before one realises it, we say our byes to our hosts and are driving back to Bangalore - jams, noise, concrete and 12 hour shifts, but carrying some very interesting, wonderful memories.  

The author prefers to discover nature's surprises than man-made ones