All options exhausted, leopard had to be shot, say officials; wildlife experts wonder if situation could have been handled differently

After an intense three-day search operation by officials from Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), the leopard that was spotted near Kudlu Gate in South Bengaluru was shot dead on Wednesday.

According to senior officials, the decision to shoot the leopard was taken after all other options had been exhausted. Officials also said that special permission was sought from the Chief Wildlife Warden before shooting the animal.

Officials say the leopard kept on attacking people during the duration of the operation starting Wednesday morning. Once it was seen around 9 am, it attacked the veterinarian trying to tranquilise it. KFD claims the leopard aimed for the doctor’s neck but the vet escaped with minor injuries. It then attacked another official from the Leopard Task Force (LTF). The official was called from Mysuru for this operation. The third attack was on a representative of a non-government organisation that was supporting the department in the operation. 

Around 2.30 pm, it again came out and charged. “It is very difficult to capture a big cat, especially in a city with high population density and no open spaces. Around 2.30 pm, when it charged again for the fourth time, one of our officials opened fire and the animal was shot dead. We had permission from the Chief Wildlife Warden to shoot the animal if the need arises,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), KFD.

KFD carried out the operation at the spot where the leopard had taken shelter for the last two days. It had taken refuge in an abandoned building with thick bushes on the campus and a godown nearby. Officials had spotted pugmarks and scats in the area over the last three days, but the leopard was finally spotted on Wednesday morning.

Officials told BM the animal had become very aggressive because of so many people around and was not getting an escape route. “We also did not want it to escape as it could have been dangerous to the people around us. Even an earth mover was brought in to dart the animal from up close but we did not succeed,” added Pushkar. After the incident, the body was taken to Bannerghatta Biological Park and a post-mortem was conducted.

“It was an old leopard as it had already lost its canine teeth, which are very important for hunting. It should be around ten years old. Its stomach was empty indicating it had not eaten in the last two to three days. There were talks of it venturing out and picking up stray dogs, but the post-mortem report has proved that was not the case,” said Pushkar. Officials also confirmed that this was the only leopard in the area.

Forest officials carried out the operation at the spot where the leopard had been hiding out for the last two days; a large crowd gathered around complicating the mission further leading to the shoot-out

Experts unhappy
Wildlife conservationists say the department could have handled the situation differently. Citing a video recording of the last few minutes of operation that has surfaced, experts say an experienced team could have led to a better result.

“The video clearly shows that the leopard did not charge before it was shot dead, as claimed by the officials. It was rather running towards the net that was put in place by the department to catch the animal. The moment it surfaced from the thick bush and ran towards the net, it was shot. The video also shows that one of the officials tranquilised the animal even after it was gunned down. There was a mini celebration that took place after the big cat was killed, which is disturbing. Officials were seen congratulating each other. There was no need to shoot it and tranquilisers could have done the job,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.


. 
Experts say it is high time the government reconstitute task forces, whether elephant task force or leopard task force, across the department. Conservationists say an expert with the right background for the job would have reacted differently in the scenario.

“It is time to have a better rescue team at every centre. The LTF has been created loosely, similar to the elephant task forces. These teams have been formed by pulling in people randomly.

It is difficult to capture a big cat, in a city with high population and no open spaces. When it charged for the fourth time, our official opened fire ­–Kumar Pushkar, APCCF
 There is a clear surge in man-animal conflict cases and this operation is a good case in point to ensure there is an experienced team to capture tigers, leopards, bears, and other such animals in conflict situations. LTFs and ETFs should be reconstituted and right people should be brought in. It is not the question of if the leopard could have been saved or not. It is about how one reacts in the given situation that is important,” said Hoover.

However, KFD officials disagreed.
“Our team was well-experienced in handling this operation. The chief conservator of forest along with the deputy chief conservator was present on the spot during the last two days of the operation. Had it been a village, we would not have killed the animal as it would have got an escape route. Here, we were dealing with a densely populated area,” said Pushkar.