Forest officials have been carrying out combing operations in the area for last 10 months
 
 
 It took forest officials 10 months to corner four leopards roaming around the Gulaganjihalli near Tavarekere. This story finally ended when the fourth leopard was rescued on Sunday night.
 	  	The four-day long effort ended when the last male leopard, aged about six years, fell for a bait that authorities had laid out, and it was later released into the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary on Monday evening.
 	  	Residents in the area had last year complained about leopards frequently being spotted in the village. Residents said they feared moving out during late evenings, nights and early mornings due to the big cats’ nocturnal movements. Since then, city forest officials had been carrying out combing and capture operations in the area.
 	  	The first capture of a stray leopard was made in August last year when one, believed to be from the neighbouring forests in Savandurga, Basavantpura and Sulikere, was captured in Gulajanjihalli. It was trapped when it strayed into an abandoned shed. Then in the same village, the city wildlife sleuths captured two more leopards in December. In both these cases, the forest team had laid bait after tracking the movements of leopards.
 	  	A trap was laid last week, after officials spotted and followed the fourth leopard in Gulaganjihalli. Based on witness accounts, authorities were combing the area for the last fifteen days. The leopard was finally led into a cage on Sunday evening, the officers said. They added that it was a relief that there had been no untoward incident involving humans.
 	  	“We have so far rescued four leopards in the same village. The residents frequently lost cattle and dogs. The number of these animals have decreased because of the issue. But they are relieved now. The village has a rocky area around and leopards that live in forest fringes, stray into villages looking for food. Encroachment of their habitat is another important reason behind their migration into city areas. They exist in Devika Rani Estate, Khoday’s Estate, Bannerghatta forests and Sulikere forest areas,” M Nagaraj, range forest officer, Kaggalipura range told Bangalore Mirror.
 	
 	
 	Ten months vigil
 	
 	 		It took forest officials 10 months to corner four leopards roaming around the Gulaganjihalli near Tavarekere 
 		 	 		* The first capture of a stray leopard was made in August last year when one, believed to be from the neighbouring forests in Savandurga, Basavantpura and Sulikere, was captured in Gulajanjihalli
 		 	 		* Then in the same village, the city wildlife sleuths captured two more leopards in December
 		 	 		* The story finally ended when the fourth leopard was rescued on Sunday night