Wildlife enthusiasts have started an online petition on change.org addressing the Government of India demanding a ban on the sale of peacock feather and amendment in the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. They are also planning to start a campaign to create awareness among public about the Schedule I animal. Legal experts will also file a petition in the High Court seeking amendment to the Act. 

This comes after the Karnataka Forest Department let two men caught selling peacock feathers in Vidyaranyapura a few days ago go. The Department has said that they were released as per Section 44 in the Act, which exempts sale of peafowl feathers. But wildlife lovers say it can be presumed that the birds were killed to collect feathers in such large quantities. They say they could have been booked them under Section 57 of the Act which states it can be presumed that the person is in unlawful possession of the article until proven otherwise. 

Sridhar Punati, Karnataka Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF), said peafowl feathers are exempted under Section 44 in the Wildlife Protection Act and that’s why the two men were released. J Manjunath, Hon. secretary, The Wilderness Club, said that this section is a flaw in the law but the Forest department could have booked a case under Section 57 in the Act. “Since it was found in a large quantity, the officials can assume that the birds must have been killed and booked a case against them. The accused can then prove their innocence, if so, in the court,” he said adding that the violators get minimum punishment of three years of imprisonment. 

Rajesh Kumar, founder-trustee of Wild World Conservation Trust said that not all peafowls shed feathers at the same time and they don’t shed them all together. “Each bird has 150 to 200 feathers which weigh 300 grams. A few young ones do not shed for months after breeding season as they wait to mate again. Several efforts were taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to ban the sale of these feathers but it was not successful,” he said.