Parallel to the state government’s promotion of eco-tourism in wildlife rich forests of Karnataka, the state is fast emerging as the most sought after place for hunters and poachers too! Raising concerns among wildlife conservationists and forest officials, Chamarajanagar has turned out to be the heaven for hunters and poachers in Karnataka. Despite the strict ban on hunting or poaching, several districts along with Chamarajanagar have been on top of the list for most number of hunting and poaching cases of wildlife in Karnataka.
 
 
 Recent crackdown by KFD officials on hunters inside Bhadra Tiger Reserve limits
 
 
 This worrying trend was revealed by none other than forest minister B Ramanatha Rai (in pic). In his reply to a question raised by BJP MLC Sunil Subramani in Karnataka Legislative Council, Rai said that in the last three years, about 262 cases pertaining to hunting and poaching have been registered. “The government is in the process of filing charge sheets before various courts and the accused have been remanded in judicial custody.”
 
 Revealing that the arrest of hunters in Bhadra Tiger Reserve limits on New Year eve was a major crack down by the Karnataka Forest Department, Rai said they have left no stone unturned to ensure punishment to offenders in the case. “The accused have applied for bail before the court and we have been arguing against it as they could impact the investigation.”
 
 Rolling out statistics of poaching and hunting in various districts, Rai said a total of 262 cases have been registered till date in the last three years. “Hunting of wildlife for pleasure or for meat is a punishable offence under Indian Wildlife Act (Protection) 1972,” Rai revealed. According to data tabled by the minister, Chamarajanagar has witnessed the highest incidents of poaching and hunting. The district, that boasts of the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, Biligiri Ranga Temple Tiger Reserve and Bandipur Tiger Reserve has witnessed 90 cases of hunting and poaching!
 
 Close on the lines of Chamarajanagar, Shivamogga which is home to Bhadra Tiger Reserve and other protected areas interspersed with evergreen and Shola forest vegetation has witnessed 51 cases so far. Chikkamagaluru district which also shares territory of Bhadra Tiger Reserve along with other protected areas along the Western Ghats revealed 32 such poaching and hunting cases. Uttara Kannada district which has the highest forest cover than any other districts in Karnataka also witnessed 26 cases of poaching and hunting.
 
 A few days ago, forest officials unearthed a network of poachers in Malai Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary limits who allegedly used urea to poison and kill herbivores like Chital and Sambar deer. “The incident came to light when a couple of dogs dragged in a skull of a sambar deer near Nakkundi village in Hoogyam range of the sanctuary. Subsequent investigations revealed the death of the deer by urea poisoning — fertilizer used by farmers. A colourless, odourless and easily soluble urea is added into water. Any animal consumes water mixed with urea experiences increase in blood ammonia levels and dies immediately due to poisoning,” explained a conservation volunteer working at the sanctuary. However, when Bangalore Mirror contacted the KFD wildlife range officials, they denied any such development within their jurisdiction.