Nationwide campaign titled ‘Gaj Yatra’ to highlight the importance of securing right of way for jumbos
 
 In a few weeks a nationwide campaign ‘Gaj Yatra’ will pass through the state. The yatra is being undertaken to highlight the importance of securing passage for elephants.
 
 According to experts, acquisition of 829.5 acres will secure the crucial passage for herds of elephants to pass through without any impediments and thereby help resolve the never-ending elephant-human conflict across the state. The Gaj Yatra is being undertaken by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), the ministry of
 Environment and Forests (MoEF) and several NGOs.
 
 Elephant experts from WTI, Project Elephant under MoEF and other NGOs have identified 101 corridors across the country that require to be protected to ensure a win-win situation for the humans and the elephants.
 
 Interestingly, the number of elephant corridors has increased from a mere 88 to 101 in a decade, reflecting on the salubrious population of pachyderms and also the rising threat to their free movement.
 
 Giving details of the campaign, Vivek Menon, Founder and Executive Director of WTI, said that the campaign was launched in New Delhi in August coinciding with the Elephants’ Day. “It will be a 15-month awareness campaign highlighting the shrinking space for wild elephants and importance of corridors for their passage across 12 states where there is an elephant population. With Bollywood celebrities, corporates, NGOs and state governments taking part in the campaign, it is one of the biggest events planned around India’s wild elephants. The campaign is likely to pass through Karnataka in December-January,” Menon said.
 
 Karnataka is key 
 
 Being home to 6,000-plus elephants, Karnataka is the centre of the campaign. “In Karnataka, 33 forest divisions have elephants and out of the 101 elephant corridors identified, 11 corridors, spanning several hundreds of kilometres, pass through Karnataka. The problem of human-elephant conflict has remained the same. The crux of the problem that affects not just elephants, but the entire wildlife in India is that of access to land.
 
 “A large chunk of the country’s elephant habitat is unprotected and susceptible to encroachment or already occupied by humans. We are aiming at securing these passages with the help of several stake holders for the free movement of elephants,” Menon said.
 
 Previously too several bottlenecks along the elephant corridors, especially under the Bandipur and Nagarahole National Park limits were resolved with the intervention of Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) and philanthropists.
 
 Several acres of land was bought from private parties and added to the elephant corridor, sources said. Experts said that in 16 years, only six corridors have been secured and reclaiming encroached or occupied territory of elephants is a tedious and slow process.
 
 “Of the 11 elephant corridors that pass through Karnataka, four are within the state while the remaining seven interlink the state with other neighbouring states like Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Most of the corridors pass through private coffee and rubber plantations. At a few places, we need to rehabilitate villagers which requires the government’s intervention,” Menon said.