Over the last three days, the mercury level in the city has been rising and on Saturday, the Met Department recorded 3 degrees above the normal temperature. The city’s temperature was between 31 and 33 degree Celsius. Officials said this will continue and the India Meteorological Department (IMD) predicts a harsher summer this year.

Geetha Agnihotri, director-in-charge, IMD Bengaluru said, “Over the last three days, we have been recording above normal temperatures. This is quite normal after Makara Sankranti, but this time it is different as we are seeing a quicker rise in the temperatures. The normal at this time of the year is 27 degrees Celsius. The reason is that there are no clouds so we are receiving direct sun. There are no weather systems currently present which is why skies are cloudless,” she added.

According to the Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring Centre (KSNDMC) temperature records, Bengaluru Urban’s temperature was ranging from 28.10 degree C to 33.60 degree C; Bengaluru Rural was 27.50 degree C to 32.60 degree C and Belagavi was 27.60 degree C to 33.90 degree C.

The IMD’s forecast for the next two days (January 26 and 27) is that there will be fog or mist in the early morning hours in some areas and the maximum and minimum temperatures are likely to be around 30 and 16 degree Celsius respectively.

Dehydrated barn owls rescued from city

The high temperature seem to have affect the city’s birds too Vijay Kumar, resident of Kirloskar Colony, Basaveshwara Nagar, saw a barn own hovering close to perches and being chased by crows and dogs and he immediately contacted Pritham S, researcher and wildlife crime control volunteer. 

Pritham found the bird in a dehydrated state. He says, “The owl was found to be resting at shoulder high places in the area pointing to weakness and also appeared extremely dehydrated. We gave it some water for rehydration. On the morning of January 24, I received another call from the same area regarding the presence of another Barn Owl that was also dehydrated.” Both the barn owls have now been handed to a wildlife rehabilitation centre on Mysore Road for treatment. 

—Reya Mehrotra