Scientists analyse 245 cases of human-leopard interactions across 175 taluks from local dailies
 
 	Scientists from the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) India Program used information from media reports in a novel way in a recent study, revealing information on leopard ecology outside protected areas in Karnataka.
 	  	The study was published in the international journal PLoS One. Titled, Spotted in the news: Using media reports to examine leopard distribution, depredation, and management practices outside protected areas in southern India. It relied on reports of leopards from various editions of Kannada and English newspapers and analysed 245 unique cases of human-leopard interactions across 175 taluks of Karnataka that had occurred between March 2013 and April 2014. Integrating this information with statistical occupancy modelling methods, the scientists Dr Vidya R Athreya, Arjun Srivathsa, Mahi Puri, Krithi Karanth, Samba Kumar and Ullas Karanth examined patterns of leopard distribution, factors determining their presence in human-use areas, patterns and factors associated with livestock and human attacks by leopards, and the implications of their presence across large human-use landscapes in Karnataka. The study also critically evaluated current management interventions that involve capture and translocation of leopards.
 	  	The study indicated that leopards currently occur across 84,000 sq km (about 47 per cent) of the state’s geographical area excluding, national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. Taluks along the Western Ghats, the south-western and south-central regions of the state had highest probabilities of leopard presence. Factors that most likely affected leopard presence in the human-use landscapes were free-ranging dogs, vegetation cover, rocky escarpments and irrigated crop fields. Surprisingly, there was weak correlation between livestock density to leopard presence.
 	  	Contrary to popular belief that capture of leopards is a solution, the analysis indicated that leopard captures (removals) were associated with higher probabilities of leopard attacks on livestock and/or humans. During the 14-month study period, instances of human attacks were rare, accounting for 32 records including three fatalities. The study documented that 91 per cent of these were reactions to livestock attacks or even mere sightings and recommended the capture and translocation of 56 leopards as ‘conflict mitigation’ measure.
 	  	The authors point out that these captures are in contravention to the MoEF guidelines issued in 2011, which require states to shift from reactive management practices to proactive measures that prevent loss of livestock/human lives. It is likely that these captures often violate the Wildlife Protection Act which stipulates that leopards can be captured only when it has become dangerous to human life and not simply because it was sighted.
 	  	Countering current management notions that these leopards have ‘strayed’ from their natural forest habitat, the results establish that there are resident leopards in large parts of human-dominated landscapes especially considering that the study found 19 reports of leopard cubs in agricultural fields, indicating the presence of breeding resident females.
 	  	While their widespread occurrence suggests the presence of a fairly large leopard population across the state, the authors found that threats such as poaching and road kills accounted for the highest number of leopard mortalities in the region.
 	  	The findings suggest the need for drastic change in the approaches and attitudes while dealing with leopards in human-use landscapes. The authors call for change in management approach from reactive conflict redressal that involves capture and translocation, to preemptive measures that ensure safety of people and their livestock. They also appeal for issuing prompt and just compensation for losses caused to prevent retaliations, and large-scale awareness drives to enhance people’s understanding and thereby facilitate acceptance of these adaptable felines.
 	  	“The study highlights the fact that resurgence of large carnivores in human landscapes thanks to increasing human acceptance, now needs to be buttressed by management actions based on research that generates knowledge about their ecology,” said Karanth, director for science (Asia) at the Wildlife Conservation Society.