Animal activists have a tough time rescuing puppy from its owner, who was accused of beating the animal when inebriated

It was a day of drama for animal welfare activists and officials from CUPA when they went to rescue a three-month-old Rottweiler puppy from its pet parent who was allegedly abusing it for a couple of months.
 
The alleged abuse of the pet was happening at the hands of a pet parent at an apartment complex on Andree Road in Shanti Nagar in Central Bengaluru. The pet parents -- an 80-plus ex-serviceman and his son who according to the informer was an alcoholic – would beat up his Rottweiler puppy Floyd on his balcony whenever he was drunk.
 
The informer, a woman living in the neighbourhood recorded the incident. When she screamed at the man to not hit the dog, he asked her to mind her own business. 
The woman then posted the video on social media where it came to the notice of activists and officials from CUPA. Animal activist KB Harish went to the spot and reported the incident to CUPA officials who decided to rescue the puppy. It was a day-long drama at the apartment and the police station where some friends of the pet parents came to claim custody of the Rottweiler and the police and CUPA officials had a tough time convincing them that according to protocol, the pet goes to CUPA-designated foster care homes. A friend of the accused said he was an animal lover who does not abuse any of his pets, but since he had drinking problems, at times he would lose control. But neither the activists nor the cops gave in to the pleas of the friends, and rescued the dog.
 
The activists also found a parakeet at their house - a Red-Ringed Indian parakeet protected under the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. The activists and cops took both the Rottweiler and the parakeet to a foster care home. “Neither the informer nor other neighbours wished to pursue a police complaint against the pet parent,” Harish told Bangalore Mirror.

He doesn’t abuse his pets but since he has drinking problems, he would lose control sometimes–A friend of the accused

Puppy run over
In another incident, a two-month-old Indie puppy was run over by a car near D-Mart in Ramamurthy Nagar, east Bengaluru on the morning of June 8. Though the driver of the car stopped to check what happened to his car, he saw the bleeding puppy and dragged it to a side of the road and decided to leave, when a few onlookers including Gyanesh, a 24-year-old student and his mother requested him to take the injured puppy to the hospital. The driver who seemed to be the owner of the car seemed to have no concern about what he had done. Meanwhile, another onlooker poured water on the dog’s face and realised that it was dead.
 
Gyanesh told the man to give the dog a burial but the man left. He then followed the car on his bike to record the registration plates and when he again asked the driver to give the dog a burial, the accused made an offensive gesture that was caught on camera. Gyanesh then approached the police for filing a complaint, but the cops told him only his complaint on the offensive gesture can be taken up. “I wanted the driver to be prosecuted for the dog’s death,” Gyanesh said.