Palike to take action against sellers too; man injures neck in nylon thread

Due to the choking hazard posed by nylon threads, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike has decided to take action against those selling and using the threads, also called the Chinese manjha or a ‘silent killer’. Palike’s Chief Commissioner Gaurav Gupta said, “Despite a ban on usage of nylon thread, a few are selling it illegally, and now we will take stern action against the offenders.”

His comments came after a video went viral of a middle-aged person who was injured in his neck by a nylon thread. The victim appealed to people to resist using nylon thread. In the video, he said, “I was passing a road near Adugodi police station when a nylon thread encircled my neck. It resulted in a deep cut. I tried to snap the hard thread but injured my fingers in the process. I request everyone to stop flying kites. I almost lost my life; imagine the condition of the birds…I also request every government official to ban the usage of nylon thread.”

As reported by Mirror earlier, flying kites has turned out to be a most popular sport. While there is no harm in flying kites, many are resorting to the usage of nylon thread which is proving fatal to birds. Wildlife rescuers are stating that every day, they are receiving close to 10-15 phone calls about birds being entangled in nylon threads. This needs to be curbed as someone’s fun cannot be fatal for others. Surprisingly, despite the ban, children are now having access to nylon threads.

The national green tribunal has already banned the nationwide usage of nylon thread. The State Government too has banned its usage since 2014. Yet, people continue to use them.

Egyptian Vulture rescued 

On Tuesday evening, People for Animals released one of the rare birds, an Egyptian Vulture… “So rare that it is almost after 10-15 years that we rehabilitated one,” said a source from the NGO.

On May 17, the vulture was spotted in a balcony at Prestige Shantiniketan in Whitefield. Rajesh, a wildlife rescuer, handed it over to PFA. “On being brought to the PFA Wildlife Hospital in Kengeri, our veterinarians found out that it was dehydrated and starved,” the source from PFA said.

“In the beginning, the vulture was not eating so we used our prosthetic feeding tool to feed it. After a couple of weeks of successful rehabilitation, and after observing a successful flight pattern, we, in association with the State forest department, released the bird at the Ramanagara Ramadevara Betta Vulture Sanctuary,” the source said. The forest department and PFA chose this location for releasing the bird because vultures are known to nest on high cliffs.