With adventure-seeking youth wandering into dangerous and forbidden reserved areas, forest department decides to... trek control!
 
 There’s no mountain or valley, gorge or ravine, bush or jungle which has not succumbed to the vigorous footfalls of the trekker.
 
 Worldwide, trekking is considered an adventurous, yet pleasurable recreation, especially popular with youngsters. Yet in Bangalore, for the past few years, many trekkers have either been injured, or have even lost their lives while venturing without adequate preparation into forests and other uncharted territory. To minimise the risk to life and limb, the Forest Department had been playing party pooper, branding trekkers as 'trespassers', and arresting many under provisions of the wildlife protection and conservation acts.
 
 Undeterred, the youngsters continued their trek to the forests, heeding the call of the wild. So finally, realisation seems to have dawned on the keepers of the forests that legalising treks, by providing trails which are exciting, yet safe and tracked by satellites, would be a better way to regulate trekking.
 Starting October-November, around 16 trails will be opened up at various parts of the state and eventually, the Forest Department wants to open up the whole state with trails stretching the distance between Kodagu in the southwest to Castle Rock (near the Karnataka-Goa border in the Western Ghats) in the north-west. A senior forest official said, “We are tired of stopping these trekkers (mainly students and techies) from entering forests. Just as it is impossible to fence the vast expanse of forests, it is difficult to stop a determined trekker from entering them. Our biggest concern is that many of these trekkers who enter the jungle after looking at Google Maps are getting lost. We get a complaint at the last minute, and have to deploy our men to track them which many a time is next to impossible. We are thus following the golden rule. When you ban something, it is certain to attract violations. So the best way to legalise trekking would be by putting in place proper guidelines.”
 
 16 TRAILS IN PHASE-1
 As a first step, trekking trails have been mapped across the state. Around 16 trails with camping facility have been identified. In the first phase, the trails will be located in Kodagu, Kudremukh, and Dandeli ranges. In September, the first batch of certified guides will be trained for the purpose. The guides, who will be selected from among the locals (which will double up as an employment generation programme), will be trained in trekking as well as using GPS (global positioning system) devices. “Henceforth, any trekker venturing into the forest has to log into an online portal. He has to select the trails and pay the fee. The size of each batch will be limited as it is difficult to monitor a large number of trekkers. For example, around 40 trekkers can be accommodated for a 16-km trail. Only a certified guide will take them and their movements will be monitored online by forest officials. This means that all trekkers can be followed on satellite and this will put an end to the current trend of trekkers losing their way. We may tweak the system so that even family members can keep a track on trekkers online,” said Jungle Lodges and Resorts executive director Vijay Mohan Raj. He added that at present, they were extensively studying the trails to match them with available logistics.
 “As of now, many trekkers are taking to it with the intention to shed calories. So we will market the trails in such a way that the calories likely to be shed in each trail will be highlighted,” he added.
 Eventually, these legitimate trails will open all across the state. One criterion used to screen for the phase-1 trails was their location outside the elephant zone. “We are having a trek from Castle Rock (considered the birthplace of Kali river) to Dudhsagar Falls. Though Dudhsagar is one of the splendid falls in Karnataka, many trekkers cannot do that circuit as there is no road connectivity,” said Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests.
 Another forest official added, “The nearest railway station is Castle Rock and many try to jump out of trains near the falls. So we will be having a trek from Castle Rock to Dudhsagar and so on.” He said trekkers have to give an undertaking at the beginning of the trek that they won’t litter. They will be given garbage disposal covers, and have to bring back all the rubbish they generate.
 A Forest Department official said that though a few trails were opened sometime back, they failed to lure trekkers since there was no monitoring mechanism in place. Officials hope that with sufficient planning, the youths will once again heed the call of the wild and head to the forests, but this time through the trails they have cleared.
 
 
 
 Treks into danger
 Trekking had turned too risky of late. It almost took nine months to unearth the skeletons of three city-based trekkers who had gone to the Sakleshpur forest in 2006. Their skeletons were found only in 2007. In 2012, around 14 students had a harrowing time in the forests near Sakleshpur when one of their friends was washed away in the rapids while others waited inside the forest an entire night for help to arrive. In 1999, a Bangalorean who had been rafting at Kempu Hole met a watery grave. Very recently, 21 trekkers were trapped inside the forest, also near Sakleshpur, and had a tough time. These known instances may only be a small fraction of the ground reality as dozens of such incidents go unreported. Each time someone gets stuck in the forest, they have to endure an agonising wait until help arrives.