Richmond Circle Flyover’s pillars feature paintings of cricketing world’s greats as part of Brand Bengaluru initiative to develop vacant areas

If you drive past Richmond Circle, you are sure to see some of Karnataka’s sports icons around you. As part of the Brand Bengaluru initiative to thematically develop areas under flyovers, and to celebrate 50 years of naming the State, a new place-making initiative that highlights the state’s sporting culture and its icons, aptly called Kreeda Junction, is being developed at the Richmond Circle Flyover.
 
Vibrant Bengaluru, one of the nine groups working under the Brand Bengaluru initiative, aims to vibrantly beautify the city by reclaiming and restoring areas under flyovers with public participation. This being the first project is still a work-in-progress, and is likely to be completed and inaugurated in a few weeks. The paintings include some of the big names from the cricketing world such as Rahul Dravid, Anil Kumble, EAS Prasanna, V Subramanya, GR Vishwanath, Syed Kirmani, Roger Binny, Shantha Rangaswamy, BS Chandrasekhar and Javagal Srinath.

These areas under the flyovers, particularly on KH Road had deteriorated into a garbage dump and a public urination spot. The primary purpose of this project is to reclaim these public spaces from filth, and to create a neat, safe, themed space that pedestrians and the general public can visit and spend time at, and also feel a sense of pride about their city and state.
 
This theme was decided as Karnataka is a sporting state and has produced a wide range of elite sports stars across several disciplines over the years. There is no public celebration of the state’s sporting heritage and Kreeda Junction aims to fill this gap. 

Why this spot?
Five of the city’s important sporting venues are located within a mile of the Flyover – Chinnaswamy Stadium (KSCA), Kanteerava Stadium, Karnataka State Hockey Association (KSHA), Bangalore Football Stadium and Karnataka State Lawn Tennis Association (KSLTA) in Cubbon Park. Kreeda Junction is literally a junction at which all roads lead to these Kreedanganas (sports venues). In addition, several schools with a strong sporting tradition (that host prestigious inter-school tournaments), and that have produced many of the state’s icons are located nearby (St Joseph’s Boys & Indian High Schools, Bishop Cotton Boys & Girls, Baldwin Boys & Girls, Cathedral, Sacred Heart Girls).

People behind task
This Under Fly Over (UFO) development has been conceived and executed by India Rising Trust (IRT), in partnership with the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) as part of the Brand Bengaluru Initiative. IRT is a non-profit that is inspired by the citizen group – The Ugly Indians who have done work in reclaiming pillars of flyovers across Bengaluru for the past decade. IRT has partnered with BBMP under the Adopt-a-Flyover initiative, and this is the 4th UFO area it has thematically developed over the past few years. The previous 3 included Wild Arena at Veeranapalya (opp Manyata Tech Park) themed on Karnatka Wildlife, Bengaluru Margadarshana at Kodigehalli (on ORR, near Hebbal) themed on Bengaluru Road Systems, and City’s History and Chaturanga Mantapa at Carmelram Junction on Sarjapur Road themed on Chess.

Aniruddha Abhyankar, Chief Design Officer of IRT, who has been instrumental in conceptualising the design and other place-making projects in the city, said, “All these years these pillars were waiting for an identity, I responded to that need through the concept and design. Now the junction will bring that iconic identity to this neglected public space. ‘Beauty and neatness commands respect’ is the design principle that I use.”