By Melvin Mathew

Only tribes people, villagers physically capable of reaching specific spots

Villagers are helping forest watchers check forest fires in Bandipur range.
 
Volunteers from nearby Mangala village beat fires with green twigs at a low-intensity stage even before it came to the notice of forest watchers.

Forest fires are common in these parts with some fires going up to 30 feet high. If not stopped on time, it spreads beyond control and leads to heavy losses to life and property. So, the villagers decided to do something about it.
 
Though the NGO Kriya was established in 2021, the work has been happening for years now. The current trustees of the organisation started as volunteers to reduce the incidence of forest fires and handed over the task to the villagers. The team is also spreading awareness.
 
“Most forest fires are man-made. When the fire rages, surrounding areas get affected. The cultivated lands of villagers experience water shortage with the perennial river running dry; groundwater starts receding too. As a first step, we started educating villagers about the harmful effects of forest fires. To reduce the practice of wood-burning, we were able to arrange natural gas connections for some households,” said Daniel Sukumar, wildlife activist and project mentor.
 
Being the first ones to notice the fire, the team started to physically extinguish the fire. “This is challenging terrain. Only the tribespeople and villagers are physically capable of reaching specific spots. Fire has to be put out when it is at lower intensity; once raging, we have to wait for it to settle down. The only solution is to physically beat it as no fire engine can reach these areas. A fire has to be beaten down continuously using green twigs until it is extinguished. Counter-fire measures that hold the possibility of starting another fire are used as a last resort,” added Sukumar.
 
“When a fire starts, we take around 40 people to the spot and start beating out the fire. We see most fires during December till the monsoon starts. We take care of two ranges — Bandipur and Kundagere. We have two sets of volunteers: one for extinguishing fires and one to create awareness,” said Swamy, a resident of Mangala village and volunteer member.

   .
 
Wildlife experts said creating awareness about the subject is key. “In this area, every household has 10-100 cows. So grazing is a major task. Forest fires burning grazing pastures was a matter of concern. For two years, we faced severe water shortages too,” added Swamy.
 
Tribal communities hold superstitions that a burning forest is a sacrifice to goddesses. The team has been going to schools in nearby villages to create awareness and bust ‘superstitious’ myths.

Noting that the solution to forest fires is to work with neighbouring communities, former director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve, Balachandra T, said instead of spending lakhs of rupees, focus should be on protecting forests.

“Forest fires cannot be stopped by the forest department alone. With the involvement of people, fires can be effectively checked. All forest fires are caused due to some sort of conflict between groups; mitigating the causes of fires and finding a solution is the right way. Awareness drives should be conducted at regular intervals to change mindsets toward collective ownership and protection of forests,” he said.