Two Bengalureans successfully climb Mount Elbrus in Russia; share challenging experiences of changing weather at peak from morning to evening, and more 

A team of two from Bengaluru, Sandeep V Shah and Rekha Tiwari, who were on an expedition in Russia to climb Mount Elbrus, are said to be the first Indians to complete the climb. Mount Elbrus in Europe is 5,642 metre above sea level and is also known as the tenth most prominent peak in the world.

The project Reroute team, under their project Wilderness on Foot, is on a mission to climb the 14 highest peaks in the world as Indian mountaineers in order to spread a message about the conservation of wildlife, conservation of forests, and increasing forest cover.

In the first phase, the team plans to climb seven of the highest peaks on seven different continents. The focus is on summiting Mount Everest (8,850 m) in Asia, Aconcagua (6,962 m) in South America, Denali (6,190 m) in North America, Kilimanjaro (5,895 m) in Africa, Mount Elbrus (5,642 m) in Europe, Mount Carstensz (4,885 m) in Oceania, and Mount Vinson (4,892 m) in Antarctica.

Currently, the team has covered two peaks so far: Kilimanjaro and Mount Elbrus. A team of five members successfully summited Kilimanjaro in Tanzania on August 23. And on September 2, at 12:53 pm, Sandeep V Shah and Rekha Tewari became the first Indian team to summit Mount Elbrus from the north face, traverse from the east summit to the west summit, and descend to the south face.

Speaking about the expedition, Sandeep said, “Usually mountaineers need to be particular about their gear. As Africa is a warm country, we had to wear light clothing that was easy on us. We landed in Africa and went for an acclimatisation walk near a waterfall, and we introduced the team to the coffee ground grown there. The second day, we started a walk through a dense forest, where it was very humid. We informed the participant to wear something thin that would help them trek easily.
 
Slowly, when we kept climbing up, the dense forest reduced, and it turned into a scrub forest. The fourth day, we started feeling the cold during the night, and the final summit was extremely cold, and we found it challenging to finish the summit.”

Further, he said that even the water they carried had frozen. However, they completed it successfully. On top of the mountain, there was a glacier. People say that about 20–30 years ago, the glacier would have been so thick that it would have covered the Kilimanjaro mountain, but when they saw it now, 80% of the glacier was gone due to global warming. This highlights the need for us to conserve our environment and ecosystem.

During the challenges faced at Mount Elbrus, Sandeep said, “As Russia is a cold country, we had to get on to our warm gear. We started to trek and reached our shelters, which were like cabins. We did not stay in tents due to the cold weather. Through cabins, we were able to see Mount Elbrus, and we were chalking our way. The weather conditions would keep changing from morning to evening. It was very challenging. A Russian joined us during the trek, and I, along with Rekha, submitted on September 2.”

 I used to explore and find out different routes. During covid, I decided to launch Reroute–Sandeep V Shah

 Reroute is an integrated platform for wildlife trekking, cycling, swimming, and fitness workshops by being close to nature and by knowing more about a sensible and sustainable healthy lifestyle.

 Sandeep said that trekking was something that always gave him peace. “I used to explore and find out different routes. During covid, I decided to launch Reroute to bring us closer to nature and forests. Through project Reroute, my aim is to spread awareness about the harm the human race has caused to the environment.”