In the wake of multiple botched snake rescue operations by unskilled snake rescuers in the past, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has finally started its programme to train snake handlers in the city.

Under this initiative, the department has decided to conduct a two-day training programme for rescuers in Bengaluru. The training will be held on June 19 and 20 at Bannerghatta Biological Park.

“Keeping in mind the instances of human-snake conflict, snake rescuers in Bengaluru and surrounding areas are key to peaceful and safe coexistence. Training will be given by experts on various aspects of snake rescue such as situations that warrant a rescue, protocols for the safe handling of snakes, strategies for community engagement, knowledge of the latest developments in taxonomy, herpetological science, snakebite management, etc,” said a statement released from the department.

The programme will train participants to help the department in record keeping. After the programme, successful participants will be certified as trained rescuers by the department.

“We are mulling over uploading a detailed list of certified rescuers on our website so citizens can reach out to them when in need. The programme will also help us understand the level of human-snake conflict.
 
It will help us understand conflict-prone areas and this information can then be used to plan mitigation measures. The department will also play a role in the safe and scientific release of snakes,” said Kumar Pushkar, additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), KFD.

In October 2022, the department came up with a draft operational manual to effectively mitigate human-snake conflict. The idea was to institutionalise the process and make it compulsory for the handlers to seek a certificate from the department.

As per the manual, anyone interested in snake rescue will have to undergo a periodic certification programme at institutes notified by the department. The department had then mentioned that the handlers will have to undergo the certification and assessment program every two years. According to the department, the idea is to provide standard operating procedures to guide a rescuer in managing a conflict situation and build a system of accountability to regulate snake rescue across the state.

Later, in February this year, an instruction was issued by the department’s Wildlife Division to all CCFs to conduct training programs for snake handlers as per the operational manual.

Interested volunteers can register at https://bit.ly/kfdswblr and https://forms.gle/mT8gNW2oK7usEhx58