Frequent incidents of leopards straying out of forests and entering human-inhabited areas in recent times had left several conservationists and forest officials puzzled—why do leopards keep straying out of forests and into human domains? Although experts have been studying the phenomenon of human-leopard conflict in various landscapes, it is now observed that the increasing density of carnivores in the forest areas, and an increasing density of livestock in human-inhabited areas near the forests, is most likely the answer.
 
 	Experts working on the issue of human-leopard conflict in regions of Maharashtra have observed that leopards are capable of living not just in forested areas but also in crop lands, urban spaces surprisingly with low levels of conflicts.
 	
 	These interesting observations were discussed during the workshop on ‘Dealing with Leopards and elephants in human-use landscapes’ jointly organised by the Press Club and Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) of India Programme on Friday. 
 	  	Sharing the study findings, Dr Vidya Athreya, research associate, WCS, said several landscapes across Maharashtra revealed high density of carnivores in a designated area. “It was found that 100 sq km area of forests is home to at least five carnivores,” Dr Athreya explained. Interestingly, India has about 25 per cent of world’s carnivores in 5 per cent of the total area of world’s land.
 	  	Various studies and animal census have revealed a high density of prey outside of the forest areas. In India alone there are about 96 cattle and 61 goat/sheep per sq km area. “If you consider the prey density in and around Nagarahole national park region of Karnataka you will find 60 sambars per sq km in the forest, while the livestock density outside is at a whopping 150 cattle per sq km. It is obvious that predators (leopard) move in where there is plenty of food available,” Dr Athreya said.
 	  	Surprisingly, dogs are an important component of their diet. But, on the flipside, capturing a leopard and translocating it in different area is likely to intensify the problem. “Capturing leopards just because they are seen could increase the conflict as our studies have revealed more number of attacks near the translocated areas. Hence, an informative dialogue with awareness on nature is crucial to alleviate the conflict.”
 	 

 	A SOLUTION TO CONFLICT WITH ELEPHANTS?
 	  	Meanwhile, the Karnataka forest department is mulling over a novel solution to mitigate the man-elephant conflict in Kodagu region particularly between the Kutta and Veeranahosahalli Elephant corridor adjacent to the Brahamagiri Hill. Manoj Kumar, chief conservator of forests, Kodagu Circle said, “The department is thinking of buying private land and thereby clearing the blockage of about 1.5 to 2 km along the stretch. But the only problem is that we are yet to establish the width of the area that is actually used by elephants. We have requested elephant experts, conservationist to study and submit a report and depending on the land rate we will take a final decision,” he explained.