By Salma Prabhu

Life may seem overwhelming at times, but there’s always a way to bounce back. Here are some techniques to help you cope

When Amisha, 44, sat across from me in my clinic, her body language suggested that she was sad. She teared up when she spoke, saying that she often feels that her life has been worthless. She also felt lonely, she said. Her husband was busy with his work, which involved a lot of travelling; her son was now in college and spent most of his time with his friends. Consequently, Amisha often felt like she had nothing to do. Despite having a part-time job, she felt uncertain and incomplete.

What Amisha was going through — this feeling of being ‘overwhelmed by midlife’ — affects many. Typically defined as the period from age 40 to age 55, this is, after all, a time when one starts evaluating one’s life — when one takes stock of his or her career, relationships, achievements and failures. It’s a time that’s often marked by thoughts of negativity and a sense of hopelessness.

Harmit, a 46-year-old IT professional, for instance, sought my guidance because he felt a deep dissatisfaction with his professional life, even though he earned well. He could not leave his job or switch to a different line of work as he had a family to support and didn’t want them to be face uncertainties. Harmit told me he suffered from frequent migraines.

Through our discussions, I gleaned that while he was genuinely interested in his work, the monotony was engendering fatigue and restlessness. And, Harmit’s unhappiness was manifesting as migraines. After introspecting for a few days, as per my advice, Harmit decided to go trekking, an activity he had always enjoyed. He became the member of a forest conservation group, and started going along on their excursions — treks and trips to forest reserves. Harmit also discovered that he enjoyed photographing wildlife, and had something of a gift for it. He is now looking at publishing an e-book of the photographs he has made. The interesting thing is that far from being a distraction from work, these activities have helped him to rediscover his love for it. Perhaps most importantly, Harmit now has something to look forward to at the end of every hectic week.

What’s bringing you down?

While stressors like divorce, strained finances can occur at any time in your life, in midlife, they can pack a powerful, emotional punch, as this is also the time you start contemplating mortality. You wonder how much time you have left to do the things you have always wanted to. Even if everything’s going well, you may start to experience a sense of monotony. Boredom and dissatisfaction set in. It becomes very important then to feel appreciated — this is often the reason cited by those who get involved in extramarital affairs.

Hormonal changes occur, especially in women, who may be perimenopausal, menopausal, or postmenopausal. These hormonal changes could trigger feelings of fatigue, depression, and sleep disorders, as well as other problems.

A short vacation may help you feel better, but only temporarily. For a lasting cure for the ‘midlife blues’, try these techniques.

Distract yourself

Think about what’s causing the void you feel, and about whether this is a recurrent feeling, or one that simply comes around at certain times of the day. Next, list all the activities that you have wanted to do, but were never able to, “because life happened” as my patients often say.

For example, you may have wanted to pursue dancing or painting. Once you recognise unfulfilled desires, you can find ways to make time for them. Also list the things that have bothered you — the big and small compromises you have made. Before the healing can begin, you must acknowledge these.

Share your thoughts

Talk to your family about the physical and emotional changes you’re going through. Tell them that you may need their support. Also, indicate that you may stop doing certain things that were seen as your responsibility earlier. If you feel that you cannot say all this in person, send an email or a text, and start eliminating these stressors from your life.

Seek happiness

Begin by participating in the activities that you feel you didn’t get a chance to enjoy before. This may be something as simple as going for a daily walk, or joining a dance class.

Learn to just relax and focus on feeling good. Celebrate small successes — for example, perhaps you were regular about hitting the gym this month.

Remind yourself that you are strong

Remembering that you have overcome formidable obstacles in the past will help you to be optimistic about your ability to get past the current predicament.

To counter the tendency to complain or think of yourself as a victim, use positive affirmations. Tell yourself things like “I am a happy and confident person”, and “I love and respect myself”. Make your own affirmations to counter any negative thoughts that may cross your mind. Write these down and stick the note in a spot where you’re likely to see it every day.

► The author is a clinical psychologist and career counsellor