It’s not just in the news headlines – Kashmir will be one of the focuses of the Neev Literature Festival for Children too. In its third edition, the festival 
will host 67 speakers and authors, from Veera Hiranandani to Nandana Dev Sen as well as Stephen Alter and Susan Perrow, while offering workshops, book launches, the Neev Book Award and a curated book exhibition of over 1,000 titles. 

This year’s event has been categorised event into four trends: ‘Reading’, ‘Identity and history’, ‘Building empathy’ and ‘Futurism’. For Kavita Gupta Sabharwal, co-founder of the Festival, it has been important to celebrate children’s literature out of India – a category that she pegs at less than 10% of the total market, which is saturated with textbooks, encyclopedias and the like. “And even in that 10%, they have to compete with international books for children,” she explains. The spotlight of this year’s Festival, then, has been squarely on high-quality, mature literature, both out of India and abroad. “How can children access the multiple reflections of life in India, and the history of India? Even on Partition, we have only one book from India in the children’s literature category. It’s important for Indian children and the world to get a view into our stories. We need to find literature that mirrors our identities,” Sabharwal says. 

Which is why, fantasy strides alongside our realities in the Festival this year. For instance, Bijal Vachharajani, children’s book author and senior editor at Pratham Books, will be reading from her climate fiction, A Cloud Called Bhura, and creating climate bulletins based on the news that children been hearing – both locally and globally. “In my second session, the participants will create their own post-apocalyptic world, using their imagination and current news – to imagine a new future,” she says. Then there’s Sangeetha Kadur, a city-based wildlife artist, who will conduct a workshop around “observing the bounty of nature around us and transforming those observations on paper in the form of sketches and notes... in the process there are so many stories that we can collect just by spending time with nature”.


  The only way to access different worlds in a digital age is by reading–Kavita Gupta Sabharwal 

There will be others too, such as Donna Jo Napoli, who has a body of work in historical fiction and fantasy – “genres that are not prevalent in India”, Sabharwal says. “Then there are Katie Milway Smith and Kinyanjui Kombani, who write about Tanzania, Kenya and The Honduras. From India, Devika Cariappa has written about history, Natasha Sharma has written stories related to children’s worlds, and Bhakti Mathur tells stories on religion, festivals, gods etc.” As for Kashmir, it will be featured front and centre in the stories about conflicts within our country, in the works of authors such as Paro Anand. “We have stepped up the maturity of the speakers, and that steps up the conversation,” Sabharwal says.

All this, not just because children must read. Sabharwal shares neuroscientist and writer Maryanne Wolf’s view on how the reading brain must be developed differently. “In a world that’s changing so rapidly, where careers that children see today may not even exist when they grow up, they need to engage with deep text, to develop a lifelong ability to learn. The only way to access different worlds in a digital age is by reading,” she explains. Hopefully, the Festival will offer a way to do that.

 Neev Literature Festival for Children, from September 20-21, Neev Academy – Yemalur Campus, Kempapura Main Road, Yemalur. INFO: eevliteraturefestival.org

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’