Lake walkers across various waterbodies in the city have raised the issue of insufficient security.
 
They said the city’s lakes currently have guards on the general shift from 10 am to 6 pm leaving morning and evening walkers vulnerable.

Regular visitors to the lakes and walkers highlighted that the majority of the waterbodies revived by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) have gaps when it comes to the safety and security of walkers and lakes’ biodiversity.
 
Moreover, lack of adequate surveillance is leading to illegal activities at many lakes.
 
“While we are grateful to the BBMP and local panchayat officials for stationing one security staff from 9 am to 4 pm, to curb trespassing, it is not good that the lake remains unguarded during the evening and early mornings.
 
This lack of security would only lead to unauthorised users who are using the park for illegal activities like fishing, liquor consumption, etc,” said V Selvarajan, founder of Green Circle, a citizens’ association working towards the development of Avalahalli Lake in Yelahanka.

According to Raghavendra B Pachhapur, a city-based lake activist, lack of adequate security is leading to illegal fishing activities in some waterbodies. One such lake is Doddakallasandra in Narayana Nagar. While the Department of Fisheries has temporarily suspended the fishing licence at the lake owing to a drop in water level, trawling is still going on.

 “The water level in the lake has gone down and thus the fishing licence has been suspended by the fisheries department. However, illegal fishing has continued. After a gap of many years, the lake is witnessing a good number of endangered bird species such as the Painted Stork and Black-headed Ibis. But illegal fishing is threatening their resources and habitat. We have seen people walking down to the lake bed as there is nobody to stop them,” said Pacchapur.

Walkers from other lakes in the city highlighted issues such as an increase in stray dog population inside lake boundaries and mismanagement of lakes, much to their dismay.

“There have been instances of morning walkers coming to the lake, but had to return as gates were not opened on time. Similarly, gates are also not locked on time, leading to various illegal activities, including stealing of bamboo vegetation,” said another walker at Doddakallasandra.

Locals living around Chunchaghatta Lake in Kothnur said they have seen the main entrance of the lake wide open during odd hours.

“A month ago, we saw the main gate open during late night hours. We also clicked pictures and sent them to BBMP officials concerned. Such events not only promote illegal activities inside the lake premises but also impact urban wildlife. Lakes in the city are ecological hubs and human interference during odd hours may prove detrimental to the ecology,” said a resident of the area.

“We have seen children walking on the stone revetment of the lake with security personnel nowhere to be seen. This is a big lake with a 2-km pathway. Children walking on these stones risk falling over the waterbody. Moreover, these revetments house snakes and can lead to untoward incidents,” said a walker at Agara Lake in HSR Layout.

Some walkers at Nagawara Lake raised safety and security concerns in the absence of adequate security measures and the number of security personnel.

“These aspects should be covered under the lake rejuvenation process. Every lake in the city should have security guards on two shifts, if not round the clock. Moreover, there should be bicycle patrolling guards for better security,” added Pachhapur.

.
Who goes there? Intruders in birds’ space 

Lake activists have flagged an incident of a person walking inside the premises of the Doddakallasandra lake, disrupting the natural habitat of the many birds that thrive in the shallow waters. They have called on the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) to hire an adequate number of security guards to have an eye on the entire boundary of the lake to ensure wildlife within the lake remains undisturbed.

Arun Soundararajan, a resident who has been advocating for the protection of Doddakallasandra lake, noted that a few citizens enter the lake for the purpose of cutting grass and with them, stray dogs also make their way into the lake premises, leading to all the birds in the area to fly away. He urged the BBMP to take action and ensure that guards designated with the task of manning the lake be available at all times. Currently, they are not present through most of the day, he claimed.

.
Various birds including the oriental darter, painted storks and black-headed ibis, which have been deemed as Near Threatened (NT) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), thrive in the shallow waters of the lake, a transitional zone between the shore and the deep waters. The birds gather in shallow waters due to security and abundance of food presence.

A recent survey involving the Doddakallasandra lake among six other lakes in South Bengaluru had found violations in fencing to different degrees, pointing towards threat to biodiversity thriving within the habitats. Conducted by ActionAid Association, the survey noted that as a consequence, the lack of adequate fencing adds on the survival risk to biodiversity within the lake particularly in late evenings and nights when there is no guarding.

Every lake in the city should have security guards on two shifts, if not round the clock— Raghavendra B Pachhapur, city-based lake activist
The survey noted that 73 – 124 bird species visit these lakes, with Subbaraaya Lake recording 73 and Dorekere lake recording 124 bird species.