The loss of vast stretch of pristine forests due to wildfires was more than enough for CM Siddaramaiah to lose his cool over the functioning style of Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officials amidst his hectic pre-budget meetings.
 
 
 
  Chief minister Siddaramiah meeting with IFS officers
 
 Armed with detailed presentations to appraise the CM about the loss, IFS officials were caught off-guard when Siddaramaiah instantly asked how many of them had actually visited the worst affected Bandipur and Kappatagudda.
 
 Fuming at the officials for sitting in Bengaluru, the CM reportedly asked them to keep aside their presentation and reply to his poser.
 
 “Forest officials must be in forests and why do they always sit in their offices here in Bengaluru all the time. I do not see any officer working in the forests. Officials should not be complacent in the matter of protecting our forests and I would not endorse that kind of attitude. Who is responsible for the loss that we have suffered?” the CM shot back according to officials who were privy to the meeting.
 
 Keen on knowing the movements of officials in the last one month, CM reportedly directed additional chief secretary P Ravikumar to submit a detailed report on movement of KFD officials and the work executed by them in the forests. Only when forest minister B Ramanatha Rai insisted on seeing the presentation, that Siddaramiah agreed to go through the presentation.
 
 
 Alerts could not be passed on to the staff immediately!
 
 Listing out the reasons for the raped spread of fire in various forests of the state, the officials briefed the CM about natural factors like drought, wind, dense foliage of lantana cover and other factors. When CM asked the officials that were they not alerted in advance, the officials explained, “The National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) had constantly provided us with fire alerts. However, by the time we communicated the same to the ground staff in core areas there was delay of 4 to 5 hours as several of them were stationed at inhospitable locations.” However, overcoming the delay in reaching out to the staff, the KFD has now built fire watching towers at sensitive locations and assigned staffers to keep tab on forest fires on rotation basis. 
 
 Court orders, policies too added to the spread of fire
 
 While attending to the fire, the biggest hurdle forest officials faced were various court orders that prevented clearing of litter or fallen trees from forests.
 
 “There have been national policies and several court orders that forbid clearing of fallen trees and branches in protected areas. With back to back drought spanning three-years, the forests had turned dry with several dry logs littered all over the forests. This has added to the fast spread of fire to different parts of the forests,” another official briefed the CM.
 
 The officials felt that even though such orders were found to be useful for regeneration of forests, it does not serve the purpose in tropical forests like those in Karnataka. Tropical forests have more timber trees like teak, rose wood compared to other forests that largely have softwood trees. These timber species requires several years to disintegrate and when lit by fire they generate more heat due to which even the live trees area also burnt.
 
 This trend has resulted in development of crown fires that spreads to wider area if there are heavy winds. The department, trying its best and pooling in all its resources, had tried its best to douse the fire, according to senior officials. Preventing the forest fire incidents further, the KFD has set up 137 forest fire camps where 700 fire watchers who have been recruited recently to keep vigil over incidents of forest fire and alert the ground staff immediately. “The prolonged drought has not only dried up water holes in forests especially Tiger Reserves but also left the ambience very dry. Hence a special meeting was held with the fire brigade officials to keep vigil on forest fire in Tiger Reserves. This apart both Bandipur and Nagarahole will be provided with a fire tending vehicle while the BRT will have a Quick Response Team stationed always at the forest till the monsoon,” the officials revealed.
 
 Siddaramaiah was reportedly relieved when officials briefed him that donors have helped in drilling bore wells and operate those using solar powered motors. “We must ensure that by making use of these bore wells all waterholes be filled with water. If need arises build small check-dams at various vantage points and ensure collection of water,” CM directed officials. Adding further, CM cautioned the officials, “We need to wait for another two months till monsoon. Until then officials have to work relentlessly and more cautiously. There should not be any more lapses due to their mistakes.” CM also directed the KFD officials to provide jobs in the department to the family members of the KFD officials who martyred during the fire mishap.
 
 
 Chief wildlife warden transferred
 
  Barely a few hours since holding the highlevel meeting with IFS officers about forest fire and acute scarcity of drinking water in tiger reserves, the state government ordered the transfer of chief wildlife warden BG Hosmath. Managing director of Karnataka Forest Development Corporation (KFDC) Kishan Singh Sugara has been made the principle chief conservator of forests (wildlife) while Hosmath has been posted to KFDC as its managing director.