Shakti S Putra offers three takes from the idyllic fairytale versions to stark reality
 
 	The Disney-Princess version
 	  	W ake up on a fine sunny morning and decide to take a walk in the woods. Walk for a while until you find a picturesque spot. Set up your easel and palette, and paint the scenery. The squirrels and birds love you and admire your art work. Some even pose for you! Once you are satisfied with your picture, you roll it up and walk further in search of the perfect spot for some lunch. 
 	  	Have your lunch in the company of little forest creatures that you have befriended. After a singing session with the birds, you promise to return soon and skip back home. On the way back you see a doe that beckons you to follow it. You decide to follow the doe and you find a tired traveller who seems to have fainted. You get some water for him and save his life. Your eyes meet and you realise that you met him ‘once upon a dream’ and decide to live happily ever after. 

 	The Bollywood version
 	  	You and your friends go on a road trip, and your friends decide to go to a road-side cafe to grab some lunch. Having had a lot of snacks on the way you decide to skip lunch, and instead take a stroll in the woods just across the road. You walk for a while and see an exceptionally pretty white mimosa bloom. You climb a rock to pick it and just then a waft of air blows and takes the flower with it. You run behind it, trip over a rock and fall. The next moment you wake up and find a pair of deep dark brown eyes looking at you. The handsome stranger helps you up and offers some water. Half dizzy with the fall and half dazed by your rescuer’s kindness, you give a weak smile. You both sit staring for another minute before a cool breeze brings you back to your senses and you see your friends who have come to look for you. 
 	  	The stranger introduces himself as a wildlife volunteer who was just leaving after having checked on a rescued monkey. Your friends ask him to join in on your road trip and he agrees (he would do anything to spend more time with you!). You and your new friend hang back a little and start a conversation. You reach your car, your friend pulls out your guitar which you had brought along and begins to sing. Encouraged by your friends, you coyly join in and as the music takes over, you realise your inner feelings for each other. On your way you see a parade and stop your car. All of you get down and join a well-choreographed impromptu dance. And the movie continues… 

 	The real-life version
 You and roomie decide to take a walk in the woods amidst pristine nature, away from the hustle and bustle of the city. To find some "woods" you drive at least 40km through traffic. An hour later, you find some expanse of land that is untouched by builders or industrialists (as yet, of course!). Also, this was quite a safe area (at least that’s what Google said). Next you take out your backpack and check if you have everything that you may need packed. Band-Aids, antiseptic, cotton, pest repellant, pepper spray, water bottle, food, a little knife (that’s what Man vs Wild taught you. Always carry a knife!) and your camera. Woah! That’s heavy. 
 	  	Is the walk really worth all this pain? It hopefully will be. Every rustle in the leaves looks like a snake and you imagine a tiger behind every moving bush. Considering the fact that tigers are on the endangered list, it would be highly unlikely. But your mind plays games in the forest and turns your fears into paranoia. Finally, you find a spot to spread out a thick blanket. There could be bugs! You unpack your sandwiches, take a bite and let the moment sink in. But don’t lose yourself in your thoughts so soon because there is a monkey staring at you from the tree close by. When you smelled your sandwich, the monkeys too got a whiff of it! You avoid making eye contact. Remember The Gods Must Be Crazy? ‘If you don’t bother them, they won’t bother you’. 
 	  	However, the balance is off when you add food into the equation. You try to shoo away the monkey but fail to notice that it was only a decoy. Another jumps in from behind and flicks off the rest of your food! Not fair! Determined not to let it ruin your day, you walk on. You did have a good breakfast in anticipation that something might go wrong. 
 	  	You decide to drink some pure natural stream water and after another half hour’s walk you find some flowing water. Flowing water can’t be bad right? You take a gulp. It tastes horrible! Convincing yourself that that’s what natural stream water is supposed to taste like (it has some useful minerals dissolved!) you decide to walk along the stream. Maybe the water would taste better at the source. A little distance away, you notice froth from factory effluents floating. Sickening! Hope it wasn’t poisonous! 
 	  	Finally with the help of your GPS you make your way back to the car. Thank God! At least your car is safe. On your way back, it starts to rain. You turn on your wipers and they don’t move. The dried leaves and twigs have jammed them. You pull over, get down and clean out the dry leaves while getting drenched in the rain. Find an old plastic bag to line your seat (you can’t get your new seat covers all wet can you?) and drive back through heavy traffic. By the time you reach home, it is 7 in the evening and you have to fix some dinner and you need to go to college tomorrow morning. You post some pictures on Facebook and update your status to ‘At peace with nature’; curse that you wasted your weekend and got no rest; decide never to do that again and retire to bed.