If any of these creatures are spotted, inform BBMP control room; city home to over 20 species
 
 	Heavy downpour in October not only resulted in flooding of low-lying areas in various parts of Bengaluru to claim two lives; it also gripped people in several parts of the city with panic over snakes and other reptiles slithering their way into homes! 

 	The Bruhat Bengaluru Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Wildlife Wing has received over 400 distress calls from panicking residents about snakes getting into their homes. 

 	That sounds scary, right? But not all these slithery creatures are venomous, according to herpetologists. Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden with BBMP Forest Cell, told Bangalore Mirror that Bengaluru and its outskirts are home to 21 species of snakes. "Out of these 21 species only 4 are venomous. The venomous species comprise Common Cobra, Russell Viper, Saw Scaled Viper and Krait. People need to be careful of only these snakes, but need not get panicky on seeing the other snakes. These snakes (the venomous ones) are easy to identify and people must stay away from them." 

 

 	Indian Cobra 

 	Touted to be the most common venomous snakes, Bengaluru has considerable population of Cobras. 

 	BBMP volunteers catch about 30 cobras every day in various parts of the city. These are commonly found in burrows located in open areas, unused parked cars, creepers on balconies and compounds and covered bushes. 

 	"Cobras can easily be identified by looking at their impressive hood which has a spectacle pattern in the form of 'V'. 

 	Cobras normally measure 4 to 5.5 feet in length and in exceptional cases can go up till 6 ft. Upon sensing a potential threat it raises its hood for 1 to 2 ft. height with a hissing sound," says Sharath Babu. 

 

 	Russell Viper 

 	Next time when you hear a whistle similar to pressure cooker whistle in an unusual place like open land, rocky terrain or amidst heaps of dry leaves in parks and fields, then it is Russell Viper. Known to inhabit rocky open terrain, open fields with heaps of dry leaves or crushed jelly stones or boulders, Russell Vipers are reported to be shy in nature. They can easily be identified with their brownish coloured skin with diamond shaped black markings all over its body. They normally measure 4 to 5 ft. in length and are normally active during evenings. 

 

 	Saw Scaled Viper 

 	Considered to be the shortest of all venomous snakes, saw scaled vipers also make pressure cooker whistle-like sounds. Their colour varies from brown to muddy red with constant diamond patches in brown with white borders. 

 	Found in open tracts of land and meadows, these vipers are very aggressive and measure just 1.5 to 2 feet. 

 

 	Krait 

 	Of all the venomous snakes of Bangalore, Kraits are the only nocturnal creatures measuring about 4 to 5 feet in length. 

 	Largely found in garden areas, lawns, brick piles, crevasses along the drains and compound walls, Krait largely come out in the night looking for prey in the form of small snakes, lizards and rats. These snakes are dark in complexion with horizontal white patches at regular intervals all through the body. 

 	Upon seeing snakes with these features, people are requested to stay away from them and immediately inform the BBMP control room. "If any snake is found within the house it is best to leave the area dark by throwing a damp gunny or blanket. With this they do not move out easily and ensures enough time for the rescuers to arrive and catch them. 

 	Sometimes people call us even if they spot snakes in gardens or even open lands. But people must understand that these are their natural habitats and must be allowed to let go without creating any trouble," Sharat clarifies.