DRI sleuths bust smuggling racket at TN border; pet shop owner arrested
 
 Sleuths of the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence have busted an exotic animal smuggling racket based in the city and have rescued 1,012 exotic turtles and tortoises worth RS 4 crore that were to be trafficked to Hong Kong and China to be used as “good luck charms” as well as a delicacy in restaurants. One person has been arrested and more are likely to be nabbed in the coming days in Bengaluru and Chennai. The turtles were found tightly bound in seven travel bags and were kept in two Chennai-bound cars from the city. A DRI team intercepted these vehicles at Attibelle toll gate on the outskirts of the city and have come to the conclusion that a Bengaluru-based pet shop owner was the mastermind of the racket and has been taken into custody. All these species are classified as endangered species and their illegal capture and transport can attract a minimum prison term of seven years as per the provisions of the Customs Act and Wildlife Protection Act 1972.
 
 “The accused has given more information about people in the city who were his accomplices. We have launched a hunt for them. They were active since 2016 and used to capture or procure these turtles through agents from forests in Andhra Pradesh, Telengana and Karnataka. Then they were taken by road to Chennai to be airlifted as air cargo to China,” said DRI sources.
 
 According to an official release, the illegal consignment had 852 Indian Star tortoises, 76 Tricarinate hill turtles, 46 Female Melanochelys tricarinate turtles, 11 red eared sliders and 27 Indian tent turtles. The DRI has informed the state forest department about the seizure and the rescued animals would be handed over to them.
 
 “The gang has so far managed to smuggle turtles worth atleast Rs one crore to China. We have been told that the main customers are individuals involved in “good luck charm” business and agents who supply them to restaurants. The individual price depends on the size and purpose of procurement for each of these species,” sources added.
 
 It was also pointed out that since the turtles were kept captive in hostile conditions, the forest department would give veterinary care to them for a couple of days before they are released into the wild or rehabilitated in any government animal centre.