T
 he best in a wildlife expert comes to the fore when actually under attack from a wild animal. That was how it was with conservation scientist Sanjay Gubbi when he was fiercely attacked by a leopard that was desperately trying to escape from the Vibgyor High school which it had entered in the wee hours of Sunday.
 Although the leopard had a vicelike grip on his right arm and shaking him from side to side like a rag doll – which ruptured arteries and veins and chipped his elbow bone – Gubbi could be seen in the visuals raising his binoculars to shoo away the leopard, but he did not hit him.
 As a wildlife expert, Gubbi realised that as the leopard had brought him down on the edge of a swimming pool, had he himself turned aggressive the already scared leopard could have fallen into the swimming pool.
 Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror that the school authorities, despite requests to have a bamboo ladder dropped into the school swimming pool so the cat could float if it fell into the, failed to cooperate with the forest officials. They did not even drain the swimming pool as was the primary request when the foresters had for a few minutes restricted the leopard within swimming pool area of the school.
 “When I was dragged (by the leopard), many told me I could have fallen into the pool but that would have been very dangerous. I would had to fight water and the animal simultaneously,” Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror from his bed in Columbia Asia Hospital in Whitefield, where he has been admitted with severe leopard bit injuries from the Sunday attack.
 But more than that, he said “With the darter, the animal may have drowned in the swimming pool. The school authorities had refused to drain the water. Then I advised them to throw a bamboo ladder or a pole into the pool so that the animal could still float if it fell into the pool. But there was not much cooperation.”
 
 Gubbi said as he had sensed the lack of adequate arrangement by the forest officials and the police while trying to trap and rescue the leopard, he and his team members had requested the officials to arrange for ambulances and the fire brigade to tackle any possible emergency situation.
 
 “(But) Till the end of the operation there were no ambulances or fire brigade. With the leopard inside a room close to the swimming pool, we decided to trap it by laying a net and tranquilising the cat before shifting it to a zoo,” Gubbi narrated. “By that time, a couple of television channel cameramen began making adventurous moves to ‘shoot’ the cat. I was worried that if something went wrong, then would lose lives, and was trying to convince them to go back. But just then the leopard jumped out of the room and came into the open to attack a forest department driver in the pool area.”
 
 The driver was not seriously injured, but the next target was Gubbi himself when the wildlife expert was trying to scale a side gate to get away from the leopard on the loose.
 
 “The already panicking leopard, after attacking forest department driver, came darting towards me when I was trying to climb. I could not climb as the wall had sharp edges…but by then it had pounced on me, grabbing me by my thigh and dragging me down with all its power,”Gubbi said.
 
 Although ending up inju-red and requiring two surgeries for restructuring, Gubbi is satisfied that the leopard did not jump out of the school, which could have resulted in catastrophic consequences as the school is surrounded by a densely populated residential area in Kundalahalli off Vart-hur Road. He feared that such a thing could have led to many more casualties or even deaths among the general public.
 
 “Luckily, it has ended with only me being a casualty,” Gubbi sighed with a smile.