The civic body is accused of raising the level of the road leading to a private hospital by around 10 feet          The Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), which had earlier drawn flak for its obsession with widening of roads, has now earned the wrath of public for spending public money on a project to please the authorities of a famous private hospital.
 
 Residents of Kengeri are angry that the civic organisation is raising the level of the road connecting the main road to BGS Hospital by around 10 feet, allegedly to facilitate a better view of the building. Work on the one-kilometre stretch has been going on for the past three months. The move will cut off access to Mylasandra temple and lake, which are frequented by local residents.
 
 “We have been visiting the lake for the past four decades. Now, there is no way to reach there as the road level is being raised for the sake of BGS hospital,” said George, a resident of the area.
 
 The area being part of Turahalli mini forest, residents also pointed out that the new road will also act as a barrier for wild animals from reaching the lake. “We don’t understand the necessity for the project, as the hospital is already well-connected to the main road,” said George, who used to work for People for Animals (PFA). “We are told that the road level is being raised to help the BGS group. It is unfair to do all this to please a private institution.” 
 
 Officials of the forest department, which has already booked the BGS hospitaltop-brass for encroachment, said that they can take action only if the public raise objection. “We have inquired about the project. If somebody brings up the issue pertaining to wildlife, lake and the forest here, we will certainly take action,” said S Kumaraswamy, deputy conservator of forests (Bangalore Urban).
 
 The BBMP, however, assured that it would make sure that the public is not inconvenienced by the project. “We are aware of the issues. We will not cause any inconvenience to the public. A small service road will be built to ensure connectivity to the temple and the lake,” said G H Ramachandra, the chairman of major works committee.