The BJP government in Karnataka has indeed managed an extraordinary feat by obtaining consensus in the state Assembly on Thursday in rejecting the world natural heritage status accorded to sensitive sites in the Western Ghats by Unesco on July 1. Now that the members of the Assembly have “unanimously” passed a resolution urging the Union government to write to Unesco to withdraw the heritage tag for 10 sensitive spots in the state, the world will have to look up to Bangalore to address all future ecological questions like global warming or climate change.   Forest Minister CP Yogeshwar lamented in the Assembly that this heritage status had been accorded even though the state had written to the Union government last year to desist from its efforts to obtain the globally coveted tag. He is now set to lead an all-party delegation to the Union ministry of environment and forests (MoEF) to register the state’s opposition. Some BJP legislators were willing to even sacrifice their positions in the House rather than accept Unesco’s recognition of the Western Ghats as one of the most important biodiversity zones on the planet. Such is their courage of conviction.   What will be particularly pleasing to this government is that the state Congress is supporting leaders of the BJP in this amazing campaign. When the BJP government first wrote to the Union in June last year against the campaign for the Unesco tag, the then Union environment minister Jairam Ramesh – originally from Karnataka – had bluntly declared: “The Karnataka government’s opposition to getting the Unesco heritage tag for the Western Ghats is giving wide scope to suspect that it is yielding to the pressure from vested interests like forest encroachers, the mining lobby, timber smugglers and poachers.” He will be pleased to know that his colleagues in the Congress have possibly aligned themselves with these very categories.   He had then pointed out too that the MoEF had submitted a dossier on the Western Ghats in 2006, desperately seeking the Unesco heritage status, only after getting the approval from the Karnataka government. Since the subject had come up last year, the BJP government had opposed the Unesco tag to Hampti too. One of its leaders, now dead, had declared that the Unesco status was a hurdle to “constructive conservation.” The “constructive” part obviously includes felling of trees, stripping of forests for mining contracts, selective de-reservation of forest areas and quick-and-dirty mini-hydel projects. And, while we are at it, the BJP government has also opposed the Union government’s proposal to declare the Kudremukh National Park as a tiger reserve and the expansion of the Bhadra reserve area. So, to hell with conservation.   The long struggle to persuade the Unesco World Heritage Committee to accord the heritage status to the sensitive sites of the Western Ghats had actually begun with the Vajpayee government in 2002. The Union ministry’s proposal to Unesco was based on expert inputs from the Bangalore-based Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE), the Mysore-based Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), and Wildlife Institute of India, Dehra Dun, an autonomous institution under the MoEF. Unesco’s World Heritage Committee itself went through the recommendations of the Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel headed by India’s leading ecologist Dr Madhav Gadgil before announcing the inscription.   Now the state BJP has disowned a campaign mounted by its tallest leader in India. The government and the friendly Opposition in the state are rejecting the opinion of some of India’s leading ecology experts. One of the founders of the Nature Conservation Foundation, MD Madhusudhan, was awarded the “Green Oscar” (Whitley Award) in 2009. The state’s political parties are opposing the heritage tag on the grounds that it would disrupt the lives of local communities. Ironically enough, wildlife biologist Madhusudhan received the Green Oscar in recognition of his efforts to reduce human-wildlife conflict in the Western Ghats. In fact, to be considered for the award, candidates need to show a strong track record in conservation work and a viable plan for implementation of their recommendations.   Are we to believe that our politicians have greater scientific knowledge of ecology and deeper concern for the impoverished local communities? Given the number of cases that the political leaders of this state now face in several courts, on various counts, and the status of Karnataka in owning the most corrupt administration in India, are our lawmakers seized of the impression they could create nationally and globally for what was once hailed as a model state?   Incidentally, it would be worthwhile for our lawmakers to find out what exactly their legal position could be in the matter, given that the forest bench of the Supreme Court is already engaged with several environmental questions that trouble Karnataka. Besides, the appeal to Unesco was made by the Union government only after due process of consultation with Karnataka. Unesco’s heritage inscriptions are based on the 1972 ‘Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage’. India is a signatory nation. Our representatives need to look at this issue in the clear light of reason.