K Ullas Karanth, director for Science-Asia, Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), who is also Fellow, Indian Academy of Sciences, feels that the panic is born from a wrong notion that leopards deliberately attack; instead they are very shy and are not normally seen. In his replies sent via email to Bangalore Mirror, he said most schools in Karnataka may have to be closed permanently if they are shut because leopards are around.
 
 
 	Here is his take on the ongoing leopard-row with Dr Vidya Athreya, among India’s leading experts on leopard issues, who is also with WCS, sharing her thoughts too.
 	 

 	On panic-struck residents and parents (after the recent leopard-rescue episode at Vibgyor High school) Karanth: There is no need to panic. Many leopards are living not only around Bengaluru but also around most human settlements across the 80,000 Sq km area in Karnat-aka. They are harmless and live on prey like street dogs/cats.
 	
 	
 	They avoid people; they are very shy; and are not normally seen. If we have to close schools because leopards are around, then most schools in Karnataka may have to close permanently! I heard a little boy say, ‘I wish the leopard comes often because I don’t have to go to school!’ This is not a good idea.
 	 

 	On the ‘leopard mania’ that has struck the city with the Vibgyor High episode and subsequent ‘leopard sightings’ in and around Marathalli, Nallurahalli, where baits have been placed. Is the issue being blown up for no reason? Or is it really serious and needs to be addressed with utmost urgency and priority?
 	
 	  	Karanth: This panic has spread because of the wrong notion that leopards deliberately attack and chase people as a part of their normal behavior. Leopards are afraid of people and hide and run away from them. It is only when cornered, or when their escape routes are blocked, that they may claw or bite people who they perceive as a threat purely out of self-defence. Such video records and colorful descriptions that portray these cornered leopards as aggressors is in fact feeding this panic…for which there is no need.
 	
 	  	On reasons behind the human-leopard conflict in a city like Bengaluru Karanth: There are hundreds of leopards living in and around rural areas and towns of Karnataka.
 	
 	
 	The incidents of the so-called conflict are often generated when leopards are cornered by mobs, or leopards are captured in one place and dumped in another without understanding their biology. There is some killing of livestock, but even this is rare and can easily be compensated or, better still, prevented by good livestock-guarding practices.
 	
 	  	If depletion of their prey base is the cause, is there worse in waiting with more such incidents occurring? What do you think is the reason that draws the leopards from the fringes of the forests into the city?
 	
 	  	Karanth: Depletion of the prey base is not the cause. In fact, the reverse is true. Leopard numbers and range have increased in the last 30 years after hunting was banned and prey base in the form of domestic dogs has increased. These leopards are living in rural landscapes in high densities: They are not coming from some faraway forests. They enter urban areas usually at night to look for their favorite prey, street dogs, which are found by the thousands. Get rid of the dogs and the garbage that feeds them, and there will be fewer leopards looking for them.
 	
 	  	The MoEF advisory in 2011 states creation of emergency response teams. But we have none. Do you think the state government has miserably failed on this front with no quick response team till date?
 	
 	  	Vidya Athreya: So all these incidences are new for everyone concerned in Bengaluru. I am sure the forest authorities will respond quickly to resolve the issue. Already, the DCF has been talking to experts and other officials who have handled these situations and is taking action on the same. There is no point only pointing fingers where it is something all of us (police, forest, media, citizens, conservationists) have our role to play like we have done in Mumbai.