By: Harsha Bhat
 
 The Children’s India International Children’s Film Festival brings a bouquet of 200 films from across the world
 
 	Children’s films made by adults — it doesn’t sound right. Which is why movie buffs will be delighted to learn that the 9th edition of the Children’s India International Children Film Festival (CIICFF), that was inaugurated yesterday, focuses on a series of films made by children for children. Films by two Indian children — 15-year old Siddhanth Joshi’s Breaking the Silence and City of Tears and 16-year-old Jayashree Janu Kharbade’s Fire in our Heart — are among the 20 films made by children from seven countries that will be screened at the fest. 

 	Forty four countries will participate in the film festival that will show 200 screen children’s films from all over the world at five different venues across the city. In a first this year, open-air public screenings will be held at Boulevard Rangoli on MG Road throughout the day and Madhavan Park at Jayanagar in the evenings, apart from Bal Bhavan, Navrang and Badami House. 

 	“Apart from giving children exposure to cinema from across the globe, the festival attempts to mould young minds and make them global citizens using the medium of cinema,” says Festival Director NR Nanjunde Gowda. He is of the view that cinema can be used as a tool not only to break barriers and enhance the understanding of cultures, but also to enlighten children on issues such as poverty and social injustice, often tackled in films from Sri Lanka or Iraq. “It will also kindle creative aspirations among the kids as they watch young minds like them from across the world that have been part of the cinematic process,” adds Gowda. 

 	The special focus country this year is Denmark, “as after Netherlands and Iran, Denmark makes the most number of children’s films,” informs Gowda. There will be a special section of films on wildlife and environment this year. With free entry for children, (adults accompanying them can collect free passes at the festival office in My Sugar Building on JC Road), this event promises to be fun as well as educational. 

 

 	Jan 21 – 24, Rangoli Metro Art Centre; MG Road, Madhavan Park, Jayanagar; Bal Bhavan, Cubbon Park; Navrang, 	Rajajinagar; Badami House, Nagarathpet. Log on to www.childrensindia.org