Before I set out on this trip to the wild, I never knew how fortunate I would be to see all that I saw on this outing. I so nearly missed this experience of a lifetime. 

My friend Joshua invited me to join this adventure he had embarked on with his brother Ajith, who was back home for his holidays. I could not say no to him as he has been of immense help to me. But I could not commit instantly due to some problems. Finally I agreed to join the brothers on this trip.  

We travelled in Josh’s flaming red Zen to Masinagudi with the plan of visiting Bandipur and Mudumalai parks, and Josh’s estate in Gudalur. We had arranged for our camping at Quiet Corner in Masinagudi. 

Josh is only keen on wildlife and a bit in photography.  We took off for a day on Friday and reached Masinagudi late Thursday night to catch up on some sleep.

Day1: Saw bengal beauty
I have been through Bandipur many times but never got a chance to go on a safari ride. So this was my first safari ride here and also my first adventure with Joshua. The safari ride started in a cramped forest department bus. 

Half an hour into the ride, just as the thought of seeing nothing special crossed our minds, someone seated in front of me shouted “Tiger! Tiger!” Immediately all 70 legs on board sprang and jostled near the windows for a glimpse of the royal Bengal beauty. 

Many people don’t know how difficult it is to spot a tiger in the wild in South India. I forgot to zoom my camera properly. My hands were trembling and I somehow managed to peep out of the window and get a shot or two. The majestic beauty - an adult female - was trapped in the camera and in my eyes forever. 

The photographs were not as good as I was seated in the last seat and the tiger was seen in front of the bus and the window next to me was sealed! As the beast saw the bus she stared at us with a no nonsense casual look. Neither was she perturbed nor disturbed. After walking next to the bus for a few steps, she vanished into the bushes after giving a us a final look of disdain. This first sighting of the tiger will be a memorable one for me. 

This was Josh’s first sighting in South India. He thought lady luck had favoured him as I was with him. After the morning safari rounds we came back to Quiet Corner for some rest till evening. In the meantime we paid a visit to a rehabilitation centre in Masinagudi run by an NGO. This organisation takes care of all deserted and wounded animals. Some of the animals here include dogs, cats, monkeys, horses, donkeys and camels. We did four safaris that day at Bandipur.  In all safaris we had at Bandipur, Mudumalai and Masinagudi we spotted the tiger, sloth bear, sambar deer, Indian gaur, mouse deer, wild dogs, jungle cats, Malabar squirrel, Indian civet and many more. Many of them were first timers for me. I had never seen a civet or a mouse deer before. 

Day 2: met More jumbos
We had a slightly different plan for the day. The safari rides in Mudumalai didn’t let us down as we got to see the dholes, mongoose family, elephants, sambar during the rides. On the last safari ride in Mudumalai, we got to see the Moyar falls. Imagine being on a safari in the jungle, getting off the bus and walking to the nearby vantage point to spot the majestic falls. This was completely different than the one I had seen the last time near Moyar village. It’s the same river that plunges down in different places creating majestic sights.  

The experience at Josh’s estate in Gudalur was also wonderful with me getting wonderful birding opportunities along with Ajith, who was my guide cum encyclopaedia, as we roamed around the estate. The estate is full of tea and coffee plantations. I heard that porcupines reside at a particular rocky terrain in the estate and wild elephants frequently visit 
it. We were served a delicious meal cooked by the resident cook. We got to see the Malabar flying squirrel, racket tailed drongo, velvet fronted nuthatch and many more winged varieties. 

Day3: fell for waterfalls 
Being a Sunday and with just half-a-day at our disposal, we went trekking early in the morning around Masinagudi accompanied by local guides. It was a good “trexperience”. We almost bumped into wild elephants twice. Now trekking/walking is banned in the Masinagudi area as it is now being declared a buffer zone. On our drive back we visited the Ranganthittu bird sanctuary again for some more birding activity.   

It was a wonderful experience with loads of luck on our side and some good sightings. Bandipur didn’t disappoint us this time and now looking forward to more adventures in the jungles.  

The author works for a logistics MNC