There is large-scale environmental devastation in Kodagu district, the origin of the Cauvery. Political will and a little intelligence is all that’s needed to remedy the malaise
 
 
 As the Cauvery issue continues to simmer, there have been few solutions aimed at the very root of the problem. Failure of monsoon in Kodagu district, which is the birthplace of the Cauvery, is resulting in acute water shortage in the state of Karnataka. It is estimated that over 8 crore people and 600 major industries are today dependent on Cauvery water. But the reckless destruction of forests in the district has resulted in reduced rainfall and low water inflow into reservoirs in Cauvery catchment areas from where Bengaluru gets water.
 
 
 “At this time, when there is a serious conflict on sharing Cauvery water between Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, it would be vital to introspect on protecting the Cauvery Catchment in Kodagu from further damage and degradation,” said Col. Muthanna, President, Coorg Wildlife Society.
 
 
 He was speaking at a meeting jointly held by ‘Save River Cauvery Foundation’ and ‘Coorg Wildlife Society’ in the city on Thursday to draw attention to these real issues that are causing failure of monsoon in Kodagu. “Through Right to Information, we have confirmed that about 2,800 acres of land in Kodagu were converted for commercial purposes during the last 10 years,” says the group, adding that hundreds of fresh applications for land conversion are still pending. In many cases, land conversions and constructions are against the existing laws and regulations, and serious violations have taken place.
 
 
 Last year, over 55,000 trees were cut in Kodagu for a 400 KV High Tension Power Line from Mysuru to Kozhikode in Kerala. As a result of this tree loss, the volume of water inflow into KRS Dam is reducing, and the silt deposits in the dam are increasing.
 
 
 In addition to the damage that has already been done, there are also other plans on the anvil. “There are now plans to push a railway line through Kodagu and to widen the existing roads to two-lane and four-lane National Highways. This will again result in the destruction of several thousands of precious trees that provide water for the river Cauvery,” they said. An online campaign was conducted against the railway line with more than 17,000 signatures from supporters. “We are taking up a case with the government for detailed investigations into the land conversions and the constructions, and the law will take its course. The public should be cautious regarding advertisements in papers and other modes such as flyers, brochures etc regarding commercial properties in Kodagu such as sites, layouts, villas and gated communities.
 
 
 Many of these ventures are not in accordance with rules and regulations and you may lose your investments in these commercial properties. Demolition of constructions may also be possible,” said Col. Muthanna. He also expressed his concern over new layouts being ambitiously planned in Bengaluru, which will require more and more water at a time when the existing population does not have enough. “Imagine the scenario in 10 years if we do not stop the destruction of the Cauvery catchment area in Kodagu now. We are well aware of the ongoing legal complications with Tamil Nadu on water sharing,” he said.
 
 
 The agenda of the meeting essentially was to spread the message of “Halt destruction of Kodagu landscape. More green cover in Kodagu is a must to ensure sufficient water in Cauvery for both Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.”