By Iffath Fathima

While in 2020, 67 bonnet macaques had to be rescued, in 2021, the number of rescues had jumped up to 146 in the city’s concrete jungle

With rapid urbanisation, the number of rescues of bonnet macaques in the city has increased. From 67 rescues reported in 2020, the rescues rose to 146 in number in 2021.
 
The People For Animals (PFA), wildlife rescue and conservation centre located in Kengeri has seen a significant increase in the number of bonnet macaques rescues.
 
The rescues are more prominently in areas like Yelahanka, Banashankari, Sarjapur Road, Hebbal, Mahalakshmi Layout, Jalahalli Cross, Basweshvar Nagar, KR Puram.

Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, Chief veterinarian, PFA Wildlife Hospital pointed out that with the rapid urbanisation and building activities the macaques have lost their habitat. 

Loss of habitat
“With the number of buildings coming in and many trees being cut, they are losing their habitat at a fast pace. This apart, due to religious purposes, many people start to feed the macaques fruits in areas where the animals do not have have space to move. In order to move from one apartment to other apartment they use electric wires, which results in their electrocution. There has been a rise in incidence of electrocution. Some even fall from the buildings and get injured.” said Dr Shariff.
 
This apart, there have been cases of of people try to shoo them away by throwing stones at them and thereby injuring them. Dr Shariff also pointed out that with more awareness on rescue centres, people have started to call and report to centres. “Earlier many of the macaques would have even died as people were not aware whom to inform about the injured macaques. We have even had cases where macaques have been electrocuted and unattended to for over 4-5 days as people did not know who should they approach to. Now we get calls on our helpline number and the rescue officials go to the spot and rescue the macaques and thereby looking at the injury, we carry out the treatment.”

There are localities where at the garbage dump, food packets are thrown and macaques are seen there. We asked the people to maintain cleanliness– Dr Nawaz Shariff, PfA
Recently one adult macaque was seen going from one house to another, and a citizen noticed that the newborn was hanging in the uterus. While the baby was dead, the mother was moving around, one of the citizen noticed it informed the PFA team for its rescue. The macaque was then captured through a net and the adult macaque was given anaesthesia, and the baby was removed.
 
Dr Shariff also pointed out that alot of times people call them up to capture and relocated the macaques, however he said that according to the wildlife act, they cannot capture or relocated an animal. “We advise people to stop feeding them, once it’s stopped they will go away. There are localities where there is garbage dumping, wher
e food packets are thrown and the macaques are seen in such places. So we asked the people to maintain cleanliness around and avoid feeding them.”

The bonnet macaque is a protected species under the Schedule II (part 1) of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.