The state energy department’s plan to provide internet connectivity to its power generating units has run head-on into tiger conservationists who fear that the cable-laying works taken up within the tiger reserves could disturb the habitat of the big cats.
 	
 	  	The digging works for laying optical fibre cables to connect Nagihari Power Station with the Karnataka Power Corporation Limited (KPCL) in Ambikanagar (a distance of 10 Km) has been opposed by the tiger conservationists as works along 8 km fall within the Kali Tiger Reserve in Dandeli.
 	
 	  	Nagjhari is the second hydroelectric power station built across the river Kali in the Western Ghats. The power station consisting six generating units has an installed capacity of about 855 Mw. With the energy department in Karnataka implementing SCADA system (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) linking all generating stations with transmission centres, the linking of Nagjhari unit with KPCL exchange for ready telecast of power generation details is being viewed as crucial.
 	
 	  	However, the conservationists have complained to the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) that this could disturb the tiger habitat; and the NTCA has now called for a detailed project report. 	
 	
 	According to eye witnesses, a 2.5-foot-deep trench has been dug along the entire stretch with cable bundles at regular intervals. Documents made available under RTI by the NTCA have revealed that no prior permission was obtained to lay the cables. 
 	
 	  	Sources in the forest depa­rtment told Bangalore Mirror that work on laying optical fibre cables between Nagjhari power station and the KPCL exchange commenced a month ago.
 	
 	
 	 		“Out of the 10 km distance between both the places, about 8 km of area passes through the Kulgi Wildlife Range under the core area of Kali Tiger Reserve. This is in complete violation of the Wildlife Act. As per NTCA, new works like road widening, digging, construction has to be approved by MoEF or NTCA well in advance. But NTCA has clarified that it has not approved any proposal to lay cables between these places,” explained a conservationist from Sirsi.
 		
 		 	 		Apart from this, another user agency, too, has started digging up between Ambikanagar and Bhagavathi – a distance of about 15 km – to lay optical fibre cables without getting any prior approval from the NTCA.
 		
 		 	 		Director of Kali Tiger Reserve K Srinivasulu said, “The rule is very clear that no new works can be taken up. Only repair or maintenance works of the existing setup may be taken up. Similarly, the cables too have been laid in the existing place where the agencies have already laid telephone and other communication cables.” However, with the matter reaching out to NTCA, the officials in Bengaluru have ordered a field report about the entire incident.