Setting a bad precedence in the conservation history of the state, the state wildlife board has paved the way for the denotification of Kappatagudda as a conservation reserve. The 9th meeting of the State Wildlife Board, on Wednesday, decided to hold yet another round of public hearing pertaining to the declaration of Kappatagudda in Gadag as conservation reserve. Interestingly, the same wildlife board, a year ago, had resolved to declare the same hillock as a conservation reserve. In the meantime, the decision to initiate the process to denotify the biodiversity hotspot as a conservation reserve has triggered a huge backlash from conservationists. Kappatagudda is home to several wind farms and it contributes in a big way to the state grid. Of late, identification of iron and other minor mineral deposits have triggered an intense interest among mining giants to dig deep into the ecologically fragile Kappatagudda. However, the wildlife board’s decision to declare the hillock as a conservation reserve and ban such activities last year had left them frustrated. But now, the state government deciding to reconsider its earlier decision has triggered doubts whether the government has succumbed to the intense lobbying by the mining and windmill lobby.
 
 
 Sources in the wildlife board revealed to BM that some local organisations had raised objections over declaring it as conservation reserve on the pretext that proper public hearing pertaining to the issue was not conducted. Even though it was proposed to withdraw the earlier notification, the board decided to hold yet another round of public hearing before taking a decision.
 
 
 A senior official in the Karnataka Forest Department said, “It was declared as conservation reserve under section 36 (A) of the Wildlife Protection Act. It is impossible to directly repeal the decision as the matter has to be placed before the state legislature and only then it can denotify it.”
 
 
 Several members in the board protested against the decision, yet the department decided to reconsider the issue. A senior member of the board, requesting anonymity, said, “On the one hand, the government had decided to declare Ankasamudra in Hagaribommanahalli taluk of Ballari district as conservation reserve without any public hearing. On the other, it has decided to hold public consultation in this case. Why is that only in Kappatagudda that it has decided to hold another public consultation even after declaring it as conservation reserve a year ago? Today, the government has decided to denotify Kappatagudda, tomorrow it can happen to Nagarahole or Bandipur. This is for the first time in the history of the state that government has taken such a drastic decision.”
 
 
 Amidst decision that left many conservationists worried, the meeting has good news too. The government has decided to declare Southern birdwing (Troides minios) as the state butterlfy. Following the recommendation by the APCCF (Research) Sanjay Mohan, the board has cleared the proposal to declare the colourful butterfly as state butterfly. BM had first reported about the demand to declare it as butterfly and proposal to have it as state butterfly in its editions dated 1 June 2016 and 7 October 2015. The Wildlife Board has cleared proposals to lay optical fibre cable through forest areas, including protected areas.
 
 
 The board has also agreed to declare Ankasamudra Lake, spread across 224 acres in Ballari district, as bird conservation reserve. Further, the board has also sought a resolution from the Ummathur Gram Panchayat in Chamarajanagar district to declare the village as Black Buck sanctuary.