While locals are yet to explore Kayaking, backwaters of Mangaluru are attracting techies from all over India
 
 	The backwaters of Mangaluru is growing into a hub for kayaking enthusiasts from Bengaluru and Mumbai. 

 	Kayaking is an adventure sport where participants use specialised boats called kayaks in a wide variety of waterways. 

 	Kiran Kumar from Mangalurubased Mantra Surf Club — India’s first surf club dedicated to introducing surfing in India and India to the international surfing community — says that most of the adrenaline junkies heading to Mangaluru from Mumbai and Bengaluru on weekends are techies. “They come here to surf and take up related activities like stand-up paddling and kayaking. 

 	Every month we get about two such groups comprising 6-7 people. 

 	Generally men surf, while women prefer kayaking.” “However, kayaking has not picked up with the locals. Kayaking as an industry here is yet to grow. 

 	Kerala knows what it is doing and how to use resources, when it comes to kayaking,” he said. 

 	Mangaluru residents G N Ashokvardhan (62) and his wife Devaki (56) are into kayaking. After travelling on their tandem cycle and popularising the same, the duo purchased a two-seater kayak recently. 

 	Ashokvardhan, an environmentalist, says, “After mountaineering, we decided to take up kayaking to explore several islands and rivers. I don’t like to admire nature from at a distance. 

 	“People go to beaches only to sit and eat ice-cream or churumuri and never get into water. In the past we have undertaken kayaking at Lakshadweep or Ooty. We will explore several islands and river and document the same. River bodies getting polluting at a greater rate. We are doing this to create awareness,” he said. 

 	It may be recalled that eight surfers Partha Varanashi (surfer and swimming coach from Puttur), Gowri Varanashi (conservationist and wildlife photographer) Neeti Mahesh (conservationist), Paul Rosolie (explorer, conservationist, author), Kishore Kumar (surfer), Satyaraj Das (surfer), Shamanth Kumar (surfer) and Arjun Achar (surfer) undertook a kayaking expedition from Seere river to west about 38km where it reaches the Arabian Sea in an attempt to popularise kayaking last year. 

 	Partha Varanashi said, “We are blessed with many rivers in South India. We need to explore water adventure sports rather than stay at home and watch TV. Kayaks are available in India in outdoor shops. 

 	Kayaking is one of the best ways to explore the rivers and get ourselves close to nature. 

 	“We would love to have events where people who have kayaks can come and join for weekend getaway expeditions and create awareness of outdoor adventure among fellow countrymen. There are about 10 people who own kayaks in this region.”