The 12-minute film will be screened at fest dedicated to inform, engage and inspire global wildlife conservation
 
 
 	Crabs of Karwar, a 12-minute short film, which is an outcome of intense documentation, has been selected for the WildLife Conservation Film Festival (WCFF) to be held in New York this October. The WCFF is a unique film festival dedicated to inform, engage and inspire global wildlife conservation and biodiversity.
 	
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Adarsh J Raju, co-producer of the short film, a conservationist and an employee with Oracle, said, “Wildlife is not restricted to tigers and elephants. We have documented at least eight species of crabs and each one has its own character. We had collected about 500GB of videos and went through several brainstorming sessions to make a film of 12 minutes. We had so much content. For most people, crabs are often thought of as a delicacy. We tried to cover all aspects of the crabs including its sale in fish markets and hotels, apart from documenting them on the beaches,” he said.
 	
 The journey into documenting crabs began in 2013, when Radha Rangarajan, an employee of Dell who also curates the online magazine JLR Explore for Jungle Lodges and Resorts, spent a few days at Devbagh Beach resort to document mangroves. That was when she spotted solider crabs. They were about 1,000 in number and were marching. She told Adarsh that they needed to be documented. The idea seemed exciting for Adarsh, who had just returned from the US. Another enthusiast, Shreeram MV, founder and mentor at Darter Photo-graphy professional and a wildlife photographer, naturalist and traveller also chipped in.
 	  	
 	“Whenever there was low tide, we were amazed to find species such as Fiddlers or ghost crabs that would come out at dusk. Shooting crabs is indeed a challenge as one has to actually go down to the level of the crab’s eye. Initially, we would shoot anything and everything. That was the time we got to interact with Pradnya Bandekar, a researcher, and Karthikeyan, who is associated with the Jungle lodges, and who had documented a few crabs of Karnataka. We were mesmerised by the beauty of the crabs. The manner in which the male ‘Dhobi’ crabs moved their arms to attract females was amazing and we gradually started scripting. Initially, we had no ideal of filmmaking. As we shot for three months from March to May (2014), in between, we also did a course on filmmaking,” said Adarsh.
 	  	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	‘Pakke Paga’ to be premiered
 	
 Adarsh has two reasons to celebrate. Another film documented by him Pakke Paga, a 12-minute short film on protecting the hornbills of Arunachal Pradesh, has also been selected for the WCFF. Adarsh said, Pakke Tiger Reserve there is a haven for several of hornbills that faced threat from hunting. “The Nature Conservation Foundation has been doing lot of research in the area. I met Hornbill conservator Aparajita Datta who has been actively studying hornbills since 1995. The dominant tribe in Pakke is the Nyishi community. The Nyishis use the upper beak of the hornbill for their traditional headgear, which is a symbol of pride and masculinity. With support of the DFO Tana Tapi who is also from the Nyishi community, Hornbill Nest Adoption Program in partnership with the Ghora-Aabhe Society was launched in 2011. During the breeding season, the female seals herself inside the nest, leaving only a slit for the male to bring back food for the family. They thus become extremely vulnerable to hunting and habitat loss. Since I was adopting a nest, when on a sabbatical, I decided to go to Arunachal and document the Hornbill Nest Adoption Programme, which included interaction with local community,” he said.