Everybody is a photographer these days! We love capturing for posterity the emotions, fun and togetherness of friends and family in a frame. However, taking a good photo is still an art. How many times have we come back to find that the one photo we thought was absolutely priceless is underexposed or blurred. Here, three professional photographers share their tips on some basic, yet important photography skills, which will help you take 
 photographs that can be timeless representations of life.
                                   Shot by&nbsp; Shibu in Paro, Bhutan          Shibu Arakkal on travel photography
 » Travel light. Most people today can afford to buy expensive and bulky camera equipment. But honestly, if you are tied down with heavy baggage, you often can’t do things like trekking up the mountains or going long distances. Plan ahead and carry only what you need. A camera, a good lens, another one only if needed and a small tripod.
 » Some of the most common but beautiful sights when travelling is that of a sunset or a sunrise. Even the most basic of point and shoot cameras have what is known as metering. This is basically a measure of light levels in an entire frame and once set, the camera takes an average of the darkest and lightest points and gives you the optimal mode on which to shoot a picture. In some cases, the metering can be cheated by the light conditions at that point and you can end up with a dark photo. To counter this, it would be best to set the metering or the brightness of the camera two notches higher than the general setting. This will assure you of a good photo. When choosing a point and shoot camera, it would help to look at how wide the lens is. The best ones to pick up are those that have 24mm lenses. This way, no matter how wide your frame or how tall a subject is, you will always be able to take a photo of it. Should you not have a wide lens, then shooting a monument from a low angle, looking upwards will ensure you good shots.
 » Carry a tripod; not one of those huge bulky ones but a small one, which is around 12” to 15” when closed and completely lightweight. This is great for night shots or those that require you to work on low shutter speeds. 
 » When you are looking through the viewfinder of the camera, make sure that you also pay attention to the edges of your frame. Let there be nothing sticking into your frame, which will surely disturb the picture.
 » Never take photos of monuments or travel spots at eye level.  A high or low or any other angle is what will help you make a simple picture all the more dramatic. 
 » Even simple point and shoot cameras allow you to take pictures by changing the brightness levels you have on it. This is often denoted with a plus or minus sign on the specific menu. Use this to take multiple shots in varying exposures or brightness. This way you will never end up not having a good shot of the scene. It’s an insurance of sorts since you cannot really go back there. 
                                   Shot by Kalyan          Mayur Channagere on people photography
 » When you are shooting strangers, make a connection. Gesture to your camera for permission. Sometimes, a smile alone is enough to break the ice and people will be more comfortable in front of the camera. 
 » Every person has a characteristic or a feature that is worth highlighting. Learn to pick this feature out. For example, if you  find that somebody has beautiful eyes and that is what you want to highlight, try and get what is known as the catch light in the eyes. This is a reflection of light on the eyes in such a way as to create a glint or add more depth. This can be done with natural lights around you and in an artificial set up as well. You can also develop the knack of understanding what good features are to highlight by turning back to art. Paintings give you a great understanding of lighting, angles and expressions. Observe these to develop your sensibilities.
 » Move away from tight close-ups. There is more to people photos than just the close-up with a blurred background. Use the surroundings to enhance a picture. Use it as a contrast or complement to the person you are shooting. This can be when the subject is at work, play or leisure. Every environment provides a completely different background.
 » Taking a top angle shot, especially of children can intimidate your subject. Try and take a photo of a person at eye level and they will be much more comfortable. This can get you a good photo, but not necessarily the ideal ambience. That is why it is also important to factor in the person’s reaction to you taking a photo. The more comfortable they are, the better the photo.   
 » When you are shooting people, it’s always good to have a camera that works with good and fast shutter speed. This is especially important when on the streets. If you have a point and shoot, then use your flash, even in bright daylight. This will give your camera the added speed it will need. But a good idea would be to carry a roll of scotch tape with you. Mask the flash a bit so that it gives you the fill-in-light without completely flattening the image. Using the flash in a toned down manner can really make a difference to your portraits. 
 » When you are indulging in some street photography, make sure you are facing the crowd.
 » While taking photos of people, it is imperative that you avoid the ‘red eye’. When pupils look at something bright, they shrink, reducing the potential for red-eye; glancing at a bright light source right before the photo is taken helps.
 » While taking photos of babies, get down to their level for the best shots.
 » Cloudy overcast days are the best for shooting people since it gives a flattering soft light, rather than sunny days when the light casts harsh shadows. Even on sunny days, you can move the subject to a shady area and use fill-flash to get beautifully-lit photos.
 
                                  Shot by Mayur          Kalyan Varma on wildlife photography
 » Forget exotic places, look in your own backyard. Most people think that wildlife photography is all about exotic places, pitching camp and waiting for hours on end for the right photo. While it is so in rare cases, it is not really true most times. There are so many places close to home that one can visit like Lalbagh, Hebbal, Nandi Hills and even Ramnagar for some great wildlife.
 » Do not get carried away by big animals. Of course they look impressive, but in the bargain, the wealth of images that, say, the insect kingdom can provide you are lost entirely. Try and shoot animals in their natural environment for authentic shots. If it is birds, chart their migratory routes, stake out the trees that they eat off. For animals, look for the flowers or berries that they feed on. All of these locations will ensure you great and natural backgrounds for your animal shots. For insects, look for them on leaves, flowers, in the nooks and corners of the house etc. 
 » Macro mode for insects. Almost every point and shoot camera these days comes with a macro mode option. This will basically tell your camera to focus on something very close to the lens. This closeness, of course, will vary with the model of the camera you have. For an amateur, the investment in such cameras is cheaper and the images of good quality. 
 »  Research is an integral part of getting a good photo of an animal. Meet specialists like wildlife biologists and spend time with them on the field for a better understanding of animals. Join forums where people share information. You will be able to keep track of latest sightings and the experiences of others. It is only when you share thoughts with peers and experts that you will be able to improve on your photo-taking.