700+ new cases in April- December 2023; Bengaluru’s 121 cases alarming, say experts

Between April and December 2023, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) registered more than 700 fresh forest encroachment cases across the state. According to the department’s latest interim annual report, the majority of these cases were registered from Shivamogga circle (142), followed by Belagavi (128), and Bengaluru (121) circles. With 716 fresh encroachment cases, the department now has over 45,000 cases of forest encroachments pending eviction.

Out of the 121 encroachment cases from Bengaluru Circle, 81 cases were registered from the Chikkaballapura division, 20 encroachment cases were registered from Bengaluru Urban and 19 from Bengaluru Rural divisions.

“Over 100 encroachment cases from Bengaluru Circle is alarming. The department must focus on Chikkaballapur division as real estate is eating into forest patches in the area. So many encroachments despite the Supreme Court’s judgment in 2002 amount to the court’s contempt. The judgment mentions that any encroachment on forest land should be immediately evicted and disciplinary action must be taken against senior officials responsible,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.
 
The Supreme Court in 2002 had stated that no fresh encroachments of forest land should be allowed and in case of violations, the official concerned, which is the Deputy Conservator of Forest (DCF) of the sub-division, should be held liable. Any forest department officials giving the opportunity to encroachers can also be prosecuted.

Conservationists highlight an order passed by the Head of Forest Force, Karnataka Forest Department 2018.

“The order was regarding disciplinary action against all officials from the rank of chief conservator of forest to forest guard, under whom encroachment had taken place and eviction did not happen immediately. However, there is hardly any disciplinary action against officials in encroachment cases. This shows the department is not serious about this issue,” said a city-based conservationist.

Activists also say while the primary duty of the KFD officials is to conserve existing forest cover and ensure the eviction of illegal encroachments, the department is more devoted to development work.

“While thousands of hectares of forest land is being encroached every year, no action is being taken against KFD officials. A guideline issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MOEF&CC) a few years ago states that in case of any fresh occupation of forest land, the state government shall hold the concerned District Magistrate and Controller, Superintendent of Police, and the Divisional Forest Officer personally responsible and they should be liable for disciplinary action. However, in reality, no disciplinary action is being taken,” said a wildlife activist and added that such a high number of encroachments goes to show that the majority of the PCCFs, CCFs, CFs, DCFs, ACFs, and RFOs of forest department have failed to perform their duty.