Having learnt from the ‘man-eater’ episode of Khanapura near Belagavi that available information on wild animals is insufficient, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has decided to sever its relationship with eco-conservation NGOs for collaring and tracking of animals. The department will buy collars and have them fixed on wild animals by its own trained staff hereafter. Further, the department will become the first in the country to have a complete database of tigers that will come handy in identifying tigers by their names. 

 	Following directions of National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), the department has decided to work on its own when it comes to collaring and tracking of animals. While the collars will be procured from a US-based company, the expenses will be borne by Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India (WII). 

 	This apart, the department will have a complete digital database of tigers present in the forests of Karnataka. 

 	Confirming the decision of the department, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), Vinay Luthra said, “NTCA had written to us to function in our own capacity to fix collars on wild animals. Following the directive, we have decided not to depend on NGOs anymore to fix collars on animals. WII is willing to fund procurement of the collars, and our staff will be trained by WII experts to fix them on animals.” 

 	Though the department is yet to finalise on the particulars of the required collars, officials have decided to buy different collars for different animals ranging from medium (tigers, leopards) to large mammals (elephants). 

 	“WII will help us in getting the best and latest collars. The cost of each collar may vary from Rs 2–3 lakh. The collars will be capable of tracking animals through the global positioning system (GPS), based on satellite signals and very high frequency (VHF) transmission. Initially, about five to six collars will be purchased and kept for the purpose,” Luthra said. 

 	A source from KFD revealed that the collars would be self-timed to fall off with the expiry of the battery. “The weight of the collar is likely to be between 300 and 400 gm and capable of collecting 8,200 latitude/longitude locations. The collar can transmit signals for about 13 months. The collar will deliver superior performance even under a thick forest canopy,” explained a senior forest official. 

 	Backing the decision of KFD, Information and Communications Technology (ICT) wing of the department has embarked on a mission to set up a complete digital database of all tigers inhabiting Karnataka forests. 

 	The department will use ‘Extract-compare photo ID software’ to identify individual tigers. 

 	Based on its stripe pattern, every tiger in the state has been photographed and named.