Already busy finding a solution to the mounting elephantine problem across the state, the forest department has another headache. The tiger  which recently spread panic in villages of Virajpet has resurfaced.
   Even as officials are trying to verify whether the same elusive tiger has strayed out of forest after a month of hiatus, the big cat has injured two buffaloes and killed a cow in one day.
   On Sunday, a few residents of Birunani spotted a tiger on the outskirts of the village. “The tiger attacked two buffaloes on Sunday while they were grazing outside the village. It also killed a cow in the night. We do not know whether the same tiger has come back or it is another one. The attack on livestock has spread fear among villagers,” said Sachin Mandanna, a planter in Virajpet taluk.
   Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) B K Singh said, “I am yet to get reports about the tiger attack. Our officers and personnel in Kodagu Circle are on the lookout for the animal. Only after they report back to me, I will be able to confirm whether it is the same tiger or another one.” 
   “We have started a search for the tiger though we are awaiting permission from the higher-ups for a full-fledged combing operation,” said a junior forest officer from Virajpet.
   Almost a month ago, a tiger had terrorised the villagers of Srimangala hobli in Virajpet taluk by killing more than 20 heads of cattle. Several senior forest officials and MLA of Virajpet K G Bopaiah visited the locations and met the affected families. 
   Pressured by the people, Bopaiah had even sought implementation of Section 11 of the Indian Wildlife Act and permission to shoot the tiger, over which the forest department and local leaders locked horns (Bangalore Mirror, November 10).
   Though sharp shooters were engaged to tranquillise and rescue the tiger, it eluded them for a few days and disappeared into the forest. The officials scouting for the tiger traced the pug marks of the big cat leading to Nagarahole and assumed it had gone back into the forest.