The spectacular landscape of coastal Karnataka that supports great floraL and faunal diversity throughout the year, especially in the monsoons, is often perceived as wastelands by government authorities as well as local communities. Now, 24-year-old conservationist Ramit Singal is undertaking an assessment of faunal diversity along the laterite landscapes of the state's coastal plains and conservation of the same through wide-scale community involvement. 

 Speaking to Mirror, he said the project, funded by The Rufford Foundation, aims to fully document and assess the faunal diversity, specifically birds, mammals, amphibians, reptiles, butterflies and dragonflies in the (iron-oxide rich) laterite hill landscapes of Manipal and surrounding regions in Udupi district. Surveys will be conducted to note the presence of any human-wildlife conflict as well as to take down observations from the local residents regarding change in wildlife patterns over the past decade. There is currently no such data available for the region. Trained naturalists as well as volunteers from local communities, schools, universities and villages will be participating in the surveys and data collection. “We will also be using photographic and video documentation techniques to come up with various presentations and shorts films about the region and its fauna. These will incorporate the data collected through the surveys and will be used during the project to spread awareness through screenings and small festivals across the region where laterite landscapes are predominant,” he said. 

 	“The project that began in August this year has a dedicated team of at least four members at any given time, mostly students from Manipal University. The basic amphibian surveys for this season have been completed,“Ramit said. 

 

 	FROGS play a big role 

 	A poster to showcase amphibian life in monsoon wetlands formed in laterite grasslands has already been distributed to local schools of the region. During the process, they have possibly discovered a new species of frog. Frogs play an important role in the food web of wetlands and rivers and if frogs disappear from an area, the whole ecosystem can suffer. The thin, porous skin of frogs and tadpoles makes them sensitive creatures. Through this skin, they absorb chemicals from the air and water. For this reason, frogs are good indicators of environmental damage. If you hear many frogs in an area, it means that the local environment is unspoiled, he said. 

 	Ramit, who hails from Delhi, completed his engineering in Instrumentation and Control Engineering from Manipal University and was associated with the Centre for Wildlife Studies in Bengaluru. He has to his credit A Birder's Handbook to Manipal which is a result of three-and-a-half years of documentation and compiling of data that he had collected about birds in Manipal. He is the son Dr Dinesh, a gastroenterologist and Dr Archana, a dermatologist. 

 Sharing his experience, Ramit said, “For someone from Delhi who’s moved to a place so close to nature as Manipal, almost everything initially is a memorable experience. Watching my first big flock of Malabar Pied Hornbills stands out, as does coming face-to-face with a leopard, observing South India's first documented sighting of the Pale Rock Sparrow, being up close with so many endemic and intriguing species of all forms of life, introducing many people to bird watching, the book release, all have made for a very memorable journey so far. I would encourage everyone to go out and observe nature as much as possible. Appreciation and understanding of nature is impossible if we continue to ignore the flora and fauna around us. Citizen Science is picking up.”