Two wild animals rescued from Kathriguppe and Yelahanka await release
 
 A city based wildlife rescue centre has written to the Karnataka Forest Department seeking permission to release two rescued jackals — schedule II animals — back into the forest areas of the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. The animals were rescued from Kathriguppe and Yelahanka.

While a pup was rescued from Kathriguppe, an adult jackal was rescued from the parking space of an apartment complex in Yelahanka.

“We received a call a couple of months ago regarding a dog howling on the balcony of a building. The person who called us was doubtful if it was a dog. We requested the informer to share a video; to our surprise, it turned out to be an Indian Jackal pup. We received another call regarding a Jackal displaced inside a building’s parking area in Yelahanka. This animal was starved, dehydrated and had hypercalcemia at the time of the rescue,” said Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA wildlife hospital.

Jackals in India are protected under Schedule II of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. Police have the power to seize such animals and send them to infirmaries for treatment or rehabilitation before they can be released.

According to Rahul J, rehabilitator at PFA, with a proper diet, calcium supplements and boosted wild instincts, the adult jackal has recovered from his trauma and gained good health.

“Jackals are foragers; hiding or scattering food in their enclosure encourages this natural feeding behaviour. We nurtured this instinct by hiding a mixture of meat and pellets under branches/piles of logs, or scattered around the enclosure to encourage the jackals to retrieve food by either grabbing with teeth or paws,” said Rahul. Both the jackals are now fit to be released in the wild.

“We are awaiting their release. We have requested the Karnataka Forest Department to help us in the ‘soft-release’ of these two rehabilitated jackals back into the wild. Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, Muthathi, is a suitable habitat with a good distribution of golden jackals, along the Cauvery river. We are planning to ‘soft-release’ them in the sanctuary as soon as the forest department gives clearance,” said Colonel (Dr) Shariff.

Wildlife experts are not amused
According to wildlife researchers and conservationists, rescues should not happen unless the animal is grievously injured and in need of help.

“While we fragment urban green spaces and spread deeper into urban forests, we are highly unaware of how to deal with a situation like this. Wild animals should not be taken to rescue centres unless they are injured or pose a threat. Even if spotted, they should be left alone till it is dark. They will disappear into their natural habitat in no time. We increase the chance of their displacement by rescuing them,” said wildlife researcher Ramesh Belagere.

Jackals are foragers; hiding or scattering food in their enclosure encourages natural feeding behaviour–Rahul J, rehabilitator at PFA

Experts said while sightings of wildlife are not uncommon in the city, lack of awareness about local fauna among the urban population is an issue that needs to be addressed.

“There is huge pressure on the city landscape; it is impossible to make space for the ever-increasing human population without clearing green patches. Wild animals are bound to be seen more frequently as we end up encroaching upon their space. The least we can do is learn about them and understand how to manage a situation involving wildlife in a converted landscape,” said another wildlife activist