If you encounter a leopard in the city, worry not, you may soon be able to dial for help. The forest department is in the process of launching a dedicated helpline number for leopard rescues.

A senior forest department official said, “The dedicated leopard task force will have 35 members, including veterinarians, equipped with all necessary tools, such as snares and other protective gear. The team will undergo extensive training, and a dedicated helpline will be established. If anyone calls, this team will promptly come to the rescue of the leopard.”

According to the official, a few staff members will oversee the operations. “We will hire around 35 staffers on an outsourced basis. They will be provided with modern equipment and undergo special training at the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, or any other suitable training facility.”

After a leopard startled residents of Kudlu area recently and a rescue operation that eventually led to the killing of the big cat, Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre announced the formation of a task force to address future human-leopard conflict cases. The task force will be led by the Deputy Conservator of Forest.

Task force to keep eye on big cats in BengaluruThe team will be headed by the Deputy Conservator of Forest, either wildlife or territorial. The task force will also include an assistant conservator of forest, one range forest officer, four deputy range forest officers, eight forest guards, and 40 watchers. According to the officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), a proposal for this will soon be sent to the government and the task force will be constituted in a month from now.​

Wildlife scientist Sanjay Gubbi had previously urged the State Government to incorporate a curriculum of at least one week of training on human-wildlife conflict in the Forest Watcher, Forest Guard, Deputy Range Forest Officer, and Range Forest Officer training schools. He also insisted that these courses should be mandatory for all Forest Department personnel.