By: S Shyam Prasad and Niranjan Kaggere
 
 After his controversial remark that encroachers of less than 10 acres of forest land would not be evicted, forest minister Ramanath Rai tries to set the record straight by saying encroachers around Bangalore will not get any such ‘leniency’
 
 Attempts at social engineering by our netas — read, playing to the gallery — quite often end in the cure being worse than the disease. Take the recent pronouncement by state forest minister Ramanath Rai that ‘poor people’ who have encroached on “less than 10 acres of forest land” will not be evicted. Environmentalists and legal experts fear such a statement coming from a minister could put thousands of acres of encroached forest land outside the ambit of the law.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Rai tried to set the record straight, saying, “In the Malnad region, large encroachments, each much bigger than 10 acres, have taken place. Our focus right now is on such encroachments. If estates, resort owners and such others have encroached on even a cent of forest land, they will be evicted. Clearing minor encroachments less than 10 acres will be taken up gradually in a phased manner.”
 
 In the backdrop of the nexus between the land mafia and encroachments of forest land around Bangalore, the minister resorted to further damge control, saying, “Encroachers in Bangalore need not cheer. Bangalore is a different case altogether. Encroachers here cannot be treated like tribal people in the Malnad region. They will be dealt with seriously.”
 
 Needless to say, the law itself has no place for such a selective approach. The amendment in 1983 to Section 2 of the Forest Conservation Act has made it mandatory to get the Central government’s permission to divert any forest land for non-forest activities. Moreover, the landmark TN Godavarman Thirumulkpad judgment by the Supreme Court says that irrespective of the ownership of forest land, it has to be protected. Section 64(A) of the Karnataka Forest Act also makes it mandatory to evict anyone who has encroached on forest land.
 
 Environmentalists and legal experts fear the 10-acre loophole will create major complications. Advocate AV Amarnath, who has filed several PILs related to environmental issues in the High Court of Karnataka, said, “This seems to be an attempt to erase the distinction between forest dwellers and encroachers. Two months ago, the Governor had said that he would partly approve the Akrama-Sakrama scheme by which only government land encroached in villages for building residences would be regularised. Ten acres anywhere is not a small piece of land and more than what is required for building residences. More than poor farmers, we find politicians and their ilk encroaching on forest land in the belief that their clout will prevent repossession of the land by the government. Saving what is left of our forests is important, even if it is 10 acres at a time.”
 
 Citing the case of a former minister who was denied a cabinet berth in the current Congress government following charges that he had encroached on forest land in the region bordering Andhra Pradesh, activists pointed out, “The present move will help such politicians.”
 
 Advocate Ponnanna Subbaiah, who represents many villagers against the forest department in several cases, had a different perspective on the issue. He said, “Forest land as defined under the law has to be protected and cleared of encroachments. However, forests as per the forest department’s definition are not necessarily forests and they are trying to bring it under the deemed forest category. Encroachers or unauthorised occupants of such land must get the protection available under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act and rules, and to this extent the minister may be justified.”
 
 Eating into Bannerghatta Park  A report by the deputy conservator of forests had found 699 cases of encroachment in the Bannerghatta National Park. The extent of encroachment identified was 442.32 hectares (1,093 acres). The maximum encroachment was found in the Bannerghatta wildlife range (439) followed by the Anekal wildlife range (141) and the Harohalli wildlife range (119) in the national park. Curiously, most of the encroachments range between one and two acres. 
 
 The report, which was tabled in the Assembly in April 2007, has been put in cold storage and buildings continue to crop up on the encroached land. As the only wildlife area near Bangalore, the Bannerghatta forest is under tremendous pressure. At a conservative estimate of Rs 1 crore per acre, the value of encroached forest land in Bannerghatta alone is worth more than Rs 1,000 crore.