Residents say the macaques, though playful, were part of their lives; resolve to create awareness to prevent a repeat
 
 In an unusual gesture, staff at the Raheja Residency and residents of the nearby Oakwood Apartments at Koramangala 3rd Block have organised a shraddhanjali (tribute) function next Tuesday to mourn the death of the two monkeys (bonnet macaques), which were shot dead last week.
 
 |After gunning down two monkeys, man on the run|
 
 The two monkeys were allegedly shot by one of the residents of Raheja Residency, identified as Roopesh, who is now on the run with a case slapped against him for violation of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 (WPA).
 
 Residents say the monkeys, though mischievous, were part of their lives. Says 76-year-old Mira Sikand, a resident of Oakwood Apartments, “They were regulars at my place and I was shocked to read in Bangalore Mirror that they were shot. This was very painful as they had become my pets and visited my penthouse to steal bananas. Though we have two huge dogs, these monkeys were never scared of them and roamed around freely.”
 
 Now, she says, only the babies turn up. Last Saturday, residents had turned teary-eyed after witnessing the heartbroken babies mourning beside the corpses of the dead female monkeys, one of which was pregnant.
 
 So Tuesday’s tribute is indeed in order. As if to make up in some small measure, Mira has made a solemn promise: “The babies will be well taken care of.” The tribute function will be funded by money collected by the drivers and the security staff, and is aimed to create awareness about animal safety. Another resident R Ramesh told Bangalore Mirror, “The place belonged to them first. People came later. So, we want to tell people that they should be spared.”
 
 K R Puram Range Forest Officer Eranna B now has a better idea of the shooting incident after receiving the post-mortem report from Bannerghatta National Park, which confirmed that the monkeys died of bullet injuries. According to him, four bullets were fired at them using the as-yet-unidentified gun. Roopesh is believed to have fired from the second floor balcony of his residence at a troop of five monkeys, including two babies.
 
 He faces the prospect of imprisonment since the shooting is considered a serious offence. Bonnet macaques are listed in Schedule II, Part 1, of the law, and, therefore, punishment can go up to three years in jail. An FIR has been filed against Roopesh for hunting and violating Section 9 of the WPA.
 
 Monkeys roaming the urban landscape without a sanctuary are the victims of human encroachment on their living space. Mira, who has lived in the area since 1993, says monkeys, along with other animals and birds, probably lived in the green lung space around the nearby John Fowler property, where trees have since been cut down.