Conservationist launches initiative where people can visit homes which have biodiversity-rich backyards
 
 A conservationist in Manipal has hit upon a novel idea to preserve biodiversity in people’s backyards by including them in a nature walk.
 
 Ramit Singal announced the launch of the Manipal Backyard Frog Walk on Tuesday, wherein participants get to visit homes of people, whose compounds house a green patch, to observe the biodiversity there.
 
 The green initiative took off on Wednesday from the house of of Sowmya Madhukar Nayak, a teacher at Sharada Residency School, near Saralabettu in Manipal.
 
 The programme aims not only to help the house owners financially, but also help conserve the biodiversity present in their own backyards.
 
 “We are experimenting with a new conservation model where people with rich biodiversity in their backyards open them up to those who want to learn and observe,” he said.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Ramit Singal said many houses in Manipal have huge compounds with a rich variety of flora and fauna. Singal says he had made this discovery while surveying neighbourhoods for snakes and frogs.
 
 “These house owners were not aware their backyard was supporting so many species and after visits and talks, they have been genuinely surprised by the diversity their land supports,” he said.
 
 Singal said they have already earmarked about 10 houses and hope to extend the programme in September by including more houses.
 
 “With this programme, we will not only step up conservation activities across Manipal, but also involve the common man in the mission,” he said.
 
 The project is supported by The Rufford Foundation. Explaining the financial aspect of the walk, Singal said the fees would be Rs 300 per adult and Rs 100 per student.
 
 “About fifty per cent of the proceeds from these walks will go to the house owners who maintain this habitat and the remaining will go to fund libraries of local schools with books about wildlife in India,” he said.
 
 What to expect at Sowmya’s house
 
 This house has a natural pound of 20x20 metres which is on a 35x50 metre green patch. We have already recorded about 10 species of snakes, 15 species of frogs and over 50 species of birds. Among the various frog species recorded in this  compound is the Malabar Gliding Frog which is found in the Western Ghats. These frogs are one of the largest moss frogs. Males are smaller than females. These frogs can glide up to 20 mts between trees.