Allow us to take our vehicles into the forest, they ask CM
 
 There is no such thing as a free lunch, they say. This basic economic theory is spot on when it comes to Karnataka’s wildlife board.
 
 Some of the newly appointed board members and honorary wildlife wardens have reportedly asked the chief minister (since he’s the chairman of the state wildlife board) to allow them to take their cars into the 30 wildlife sanctuaries and five national parks in Karnataka.
 
 This is in gross violation of the Supreme Court ruling that says that only vehicles of government undertakings must be allowed inside the tourism and core areas of the country’s reserved forests.
 
 Also, as per rules, members of the wildlife board or honorary wildlife wardens must enter the forest in a KFD vehicle accompanied by an officer above the rank of Range Forest Officer. Just a few days back, the Siddaramaiah government had courted controversy by appointing political persons and those accused of transgressions in the forests to the state wildlife board.
 
 
 
 
 
 The latest demand, which many in the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) say has nothing to do with actual conservation work, seems to be all about the members’ and wardens’ comfort. Retired KFD officials told Bangalore Mirror the appointees were exploiting a rule under which the Chief Wildlife Warden of the state can issue a special permission allowing ‘public servants’ as defined under Rule 27 of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 entry into the reserved forests in their personal vehicles. Some of the members have now requested the CM to ensure that they are extended the same courtesy as other “public servants”.
 
 A senior officer from KFD said that a meeting of all the honorary wildlife wardens was convened a few days ago and a few of them requested ‘special permission’ to go into the forests in their private vehicles. “We only told them that we will look into it. If we yield to one person’s demands today, another person will come with a request tomorrow and then there will be no end to it. Karnataka is known for its stringent conservational measures and the results are there for all to see; we have the healthiest population of tigers and elephants. We will not allow any private vehicles,” the officer said on condition of anonymity.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A similar request was made last year – and granted. “As the direction came from the CM himself, we had to give permission. The members and wardens argued that they needed to interact with the KFD field staff and villagers inside the forest. Even though we assured them that we will provide them with department vehicles, they demanded permission to drive in their swanky SUVs. If it is for conservation purpose, the logistics arrangement of private or department vehicles does not arise as they will be driven to their place of visit safely. It is only for their own comfort that they make such demands,” a retired KFD officer said. The government had given in to the demands, albeit with riders: the permission was granted only for six months provided the SUV was either green, black or ash-coloured; had a CRDe engine and had a rexin top. The wardens were asked to enter the forests in dull-coloured clothes.