A mother’s instinct, unfathomable but precise, helped Radha Raju recognise her child’s impairment at an early stage when hearing screening for small children was almost unheard of. It is thanks to that instinct that her 38-year son is an achiever and a successful individual in his own right. A yoga instructor and corporate trainer, Radha’s foremost advice to parents of such children is to help them lead a normal life without stressing too much on their impairment.
   “There is much more to your child than being hearing impaired. The worst a parent can do is to sulk or overprotect a child because of his or her condition. While you should take all steps to see that the child has access to the right intervention and help in integrating him/her to the mainstream, your whole life should not revolve around this condition,” says Radha.
   To help parents of such children, Radha, along with a few like-minded parents, launched Loudspeakers a few months ago. One of the main goals of the forum is to counsel and support parents and also to garner support from corporates to help poor children access hearing aids and cochlear implants.
     CONFRONTING THE TRUTH Radha’s son was born with hearing loss and the discovery was traumatic. “This was three decades ago, so you can imagine how life was in those times. I got married after college and shifted from Chennai, where I grew up, to Durgapur in West Bengal where my husband was working as an engineer. I conceived after sometime. Then, we travelled to Kolkata to meet my sister and brother-in-law, who was working there.  Here, I contracted measles. Apart from some traditional remedies, we didn’t really do much about it and came back to Durgapur after a few days,” recalls Radha.
   But a piece of information in a pregnancy-related book that was gifted to her caught her attention. “One section mentioned congenital problems caused by illnesses during pregnancy and it mentioned German Measles. Thinking back, I really can’t fathom why, but my attention immediately went to hearing loss and I remember thinking, ‘what if my child is born deaf?’ I was concerned but did not talk about it to anyone,” she says. Later, it was discovered that her son’s condition was due to the measles attack.
   But when the baby was born, everyone in the family rejoiced.
 
 He had a small growth on one side of the forehead that was surgically removed; he was also born with a single tooth. Apart from that, everything else was perfectly fine. But Radha was worried and asked the family paediatrician for a hearing test.
   “He brushed it off saying that it was a new mother’s paranoia!” she says.
   Meanwhile, the child was growing fine, crossing all the milestones. “He was an alert and bright child but I was worried, because even at eight months he wasn’t talking. We approached the paediatrician again who directed us to an audiologist and I don’t know how but he gave our child a clean chit.”
   So, imagine the doting parents’ shock when a noted ENT surgeon quite insensitively announced to them - ‘Your son cannot hear. Put him in a deaf and dumb school.’  
   “When he didn’t speak even at 20 months, we were worried and consulted a surgeon who was very well-known. After a four-hour wait, they finally called us in and after only a preliminary check, the surgeon blurted out even without looking at us that our son would never be able to hear. We were devastated. I still can’t remember that day without tears in my eyes. Both of us reached home and cried for hours.”
   But that was it. That was the last time they ever cried over the issue. Radha and her husband promised themselves that they would never again brood over their child’s condition.
     GAINING SPEECH Radha decided not to confine her son to an institution. “That would kill his ability instead of making him independent,” she explains.  She chanced upon a small news item in a newspaper about speech and hearing assessment at the All India Institute of Speech and Hearing at Mysore and consulted Dr N Rathna there who is considered the father of the speech and hearing field in India. He assured them that their child would be able to speak, but with a lot of dedication from the parents, especially the mother. He also directed them to Balavidyalaya, a school which did not teach sign language but had a unique methodology to develop speech in hearing impaired children.
   After a few months, Radha’s son was fitted with a hearing aid and the parents were told to speak to him in only one language. The family opted to speak to him in English. The little boy soon started picking up the language and was able to communicate fairly well by the time he was four.
   A proud mother, Radha’s attitude that she would not allow her son to be thought less than anyone else and her resolve to keep him away from sympathy really paid off. “I faced a lot of hurdles because people told me not to allow him to do this and that, but I never treated him in a special way and brought him up like any other child.”  
   This helped her son retain his confidence and become a super achiever. He passed his engineering with 99 per cent marks and is now a successful senior software engineer in an MNC. He is married with two kids, is a nature and wildlife enthusiast and travels the world for his interests. He also cycles every day to work. Last year, he had a setback as he lost all hearing in one ear and his hearing aid didn’t help. Despite that, he carried on his work. Recently, he has had a cochlear implant.
   Radha regularly advises parents of hearing impaired children and gives them valuable information. Her son also interacts with them and helps them clear doubts.
   “That is how we thought of launching Loudspeakers. Hearing loss is found in three per 100 live births in India but awareness is considerably low. This initiative will help the cause of the hearing impaired,” says patron of the Forum, Dr Sunil Narayan Dutt, senior ENT consultant and cochlear implant surgeon, Apollo Hospital.
      Loudspeakers can be contacted on the helplines 99860 18142/9611266042
 
 
 
 DOS and DON’TS FOR PARENTS
 
 
 »	Trust your gut feeling. If you have doubts about your baby’s hearing, get it checked.
 
  »	Do  not worry all the time, if you find out your child can’t hear well. Accept your child’s condition and seek medical help as soon as possible.
         This could include getting him fitted with hearing aids or cochlear implants.
 
  »	It can be devastating to learn that your child is hearing impaired. But do not reinforce this fact all the time. Treat it as a condition and not a           ‘problem’.
 
  »	Lead a normal life and don’t deny yourself the simple joys of life. Develop your child’s abilities and skills.