In April it’s already blazing hot. The shape-shifting forests and vistas — now arid and rocky and barren, then lush with green and yellow of bamboo, suddenly flaming in deep orange and red, a shimmering lake and, around the next corner, impenetrable and dense foliage — have that peculiar quiet of such places. There are sounds, but none of them are familiar. A few know these for what they are.
   My friend and I are in the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve, the TATR, some 150 kms south-east of Nagpur. The gate at the entrance says that this is the “real” home of the tiger. That is not an idle claim. Over five drives we have more tiger spotting than I’ve had in my entire life. I am told this is par for the course here. Another friend, travelling in the opposite direction to Pench, and who has a quarter as many, says there is a discount coupon that applies to the TATR: four spottings here equal one elsewhere. There are lots of cubs, too, of different ages, and one magnificent male in a water hole who looks at us and raises his left paw in a passable imitation of royalty waving to subjects. And there’s other wildlife, too, lots and lots of it.
   It should have been as close to paradise as one could imagine. But for the other form of wildlife.  Us.
   Timings are restricted here, as they are elsewhere. But unlike other tiger reserves and national parks — Ranthambore, Pench, Bandhavgarh, Kaziranga — Tadoba has no route restrictions in the forest. And it allows private vehicles in, all sorts of them from ridiculous compact cars to MUVs. The forest guards do their best to control the surging crowds, the cars gunning their engines and racing to be first. There are cameras everywhere, each lens bigger and most fearsome than the next; one guard lifts his left arm, puts his right hand on his shoulder and asks what he’s supposed to do when people with bandooks of this size crush around him. He’s on foot, and all he has is a stick. Some are shouting; many wear clothes of hues and shades that would be an embarrassment on a Mumbai street.
   What happens next is terrifying. Three cubs, about a year and half we’re told, are trying to cross a road. The road is jammed, two lines of cars backed up. One jeep has made it to the far end and turned around. Next to us a maniac in a government Innova has his engine running. We motion to him to turn it off. He says no, it’s too hot. He must have air-conditioning. The third tiger is clearly nervous. He tries to cross, backs away. He walks down the line of cars. Camera shutters run furiously. The tiger is restive. Another Innova rushes forward, into the firelines, on the forest floor. The tiger retreats briefly, tries again. It is only after several attempts that he makes it across — and the cars fire up and crash out through the forest.
   This shouldn’t be happening. 
   There are many issues regarding the management of ‘Protected Areas’ and Tiger Reserves and, specifically, the issue of what is called “eco-tourism”. The Central Government’s Ministry of Environment & Forests has draft guidelines on the subject and the Wildlife Protection Act has a proposed amendment of 2010 to strengthen protection. But what we should be looking at is something more subtle and nuanced. Eco-tourism, and tiger tourism most of all, has significant earning potential, but very little of it goes back to the PAs. There are, too, problems with ill-equipped and under trained (or untrained) guides and staff and there is virtually no education or training centre to speak of. Guests within these areas — and we all too often lose sight of the fact that we are guests — are never given the dos and don’ts. For that reason, you see people getting out of their vehicles and approaching animals in the wild, being noisy and unconcerned about the damage they cause. Some feel we should shut these areas to tourism altogether, because the only beneficiaries seem to be the hotels and resorts. That seems extreme, and some level of strictly regulated control with well-equipped and trained officers, does have one advantage: it allows wider knowledge of what’s actually happening in those areas, and the work of NGOs and field workers shouldn’t be underestimated. 
   Another major issue is the resettlement of villages from within these protected areas. This is always a point of friction as studies from Sariska and elsewhere show. There are some success stories from Bandhavgarh and Tadoba, to be sure; others, not so much. This year, for instance, 27 sq kms of TATR’s 600 plus sq kms have been ravaged by man-made fires. This, too, is not new. It happens every year, year after year.  From tourism to poaching and forest protection and management, the issues and problems that affect our vanishing reserves are truly immense. But they must be addressed. The alternative, losing them forever, is unacceptable; for our future depends on how we conduct ourselves in the present.