A fickle pachyderm will be the cynosure at the Jamboo Savari this Dasara, but should he turn violent, all that would stand between him and the crowds that line the streets to watch the annual spectacle is a group of police commandos and lengths of rope. 
 
 With the government choosing Arjuna, an elephant with an aggressive temperament, to carry the fabled golden howdah during the Dasara spectacle in Mysore on Wednesday, the job of keeping the 6,000 kg-package of pure terror in line will fall to a group of about 25 of the state’s commandos. Their plan of action: Form a cordon with rope around Arjuna and the other animals in the procession and follow along. Beyond that, things get hazy. 
 
 More adept at tackling errant humans, the assignment would rank high on the list of most bizarre for the commandos. Experts say of all animals, judging how an elephant would react is an impossible task, so any experience the commandos have in animal behaviour counts for nothing.
 
 A senior police officer involved in security arrangements for the Jamboo Savari said, “Though Arjuna will have commandos around him dressed in black, not all of them will carry weapons. This is a first of its kind experience for them as well. However, we have shown them videos relating to animal behaviour and wildlife experts and veterinarians have given them tips on how to tackle an enraged elephant.”
 
 Commandos, however, say that it is all well and good in theory. The reality is terrifying.
 
 “Unlike other operations, this is a totally different task,” one of them said on condition of anonymity. “Some who have been picked have requested not to put them in front of Arjuna but on the flank or at the back. Senior officials will take a call on this.”
 
 The commandos will have some company. Doctors and assistants will follow along, carrying medicines and food and will monitor Arjuna’s behaviour. Although fraught with danger, the decision to go with Arjuna was pretty much forced on the government. Balarama, the elephant who had carried the 750-kg howdah for the last 12 years on the trot, is weak and is losing weight. It is believed that the strain of the 5 km march from the Mysore Palace to Banni Mantap would be too severe for the 54-year-old. 
 
 Arjuna is considered to be an angry pachyderm; he had killed a mahout a few years ago when the man tried to place the howdah on his back. The incident had delayed the celebrations, but this time, officials are taking some precautiouns, although it could rob the event of some of its lustre. 
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Dr D N Nagaraj, chief veterinarian of the Dasara elephants, said, “The police commissioner has taken a decision keeping in mind Arjuna’s erratic behaviour. Everyone is aware of his aggressive behavior, but there is no alternative than to go with Arjuna. As many as 20 to 25 commandos will form a guard around Arjuna preventing anybody from approaching him. This apart, the walking area would be cordoned off using rope so that none except the mahout, kavadi and doctors can get close to him.”
 
 It would be disappointing for visitors who in previous years could get up close to photograph the animals. A senior official who is involved with Dasara celebrations said, “Forget taking photographs, you cannot even get close to him. One has to stand at least 10 to 15 metres away from the elephants. Had it been Balarama, it would have been different as he is docile and accommodative. But Arjuna goes berserk if anybody other than his mahout approaches him.”
 
 
 Why Arjuna?
 At the start of preparations for this year’s celebrations, everybody had believed Balarama would carry the howdah. But Balarama is losing weight. Moreover, he takes much longer than the other elephants to cover the 5km route. Not only is Arjuna taller and more majestic than Balarama, but he is also healthier. Also, Arjuna has gained weight since his arrival at the Palace.
 
 “While Balarama is 54-years-old, Arjuna is 52, but he has far more vigour,” explained Dodda Masti, Arjuna’s mahout. Masti has been tending Arjuna for the last 12 years.
 
 “Arjuna measures 2.80m (about 9.3 ft) in height and 3.75 m in width, Balarama is about two to three feet shorter than Arjuna. Because he is losing weight, Balarama’s back is not flat enough to accommodate the howdah. Even during last year’s celebrations, the howdah was leaning to one side. Keeping all these factors in mind, officials chose Arjuna despite his unpredictable and aggressive behaviour.”
 
 Dr Nagaraj admitted that the officials were taking a huge risk. “More than any other animal, elephants are difficult to judge,” he said. “The gene pool of both the elephants (Arjuna and Balarama) is different. It is so with Arjuna. Balarama’s calmness is perhaps because he was bred within the group. But Arjuna is a totally different case. When he was caught during the Khedda operations in 1986, he was robust and aggressive. He is the same even today.”
 
 Arjuna was seen as the natural choice to succeed Drona, an elephant which carried the howdah for several years. But in 1996, a furious Arjuna trampled his mahout to death while taking a bath at Karanji Lake. He was kept away from Dasara celebrations for five years, but made a comeback in 2001. On another occasion during Bangarappa’s reign as CM, he went berserk when a helicopter scattering flower petals flew too low. The procession was delayed.