By Ananth Aravamudan

As my guide-cum-boatman pushed our coracle into the Kaveri river, I repeated, for the hundredth time, my request to him – I really wanted to see a fish eagle. He must have been quite used to obsessive bird-watchers like me. With a smile, he reassured me that if any of the birds were at their usual perches, I would definitely get a sighting. Alas, that evening was not a fruitful one for me. During the forty-five minute circuit around the river, we saw plenty of cormorants, river terns, brahminy kites and even the odd crocodile, but no fish eagle. The guide gave a helpless shrug. Maybe tomorrow, he said.

I was at Bheemeshwari, about 100 km away from Bengaluru, at the “fishing camp” run by Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR). The place still retains its old name, but fishing has been banned on the Kaveri since 2010, when it was found that the population of hump-backed mahseer, a species native to this stretch of river, had dwindled alarmingly. The JLR resort is in the middle of the Basavana Betta reserve forest and is rich in flora and fauna. Walking through the property, one gets breath-taking views of the Kaveri river at every turn. Adventure activities like zip-lining and kayaking have replaced angling. Erstwhile fishing guides, hailing from nearby villages, are now wildlife guides and know the local fauna intimately.

I don’t know if it is the effect of the fishing ban, but the Kaveri is brimming with fish. You simply can’t miss them at Bheemeshwari. As I stared out at the river’s placid waters, I could see fish jumping out of the water with monotonous regularity. The frolicking fish did not hold my attention for long, but for certain other creatures from faraway lands, they seem to have had a magnetic charm. The lesser fish eagle was earlier observed only in the Himalayan foothills. But since 2005, birders at Bheemeshwari and surrounding areas have been reporting sightings of this bird. It is now confirmed that a few of these birds have become residents of the Kaveri river valley. With their main source of sustenance available in plenty, the fish eagles seem to be here to stay.

As I stood on the river bank the next morning, I saw the bird I was longing to see. A lesser fish eagle was flying high above me, and as I watched, it dipped down gracefully to settle on the top of a tall tree. With my binoculars, I could see its greyish-brown (cement colour, as my guide put it) upper body and white belly. It scanned the river and, in a flash, was off its perch. It swooped down to the water’s surface and grabbed at something with its long, curved talons. Unfortunately, it came up empty-handed. As it rose into the air, it did a quick flick of its wings to get rid of the water that they had soaked up, and headed back to its perch. Clearly, though the fish were plentiful, catching them was not easy!

Later, with my guide’s help, I went in the coracle to a couple of other fish eagle haunts and spotted one more individual. Even when I couldn’t see the birds, I could hear them quite clearly. Lesser fish eagles have a long high-pitched shriek for a call, almost like a human child crying for its mother. The guides at the resort know these birds and their habits well. Not long ago, they had helped naturalists confirm that these fish eagles were residents here, by locating their nesting sites. As I left Bheemeshwari, I realized that the Kaveri river valley was one of the last safe havens for this majestic bird, which has now been designated as “near threatened” by the IUCN. A haunting cry from the skies above reminded me, and my fellow humans, to keep it that way.