By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 W eather-wise, our city is not exactly at its finest in the month of March. Old-time Bengalureans will tell you that Shivaratri, which is celebrated in the last week of February, marks the beginning of summer here. As March progresses, hot gets hotter, dry gets drier and the slightest wind raises a cloud of dust that blankets everything in sight. There’s nothing much to look forward to when you step outside. Unless, of course, it happens to rain. I’m not talking thundershowers here – it’s too early for those. With a little bit of luck, March in Bengaluru will usher in the gentlest of drizzles that moisten the parched earth with a few drops of water. I wait with great anticipation for these light rains – for they unlock a scent from Mother Earth that perks me up no end.
 
 
 
 
 Petrichor – that’s the official name for the scent of rain – is a fragrance that induces a feeling of joy and wellbeing in most people. Scientists have figured out why. Rain is a precursor to bountiful crops and periods of plenty, and so its smell has very positive associations for humans ever since pre-historic times. Added to this, the sense of smell is handled by the same part of the brain that houses memory and emotions. Smell can cut through layers of brain function and bring back long-lost memories or awaken dormant emotions in a flash. No wonder, then, that just the slightest whiff of rain instantly elevates one’s mood! This is true not just for you and me, by the way – it holds true for cultures the world over.
 
 Why are we talking about the scent of rain in a wildlife column? It’s because actinobacteria, the tiny creatures that are predominantly responsible for this beautiful scent are, in their own small way, part of the urban jungle around you. Small in size, that is – you’ll need an electron microscope to see them – but not in number. These organisms are all around us in the billions and trillions. It was the work of two Australian researchers that unearthed the role of actinobacteria in producing the scent of rain, and it was they who named it petrichor.
 
 Back in the 1960s, Isabel Bear and Richard Thomas of CSIRO Australia found that when raindrops strike dry earth, a cocktail of chemicals is released into the air. One part of the cocktail consists of oils exuded from plants in the dry season (meant to keep seeds from germinating until the rains arrive), that has found its way into the soil. The other part is a chemical called geosmin, a metabolic by-product of actinobacteria. It’s the latter that gives the chemical cocktail its distinct earthy aroma. More recent research at MIT on the subject revealed that raindrops moving at a slower rate are better at releasing geosmin from the soil. That’s why petrichor is more common after light rains.
 
 Actinobacteria play an extremely critical role in soil systems. They help to decompose the organic matter of dead organisms so that the nutrients can be taken up by plants. They also enter into a symbiotic relationship with certain plants to perform nitrogen fixing in the soil, a process that greatly enhances the fertility of the soil.
 
 These bacteria release geosmin when they die, which in turn finds its way into many things. Apart from contributing to the scent of rain, geosmin also gives beetroot its distinct earthy flavour.
 
 A friend recently pointed out that Bengaluru is increasingly smelling of hot asphalt and wet concrete after a light drizzle. This should not come as a surprise. Walk around our city’s apartment complexes or IT campuses and tell me if you can spot even an inch of open soil. As we apply layer upon layer of concrete and asphalt on Mother Earth, we are smothering her perfumers and drowning their scent that has invigorated mankind for aeons.