Protest in city today to underline need for proper treatment of wildlife

A group of protestors including citizens, animal lovers, environmentalists, foresters, and wildlife activists have decided to hit the streets on Saturday, seeking justice for Arjuna, the sixty-four-year-old Dasara fame elephant, who died early this month in a fight with a wild elephant.

The protestors will gather at Freedom Park and will also highlight issues faced by farmers living on forest fringes due to rising cases of human-animal conflict.

“This is a people’s movement and we want to bring to the fore uneasiness among citizens about the death of Arjuna and other captive elephants due to neglect by the Karnataka Forest Department. Arjuna was a retired elephant who was pressed into an elephant capture operation. As per the rules, camp elephants above 60 years are not supposed to work. We want to highlight that the department is not managing human-animal conflict cases effectively,” said Daniel Sukumar Das, director of the Wildlife Conservation Foundation.

Experts said that often the forest department jumps into an operation unprepared. “The department has recently gifted many young camp elephants to other states and has pressed retired elephants in elephant-capturing operations even in the past. No public consultations are done and unilateral decisions are being taken. Wildlife is not a commodity for exchange and capturing elephants is no way to resolve human-elephant conflict,” added Das.

They also highlight that while human-elephant conflict mitigation measures have been proposed by many scientists and conservationists, KFD has not paid heed to suggestions. Instead, elephant corridors are being converted to agricultural fields and human habitation across Karnataka. They say the department has created many waterholes on forest boundaries, inviting jumbos out of the forest area.

“Change in cropping pattern in villages abutting forests and encroachment of elephant corridors are the main reasons behind increasing human-elephant conflict cases. Earlier, farming happened during monsoon, and crops grown were not lucrative for elephants. Now farmers do not even hesitate to grow sugarcane and plantain too. This clubbed with the lack of maintenance of elephant barriers has led to a surge in cases. Farmers are not adamant about the choice of the crop as long as they are incentivised well for whichever crop is suitable for the region,” said another city-based wildlife conservationist.

Wildlife is not a commodity for exchange and capturing elephants is no way to resolve human-elephant conflictDaniel Sukumar Das, Wildlife Conservation Foundation
Citizens who have joined the movement say it is time we set a new narrative on human-wildlife conflict and the protest is a step in that direction. “Human-wildlife encounters are happening because we have encroached upon their space and not respecting their existence. In the given situation, the least we can do is to lend our voice to the voiceless who are suffering,” said Rachna Ravi Kiran, a resident from south Bengaluru.