An 11-acre island in the middle of Cauvery river in Kodagu (erstwhile Coorg) has become the bone of contention between a popular Veerashaiva mutt, a wildlife society and a Kodava group.     The Murugarajendra Brihanmutt claims that the island was given to Guttimutt, one of its three branch mutts in Kodagu, in 1796 by king Veera Rajendra, the then ruler of Coorg. It cites historical evidence including a copper plate inscription in its favour and wants to be declared as the owner of the island.    However, Kodava Okkuta, a union of nearby villagers, claims that four of the 11 acres belong to the local Kodava community. The Coorg Wildlife Society says that the island falls in a stretch of 28 kilometres of the Cauvery river allotted to it for maintenance and is part of the forest which belongs to the government. The matter has now reached the high court of Karnataka.    According to the mutt’s petition in the HC, the island has a ‘gadduge’ (samadhi) of Someshwara Swamigalu and a temple built in Vijayanagar style. After Veera Rajendra gifted the island to the mutt in 1796, a copper plate was inscribed and the inscription was published in the Epigraphia Carnatica (Volume 1). The mutt says the boundaries of the land given to it were determined by placing Lingamudras (stones in the form of lingas around the island). It also asserts that the All India Gazetteer, Karnataka State, Kodagu publication, mentions that the island belongs to the mutt. The mutt says it is in continuous possession of the land for over 200 years.    Trouble started in 1994-95 when the mutt began building an orphanage and school for priests on the island. The mutt alleges that before the building work began it had turned down the request of some local planters to develop a resort on the island. After the building work started, these planters filed two public interest litigations in the HC against the construction work. The HC then referred the matter to the local administration in Kodagu.     The Kodagu assistant commissioner inspected the area and ruled that the mutt was in possession of the island and construction work did not disturb wildlife. The Coorg Wildlife Society, which was one of the parties that had filed one of the PILs, then appealed to the deputy commissioner. The DC ordered the forest department to take over the entire island by paying compensation to the mutt.     The mutt then approached the Revenue Appellate Tribunal in Bangalore, which dismissed its plea. Next, the mutt filed two suits in a lower court in Kodagu seeking injunction against some people who were allegedly trying to interfere with its possession of the island. More importantly, it sought that the island be declared the mutt’s property. The lower court gave a partial injunction but refused to declare that the mutt owns the island. The mutt has now approached the HC against this order.    Meanwhile, the respondents in the case had made their own submissions before the lower court. The Kodava Okkuta of Valnoor claimed that local Kodavas were using four acres of the island to celebrate their traditional festivals and customs from a long time. But the lower court ruled that they did not produce any proof to support their claim. The Coorg Wildlife Society claimed that the island was part of a forest adjoining the Dubare forest area.