This is what study by two global researchers says, after factoring in value of intangibles
 
 
 Have you ever wondered how much Nagarahole National Park – one of the state’s major tiger reserves – is worth? Well you don’t have to anymore, because according to a new study, it’s worth anywhere between $13 million and $148 million per annum (that Rs.87.34– Rs.994.40 crore).
 
 The study was done by Professor Andreas Kontoleon, department of land economy, University of Cambridge; and Professor K Ninan, co-chair (representing developing countries) at the UN Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).
 
 The study, a result of two years of labour, will be used in the development versus conservation debate by strengthening the economic case for forests, thereby stressing the need for conservation.
 
 The economic valuation in the study helps us make informed decisions and policies to conserve forest ecosystems, Ninan told Bangalore Mirror. The professors have prepared the report in association with the state forest department.
 
 Unlike the calculations made only on the tangible benefits a forest provides (such as timber and non-timber forest products) the duo has also put a value on the intangible benefits such as soil and water conservation, carbon sequestration, nutrient cycling, air pollution absorption, biodiversity, pollination and recreation benefits, etc. These are usually undervalued during an economic valuation of ecosystem services in the conservation versus development debate, as intangible benefits are not traded on conventional markets, Ninan states.
 
 “If these values could be captured and factored in the decision-making process it could lead to better conservation outcomes, especially in strengthening the economic case for conservation of forests versus diverting them to non-forest uses,” the study, Valuing forest ecosystem service and disservices — case study of a protected area in India’ — states.
 
 The study on Nagarahole has been published in the journal Ecosystem Services last month. Conservation efforts often take a beating in the cases of a hydro-electric project, mining or agriculture in a forest area. Here it is addressed through economic justification, Ninan argues. Another interesting part of the study is that it also accounts for forest disservices to arrive at the net annual value of the ecosystem services provided by Nagarahole National Park is $203 to $2,294 per hectare.
 
 
 
 
 Professor Andreas Kontoleon (right) with Professor K Ninan
 
 “If some benefits such as cultural values, flood protection, water purification — for which data is not available — were also covered, the value of ecosystem services provided by the Nagarahole National Park would be higher. To test the robustness of the study estimates used, alternate methods and assumptions to value ecosystem services have been used and the value ranged from $13 million to $148 million per annum,” Ninan, who is based in Bengaluru told Mirror.
 
 Unlike past studies, the value of disservices — losses to forests in form of wildlife damage and forest fires — is an important aspect of the report.
 Conservation call through economics
 
 The report, throwing light on the economics of conserving forests and bio-reserves, applies to every forest, irrespective of country and has been well received. Ninan will be presenting his findings at the International Conference on Scenarios and Models of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in France, from August 24-29. It is being organised by the Belmont Forum, which is funded by many countries, including India.
 
 Another important aspect of the study was the CVM (contingent valuation method) which is the local community’s willingness to pay for participatory elephant conservation. It was assessed with a case study of 125 farmers from Maldari village (Kodagu district). It was found that respondents were willing to pay `13,748 per household, per year, in terms of 2013–14 prices. It was evident that even the inhabitants called for conservation over development.
 
 
 Officials agree
 
 Officials acknowledge that systematic and scientific assessment of ecosystem services played an important role in effective policy-making and planning conservation activities. “Water is one of the greatest services of our forests. When it is scarce all across the country, forests are a major source of it. Such studies are of immense use in policy-making and conservation. If the same is correlated to wildlife conservation resulting in increase of forest cover, this in turn increases the tiger population — even getting one more every year. It is worth no less than `10 crore (only an indicator) in terms of ecological services of the forests,” R Gokul, chief conservator of forests, Ballari, who was formerly director, Nagarahole National Park told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 “With this report, we see conservation is not just activism but the need of hour over development, even going by the economics of ecosystem services,” Ninan added. “The study aims to strengthen the economic case for conserving forests in tropical countries such as India where there is immense pressure to divert forests to meet developmental needs.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE HOLE TRUTH
 
 
 * Study area: Nagarahole National Park (also known as Rajiv Gandhi national park)
 
 * Locality: Nilgiris Biosphere of the Western Ghats
 
 * Area: About 643.39 km2
 
 * Flora and Fauna: 32 species of large mammals, 252 species of birds, 32 species of reptiles, 13 species of amphibians and 10 species of fish.
 
 * Famous for: Endangered species including the Asiatic elephant, Royal Bengal tiger, leopards, Indian wild dogs, wild buffaloes, etc.