BBMP’s Forest Cell stretching it with 2 vehicles to cover city limits of 800 sq km

Awildlife activist’s plea on Facebook kicked up a storm recently. Kiran Kumar DS appealed for funds on his Facebook page to buy an ambulance for injured animals. Kiran Kumar had made the appeal as the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike’s (BBMP) Forest Cell only has two vehicles to rescue wild animals in the City. These two vehicles have to transport all injured animals to a hospital or the Bannerghatta Forest, from and area spread over 800 sq kilometres.

One of these two vehicles is an Indica, a hatchback car, that doesn’t even have enough room to keep a monkey’s cage. The Indica too is an outsourced vehicle. The second one is a Maruti Gypsy that gives a mileage of 5 km/l.

Emphasising on the need to have at least four vehicles, Bengaluru Urban honorary wildlife warden A Prasannakumar said, “A proposal for the purchase of four vehicles was submitted to the then Mayor Gangambike Mallikarjun in December 2018. The Mayor had directed the authorities concerned to buy four vehicles using the fund of Rs 40 lakh allocated for the year 2018-19. However, no action was taken in this regard.’’

    The then mayor had directed authorities to buy four vehicles using the fund of Rs 40 lakh allocated for 2018-19. But, no action was taken–A Prasannakumar, honorary wildlife warden
Though the shortage of vehicles exists, Kiran’s appeal has not gone well with wildlife volunteers, who insist that one cannot seek funds from the public to buy ambulances. “I don’t understand who authorised Kiran to do this. He claims to have been associated with the BBMP, police and fire and emergency department. I asked the authorities about Kiran Kumar but they said they have not come across such a person,’’ said Ram Kumar, another animal activist.

BBMP Deputy Conservator of Forest HS Ranganathaswamy too, tried to dismiss Kiran Kumar. 

“The civic body would lodge a police complaint against those who seek funds from the public for purchasing ambulance vehicles for rescuing injured or wild animals in the city. We have not authorised anyone to collect funds from the public. I do not know who Kiran Kumar is,’’ he said.

Having said that, Kiran Kumar’s plea has indeed brought the issue of shortage of vehicles to the fore. Will the BBMP authorities take measures for the purchase of vehicles? The residents of Bengaluru and its needy wild animals have to wait and watch.