Olaf Van Cleef, the advisor for high-range jewellery for Cartier, uses precious stones to create dazzling artworks featuring Indian gods and goddesses
 
 If there were to be a Facebook page for Indian gods, the virtual followers would have been across nationalities. The beatific smiles, the multi-coloured costumes, and the jewellery would have made many within the fashion and jewellery industry go gaga. One Frenchman will agree. Olaf Van Cleef has devoted years to the Indian gods. If the name Van Cleef rings a bell, it is because the name (Van Cleef and Arpels) has been associated with jewellery since the late 1800s and has, incidentally, been the jeweller-of-choice for Indian maharajas. Born in 1950, Olaf is a third generation Van Cleef and calls himself a traveller, artist and author.
 
 His first solo show in the city Heavenly Pieces will be all about gods and goddesses. And naturally, there will be diamante crystals and semi-precious stones embedded on the works. That’s what happens when an inherent jeweller turns into an artist. “It’s mostly my passion for jewellery that made me want to paint the gods,” Olaf says in an email interview. “I could finally mix my art and precious stones. Besides, I have always liked Indian gods. They are always beautiful and young.” And so they appear in Olaf’s creations which he terms as “mosaics of multi-coloured candy papers where I like to mix the dream, the symbolic and reality.” He offers yet another explanation: “Reflections with paper and stones.” While the stones are expected, the surprise element is the use of confetti made from candy paper.
 
 With materials as basic as candy wrappers and fancy as gems and crystals and special ink from Leipzig, fine felt-tip pens, pincers and opaque gouache, Olaf proceeds to create fantasies that he had, in an earlier interview, said would not be appreciated by the European market (“too kitsch for them”). As he says, “Painting and jewellery are so different, but I have managed to reunite them. It was a challenge not to make it vulgar, kitsch or so simplistic that it is like the sandwich prepared for a kid — with lots of jam!”
 
 At first glance, the works are not dissimilar from the semi-precious artworks that are bought as souvenirs from Rajasthan. But then there appears the white space, some European aesthetics and abstractionism. Olaf has a different modus operandi. His style of painting is based on pointillism and tachisme. He explains tachisme as a French style of abstract painting (popular in the 1940s and ’50s), a method that he acquired from having to use just his fingers. What he essentially does is softens irregular dabs of bright watercolours with multiple dots of white. Using usually metallic paper and Swarovski crystals, he says that sometimes he can take hours for just 10 cms of work “to give life to a scarf of Krishna, or a flower garland of Radha.”
 
 In the wee hours of morning, Olaf likes to work on gods that appeal to him: embedding Hanuman’s muscles with diamonds or using bright colours and gem crystals for Ganesh and Krishna.
 
 Olaf, who divides his time between Pondicherry and France, is all set for the show in the city. “I love India,” he gushes. “The colours, the smiles, smells, sunsets and the importance of family are all admirable. Pondicherry is beautiful, spiritual and has the ‘geneteux’ spirit where everyone can find their place. There is a spirit in everyone to make the world a better place.”
 
 Having started young, “at the age of four with collages decorated with pieces of shells and coloured rice”, Olaf now has a tested formula for his art. Make the gods and goddesses beautiful, colourful and ever smiling and glistening – the fan following will come, even from outside India. “I have three types of clients — those who like ‘precious’ art — Brazil, China and India; those who love abstracts and those who buy my works to put in their puja rooms – from Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata,” Olaf explains. To all of them, his creations are of significance.
 
 Heavenly Pieces, 10 am–8 pm, Art Corridor, Taj West End till December 22; 10.30 am–7.30 pm, Gallery G, till December 31
 
 
 
 Child prodigy’s wild adventures 
 
 He is just eight years but has an impressive oeuvre. Rishik S Vishwanathan has been drawing since the age of 4. His art teacher, Alpana Ahuja, says, “He never copies, it’s all there in his head. Since a year, it’s been giraffes. He just draws directly with a pen and can make a giraffe do anything!” In fact, the duo team up regularly to support NGOs in Singapore (Acres) and India (Wildlife SOS) by having art shows. Rishik’s knowledge of animals (at three he identified the skeleton of a bustard bird on a visit to the Natural History Museum, London), is remarkable. His recent collection of giraffes was inspired after a school trip to the zoo. Of the eight works displayed in an ongoing show in New Delhi, seven were sold on the opening day!
 
 For more information, contact the NGO Wildlife SOS
 
 
 Select sculpture and art on show
 
 I t may be a show of works that were lined up for last year’s Art Bengaluru’s auction but this is the one place to view the artworks of artists like Ram Kumar, the reclusive New Delhi artist and Padma Bhushan awardee, Sachin Jaltare, Shanta Samant, one of the few female sculptors working with bronze, installation artist Subodh Kerkar and upcoming artists such as Vikash Kalra. There is just one work by Ram Kumar; an artist who commanded a hefty price not too long back. When an early painting from his (short-lived) figurative phase had come up for the auction at Christie’s in 2008, it was bought by art collector Kiran Nadar for Rs 5 crore. Even viewing the singular work of Ram Kumar is worth a visit.
 
 Reminiscence-II, 11 am-8 pm, Sublime Galleria, UB City, till January 19