By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 I like to think of the hero of today’s story as the Donald Trump of the animal kingdom. People love to hate it. It has a serious image problem but really doesn’t care. It is loud and noisy, picking up high decibel fights with pretty much any fellow being that crosses its path. It emits nauseating outputs when threatened or upset. Like Trump, it has loyal followers that hang on to every bit of crap it produces. Wikipedia describes it as having a ‘stocky body covered with coarse, shaggy hair’ – real hair, of course, so I guess the analogy with Trump ends there.
 
 
 	But I’m getting ahead of myself. I need to take you back to my boyhood, when I first made my acquaintance with this creature. My family then lived on the outskirts of Thiruvananthapuram, amidst paddy fields and coconut groves. At the time I knew it by its Malayalam name, marapatti (literally, tree-dog), a creature that was mostly heard and seldom seen. These nocturnal animals were notorious for keeping people awake with their loud shrieks and snarls as they fought each other in seemingly endless battles for supremacy. They were also detested for being uninvited guests in old houses, where they ran around noisily in unused attics. Behind them they left a malodorous trail of urine, droppings and glandular secretions.
 	
 	  	On the rare occasion that a marapatti was spotted in daylight, usually in some kind of distress, crowds of onlookers gathered to gawk at this small creature with its unusual dog-like face. It had black or mottled grey fur, with a white mask across its forehead and a small white patch under each eye. If anyone got too close, it would bare its sharp teeth in an aggressive display. It was a nimble climber and given the slightest opportunity, would scramble up a nearby tree and vanish from sight.
 	
 	  	As I grew up, this creature slunk away into some remote recess of my memory, only to come charging out when I read an article about the world’s most expensive coffee. Kopi Luwak or civet coffee, from Indonesia, costs around $700 per kg. Its producer, the Asian palm civet, loves to eat ripe coffee berries, but cannot digest the beans. As these pass through its digestive system, its enzymes work their magic. When the beans finally emerge from the civet’s body, embedded in its poop, they are said to have a unique flavour. If you hadn’t guessed already, the marapatti of my childhood is known to the world as the Asian palm civet!
 	
 	  	Civet coffee was originally a drink of the downtrodden. Indonesian farmers were forced to give all the coffee they grew to their Dutch colonisers, so ended up scavenging beans from civet (luwak in the local language) droppings for their own use. This drink soon gained a fan following, and became much in demand in international markets. The civet too went from zero to hero, though not in a good way. Many South Asian nations took to commercial civet farming, holding the animals captive in cramped cages and force feeding them coffee berries at one end, while harvesting treasure at the other.
 	
 	  	Palm civets, also called toddy cats because of their fondness for palm flower sap, are better off in Karnataka. They are found all over the state, especially in hilly and coastal areas. As for Bengaluru, records of sightings of this nocturnal creature are very sparse. It is almost certain that civets are to be found in wooded areas on the outskirts of our city, like Bannerghatta, Nandi Hills and Hessarghatta. There have been unconfirmed sightings (or hearings) in places like GKVK. The wildlife rescue centre in Bannerghatta receives palm civets from time to time, but because they pass from hand to hand, their exact point of origin can’t be determined. Wouldn’t it be exciting if, like the slender loris, a resident population of palm civets is discovered in the heart of Bengaluru?!