A letter from the Centre has come as a snub for members of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board who had sought an exception to rules, seeking to take their own SUVs inside reserve forests. As per the law, private vehicles are not allowed inside protected areas and officials are allowed to enter only in department vehicles. 
 
 This request was shot down by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), which is under the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF). After BM reported how members of the board were desperately looking to use their private vehicles inside national parks, the NTCA sent a letter to the state, directing the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka to restrict board members to government vehicles only.
 
 Invoking Rule 27 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, that provides entry to ‘public servants’ into core areas of forests, some of the newly appointed wildlife board members had petitioned to the Chief Minister, seeking permission to drive into core areas of national parks in their own SUVs.
 
 The members had claimed that this would reduce pressure on authorities to provide them with vehicles every time. This request not only left top-ranking officials of the Karnataka Forest Department in a fix, but also triggered a debate within the conservation circles. Sources in the forest department revealed to Bangalore Mirror that seven members of the wildlife board, including the son of a powerful minister from Bengaluru in Siddaramaiah’s cabinet, had submitted a memorandum to the Chief Minister, who is also the Chairperson of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board.
 
 The documents accessed by BM from CM’s office revealed that the seven members — Shivaprakash NC, HV Santhrupth, Rana George (misspelled in the letter as ‘Rane’), K Shyam Raju, Ramachandra Shetty, G Malleshappa, and Madegowda C — had requested CM Siddaramaiah to allow them to use their own vehicle to enter the forests. However, CM had reportedly reserved his decision on the petition.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bangalore Mirror was the first to report on September 1 (‘Wildlife Board members are getting ready for a carnama in the jungle’) about the efforts of wildlife board members.
 
 The officials from the NTCA regional office in Bengaluru had brought the issue to the notice of their higher officials in New Delhi. Taking note of BM’s report (as mentioned in its letter), the NTCA, the apex body in tiger conservation, wrote to the Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka not to entertain such requests.
 
 BM has a copy of this letter signed by Vaibhav C Mathur, Assistant Inspector General of Forests (NTCA).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “I am directed to request you to take action in accordance with relevant provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 and the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) (Normative Standards for Tourism activities and Project Tiger) Guidelines 2012, in respect of the said matter to avoid unnecessary litigation and restrict to using government vehicles only, while on duty in a tiger reserve (sic),” the letter said.
 
 The earlier members of the board, back in August 2016, had made a similar request with the CM. Caught in the pincer, the KFD officials had honoured their request with a rider that the permission would be valid only for 6 months. However, with the dissolution of previous wildlife board and the reconstitution of the board, the newly appointed members also put claim to private access into forest areas.+