Civil society organisations, activists demand justice for sportspersons protesting against sexual harassment

Swimmer Nisha Millet and athlete Reeth Abraham on Sunday condemned the treatment meted out to protesting women wrestlers in Delhi. They were joined at a solidarity event held at Freedom Park by historian and author Ramachandra Guha and writer Amandeep Sandhu in demanding justice for the wrestlers who brought Olympic fame to the country.

Concerned citizens joined sports lovers of Bengaluru, former sports journalists and about 18 civil society organisations, expressed solidarity with national wrestlers fighting against sexual harassment of women sportspersons for nearly a month at Jantar Mantar in New Delhi.

“The brutal manner in which our Olympic stars were dragged and bundled up is a shame. They are the nation’s pride and politicians who enter sports should develop sports not indulge in sexual harassment. Sports is no place for such things and perpetrators should be booked immediately,” said Nisha Millet.

“We take a stand on behalf of the wrestlers who brought glory to the country and support them in demanding justice for the victims. This should not happen to any girl, leave alone sportswomen. The minute we throw out politicians, everything will become alright,” said Reeth Abraham.

Ramachandra Guha condemned the arrests and pathetic treatment meted out to the wrestlers in Delhi. “The wrestlers who brought laurels were protesting for a genuine reason and it was absolutely peaceful.
 
But the paranoid, fearful and insecure government instead of protecting the athletes is protecting the perpetrators. It has dismantled and arrested the athletes with arrogance and its own MPs are left scot free.”

Amandeep Sandhu and Joseph Hoover and many others progressive thinkers and activists spoke at the protest. “The main demands included immediate arrest of MP and Wrestling Association president Brij Bushan Singh, putting out the inquiry report in the public domain and passing a law or ordinance to set-up Visakha committees in Sports Federations to facilitate complaints against sexual harassment,” said wildlife activist and former sports editor Joseph Hoover.

A resolution was passed and signed by 102 members of the gathering. It would be put online to continue the signature campaign.

Demands made by protesters

1. Stop sexual harassment and provide safe space for sports persons
2. Release all the detained wrestlers and arrest sexual offenders
3. Arrest Brij Bushan Sharan Singh
4. Introduce Supreme Court’s Visakha Guidelines against Sexual Harassment in Sports Federations too
5. Stop punitive action against protestors


We take a stand on behalf of the wrestlers who brought glory to the country and support them in demanding justice for the victims– Reeth Abraham

CM throws weight behind wrestlers’ cause Criticising the Narendra
 
Modi-led Central government over the way it handled the wrestlers’ protest, Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah on Sunday wondered “what’s the need for the new Parliament building if it can’t give justice to the wrestlers who are protesting”. “It is unfortunate to know that a few wrestlers have been detained for demanding justice,” tweeted the Chief Minister after Delhi Police on Sunday detained the protesting wrestlers who were trying to march towards the new Parliament when it was being inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. “We as humans and Indians should stand with them and voice their concerns. They have made Indians proud by winning medals for us and we should make them feel proud to be Indians,” Siddaramaiah said.