Poachers have now taken to selling bones, as they bring in more money
 
 	Poachers in Karnataka appear to be becoming more cunning with every passing day. Gone are the days when animals were hunted just for their pelts. Now, knowking full well that the police wil be on the lookout for skins, poachers are eying the bones of animals that fetch several crores on the international market.  

 	This latest trend is spreading fast among the poachers’ network and the police have unearthed the first such case in Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve in Chamarajanagar district. The police have nabbed two poachers who were trying to trade Tiger bones to a dealer in Tamil Nadu. 

 	Following a tip-off, the police nabbed Balu Naik and Muniswamy, residents of Kolipalya near Punajanur in Chamarajanagar last week and recovered more than 100 small and large Tiger bones as they were trying to sell it to a dealer.  	A detailed investigation into the modus operandi of the duo has not only left the cops flummoxed but has thrown light on the poacher network of Karnataka that targets Tigers in Bandipur, Nagarhole and BRT Tiger Reserves in Southern Karnataka. 

 	Tigers poisoned  	Giving details, HM Mahadevappa Circle Inspector of Chamarajanagar Rural Police told Bangalore Mirror that the accused used to kill the big cats using poison. “The duo managed to lace mutton with poison and keep it close to watering holes and caves in forests while waiting for tigers to feed on the meat. In this case, the tiger had eaten the meat and was found dead in a remote part of the forest. The duo traced the body in less than a day and separated the pelt and bones immediately on site. After drying the bones, they were put into a gunny bag and kept in their fields,” Mahadevappa said. 

 	Deal struck at a hotel  	Wondering how to trade the bones, the duo were apparently informed that agents from Tamil Nadu often visit border areas and purchase these bones. “The duo revealed that the bones were crushed into powder and used in the manufacturing of medicines, particularly alleged aphrodisiacs. Sometimes they even mixed it with the bones of buffalo or other livestock to mislead police or sleuths. At a roadside hotel the accused were told about a dealer who trades bones and after striking a deal with him over the phone, both had come to a hotel to sell him the bones,” explained a police official, who was part of the investigation team. 
 	  	However, much to their disappointment the police arrived at the hotel on a routine visit before the trader. “Panicked on seeing the police, the duo began behaving suspiciously and started running from the spot. Then our personnel chased them and nabbed them finally. During interrogation they revealed the had killed a tiger and were attempting to sell its bones. We have recovered claws, more than 100 bones and pelt which costs several lakhs on the international market,” explained SN Srikanth, Sub Inspector attached to Chamarajanagar Police Station. 
 	  	Both the accused have been booked under various sections of both Indian Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and IPC. The police have surrendered the accused to judicial custody and investigating the case for further details.