Bannerghatta zoo’s giraffe has been the only one of her species since companion’s death in 2021 

Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) authorities have finally succeeded in their search for a pal for the lone giraffe at the zoo. A female giraffe Shivani, born to Bharath and Babli in Mysore Zoo, aged about one year seven months, was shifted from Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Garden, Mysuru, on February 27. Till now, BBP was housing a lone female giraffe aged around eight years, which was also acquired from Mysore Zoo in April 2018.
 
As Mysore Zoo currently houses nine giraffes, they have spared a female for Bengaluru’s lone female giraffe. The Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi, approved the animal exchange for conservation education. “When Shivani was released into the giraffe enclosure, Gowri walked towards the new member of her species. Later both the giraffes started sniffing each other.
 
They are responding positively towards each other and will be compatible very soon,” said an official.

Till now, Gowri, a female giraffe, is housed at Bannerghatta and as it is alone, they need to get a male giraffe. In September 2021, a three-and-a-half-year-old giraffe of BBP, Yadunandan, died due to asphyxiation. Yadunandan is said to have entered the treatment area, housing the park’s staff, and got his six-feet-long neck trapped in the rods barricading the area. Although the staff rushed to the spot to help Yadunandan, they couldn’t do much.
 
Yadunandan had lived in Bengaluru for one-and-a-half years after being brought here from Mysuru. The young giraffe used to be one of the main attractions at BBP and was one among the only two giraffes at the zoo. As Yadunandan died, his companion Gowri was left alone.

Yadunandan had been brought as a companion to Gowri and it seemed as though the two had taken a liking towards each other instantly. 
 
The giraffes are responding positively towards each other and will be compatible soon–BBP official
Male giraffe relocated to Hampi
In another development, a male giraffe has been relocated to Hampi’s Atal Bihari Vajapayee zoo to serve as a companion for a female giraffe. This move makes Hampi zoo the exclusive zoo in North Karnataka to house giraffes. Currently, Bengaluru and Mysuru zoos are the only other locations in the state with giraffes. The four-year-old female giraffe in Hampi was previously brought from Patna, Bihar. The introduction of a mate for the female giraffe enriches the zoo’s offerings and contributes to the diversity of wildlife experiences available to visitors in North Karnataka.