Forest offence cases pile up as officials’ skill, awareness of law not up to the mark Forest offence cases pile up as officials’ skill, awareness of law not up to the mark

Despite a drop in the total number of forest offence cases in Karnataka over the last few years, pending cases are piling up fast. According to official data from the Karnataka Forest Department, in 2020-21, as many as 7,429 fresh forest offence cases were registered and towards the end of the year, the backlog number was 67,512.

The number of cases registered in 2021-22 went down to 6,521 and the number of cases pending as of March 31, 2022, was 69,568. But, in 2022-23, while the number of fresh cases registered was 5,808, over 70,000 cases are pending as of March 31, 2023. These cases are filed against illegal encroachment of forest land, smuggling sandalwood, red sandal, timber, wildlife-related crime, and others.

Experts say offence cases are piling up as forest department officials do not follow up after filing complaints. “While forest offence cases are filed, they rarely reach their logical end as no follow-ups are happening. This is because the department prioritises development work over clearing these cases,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

According to Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development, the high number of pending cases implies that enough evidence has not been provided to take these cases forward.
 
“Sometimes, people who are caught red-handed are middlemen, and getting to the actual criminal becomes a challenge. This requires special skills, which forest officials lack. Most of the officials working on-ground and are filing forest offence cases are not well versed with the Forest Act or Wildlife (Protection) Act. This lack of knowledge and training makes it difficult to gather pieces of evidence,” said Belagere.

Section 64 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, gives power to forest officials above the rank of ACF to arrest a defaulter without any warrant. As per the law, any forest officer may, without orders from a magistrate and a warrant, arrest any person against whom there is a reasonable suspicion of having been involved in any forest offence that is punishable with imprisonment for one month or upwards.

“Even the Karnataka Forest Act,1963, empowers forest officials above the rank of ACF to hold a summary inquiry to check the veracity of the document produced by encroachers as well as forest department officials, which is the range forest officer. If the official concludes illegal encroachment of forest land, they can declare eviction through an order. This is a civil procedure and does not require a magistrate order. However, rarely are such steps taken. This is because there is no pressure from higher authorities to clear them,” said a source from Karnataka Forest Department.

Encroachment
Interestingly, encroachment cases form the largest chunk of pending forest offence cases. Out of the total of 70,312 pending cases, 44,608 are of illegal encroachments.
 
Conservationists say the lack of action against offenders in such cases is only emboldening them.“Unresolved cases give history sheeters a chance to repeat the offence. The majority of the encroachment cases are not even filed under appropriate sections. While the laws and rules governing our forests and wildlife are stringent, implementation is the issue. For instance, while encroachment of forest lands is punishable by three to seven years of imprisonment, offenders are allowed to walk away with a penalty sum,” said the conservationist.

Some also highlight that forest officers lack the skill of developing networks or intelligence gathering. “Karnataka Forest Department has a frail intelligence network. This impacts their ability to track forest-related crime leading to a lack of evidence,” said Sharath Babu, a city-based wildlife activist.