Vinay Luthra says it will submerge a large stretch of forest land; but CM Siddaramaiah says there is no stepping back
 
 	The state government’s efforts to quench the thirst of Bengaluru by lifting water from Mekedaatu seem to have become embroiled in controversy even before the project could take wings. A day after neighbouring Tamil Nadu filed a petition before the Supreme Court seeking a stay over Karnataka’s decision to build a balancing reservoir at Mekedaatu, the Karnataka Forest Department too on Wednesday took objections to the proposed project. 

 	Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra said on the sidelines of a function to hand over cameras to the Nagarahole Tiger Reserve (NTR) that his department would oppose the project since it would submerge a large stretch of forest land within the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. 

 	“As of today we have not received any communication about the project. We too have read about it in the media. But when we get an official communication, we will oppose the project as it would not only submerge forest area in the Cauvery sanctuary but also leave the precious elephant and tiger corridors fragmented. Such a situation prevails in Hassan district as forest lands were fragmented into small pieces following the building of dams. This has increased the elephant-human conflict,” Luthra said. But contrary to the stand of the Forest Department, Chief Minister Siddaramaiah on Wednesday told reporters in the city that the government will not step back from its decision to build the reservoir at Mekedaatu. 

 	The CM said, “The government has conceived the project only after taking due legal opinion from experts. There will not be any injustice to Tamil Nadu or any other state. We will release the quantity of water supposed to be released to Tamil Nadu, and the Mekedaatu pro ject will not affect that process in any way. The project will be taken up on our land to meet the demands of our people. We will consult legal experts and discuss about the objections raised by Tamil Nadu.” The state, after obtaining green light from its counsel Fali SNariman, had called for a global expression of interest (GEoI) to build a balancing reservoir at Mekedaatu. According to Major Water Resources Minister M B Patil, the project would help stock about 48 TMC of water to meet potable water demands of Bengaluru and adjoining areas. 

 	It is expected to submerge about 2,500 acres of forest land falling within the jurisdiction of the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, known for its flourishing population of tigers and elephants. 

 	Meanwhile, the minister did a volte-face on Wednesday stating that a detailed project report was being prepared and the project would be taken up only after placing it before the Centre for approval.