A 19-yr-old is heading on a filmmaking expedition to South East Asia to document and bring awareness to the trafficking of Manta Rays
 
 
 When she was 10, Malaika Vaz wanted to buy a new pair of shoes for her Barbie, and sauntered up to her mother to ask for money. Her mother joked that they were broke and that Vaz would have to make her own money. Only, Vaz took it seriously. The next day, she walked into a local TV channel’s office in Goa and asked if they would pay her Rs 5,000 for making an adventure sports film. She chuckles, recalling how amused they were: “They thought I was really cute and said ‘Ok, go and make a film and come back and show it to us’.” She came back with a segment about horseriding – something she was doing at the time, and they “loved it”. And that’s how at age 10, Vaz became a TV presenter, anchoring a show called Spotlight With Malaika for two years, in which she brought adventure sports to young kids in Goa.
 
 Call it precociousness, will, or just plain luck, but that story is indicative of Vaz’s current status as one of the country’s youngest wildlife and environment warriors. At age 19, the Bengaluru-based Vaz has a litany of achievements to her credit – she was named State Youth Leader for 2016 for her achievements; she was awarded the National Geographic ROAR Talent bursary to attend the Wildscreen Festival 2016 (Green Oscars) in Bristol. And she is gunning for more with her upcoming project, a documentary film called Ocean to Potion, which will track the illegal trafficking of Manta/ Mobula Rays across South East Asia.
 
 
 Stop the killing
 
 Seated across from us at a city restaurant, Vaz talks passionately about the trade, and why it needs to be stopped. It has its roots in the consumption of Shark Fin Soup, often seen as a luxury item in Chinese and Vietnamese cuisine. Excessive hunting of sharks meant that the population began to deplete. With diminishing stocks and international attention reducing the trade, an alternative was required. Unfortunately, Manta/Mobula rays – which until even five years ago, were seen as only bycatch (“fisherman would sometimes throw them back out into the sea if they caught them with their catch,” Vaz says), are now being actively targeted. The other big reason is the fact that manta rays have gill rakers (the thin filaments they use to filter food from the water), which are being marketed by Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) practitioners as an immune system booster.
 
 “Manta and Mobula Rays have extremely low reproductive rates – making them especially vulnerable to the trade. This is why I think it is crucial to document this species now,” she says. Plus, she has had some “incredible encounters with the beautiful, sentient and interactive species underwater”, and aims to protect them through her work.
 
 Currently in pre-production, Ocean to Potion will start to be filmed on January 15 in Andhra Pradesh, where Vaz and cinematographer Nitye Sood will spend 15 days shooting the Manta Ray trade. Bhushan Bagadia will be the underwater cameraman. She will then move on to the Maldives – “a conservation success story,” she says – the Andamans and then to China. Each leg has been chosen with the intent to focus on a specific aspect of the Manta Ray life cycle and trade. Andhra Pradesh is one of the largest catchment areas for rays, and it is here that Vaz aims to document the actual capture and sale of these marine animals.
 
 In the Maldives and Andamans, Vaz will document the beauty of the creatures by snorkelling and scuba diving, respectively, with them. This is important, because, as she says, “as a filmmaker I have to engage with the audience with visuals”. Vaz believes that if viewers see how beautiful enforced protection is (as it is in the Maldives, where a trading-based economy has shifted to a tourism-based economy where Manta Rays are protected and are a source of income for the locals), they will fall in love with them and automatically want to protect them. “Unless a film is visually stunning, you can’t draw someone in. Viewers will only protect what they love and they’ll only love what they see. I want them to see that just like we have tigers in our forests that we need to protect, we have these beautiful creatures in our oceans, and we must do everything in our power to stop their massacre,” she explains. In China, the idea is to investigate the mercenaries of the TCM trade and bust their claims of the usefulness of Manta Rays to their potions.
 
 Nuanced conservation
 
 But this is no natural history project. With a wisdom that belies her young years, Vaz makes clear that the focus of her film – and her work and philosophy in general – is human-animal interaction and conflict. So while she is passionate about the protection and survival of Manta Rays, she also understands that it would mean taking away a source of revenue from the fishermen – a problem that will demand an alternative solution; “a nuanced approach to the problem,” she says. Which is why, eventually, the hope is that Maldives conservation success story can be emulated, locally adapted and be replicated here, creating monetary opportunities via tourism while aiming to bring about policy level change and enforced protection of the species.
 
 It is an approach she conceived while making her last film, Waghoba, which was supported by her mentor, wildlife filmmaker and conservation photographer Sandesh Kadur. What was intended to be a natural history film based in Umred-Karhandla Wildlife Sanctuary in Maharashtra about one particular tiger changed completely due to one incident that she now sees as seminal to her philosophy. “When we got there we realised there were people and cattle dying because of tiger attacks,” she says. But it was a meeting with Baoji (meaning grandfather), an old farmer who she really “bonded” with, in whose home she spent the night, and who she planned to shoot with for the film, that really caused a “lightbulb to flicker” in her head, she says. “Two days later, we learnt that he had died, from the shock of losing seven of his cattle overnight to a tiger attack. For a rural farmer, losing one cow is like losing Rs 25,000 – it’s his livelihood. My story completely changed in that moment,” she recalls. Eventually it became a more nuanced portrayal of people’s relationship with the tiger, and of the latter’s stature as provider, destroyer and deity to the locals.
 
 “Conservation can’t be done in isolation,” she also realised, after a conversation with a 14-year-old girl who asked why the tiger should live after killing her grandmother. “All my life I had been campaigning for the tiger and fundraising, but never thought about how it impacts humans. When she asked me if I’d feel so passionately about protecting them if they had killed my grandfather, it was transformative,” she says.
 
 
 Together, forward
 
 Early on, her experience with founding Kriya – a Pune-based organisation that works to empower women who are victims of domestic and sexual abuse and children from tribal communities where kids are criminally labelled, through adventure sport – also contributed to her understanding of the “human side of wildlife challenges”. The idea, she says, was to take these women, “mostly from tribal communities” outdoors and get them to participate in adventure sports and outdoor activities.
 
 “When a woman climbs a 6,000 mt mountain she realises she can come back and get her own job and go to university. Until then they’d never even left their homes and were so boxed in by inequality – at home and structural too. They were told they couldn’t climb mountains, life weights, cycle, swim, etc. But when they pushed their physical limits, they also realise their mental strength, and that gives them a big confidence leap,” she says.
 
 Today, filmmaking and the desire to be a wildlife presenter follow naturally from Vaz’s passion for adventure sport, exploration and love for wildlife – for instance, she’s the youngest person to expedition to both Antarctica and the Arctic; she’s a national level windsurfer, endurance horse rider, sailor and kayaker. But it has been her experiences with wildlife and people that have taught her to look beyond her “cosmopolitan bubble” to a world where co-existence is central.
 
 And that’s what she hopes for the viewers of her film, who she stresses, will be people like you and me, not “festival audiences, because that will be like preaching to the converted”.