As tiger deaths creep up in state, activists question transparency, highlight issues such as electrocution risk, inefficient ground staff

Across all its five tiger reserves, Karnataka lost 54 tigers between April 2018 and March 2023. According to Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) data, the number of tiger deaths in 2018-19 and 2019-20 was seven tigers each year. However, in subsequent years, the figures surged to nine deaths in 2020-21, with 18 big cats perishing in 2021-22. In 2022-23, as many as 13 tiger deaths were recorded. The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) reported eight tiger deaths in the state so far this year.

The data indicates an upward trend in tiger deaths, raising concerns among wildlife activists, most of the deaths are due to natural causes and thus not alarming. They attribute high death numbers to the increase in the population density of big cats in the state.

“In the case of tigers and most carnivores, a mortality rate of 5% is considered normal. Moreover, the population of big cats in Karnataka has gone up considerably, causing a surge in death numbers. Tigers are territorial and with high tiger density, especially in Nagarhole and Bandipur Tiger Reserves, competition for survival and territory gets stiffer and weaker individuals are killed. Older tigers are also driven away to adjacent areas with insufficient prey population and die due to starvation,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (Wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

He added that the higher number of reported cases is also a result of improved patrolling and surveillance by forest watchers and guards.

“Sometimes, detection of tiger carcass becomes difficult owing to various limitations such as vast swathe of forestland and fast decomposition rate of carcasses. However, patrolling has improved over time and most of the cases are being tracked leading to a higher number,” said Pushkar. 

However, wildlife activists say while the number has increased, KFD has not been transparent with the actual number of tiger deaths. According to Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust, the lack of transparency is because many officials do not want to carry out investigations.

“The number of tiger deaths being reported by Karnataka was also questioned by the Chief Wildlife Warden of Madhya Pradesh. We are not reporting all death cases. This is because either officials do not want to carry out investigations or forest areas are not being patrolled efficiently. For instance, a couple of years ago, a ‘tiger snared’ case in Bandipur was not reported then, as that range forest officer avoided investigation. In many cases, the carcass is found only after it is completely putrified. Cases of electrocution, snaring, and poisoning of big cats are going up in Karnataka. Most of the farmlands around tiger reserves have snares for wild boars and deer, which kill tigers too,” said Hoover.

The issue of electrocution has gained attention in recent times due to the ineffective perambulation of big cats. They emphasise the need for KFD to work as an institution.
 
“Of late, we are witnessing tigers dying of electrocution. Perambulation of forest areas is conducted by foot soldiers and it is compromised due to various issues. These on-ground staff are paid paltry wages and are overworked. In most tiger reserves in Karnataka, the foot soldiers have to wait months to get compensated for their back-breaking work. This is when their compensation is not even 1% of the total district budget. KFD must approach the government to iron out these issues,” said a city-based naturalist.

  In most tiger reserves in state, the foot soldiers have to wait months to get compensated for their back-breaking work–City-based naturalist
Carrying capacity
Between 2018 and 2023, KFD rescued 15 tigers from areas adjacent to tiger reserves. Officials say the dispersal rate of big cats has increased as the reserves’ carrying capacity is reaching saturation points. “Broadly, a tiger’s territory is spread over a ten square kilometre area. However, high prey density and an increase in the tiger population have reduced this to around six square kilometres on average. This has led to more tigers straying out. This number is going up as the reserves approach their maximum carrying capaci ty,” said Pushkar.

“NTCA should conduct a study of the carrying capacity of tiger reserves. The island pockets around the reserves should be protected and corridors should be secured. The tigers will slowly start moving to these pockets through the corridors, reducing the number of straying big cats. These islands can be used as shock absorbers for the reserves,” added the naturalist.


Kill Bill? Experts slam tiger-threatening Bill 

Wildlife experts and activists expressed disappointment over the latest development of the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill of 2023 passed by Lok Sabha on Wednesday. Experts say the ‘destructive’ bill will prove unfavourable when it comes to tiger conservation.

“The Bill will now permit setting up of eco-tourism activities, safaris along with commercial activities such as mining in the buffer zones of tiger reserves. Such activities will lead to more human-wildlife conflict cases. This will lead to more tigers either being killed or landing in rehabilitation centres. This bill will prove detrimental to any kind of conservation efforts,” said Hoover.