A city-based techie's wild ways almost landed him behind bars. We're not talking booze or drugs, but rather his possession of a protected wildlife species. Booby audaciously posted an advertisement, putting up an Indian Pond Terrapin for sale on an Internet auction site. The amphibious species is protected under schedule IV of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act.   The techie posted his ad on the website in a bid to sell off the terrapin, but diligent wildlife volunteers were alert to it. They posed as buyers caught him red-handed. “The youth, who claimed to work for an MNC, committed such a foolish act in trying to sell an Indian Pond Terrapin,” C Kishan, manager, People for Animals (PFA), told Bangalore Mirror. “We were initially shocked to see somebody advertising the Indian Pond Terrapin on a marketing website. Even keeping it is illegal and amounts to violation of the IWA. However, we have managed to rescue the terrapin.”   Of the hundreds of advertisements on the portal, the one posted by Bobby, who resides in Kalyan Nagar, stood apart. When even possessing one is considered a serious offence and could land the person in jail, Bobby had put a Rs 1,000 price tag on his terrapin. Volunteers at PFA laid a trap and approached Bobby, posing as customers. When they met him on August 1, he upped his demand for money, say the volunteers.   “The ad was up for about four to five days before our volunteers Srikanth and Varun Reddy noticed it. As it was clearly illegal, a trap was laid. Our volunteers called him posing as customers. Three to four of them kept calling him separately,” Kishan said. Bobby initially said he was out of station, while admitting he was in possession of a terrapin. Later, he contacted one of the volunteers who had called him and a meeting was set up in Kalyan Nagar. “When it was pointed out to him, he claimed he knew it was illegal to possess the particular turtle species. He even said the price couldn’t be negotiated as illegal varieties fetched higher rates,” Kishan added.   It came as a jolt to Bobby when he realised the tables had been turned on him, and he had bitten the bait. He profusely apologised and begged not to be arrested as he would lose his well-paying job, Kishan added.   He apparently told Kishan and team he had found it earlier and had kept it in his aquarium, but he changed his mind after it started attacking the fish. He gave Bangalore Mirror a different version (see box) of how the terrapin landed with him. Though Bobby could have landed in prison for illegal possession and wildlife trade, the PFA team let him off with a warning. The juvenile terrapin has been rescued.   “It is a schedule IV animal and Bobby had committed a serious offence. He would have landed in prison for at least six months. However, we have warned him that he will be booked if he repeats the offence,” Kishan added.