On July 24, the Supreme Court passed an order, which, according to every newspaper, banned tourism in the core areas of the country’s tiger reserves. The eco-tourism inviolate areas debate is already sharply polarised; the reactions to the news were, therefore, predictably vociferous. Few bothered to read the fine print. 
   The court’s order does not contain a permanent ban. It is clearly limited “till final directions” are issued, and the case is listed but a few weeks from now, on August 22. Most commentators have also overlooked why the Supreme Court felt compelled to make this order.    On April 3, 2012, the Supreme Court noticed that despite earlier directions, as many as nine state governments had not notified the core and buffer areas of their tiger reserves under the Wildlife Protection Act. The court allowed them time to do so. The states continued to drag their feet. On July 10, 2012, the Supreme Court gave them another chance. Only two (Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh) complied. Two more (Jharkhaand and Arunachal) said they had their notifications ready and would soon place these before the court. Others, the Supreme Court noted on July 24, had “not even made an attempt to issue [the] notifications”.    That’s serious. It is just not open to a government to simply ignore an order of the Supreme Court. For that reason, the Supreme Court fined the defaulting states and noted that continued compliance failure would result in contempt proceedings.    When do our state governments propose to wake up? The 1,500 sq kms of Melghat, originally the flagship of Project Tiger, has been under threat for nearly two decades, ever since some politician decided to knock off a third of its area for “development” (Melghat’s forests are predominantly teak). The move that might have succeeded but for the intervention of the High Court and an environmental group. And there’s Tadoba, claimed to be the “real” home of the tiger. It does have tigers in teeming abundance. It also has extraordinarily misbehaved and uncontrolled tiger tourists. The fatal hit-and-run killing of a tigress with newborn cubs in Bandhavgarh last year only emphasises  the problem.    The issue is not, therefore, whether tiger tourism helps tiger conservation, but one of getting a state government to follow the orders of the Supreme Court and to act as the law requires these governments to act. To those who have been screaming about what a disaster this order is: high time we had one. If this is what it takes to get a state government to follow an order of the Supreme Court, and one that is desperately needed — to notify core and buffer areas — then so be it.    The tiger tourism versus tiger conservation issue is much trickier. There are those who claim that tiger tourism has not harmed tigers; that tiger populations have increased in the most touristed areas; and that poachers, like tigers, do not wait on tourists. Conservationists, too, are alarmed for they are likely to be shut out from the core areas where they work; and indeed their work is both vital and valuable. They argue, too, that there are indigenous forest dwellers within these areas and their lives and livelihoods should not be allowed to be stripped. Predictably, the most vociferous proponents of tiger tourism are those who have some stake in the industry as tour operators or hoteliers.   The other side of the debate, often seen as extreme, is that in our situation, the only way to protect our core areas is to declare them off-limits to all human activity: leave the tigers and forests alone. They point out that the so-called benefits to local people from tiger tourism are hypothetical; few get meaningful jobs. Also, our core areas are unlike the vast game reserves of Africa where population densities are relatively lower, and where a single family or enterprise may own and protect thousands of hectares of untouched nature. Here, the pressure of human habitation makes the protection of fragile ecosystems and habitats an impossible business.    With some luck, the Supreme Court will never need to get into it. In an interview with the New York Times, the petitioner before the Supreme Court, Mr Ajay Dubey, himself did not oppose tourism. “It should be under certain rules and regulations,” he said. He also seeks the implementation of the law as it stands: that the core areas of critical tiger habitats of National Parks and sanctuaries be kept “inviolate”, i.e., free of human activity.    The Supreme Court’s order goes no further than this. To claim that it has created some new prohibitory law, and one that will inure in perpetuity, is a myth. And like all myths, this one too is based on obfuscation.