With its virgin lakes and streams, Fraser Island is a paradise on earth
 
 Our gargantuan steel bus made for off-roading, with special monster tyres, jerks and jolts from side to side, as it makes its way over tree roots and vertiginous banks of sand. The rollercoaster ride has me hanging on for dear life. As we race down the 75-mile beach, with the Pacific Ocean on our right, I am surprised to learn that this beach is actually a registered national highway with a speed limit of 80 kmh. “It’s a highway that can disappear with the tide,” says our guide, Glen. The rugged Aussie, who is dressed in khaki shorts and hat for the day, has spent most of his life outdoors and has the complexion to show for it. “Fraser is all about nature, mate” he adds, as we watch white-bellied sea eagles and ospreys soar above as the bus speeds down the shore.
 
 The beach, we discover, also doubles up as a runway for small planes. I am on Fraser Island, off the eastern coast of Queensland, Australia. With its colossal dunes moulded by sand brought in from Australia’s east coast during the Ice Age, Fraser Island is an exotic ecosystem that offers wildlife and wetlands, rainforests, giant ferns and freshwater lakes. Fraser Island is a World Heritage site — the largest sand island in the world, where everything grows on sand, supported by fungi. Fraser Island has been in the making for over millions of years, as layers of sand deposits settled on a bed of volcanic rock. The island gets its name from Eliza Fraser, the wife of a Scottish ship
 captain whose ship capsized here and was captured by aboriginals rescued later.
 
 Getting to the island is an adventure in itself — driving along the Rainbow Beach, with serrated cliffs changing colour from a rusty orange to vermilion or a bright shade of tangerine. “Iron oxides mixed with leached vegetable dyes for millions of years to give the cliffs its colour,” explains Glen. At Inskip point, we board a ferry to Fraser Island. From the minute we roll off the ferry at the southern tip of the island, and hurtle down the beach, it’s an adventure beyond compare. “As wind and waves throw more sand onto the coastline, newer and larger dunes form,” says Glen pointing to the ‘wind blows’. These mountains of sand devour all vegetation and creep slowly, changing landscapes.
 
 We stop beside small creeks with pristine rainwater filtered through white sand. Here, Glen hands out hot coffee and lamingtons, which are typical Australian sponge cakes dipped in chocolate sauce and sprinkled with desiccated coconut. We drive to Eurong, the main commercial hub of Fraser Island. Inland from Eurong Beach, the open Eucalyptus forests, with its signature Scribbly Gums, merge to form a closed dense vegetation forest. The trees get their name ‘scribbly gums’ from the fact that its bark is covered in graffiti — like squiggles drawn by moth larvae.
 
 We head to the Central Station, an old logging station on Wanggoolba Creek, in the heart of the island. “Wanggoolba Creek used to be an aboriginal site where women gave birth because the water was so pure,” says Glen. Today it is one of the many designated camping areas with public toilets, showers, car park, and barbecue facilities. We have a light salad for lunch and tune in to the sound of cackling kookaburras as yellow and black goannas scurry past us, before waiting expectantly for leftovers from our lunch. At Pile Valley, we walk through kauri pine forests, brush box and rough barked satinays trees that soar 40 metres high like the walls of a cathedral. I feel dwarfed as I crane my head heavenwards to see the dappled light of the sun’s rays filter through the thick canopy.
 
 I love the feel of the creamy silica of the forest floor and meandering along us is the translucent waters of Wanggoolba Creek, home to fish, turtles and eels ,with clumps of rare angiopteris ferns (King Ferns) that have evolved over 300 million years. Orange fungi sprout from rotting tree trunks and rocks, while orchids embrace gigantic trees trunks. We then head to Lake Mackenzie — a crystal clear sapphire stretch of water like a lagoon, with the purest sugar white silica sand bordering it and craggy trees with thick roots that overhang over the water’s edge. It’s one of the many perched lakes on the island that are rainwater reservoirs and the water is stopped from getting draining away by decayed forest debris. I swim in the limpid waters of the lake — it’s the perfect treatment for my aching muscles after the bumpy ride.
 
 I feel energised and almost weightless in its cool waters and my skin feels baby-soft. I spot people rubbing their gold jewellery with sand, to make it sparkle. Just as I head home, I shake out the sand that’s crept into my shoes, but memories of the island continue to endure.
 
 How to reach:  Fly to Brisbane by Singapore Airlines and drive down to Noosa. From there Fraser Island is a convenient day trip or you can choose to stay there for a couple of days. If you want to do a day trip choose the Discovery Group’s Fraser Island tour from Noosa. www.thediscoverygroup.com.au
 
 What to see:  Eli Creek, the largest freshwater stream, the wreck of the Maheno a huge cruise vessel, the rainforests around the Central Station, the Pinnacles and the Cathedrals-sand cliffs, Lake Mackenzie and Lake Boemingen. You can explore the island by 4WDs, Segway tours and treks. Whale watching, Canoeing, fishing, bird walks, ranger guided nature walks are some of the activities on Fraser island.
 
 Where to stay:  In Noosa, Sheraton Noosa is the best place to stay with views over the Noosa River. Stay at the eco friendly and luxurious Kingfisher Bay Resort and Village on Fraser Island.