By: Kavita Patil
 
 It is not just the cows that are eating the wrong food (read plastic bags) and falling ill. A snake nearly choked to death after devouring a piece of cloth it could not stomach. Timely intervention by a herpetologist saved the snake. 	A wildlife activist told Bangalore Mirror that the incident is not an isolated one. While one snake had consumed a PVC pipe fitting, another had swallowed an electric bulb. 
 	  	These were saved from imminent death because they were spotted in time. There could be a lot more out there in the open suffering because of a careless act of some human being, the reptile lover says.
 	  	Two days ago, a snake was caught in a rat trap in a house near Sirsi in Uttara Kannada district. Shocked residents of the house shot off an SOS to a local herpetologist. “As soon as I got the news, I rushed to the spot but couldn’t see the snake. The family told me that it had probably gone deep into the rat burrow they had seen it in. So we did a little digging to find the snake. When we did find it, it had buried its head deeper, because of which we ended up digging further,” wildlife activist Prashanth Hullekal said.
 	  	“When we got to see the full snake, we realised that it had swallowed some cloth, a piece of which was sticking out of its mouth. My only concern was to remove the cloth quickly, failing which there was every chance that the snake would die. For this, I had to carry the snake to my house. I invited my conservationist friends over to my place. With their help, I pulled out the metre-long piece of cloth to finally rescue the snake,” he added.
 	
 	 		Chew on this... 
 		 	 		According to conservationist Gerry Martin, “Snakes find their prey through the sense of smell, which is not common. The snakes may have smelled a rat on the cloth or the bulb, so swallowed them. However, a piece of cloth isn’t a big problem because a snake can digest most of it and pass it through its system. But consuming a bulb may result in death. I haven’t come across any such incident.” Sharat Babu, honorary wildlife warden, added, “The cloth may have had the smell of urine or waste; that’s why it swallowed it. And bulb might have seemed like an egg.”