By Amit Kumar
 
 There have been 11 sightings so far; experts say humans are straying into their habitat due to rapid expansion
 
 However unwelcome here, seems like leopards don’t mind their jaunts to cities. In the last four years, Bengaluru and its outskirts have seen at least 11 instances of leopards straying into urban habitats.
 
 However, wild life experts say it is the humans who have encroached up leopard habitats and hence the big cats is forced to make an appearance here.
 
 In Karnataka, there have been at least 143 instances of leopards entering the cities/towns. The residents of Kanakapura Road and those passing via NICE Road have often complained of leopard sightings.
 
 In the last few weeks, a story of the big cat entering a house in Tumakaru and another sleeping next to a man in Mysuru. According to wild life experts, as the urban areas expand, many leopard habitats are shrinking.
 
 Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife biologist, told Bangalore Mirror that leopards live on the outskirts of cities if there is suitable habitat there like the Chamundi hills adjoining Mysuru, Bannerghatta and other forests adjoining Bengaluru or Sanjay Gandhi National Park next to Mumbai.
 
 They come looking to catch easy prey such as domestic pigs, dogs, sheep, goat or other livestock especially if their habitat has diminished and they are deprived of natural prey such as wild pig, porcupine, four-horned antelope, black-naped hare, langurs and other, he added.
 
 In Mysuru, leopards have repeatedly made headlines.
 
 
 
 
 These repeated incidents of leopards being spotted in the city has created fear among the people and they are asking the forest officials to take action to prevent leopards from entering the city.
 
 Wild animals enter the city in search of food. Usually leopards have been spotted in the night as they were are seen searching for foods like stray dogs and meat.
 
 Sources from the forest department told Bangalore Mirror, “Most leopards enter the city in search of raw meat. Meat shop owners must ensure they dispose of waste flesh in a proper manner.”
 
 They also said people must not panic and beat the leopard or attack it as carnivores attack only if they feel threatened. According to the survey conducted Zoo Authority Of Karnataka, nearly 143 leopards have entered into cities like Ramanagara, Mandya, Kolar, Bengaluru (Rural and Urban), Mysuru, Tumakuru and others.