Activist to write to CM about the repercussions to the ecosystem

After the State government decided to construct a film city at Hesaraghatta and not at Roerich estate as proposed earlier on Thursday, environmentalists have raised concerns. The green activists have now decided to write to Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa against handing over 140 acres of land in Hesaraghatta for development of film city, claiming that the area is part of a fragile ecosystem and should be preserved at any cost.

Wildlife photographer and a green activist Mahesh Bhat who has been actively involved with the protection of Hesaraghatta grassland said the area was one of the last remaining green belts around the city which was surrounded by shrub jungles and flanked on one side by the Hesaraghatta reservoir. 

Speaking to Mirror, Bhat said, “We need to understand that Roerich estate was as important as Hesaraghatta. If this project comes through, it will systematically destroy the ecosystem and the water security - whatever is left of it. It will congest the area as traffic will increase - at a time when Bengaluru can ill afford more congestion.”

   If this project comes through, it will systematically destroy the ecosystem and water security - whatever is left of it. It will also congest the area ­–Mahesh Bhat , activist
He also wondered how the State could make a decision like that, while in May the CM himself had categorically stated that the film city cannot come up in Hesaraghatta.

On the other hand, the Karnataka Film Chamber of Commerce (KFCC) president Gubbi Jairaj said that their plan of a film institute has been stalled till they get enough clarity from the government. “We want to preserve nature as it is. Secondly, we still need clarity from the government on the issue. We will abide by the State Government’s decision. Overall, we need a film city as producers are now incurring heavy expenses by travelling to other states for shooting. Currently, we have Kanteerava studio which is insufficient as the lesser space has to be shared with the TV industry as well,” he said.

The KFCC delegation led by Shivrajkumar on Thursday, had a meeting with Deputy CM Ashwath Narayan to discuss steps to reinvigorate the film industry, GST subsidies, the status of unorganised workers in the sector and the prospect of streamlining the red tape for future projects.

Rich in Biodiversity

According to a study done by S Subramanya, Prof of GKVK and a member of Bombay National Society on the biodiversity of Hesaraghatta grassland indicated that this land hosted 39 native species of scrubs, 10 species of mammals, five species of reptiles, 133 species of birds apart from several butterfly species, etc.