City emerges important trading stop for illegal hard-shell turtles

Bengaluru has emerged as an important trading stop in India for illegal trade of hard-shell turtles, after Chennai and Mumbai. According to the researchers from Wildlife Conservation Society, the city has been acting as an important hub for these illegal consignments to other places within India or abroad.

Researchers recorded 268 incidents involving poaching or illegal trade of tortoises and freshwater turtles within India or originating from India between 2013 and 2019. Live or dead tortoises/hard-shell turtles were seized in at least 118 incidents. These incidents included more than 21,000 hard-shell turtles and a big chunk of these seizures containing live tortoises/hard-shell turtles were made in Bengaluru.

“The complexity of the trade network is higher in the case of hard-shell turtles as they go to multiple locations, including international destinations. This is where cities like Bengaluru come into the picture. Bengaluru is also a hub for the pet turtle trade and also features in exporting star tortoises, tent turtles, and others. Our research shows that the city receives a lot of exotic turtle species too,” said Uttara Mendiratta, head, Counter Wildlife Trafficking program, WCS.

Pet exotic
Researchers highlight that a lot of star tortoises are being collected from smaller towns in Karnataka and then moved to big cities such as Bengaluru.

Experts say that Bengaluru residents are increasingly inclined towards keeping exotic pets, a behaviour that should not be encouraged. Wildlife law enforcement agencies must prioritise crackdown on illegal wildlife trade and spread awareness about the implications of wildlife trafficking and negative consequences for human well-being and species conservation. Not only does it provide a mechanism for human disease outbreaks, but also threatens livestock and the native wildlife population.

“Demand for tortoises such as Indian Star Tortoise as pets, is very high in cities like Bengaluru and needs to be curbed. Not only is it illegal to have a threatened species as pets, but it also entails negative consequences for human well-being and species conservation. Having exotic turtle species has implications for the potential outbreak of disease. Moreover, they invade our ponds and rivers and replace our native biodiversity,” added Mendiratta.

Out of the total incidents recorded across the country, 103 incidents involved soft-shell turtle trade, comprising 53,000 individuals. However, the number of these incidents was negligible in Bengaluru.

Overall, the hard-shell turtle trafficking network comprised 65 nodes in eight countries and 75 unique trafficking links, corresponding to 1.8% of all possible links.

 Moreover, well-connected state capital districts such as Chennai, Mumbai, Kolkata, and Bengaluru supplied tortoises/hard-shell turtles to the majority of the nodes in the network either within India or abroad.