A winning photo
It’s the last day to submit photographs for the Nature inFocus Photography Awards 2019. The awards honour shutterbugs documenting unique natural history moments and critical conservation issues. Like every year, the Awards is expected to generate an impressive catalogue of imaginative and artistic images, celebrating the rich palette of our planet’s abundant wildlife. The Photography Awards is part of the annual Nature inFocus Festival, which is scheduled to happen in July this year, in Bengaluru. You can win awards starting from `10,000, to a guided safari tour to a national park of choice, as well as a trip to the Maasai Mara National Park 
in Kenya. 

 SUBMISSION: awards.natureinfocus.in
 DETAILS: contests@natureinfocus.in

German story 
In the fifth edition of German Spotlight, curated by Sandbox Collective, catch the rehearsed reading of The Time of the Tortoise, written by Kerstin Specht and directed by Ashwini Kumar Chakre. The story is a surreal conversation between two friends, Ali and Sami, who are dead and are illegal immigrants in a European country. They will take you through their journey of love, loss, living and fate.

 WHERE: The Courtyard, 105, KH Road, Shanti Nagar
 WHEN: 7pm, May 31 ENTRY: Free CALL: 22511300

Get the party started
Head to a Friday shindig with Rohan Kapoor, who’ll be bringing the house down with some progressive and groovy house tunes. Dance Music in India and Rohan Kapoor are almost synonymous. This Bengaluru boy is known for unexpected twists and surprises in his music, which makes his gigs engaging. There’s oodles of music, dancing and cheer in store for you at this party. 

 WHERE: Nevermind – Bar & Social, 12th Main Rd, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 8.30pm, May 31 CALL: 9110841695
 ENTRY: Free (for couples and single ladies only)

A new epic 
HS Venkatesha Murthy’s play Chitrapata Ramayana is not the story of Valmiki’s Ramayana. This is more of a folk Ramayana. One of Helavanakatte Giriyamma’s poetic works contains some source lines for this work. In this play, the author has adopted a style where the story is presented through pictures and folk songs and dances by devotees of goddess Yellamma, called Bhootaes. This play depicts an imaginary scenario after the coronation of Rama in Ayodhya, in the background of atrocities that women face every day. 

 WHERE: Ranga Shankara, 2nd Phase, JP Nagar
 WHEN: 7.30pm, May 31
 ENTRY: `100, bookmyshow.com 

A touch of ceramic
Bring nature closer to you with this collection of earthen tableware and ceramic decor. Designed to create an interesting highlight wherever you place them at your home, they are bound to be a conversation starter. They are available in different hues and textures and designs. 

 WHERE: Studio Orenda, Koramangala 6th Block
 WHEN: 11am-7pm, Ongoing 
 CALL: 7625094555

An ode to the past
A talented team of singers lead by Biju Nair will pay tribute to the original kings of rhythm in Hindi cinema – OP Nayyar and RD Burman. At ‘The Kings of Rhythm – 2’, foot tapping and melodious songs will enthrall you. Nair will be accompanied by Shruti Bhide, Aishwarya Kasinathan and Govind Kurnool – and host Sanjay Singh – while the music will be provided by Pradeep Patkar and team. 

 WHERE: Chowdiah Memorial Hall, GD Park Extension, 2nd Main Road, Malleswaram
 WHEN: 7pm, May 31 
ENTRY: `300 onwards, bookmyshow.com 

Distinct sounds
At this month’s ‘Bands In A Box’, listen to Anirudh Ravi, Bharath Kashyap, and Abheet Anand – the acoustic trio that makes up Cinema of Excess. The music that the band plays is a careful curation of western folk, indie folk, and country music. Influences include artists such as The Milk Carton Kids, John Mayer, Damien Rice, Jack Johnson, and Iron & Wine. They are currently in the process of recording and releasing their debut EP titled ‘Bring Back The Sound’.

 WHERE: Life Behind Bars Cycles, 100 Feet Rd, Binnamangala, Stage 1, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 6pm, May 31 
ENTRY: `300, insider.in