By Piyush Ranjan

Burnt palms, feet of animal found in Cubbon Park indicate torture, say rescuers 

A Slender Loris was found in wounded condition on Sunday afternoon in the Bangalore Press club premises, Cubbon Park. Members of the press club informed the Wildlife Resource and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC) and was rescued and taken for treatment. It was unusual for a slender Loris to be present in Cubbon Park area and away far away from its usual habitat of the IISc and GKVK campuses in the city. 

The volunteers from the Wildlife Resource and Rehabilitation Centre reported that the rescued slender Loris is a grown adult which had been subjected to black magic. Its palms and feet were burnt and it also had a thread tied around its hand. It was taken to the rescue centre and is currently under treatment. It will take up to three months for the Slender Loris to be completely healed.

Slender Loris, along with the barn owl and black kite are common targets for black magic practices. Simhadri, a volunteer of WRRC said, “Recently we rescued two black kites which were thrown on the road inside a gunny bag in Girinagar. There was also a case of another Slender Loris which had been burnt and had a hole poked in its heart from Bangalore University campus. We treated it for three days but it died due to multiple organ failure.” 

According to Simhadri, there is an increase in the number of such cases around the Amavasya (new moon day) or Hunnime (full moon day). Recently, Two black kites were rescued during Ugadi. These animals are subjected to torture by twisting their limbs, burning them and stabbing them with sharp objects to have the same effect on another human being. Although cases are filed with the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and the BBMP Forest Cell against unknown offenders, it is very difficult to catch hold of the culprits, as the animals are usually dumped in parks and university campuses after subjecting them to black magic.

Shy and peace loving in nature, Slender Loris are difficult to capture so it is believed that poachers or other illegal traders get hold of these animals and sell them to people. As Slender Loris is a nocturnal species, their movement during the day is slow which makes them easy targets in the day. They are also captured by subjecting them to bright light in the nights which leaves them blinded for some time owing to their high sensitivity to light. Such incidents are harmful for these animals physically as well as mentally and it takes a long time for them to recover from the trauma. 

Until a few decades ago, sighting a Slender Loris was a common thing across the city but due to the decreasing tree cover and increasing intrusion of real estate developments in the forests they have been chased away from the city. 

The WRRC intends to release the rescued Slender Loris in a forest area with minimal human interaction after its rehabilitation.