By: Kushala Satyanarayana
 
 
 The scary incident on February 7 this year when a leopard entered Vibgyor High school campus in Marath­ahalli had raised serious questions about safety of children in schools located in leopard territories. But the prestigious The Valley School on Kanak­apura Road, 20 Km south of Bengaluru, has set in motion a refreshing exercise – that includes even its schoolchildren – to make man-animal conflict a thing of the past, instead making way to usher in man-animal coexistence.
 
 
 The school has written to the forest department informing the officials about the presence and activities of leopards in the campus. The summary of the letter is how the school is happy to live with wildcats and do not want any traps to be laid.
 
 
 Although initially some parents were anxious, the school openly discussed with them. “We assured the parents that all precautions would be taken. The children were very excited. Some of the older students were involved in setting up the data on the wildcats and we have put up posters in the campus to educate everyone about co-existing with the animals. So everyone out here knows who our esteemed visitors are,’’ says Jayaram S, principal of The Valley School.
 
 
 The school and an old-age home, also on Kanakapura Road, are now part of a developing story on how humans and leopards can coexist.
 
 
 
 Jayaram has also written in the letter to the forest department that the school has no issues with the big cats on their campus and they want the animals to be in their natural habitat.
 
 
 The sprawling vegetation of The Valley School and the retirement home falls along the BM Kaval Reserve Forest belt, which stretches up to NICE Road, Roerich Estate and Bannerghatta forest. In fact, there is a designated leopard crossing on NICE Road going towards Bannerghatta Road-Electronic City.
 
 
 What started with some observations and suspicion on the part of The Valley School authorities last September, has now transformed into a project to demarcate leopard territory and encourage and teach the schoolchildren to coexist with the wildcats.
 
 
 “We live in a leopard territory, after all,’’ says Jayaram. “Last year, we noticed pug marks, and some people nearby told us that leopards were on the prowl in our school campus. We also have a huge natural water body. To make sure, we approached the wildlife biologist Sanjay Gubbi and discussed how to go about it. He helped us out and it was confirmed that there were three leopards.’’
 
 
 Gubbi, also a member of State Board for Wildlife, besides of the Nature Conservation Foundation, said, “Since the campus fell along the forest stretch, we always knew that it is on the leopard’s path. But for the first time, we took up the project to find out how many leopards were there. We counselled the school and students about how to co-exist with the animals. We identified some spots during the course of camera-trapping and advised the people not to enter those areas after sunset. It is heartening to know that the school has been very positive.’’
 
 
 Sanjay Gubbi’s Nature Conservation Foundation team surveyed the area, set up 26 camera traps in a one-km radius around the school campus. Over a month, pictures were captured from different angles. After collating them, they found three big cats. In that one month, one leopard had strayed in 16 times.
 
 
 Originally, the school was spread across 120 acres, with a scenic lake, a banyan tree that was more than 100 years old, ponds and small rolling hills. Nearly, 17 acres were taken over by the forest department, reducing the school campus to 103 acres.
 
 
 
 Another story of coexistence is that of a retirement home, situated close to The Valley School. It is also located in a densely wooded area. Here too, pug marks were noticed and Gubbi’s team was informed. The same exercise was carried out and cameras were laid for 39 days. These captured images of three leopards on the campus – all different from those straying inside The Valley School.
 
 
 In fact, some of the senior inmates at the old age home were shocked and feared for their lives when they saw camera-trapped pictures of leopards just outside their doorsteps at night. However, counselling helped them overcome these fears.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 Gubbi says the leopard population in the belt is quite healthy – considering the fact that six leopards are in just two campuses.
 
 
 To continue the series and document leopard population in the belt, Gubbi is soon taking up the project again in the entire area.
 
 
 And what better a title than “Leopards of Silicon City’’ for the research project!