Grinning while dreading the party – every parent’s reaction to a kiddie party invitation. But here’s what I learned. Turn it up!
 
 This weekend has been the most intense in a while. It started with my little girl’s 10th birthday party on Friday, and then went on with more friend’s birthdays, more parties, more gifts to remember, and more sugar. So many February birthdays... makes me wonder... just how boring does May get? The heat, the summer, I guess.
 
 The parties were varied – outsourced/ingrown (mine, and just as painful as the namesake toenail!), lengthy/snappy, cool/lukewarm and every kind in between. Since I had slaved over the preparations, I thought it my duty to compare (I know, kill me). So in an exceedingly roundabout fashion, we discussed the parties. At the end of some long drives, I figured that parties mean very different things to children, and to parents. Thanks to carpool, I have opinions from outside our own gene pool. These will help anyone involved in a party and me, personally, for I have milestones to go before I sleep.
 
 
 
 It’s the party that ages you! We all know kids are in a hurry to get older, and THAT’S why birthday parties mean the world to them. When you skip the party, the child feels he hasn’t aged and that’s the disappointment. Have that party please; let’s not mess with the psyche.
 
 So? Just do it. A cake, the family, a few balloons, and his favourite food. It’s that simple.
 
 Socialising is everything. While I had planned out games, decor, and food in equal measure, my little girl, at the end of her party told me, “We didn’t even dance enough!” She promptly sat down and made out more invitations for next Friday. “This is a party only for dancing,” she informed me, “Will you buy chips?” Chips! After my elaborate Moana-style island snacks.
 
 
 So? Have as many age-appropriate games as they would like to play. Give top preference to planning activities. This brings the laughter and memories.
 
 Gifts matter. Put some heart into it, guys. Only give mugs, books, or stationery if you know FOR SURE that the birthday child LOVES them. Kids (and some parents) remember those that give crappy presents and the next time they see you, they see your gift in their heads. I’m not kidding. I know a little child who stopped being invited to parties because her mum would pack stuff they had lying around the house as a gift. The last one was a book with ketchup on it. Besides, it’s plain rude.
 
 So? Gifts mean a lot to kids. Just ask your child what the friend likes, and pick up something small and meaningful. In advance. Or at least before you pick up your child from the party.
 
 Who cares for food. For my son’s wildlife party, I baked a rather complicated Giraffe-patterned bread that took ages. The outcome was beautiful, but I was the only one enjoying it. The kids expected sugar, there was none, and butter and cream cheese didn’t count. The outcome? I found bitten slices in the trash that made me wail.
 
 So? Don’t sweat over themed-food. It only rattles other onlooker-mothers – not good for your relationship. Go with fun-familiar. I saw my son eat processed crinkle chips, recently, like a hungry
 
 hog I wanted to disown. So yes, buy junk, and think of the things you can do with the time and money you’ll save on catering healthy-whimsy. 
 
 Next year, I’m outsourcing to some pizza place with tasteless music and Musical Chairs.