By Reya Mehrotra

 Currently, BBMP only has 9 verified officials for rescue ops

Recently, when an unauthorised snake rescuer with a fake license came to the notice of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) Forest Cell and the Forest Department, it caused quite a stir. The accused named Manu VS, resident of Ramanagara held a fake ‘snake catching certificate’ from the Animal Kindergarten Source of BBMP, issued in January 2018. The rescuer was booked under Wildlife Protection Act (1972).

Cholarajappa, Deputy Conservator of Forests, BBMP says, “I have sent the fake license and the identity of the accused to the urban division of the forest department for further action.”

However unauthorised rescuers are plenty in the city and both the forest department and BBMP are in talks to appoint an expert team to conduct all rescue activities in the city. This will also curb instances of ‘rescuers’ from charging exobidant fees for the rescues.


 	  	Manu VS was caught with a fake snake catching certificate issued by the Animal Kindergarten Source of BBMP. BM’s report on April 9   

Talking to BM, Sidaramappa Chalkapure, Divisional Forest Officer, Bengaluru Urban Division said, “A meeting was recently summoned to set a standard operation procedure for wildlife rescues. Currently, BBMP only has nine verified officials for rescues operations in the city. We require at least 60-70 verified rescuers. We need qualified and trained experts for the rescue operations. Some of the verified rescuers have kept helpers under them who might not be trained or authorised which leads to a number of issues. Even some aids of the BBMP appointed rescuers have gone on to charge indiscriminate amounts of money, have also reported to harrass residents, holding a monopoly.”

On April 9th, BM had written about how independent monkey rescuers are charging as high as Rs 65,000 to one lakh per monkey rescue. PCCF Punati Sridhar had then said that he would direct the officials to fix a ceiling rate to avoid exploitation of residents. Ideally, BBMP authorised animal rescuers are not supposed to charge for any rescue as they are paid by BBMP. BBMP only charges the residents for the transportation. “Most probably honorarium method should work for the payment of this new team of rescuers but nothing has been decided yet,” a BBMP official said.