Workshop being organised for kids to help them fall in love with birding

Birdwatching is fast emerging as a popular hobby among Indians. However, birdwatchers often tend to get stuck just on ticking bird names off their lists. In an effort to make birdwatching a more wholesome experience, and to help people derive deeper meaning from the exercise, a new workshop is being organised just for the kids to learn more about the birds during their summer holidays.
 
The Young Birders Workshop is being hosted by Early Bird which is a not-for-profit initiative that focuses on helping kids expand their interest in birds, moving beyond just bird identification. It is a part of the Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), a 25-year-old public charitable trust set up to contribute to the knowledge and conservation of India’s unique wildlife heritage.
 
The workshop will be hosted in the month of May, for children between 10-13 years of age. It will be an intensive four-week online interaction, where it will encourage children to go and explore birds in their own neighbourhood through a combination of activities, videos and online classes.
 
Members from Early Bird said, “Our aim is to help children delve deeper into the world of birds, and start observing the other organisms that they share their spaces with. Since the workshop is designed in an online format, we hope to reach young birders from all over the country. The workshop will be in the form of an intensive four-week engagement tailored specifically for young birdwatchers between the age of 10-13 years.”
 
In the workshop, participants will explore different themes related to birds, each week focussing on a new theme. They will be engaged with a combination of multimedia, guided interactions, lively discussions and activities via online sessions. The themes are designed to facilitate deep observations about birds, and the linked activities will help the participants to independently explore green spaces around their homes -- an excellent learning experience during their summer holidays.
 
Rupinder Kaur, a parent of a participant who participated in the Young Birders Workshop in 2021 said, “My daughter woke up early mornings on her own; was keen to go down (even if the rest of us slept in) for walks and journal her observations. The notes she made were her own and not taken from the internet. Even though the sessions were on Sunday mornings she never once wanted to miss it. Was truly refreshing to see initiative and interest from her without us having to prod even once – all this was very different from how school work happens.”
 
The weekly live sessions will be facilitated online on consecutive weekends, each accompanied by an illustrated activity sheet that not only recaps the learnings about the chosen theme, but also shares new activities the participants can pursue on their own.
 
The workshop will give participants the opportunity to really get to know the environment around their own homes, that which they have always lived with but, perhaps never quite noticed.