While documenting leopard population in various forests across Karnataka, a team of conservationists and researchers were in for a surprise last week. Rummaging through heaps of images of camera traps that were obtained from the field, researchers were awestruck by the presence of scores of chinkaras -- called Indian Gazelle – across vast swathes of dry-lands close to Bengaluru!
 
 In an exciting record of wildlife documentation chinkaras have been spotted in Tumakuru district, 150 kms from Bengaluru! Conservationists and researchers from Nature Conservation Foundation have discovered presence of chinkaras at Bukkapatna State Forest in Sira and Gubbi taluk of Tumakuru. What has really excited the scientists is the presence of not one or two, but a large population of chinkaras there. Out of the 200-plus cameras that were deployed to record movement of leopards, several of them have captured chinkaras.
 
 RARE DOCUMENTATION 
 
 Chinkaras, locally called ‘Sanna Hulle’, has been recorded for the first time in Southern Karnataka and perhaps the second time in Karnataka. Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife biologist who has been spearheading the study on leopards, told Bangalore Mirror, “Chinkaras are believed to have existed sparsely in North Karnataka, bordering Maharashtra and AP. But their appearance down south, closer to Bengaluru is documented for the first time.
 
 Karnataka was known to be home to three of the six species of antelopes in India, including black bucks, four-horned antelope and chinkaras. While the first two have been widely documented, chinkaras were hardly documented. Interestingly, Bukkapatna forest area has now all? the three antelope species and perhaps the only documented place in Karnataka for all the three antelope species.”
 
 The study was conducted for about 30 days starting from the second week of March 2015. “Although the study was for 30 days, we have camera trapping images for only 15-days. They largely live in wooded grasslands in Northern parts. But their presence in an arid region like Tumakuru is indeed surprising. They could have been here but none of us have documented them and even locals perhaps mistook them for blackbucks,” Sanjay said.
 
 FACULTATIVE DRINKERS!
 
 According to Aparna Kolekar, one of research associates at NCF, Chinkaras have been protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. “Even though their population in Pakistan and Iran is almost decimated due to hunting, India has a salubrious count of chinkaras. But conversion of grasslands to agriculture and industrial development and predation from feral dogs is threatening their population in India. Wandering across arid regions, chinkaras can survive for several days without water, and hence they are called as facultative drinkers,” Aparna explained.
 
 Chinkaras belong to the bovidae family of cloven-hoofed and ruminant mammals. “Blackbucks and chinkaras appear to be similar, both are different scientifically. While blackbucks are antelopes, chinkaras are gazelles. While Chinkaras stand about 24-27 inches and weigh 45-50 pounds, blackbucks measure 30-35 inches tall and weigh close to 100 pounds,” said another researcher.