By Garima Prasher

The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) has finally taken up rejuvenation work at Rampura Lake. According to the authorities, the lake will be revived as per BBMP’s lake restoration model — desilted, bund restored, with embankment slopes, walking tracks and sewage diverted from the waterbody for good.

However, residents are skeptical about some of the aspects of the rejuvenation.

“There is deviation concerning the actual size of the proposed waterbody after restoration. Compared to the 2016 survey map issued by the BBMP, the size of the proposed lake is much smaller now. Moreover, the recent changes in the land-use type of the surrounding area are not in sync with the rejuvenation goals,” said Arun Menon, a resident.

Notably, the lake had turned into a cesspool with continuous flow of sewage from across the city through stormwater drains. While the waterbody is in the process of getting a new lease of life after a long wait, locals are worried about some of the proposals of the BBMP. Under the lake development plan, the area around the lake will be converted into a park, recreational space and social forest. However, residents are vexed about this beautification aspect.

“BBMP is planning a children’s park and a small social forest around the lake. Although we have opposed this idea but have only received stoic silence from the civic body. From a conservation perspective, beautification of waterbodies is not justified. It does not make sense to have large well-lit areas and concretised spaces around the lake as it will disturb the urban wildlife. A case in point is the rejuvenation of Mahadevapura Lake. They installed very powerful LED lights around the waterbody and it has now impacted the urban wildlife,” said Menon.

While the lake had been receiving sewage through stormwater drains for years, garbage dumping has been yet another issue. Residents claim that a sizeable area around the waterbody has been levelled, after a huge amount of garbage dumping, and was added to the surrounding private properties.

“There stood a vast lake here once. However, the waterbody and wetland have now been reduced to a minimum. A big chunk of the lakebed has been levelled and there are ‘land on rent’ boards put up. The surrounding area is polluted with garbage strewn all over,” lamented Ayyappa Samy.

However, many others living in the periphery of Rampura Lake are breathing a sigh of relief. Residents around the lake had earlier complained of the stench from the lake that had made the air unbreathable.
 
“We were fed up with the sewage water and waste. The lake used to stink and attracted mosquitos, making it a health hazard. The sewage water collected in the open made it a breeding ground for various health issues. Moreover, it was on the brink of depletion. Rejuvenation work is indeed welcome,” said another resident.

According to the BBMP, the lake is currently being desilted and work will be completed soon. “The work order to rejuvenate the lake was issued to us in February 2021; we plan to finish it by August this year. The waterbody will be restored on the lines of other lake development work that BBMP has taken up in the past. We will desilt the lake, create a bund embankment, put up slope pitching, build a walking track and divert the sewage. We have created a separate diversion drain; sewage will not enter the lake anymore. We will try to wrap up the work by July so that the lake gets water during the upcoming rainy season,” said a BBMP official.