Two elephant tusks, weighing about 48 kgs and believed to command a notional value of Rs 2 crore, were seized from three persons by police last month. In trying to establish the source of the tusks, the police have stumbled on what they suspect to be a possible nexus between poachers and the very people appointed to save forests and wildlife -- officials of the forest department.   Somashekar, Keerti alias Puttu, and Manohar Poojary were trying to sell the tusks in Somwarpet when they were nabbed by officials of the CID forest cell on May 16. The trio was arrested and the case transferred to the local police. Under questioning, the trio revealed that they had obtained the tusks from one Raju Gowda. The police then arrested Gowda, who claimed that he had taken the tusks off a dead elephant near Sakleshpur in June last year.   The Somwarpet police then contacted forest officials and learnt that the death of an elephant had been recorded in June 2011. This corroborated Gowda's statement. Police then took Gowda to point out the spot where he had found the tusker. Separately and unbeknown to Gowda, forest officials too were asked to point out the area where they had found the dead elephant. The forest officials too pointed out the exact same spot indicated by Gowda. That got the police's antenna up.   “In his autopsy report with the forest department, the veterinary doctor had stated that it was a female elephant which had died. The forest department had closed the case, stating the animal had died a natural death,” police said.   However, police have also found a partially burnt photograph of an elephant which showed evidence that the tusks were removed. The question is, why did the autopsy report state it was a female elephant?   Police are now awaiting a DNA report on the elephant before proceeding further with the case.   “If the DNA report proves it is indeed a tusker, we will decide whether to probe the doctor who conducted the autopsy and forest department officials for filing a false report,” V Krishnaiah, investigating officer of the case told Bangalore Mirror. “However, prima facie, we believe that it was a tusker.”   A wildlife expert said, “It appears to be either a case of blatant negligence by officials or they have joined hands with poachers. Being a Schedule I animal, the death of a tusker should be immediately intimated to headquarters. In this case, we don't know how they closed the case saying it was a female elephant.” Forest department top brass have promised to take action, subject to the police report. “Once the report is in, we will act accordingly,” Deepak Sharma, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), said.