Two men were arrested and 12 snakes, including the highly venomous cobra and Russell’s Viper, were rescued from their possession after a team from the CID forest cell raided their premises near Thigalarpalaya, off Magadi Road recently.
 
 The officials said the two men used to work as snake rescuers. People used to alert them if they spotted snakes in residential areas. However, instead of releasing these reptiles in the wild, they kept the snakes with them to illegally extract venom and sell it to pharmaceutical companies.
 
 The arrested have been identified as KA Lokesh, 46, of Thigalarapalya, and H Ravi Kumar, 32, of Singarahalli in Nelamangala. The duo is suspected to have links with illegal snake venom extraction racket and the police are probing further to nab their accomplices and associates. The officials have handed over the rescued
 snakes to the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre of Bannerghatta to be released in the wild.
 
 The raid was conducted last week following a tip off about illegal possession of snakes at a house on 19th Cross of Thigalarapalya off Magadi Main Road. The snakes were kept in nine glass bottles, they said. The forest cell sleuths also took help of the jurisdictional Byadarahalli police to avert any kind of problem from locals at the time of the raid.
 
 AR Balarame Gowda, deputy superintendent of police, CID Forest Cell, told Mirror that accused were involved in this racket for almost five years now.
 
 “Of the 12 rescued snakes, seven are cobras, four are rat snakes and one is a Russell’s viper. The accused were extracting venom from the snakes and sell it for medicinal purpose. All the snakes were alive. They had ‘rescued’ these snakes on the outskirts of Bengaluru. The accused would get calls from public about snakes. The duo, under the pretext of helping the public, would catch the snakes illegally keep it in their house,” Gowda said.
 
 The accused have been handed over to the Byadarahalli police for further investigations. “We are trying to get information about the people who were buying poison from the duo. We suspect the two are part of a bigger gang,” an official from the Bydarahalli police said.