By: Jeanne Rozario
 
 
 Themed around wildlife conservation, this Koramangala store offers organic cotton T-shirts 
 
 
 	Apart from the catchy name, The Wolfpack store in Koramangala has interesting merchandise too. Known for their line of T-shirts, themed around wildlife and conservation, the 3,000 sqft store showcases a host of colourful tees hung on the walls like pieces of art. A chat with the pack that runs the place -- Rajesh Ramakrishnan, AravindVenkataram and ArunNayaham — and it’s clear that they consider each piece unique. A bunch of wildlife enthusiasts with a passion for travel, photography and the great outdoors,Ramakrishnan and Nayaham quit their regular jobs (as a chartered accountant and outdoor advertising business, respectively) to open the store in July 2014. Venkataram, who works in the ITES sector, dedicates half his time to running the store. 
 	  	The entire range of designs — classified into wildlife, conservation and outdoor activities — are in-house productions and inspired by the  	photographs clicked by the pack. With catchy lines such as ‘Save Horn Ok’ (for rhinoceros) and‘Don’t Pass the Buck’ (conserving black bucks), the trio has found a fun way to highlight the importance of wildlife conservation.
 	  	That apart, the T-shirts are made out of 100 per cent cotton or organic cotton. According to the owners, the T-shirts also last longer as it undergoes a process called the enzyme wash. Apparently, the enzymes get activated with each wash and this prevents the T-shirt from losing its shape, colour, print, etc. They’ve also used different methods of printing like screen, puff, flock printing, etc, which results in T-shirts with different textures and finish.
 	  	Apart from the T-shirts, the store also houses a gallery which features the works of amateur photographers. Workshops on photography, documentary screenings and talks are also held about thrice a month. 
 	  	As for the interesting store name, that’s not much of mystery by the end of our conversation. Describing a wolfpack as closest to who they are, Ramakrishnan explains, “Wolves are very passionate animals, have close family ties and like to work together as a team. Since we are all close friends,who decided to follow our hearts, it seemed appropriate.” Howl’s that for solidarity!   
 	
 	
 	THE WOLFPACK STORE
 	
 	 		618, 80 feet main road, Koramangala 	 		Call: 40967212 	 		USP: Wildlife themed T-shirts 	 		Price: Rs 599 onwards