KSPCB plans to deploy UAVs to check city’s lakes for contamination; these will help them pick up samples from various spots to check for the extent of pollution

This is literally the heights of pollution control. For the first time, the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) is gearing up to use unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to collect samples of wastewater, effluents and sludge. This is expected to help the regulatory body to better understand the distribution and extent of contaminants as drones can collect samples even from the middle of a vast lake like Bellandur.

Not just that. More samples can be collected with drones – 20 samples in half an hour. Earlier, samples used to be collected from only one point in the lake. With drones, the collection can be more extensive and widespread.

Recently, the KSPCB conducted a trial run to collect water samples by using drones. The regulatory body -- which monitors water quality of all lakes every month -- has also floated tenders for the supply of four drones. Officials say the response from bidders has been good. “Drones will help us get access to water samples from any point of the lake. It is also capable of getting deep down into the lake to collect sludge samples as well. In a matter of half an hour, we will be able to collect about 20 samples from a water body,” said Syed Khaja, senior environmental officer at KSPCB. “The collection of samples is important as it determines both the source and type of pollution. We then alert our regional officers to take action against the polluters, including industries.”

  The use of drones will help in conducting a thorough research of contaminants. It’s important to get as many samples as possible to understand how distributed the effect of pollution is– Priyanka Jamwal, senior researcher, ATREE
While the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) is the custodian of all 205 lakes in the City, the KSPCB is responsible for ensuring the industrial effluents or domestic sewage does not pollute these water bodies. About 60 per cent of the result, another senior official from the KSPCB said, depends on the collection of samples. “Analysis constitutes only about 40 per cent of the entire task. Hence, composite sampling is necessary to give holistic data.” KSPCB’s recent analysis of lake samples of the City shows that most of the water bodies fall under ‘E’ or ‘below E’ categories. While ‘E’ is classified as water that is fit for irrigation, industrial cooling and controlled waste disposal purposes, ‘below E’ means the water is highly polluted and is of no use. Almost all lakes in the BBMP zone come under ‘A’, ‘B’, ‘C’ or ‘D’ categories. That means, water is not fit for drinking with and without the conventional treatment nor can it be used for bathing or even for propagation of wildlife and fisheries. Officials said the water quality of lakes gets better only in the rainy season. The KSPCB also collects samples of rivers in the state and about 70 per cent of them fall under ‘C’ category and none in the ‘A’ category.

Priyanka Jamwal, a senior researcher at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE) said the usage of drones could help in conducting a thorough research of the contaminants. “It’s important to get as many samples as possible to understand how distributed the effect of pollution is,” she said. She added that the KSPCB should also come out with certain goals it wants to achieve after conducting an analysis of the samples. 

“What is not clear is whether a certain lake should be brought under ‘C’ or ‘B’ classification. That needs to be clear to take up management action. While some want the lake water to be used for irrigation, there are views that it should be treated for non-potable purposes,” she said. 

You May Also Like To Watch

Watch: Nelagadaranahalli Lake is the most polluted in Bengaluru01:00