Karnataka Forest Department frontline staff may soon access subsidised canteen facilities, easing financial burdens, as proposed by wildlife conservationists

Subsidised canteen facilities might soon become a reality for the field staff of the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), following a proposal submitted by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) to the Head of Forest Force, KFD. “Field staff below the rank of Range Forest Officers should be able to avail subsidised canteen facilities. The facility can be extended to KFD personnel on the model of police canteen,” stated the proposal by PCCF, Wildlife.

This initiative came after a city-based wildlife conservationist submitted a letter of appeal to the Karnataka Forest Minister, highlighting the need for canteen facilities for forest personnel.

According to Giridhar Kulkarni, the wildlife conservationist who submitted the letter, the frontline staff of the forest department have the toughest job. They not only defend wildlife from being hunted but also play a crucial role in overall conservation, and their presence is essential in protecting forest areas. However, they are poorly paid and ill-equipped compared to other departments.

“Apart from poor working conditions and meagre infrastructure, one aspect that puts these brave hearts at a great disadvantage is the absence of canteen facilities where they can buy groceries and other household goods at subsidised rates. Due to the pay scale of frontline staff of the Department not being at par with other departments, there have been repeated demands to revise their pay scale, which have not materialised. Furthermore, the soaring prices of fuel, LPG, vegetable oils, pulses, and other groceries have put them in a miserable situation. If approved, the proposal will bring much-needed respite for them,” said Kulkarni.

While the construction of exclusive canteens for forest personnel would require a huge investment by the State Government, only a fraction of that would suffice if they are permitted to use facilities of the already established Police Canteens, suggests Kulkarni.

One aspect that puts these brave hearts at a great disadvantage is the absence of canteen facilities where they can buy groceries & other household goods at subsidised rates– Giridhar Kulkarni, wildlife conservationist
“A small expenditure may be required for issuing identity cards, purchase of stationery items, etc., and running capital for enabling the KFD’s frontline staff to avail the facilities of police canteens,”Kulkarni said.

He further added, “If adopted, the scheme will demonstrate the value that the government places on the well-being of its forest staff and their commitment to forest and wildlife conservation,”