Dept hopes this will help confine sloth bears to their habitats
 
 Tigers, elephants and leopards straying out of forests in search of food, water have always kept Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officials on their toes.
 
 When sloth bears added themselves to the list, KFD officials came up with a novel method — they banned plucking of custard apple from forest areas.
 
 How will it help, you ask? The officials believe that ample availability of custard apple in forest areas will stop the bears straying out of forest.
 
 The initiative of enforcing the ban was revealed by forest minister B Ramanatha Rai in Legislative Assembly on Monday. In his reply to Tumakuru MLA Dr Rafeeq Ahmed, who drew his attention about rising incidents of sloth bear attack in Tumakuru, Rai said that they have banned plucking of custard apple from forests.
 
 “We used to allow the Village Forest Committees to pluck custard apple. Now, we have banned plucking of these fruits and ensured that these fruits are available in plenty to sloth bears,” Rai explained. This apart, the KFD has been alerting people who commute during late evening hours in the area. Senior officials in the department revealed that sloth bears increasingly feed on these fruits besides eating jackfruit and jamun fruits in the wild.
 
 Acknowledging that bear attack have been on the rise especially in and around Tumakuru region, Rai revealed that the government has already declared Thimlapura a Sloth Bear sanctuary and several conservational measures have been initiated to ensure that the bear population stays well within the forest areas.
 
 Sources in the KFD revealed to Bangalore Mirror that there are over 160 sloth bears in and around Thimlapura, which borders Tumakuru and Bengaluru Rural districts. The numbers of sloth bears were assessed by Tumakuru-based Wildlife Awareness Nature Club (WANC) way back in 2002-03. The state wildlife board too had cleared the proposal and declared the area as the second sloth bear sanctuary of Karnataka after Daroji near Hospet in Ballari district.

Read Also:
Not a stone unturned