Number of water bodies with extremely unsatisfactory water quality index triples over 5 years in Bengaluru; 43 lakes/tanks now in E category

Bengaluru’s water bodies are steadily deteriorating, and the latest water quality analysis report by Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) corroborates the view unequivocally.
 
According to water quality analysis of lakes and tanks of Bengaluru’s urban and rural districts under Monitoring of India’s National Aquatic Resource System (MINARS) program, the number of water bodies with extremely unsatisfactory water quality index (Class E) is going up every year and has tripled over the last five years. While the state pollution watchdog recorded 16 lakes and tanks with category E water quality in April 2019, as many as 43 such waterbodies have been documented in April 2023.
 
In April 2020, there were 28 water bodies with severely deteriorated water quality, 30 in April 2021, and 33 in April 2022: registering a year-on-year surge in the number as well.
 
As per the Central Pollution Control Board’s (CPCB) standards, water from these lakes and tanks cannot be used for drinking even after treatment, outdoor bathing, and propagation of wildlife and fisheries. They can only be used for controlled waste disposal, industrial cooling, and irrigation. 

Do we need this sort of rejuvenation?
City-based lake activists question the rejuvenation process and maintenance contracts managed by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), Bengaluru’s lakes’ custodian. Experts say while BBMP is rejuvenating city lakes spending crores of money and creating diversion channels to ensure that the lake water quality improves, the KSPCB’s report shows these efforts have only been futile. There is no point in diverting resources towards a process that is not yielding results.
 
Maintenance of the lakes post rejuvenation has a bigger role in improving the water quality.
 
“While rejuvenation is a one-time affair, maintenance is a continuous effort. While the documents that the civic body gets signed by contractors to maintain the lakes have an exhaustive list of activities to be taken care of to maintain the water bodies.
 
However, it is mostly the aesthetic aspects that are being taken care of and no attention is being paid to the lake ecosystem and water quality,” said Raghavendra B Pachhapur, a city-based lake activist.
 
The role of state pollution control board in reducing and eventually eliminating pollution is being put under the scanner as well. According to V Ramprasad, co-founder of Friends of Lakes, KSPCB is guilty of dereliction of duty.
 
 .
As per CPCB, one of the mandates of the water quality monitoring process is to assess the quality of water and to take steps for prevention, control, and abatement of water pollution in such areas. The agency responsible to do is the state pollution control board. 

Agencies not working
“KSPCB has only been monitoring the pollution level in the water bodies and has taken no action to bring down this pollution level. While KSPCB has all the rules and acts at its disposal, the board has rarely exercised these powers in case of pollution in Bengaluru’s lakes. Identification of polluted areas is not even half the job done. It should be extended to abatement to the least,” said Ramprasad.
 
Lack of coordination between government agencies and lack of data availability in the public domain are some other reasons that lake activists cite for degrading water quality of city lakes.

  While KSPCB is not discharging its duty in true spirit, BBMP is also not bothered about water pollution– Environmentalist
“While KSPCB is not discharging its duty in true spirit, BBMP is also not bothered about water pollution. KSPCB has a mandate under MINARS and the board is interested in only populating its files for audit checks. To add to that, BBMP is rarely coordinating with KSPCB to take stock of the water quality. None of the agencies are interested in bringing down the pollution level. KSPCB should at least make their detailed water quality analysis data public, so Bengalureans can save their city,” said a city-based environmentalist.