New Delhi: As the world grapples with the coronavirus pandemic, researchers have found the presence of a different kind of coronavirus -- bat coronavirus (BtCoV) -- in two bat species from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu, according to a first of its study by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR).

According to the study published in the Indian Journal of Medical Research, there is no evidence or research to claim that these bat coronaviruses can cause disease in humans, said Dr Pragya D Yadav, Scientist at the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune and also the first author of study.

Twenty-five bats of Rousettus and Pteropus species from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu were found positive for BtCoV in Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu.

Click here for latest updates on the coronavirus pandemic

"These bat coronaviruses have no relation with SARS-CoV2 responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic," Yadav said, adding thatÂ Pteropus bat species were earlier found positive for Nipah virus in 2018 and 2019 in Kerala.

"Bats are considered to be the natural reservoir for many viruses, of which some are potential human pathogens. In India, an association of Pteropus medius bats with the Nipah virus was reported in the past. It is suspected that the recently emerged severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) also has its association with bats," the objective of the study titled 'Detection of coronaviruses in Pteropus and Rousettus species of bats from different states of India' stated.

Untitled Carousel India's tally of COVID-19 cases crosses 11,000 mark; 38 new deaths reportedWith 1,076 new COVID-19 cases reported in the last 24 hours, India's tally of coronavirus cases has risen to 11,439, said the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on Wednesday.

"In the present scenario of changing demography and ecological manipulations, it is challenging to have checks on the encounters of bats with other animals and humans," the study stated, highlighting that the need for active and continuous surveillance remains crucial for outbreak alerts for bat-associated viral agents with epidemic potential, which would be helpful in timely interventions.

"Although CoVs in the subfamily coronavirinae do not usually produce clinical symptoms in their natural hosts (bats), accidental transmission of these viruses to humans and other animals may result in respiratory, enteric, hepatic or neurologic diseases of variable severity. It is still not understood as to why only certain CoVs can infect people," the study said.

The scientists stressed on the need of proactive surveillance of zoonotic infections in bats.

The detection and identification of such viruses from bats also recommends cross-sectional antibody surveys (human and domestic animals) in localities where the viruses have been detected.

Untitled Carousel Suspension of rail services essential to contain coronavirus spread: Railway officialSenior officials of the Railways on Tuesday said suspension of train services and other public transport is necessary to ensure social distancing which is the only way to prevent the spread of coronavirus.

Similarly, if the epidemiological situation demands, evidence-based surveillance should also be conducted, the study said while emphasing on the need of developing strong mechanisms for working jointly with various stakeholders such as wildlife, poultry, animal husbandry and human health departments.

"In conclusion, our study showed detection of bat CoVs in two species of Indian bats. Continuous active surveillance is required to identify the emerging novel viruses with epidemic potential," Dr Yadav said.

Elaborating on the study, Dr Yadav said throat and rectal swab samples of two bat species -- Rousettus and Pteropus -- from seven states were screened for the bat coronvirus during which the representative samples collected from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu tested positive while those from Karnataka, Chandigarh, Punjab, Telengana, Gujarat and Odisha came out negative.

The reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests and sequencing were used for the confirmation of the findings.

"This is an ongoing study to understand the prevalence of the Nipah virus in bats," she said. 

Untitled Carousel Dharavi: Tracking the spread of coronavirus in Asia's largest slum and how numbers grew from April 1New cases were found in Muslim Nagar, Kalyanwadi, Janata Society and Rajiv Nagar localities of Dharavi.

In Pictures: Guarding the COVID19 frontlines: Men and women in uniform111The ones who can't stay at homeThey are putting their lives at risk as they take guard on the frontline of the fight against COVID-19. Men and women in uniform who are putting their duty before their safety. Mirror photographers chronicle their life in this lockdown - where they have to handle everything from agitated residents to anxious migrants and even errant pranksters. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ MMCLStories of resilience and determinationA team from Dadar police station, headed by senior police inspector Diwakar Shelke, police inspector Sunayana Nate, assistant police inspector Shivaji Devkar and two constables Jayesh Ghoderao and Rahul Gadekar, couldn’t go home for two days as they were busy sealing off the densely populated Worli-Koliwada where two people died of Coviod-19 and 17 persons had tested positive. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ MMCLPolice get protective gearAround 100 cops were deployed to man the approach roads. The police identified the vulnerable areas like Janta Colony, Walmiki Nagar, Golfadevi temple road and Adarsh Nagar to seal them off with the help of BMC. “We made sure that nobody could go out or enter the contaminated zone. The police kept a watch on the roads that led to the sea so that people did not use the beach from Koliwada to Prabhadevi,” said Sunayana Nate, an inspector from Dadar police station. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/ MMCL
On the frontlineIndia is between Stage 2 and 3 of coronavirus pandemic with large number of cases being found in particular areas, the Union Health Ministry said on Monday. The ministry concurred with the director of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), who had said that localised community transmission is being observed in some pockets of the country. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ MMCLIn Worli's containment zoneMore than 200 enclaves have been marked as containment zones and sealed off from the rest of the city. No-one is allowed to enter or leave these zones except for those providing essentials such as food and medicines. In some places, residents are given rations to last 21 days, while at others, designated security guards buy people’s supplies in bulk. All the zones are sprayed with disinfectant every few days. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/ MMCLFlouting the Lockdown1838 - that's the number of cases the Mumbai police have registered against those who have flouted the lockdown conditions, without good reason. Given the rapid spread of the virus - Maharashtra has now recorded over 1000 COVID-19 positive cases - police continue to check on those who violate the lockdown, filing cases against those who do not manage to back up their claims with enough proof. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ MMCLThe Lockdown Lathi-chargeOut of all the cases registered by the Mumbai police, many people have been charged under section 188 for violating provisions of the lockdown. Over 1400 were let off after a warning while over 100 are absconding. In Mira- Bhayandar, after it was noticed that people were using the most flimsy excuses to step out of their homes under the pretext of buying groceries, the municipal corporation put out an order directing all stores to stay shut between 5pm and 9pm, except pharmacies. The idea is to reduce the number of people who want to step out in the evening for a joyride using 'grocery purchase' as a handy excuse. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ MMCLSealing, Monitoring, Standing GuardA week after the BMC declared eight buildings at Bimbisar Nagar in Goregaon (East) a Covid-19 containment zone, Monday, April 6, brought some good news for residents. No new cases have been reported from the area, seven of the eight buildings were freed from the restrictions and only one building remained sealed off, police sources said. The building that remains sealed is the one where three residents had tested positive, prompting the creation of the containment zone. Located off the Western Express Highway near Mahanand Dairy, Bimbisar Nagar comprises 31 buildings. The eight buildings that were sealed off comprise 336 flats. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ MMCLFlying Squads for night patrolThe BMC, with the help of the police, has put together ‘flying squads’ for night patrol of the city’s various containment zones - enclaves which have been sealed off to prevent the spread of Covid-19. While civic officials and policemen are posted there during the day the civic body also wants a presence at night, to keep people from venturing out after dark. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ MMCLWhat flying squads will doPrashant Gaikwad, Assistant commissioner of BMC said, “These squads will comprise BMC officials and policemen. They will move around at night to check if anybody is trying to enter or leave a containment zone or is not practising social distancing.” Anyone with a home-quarantine stamp on their hand who is found roaming the streets will be institutionally quarantined in a hotel or lodge set aside for the purpose. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ MMCLNo inquest needed for coronavirus-related deathsAccording to a circular issued by the Maharashtra Home Department on Tuesday, the decision not to conduct the inquest, which literally means--a judicial inquiry to ascertain the facts relating to an incident -- was taken keeping in mind that the procedure could expose the doctors, nurses, and policemen to the virus infection. Mumbai police spokesperson Pranay Ashok told Mirror Online that the Home Department order is in line with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on Dead Body Management in case of coronavirus deaths. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ MMCL