Himalayan bear at BBP escaped close to famous butterfly park where visitors were pouring in on Thursday; captured on Friday
 
 
 It was a close call, one which only the forest officials and neighbouring villagers knew about, but not the visitors at the butterfly park of the Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP). An aggressive 12-year-old female Himalayan bear managed to escape from its cage at BBP owing to its corroded screws and bolts. Fortunately for everyone — especially the forest department officials who were on tenterhooks — the bear did not enter the butterfly park where visitors had started entering to witness hundreds of colorful species of the winged beauties.
 
 The bear sent forest officials into a tizzy after the latter realised the gravity of the situation considering the proximity of the butterfly park to the public enclosure for bears where the bear was housed on a trial basis and from where it escaped taking advantage of a badly maintained enclosure with corroded bolts and screws.
 
 At least 70 people including personnel and officials of the forest department were pressed into emergency mode to find the bear and prevent any untoward incidents like attacking unsuspecting visitors.
 
 After a day’s back-breaking hunt, the bear was finally found perched on a tree near a farm in Ragihalli within the limits of Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) on Friday. It was carefully caught using traps and transported back to the rescue centre.
 
 According to sources in the BBP, a pair of Himalayan bears was brought to the rescue centre at BBP from Agartala six months ago. Since then they were kept at the rescue centre and fed by the caretakers every day. The bears were kept within a barbed wire-fenced enclosure.
 
 Executive director of BBP Santosh Kumar told Bangalore Mirror that on Thursday morning at around 9 am, the female bear was released into the public enclosure on a trial basis. “But the bear escaped from its enclosure. The bears were very aggressive ever since they were brought to the BBP. As the animal was aggressive it began hitting itself against the partitions of the enclosure. Due to a corroded bolt and screw at in the corner of the enclosure, the 12-year-old bear was able to break out of the cage and sneak into the surrounding forest.”
 
 BBP veterinary doctor Dr Manjunath V, who was part of the hunt to trace the bear, said, “Our biggest challenge was to ensure that the bear did not enter the butterfly park as it would create panic among the visitors. Luckily, it remained inside the forest and our staffers began tracing it by following the pug marks. A drone camera was also deployed to trace the bear. The nearby police station and villagers were informed about the bear’s escape.”
 
 	Luckily, the forest personnel traced the bear on a tree near a farm in Ragihalli within the limits of Bannerghatta National Park (BNP). The bear was carefully caught using traps and transported back to the rescue centre.
 	  	Officials have decided to house the bear in the rescue centre for a few more months now. The Himalayan bears, according to wildlife experts, have a lifespan of 40-years.