By Shone Satheesh

With over 9,000 mm of rainfall in the last four months, Patharpunj in Satara has beaten Cherrapunji to place itself on the national map

It rained non-stop for 10 days from August 1,” says Chandrakant Challke, resident of Patharpunj, a hamlet with a population of 600, nestled deep in the Western Ghats in Satara district. “We were sure this was the end. Not one person dared to step out.” Breaking into a smile after this grim declaration, Chandrakant adds: “We prayed to Chekoba for three days. Only then did the rains let up.” 

Chekoba is the autochthonous stone deity worshipped by the residents of Patharpunj. A mound of stones outside the village marks the deity’s resting place, and the name of the village literally means ‘place of stone worship’. But the rainfall — of Biblical proportions, the way Chandrakant describes it — is no myth. It’s also confirmed by the figures from the automatic rain gauge stationed outside Patharpunj village. But while the figures speak for themselves, they barely testify 
to the harrowing ordeal residents of this otherwise idyllic village have suffered in the last few months, during what has arguably been Maharashtra’s longest monsoon. 

Till Friday, Patharpunj had registered 9,421 mm of rainfall between June and September 20 — unprecedented not only for the area, but also a record that makes it the place to have received the highest amount of rain in the country this year. To put it in perspective, Cherrapunji, considered the rainiest place on earth, only received 6082.7 mm in the same period. 

     Cherrapunji sees a record amount of   

For long, Patharpunj’s remote location had allowed it to stay under the radar. Twenty ascending kilometres of jagged pathway leading to the village, manage to keep even the hardiest traveller away. But this year’s rainfall has suddenly put the hamlet on the national map. Situated on top of a hill, Patharpunj and its neighbouring villages, Kollane and Malle, lie in the catchment area of the Vaarna river, which drains into the Chandoli dam, located downstream in Sangli district. The rain gauge station in Patharpunj was installed by the Chandoli Dam project in 1999 to monitor the inflow and outflow of water. Almost the entire population here claims Maratha descent, from a time pre-dating Chhatrapati Shivaji. 

     The rain gauge at Patharpunj, which has to be wound like a clock every 24 hours, registers the day’s rainfall   

Ananda Dangre, a resident of Kollane, recounts that the last time it rained with such ferocity, was in 2005. “This year, we were cut off from the world for a month. There are no shops or hospitals here, only houses and a school,” he says. But Tanaji Damankar, an officer in the dam’s irrigation department, claims it hasn’t rained like this in over 50 years. “In 1953, they say it rained just as heavily, but never in history has it rained for 10 days without stopping,” he says over telephone from his office in Sangli. According to him, rainfall in Patharpunj has never exceeded 6,000 mm annually. 

Chandrakant and other residents of Patharpunj discovered the havoc wreaked by the rains only when they emerged from their homes after ten days. “Half my standing rice crop was gone, and some houses had developed cracks,” he says. “A gale had ripped open the school building, and the rain had destroyed everything inside.” Others, like Bapu Sahuji Challke, also lost their rice field to the overflowing Varna (most villagers own up to 25 bighas of land, on which they grow rice, millet and vegetables). 

     Villagers working in the paddy fields, many of which have been flooded by the Varna river   

A few residents have lost their livestock as well — washed away by the surging river. Out of fear, many have started keeping the young ones of the farm animals inside their homes. “It rains a lot here, and it’s very windy. We can’t even use umbrellas because they snap back in the wind. We use a bamboo and tarp basket to shield us from the rain,” says Chandrakant. “But this year, the rain has crossed all limits.” 

In mid-August, during a particularly heavy shower, Santosh Salkhe’s house caved in. Salkhe, who works as a 
handyman in Mumbai, said his father had a narrow escape as he was not in the house when it collapsed. “The showers were so heavy, they flattened the 
remaining structure afterward,” he said. “Luckily, there was no medical emergency during those 10 days because there was no way we could have taken anyone to the hospital.” 

This is a serious problem faced by residents of all three villages. There are no medical facilities on this side of the hills, and even the first port-of-call to find a qualified doctor is a primary health centre, an achingly-long, two-hour bone-rattling drive downhill to Helwak. The nearest hospital is the rural hospital in Patan taluka three hours, or about 40 km, away. The locals claim that in the past, when there was no transport available during an emergency, they would have to carry patients 20 km on foot to the nearest health centre — a trip that easily took four or five hours.

“There’s hardly any mobile network, so we can’t even call someone in an emergency. Only one spot in Patharpunj, next to the signboard, catches any 
signal. So we take turns to make calls,” says Bhaskar Challkhe. Electricity, too, remains disconnected for long periods of time, says homemaker Surekha Salkhe. But the road — rather, the lack of it — is easily the thing most residents are upset about. Since Patharpunj, and the area around it, fall under the Chandoli Reserve Forest, laying an asphalt road here is prohibited. “A few days ago, there was a landslide on the road, and the forest department did not even allow us to clear it,” recounts Damankar. In fact, the current road (if it can be called that) was built by the residents of the three villages themselves, about a decade ago. “Some 500 or 600 men and women worked for a month to make the road,” says Ravi Dangre, who ferries a jeep back and forth from the village, in the absence of 
local transport.

Despite all this, the road isn’t always navigable. It is paved with stones because during the peak of the rainy season, the soil becomes soft and the wheels of the vehicle get stuck in it. At other times, the surface of the road is so rough that Dangre has to replace the tyres of his jeep every four months, he says. Vehicle breakdowns are also common, so Dangre ensures he always travels with at least two other passengers. For almost a month in August, he couldn’t take his vehicle out as the streams running alongside the road, had flooded it. 

The prathamik shala, or primary school, in Patharpunj, has been the worst hit by the recent rains. A metal bar-and-sheet structure, the single-building school caters to about 40 students in the village, and employs three teachers who hail from outside the region. The rains and gale-force winds have completely destroyed it: the tin sheets on the roof and sides of the shed have been blown away, while the electrical circuitry and computer paraphernalia have been ripped out. Luckily, electricity to the 
village had been disconnected for a few days, before this happened. 

“Our children now go to school in the neighbouring Kollane, but it’s a half-hour walk on a lonely stretch,” says Jayal Salkhe, a homemaker from Patharpunj. She walks her son and daughter to school every day and back, as wild animals like the gaureda (bison) and even bears have, inthe past, been spotted on this road. The school in Kollane, operating out of two adjacent buildings, has 60 students. Here, too, the rain and gusty winds tore open a portion of the roof of one building. 
Sadly, in Patharpunj, locals say the facilities for education were already sparse and dilapidated, before the rains completely shut them down. “The teacher would come at 11 am and leave at 1 pm. On some days, he wouldn’t come at all,” says Jayal Salkhe. Praveen Patil, one of the three primary school teachers in Kollane, narrates the 
ordeal that the teachers posted here, face. “During last month’s rain, my colleague Pradeep Sawant fell from his scooter while riding to Kollane. He suffered a slipped disc and has been advised bed rest for six months,” Patil says. “I don’t think he’s coming back.” Patil, who started teaching three years ago, lives in Kollane village, but travels to his hometown of Satara every weekend. “Once you come here, it’s a beautiful place. But the journey is horrible. I buy supplies for a week 
so that I don’t have to travel back too often.” 

     Villagers have to use tarp-covered baskets to shield themselves from gusty winds   

The schools in the three villages go only up to Class VIII. The local residents say a handful of students have managed to even clear that level to enrol in the higher secondary school in Patan. The dismal educational record is a thorny issue for the residents, as it keeps them trapped in a vicious cycle. “Without the road, teachers don’t come here. Without teachers, our children stay uneducated, so who will give them jobs when they grow up? Today, a majority of the youth in our village work as daily wage labourers in Mumbai,” Yashwant Salkhe, a resident of Malle, explains. 

Many believe this vicious cycle can only be broken by the forest department, which had declared rehabilitation for the villages in 1985, when the current Chandoli National Park was designated a wildlife sanctuary. “We were supposed to be relocated to Karad, 80 km away, in 1985. But 30 years have gone by, and nothing has happened,” says Chandrakant. Since then, the locals have also been barred from collecting firewood from the forest, grazing their cattle there, or even making a road of their own. 

Meanwhile, Chandrakant claims, the residents of around 40 or 50 nearby villages, like Jawli, Rundi, Chandoli, Gowe, Yati, Niwale, Takle and Aroli, have been relocated to Sangli and Satara. “We are ready to move even today,” says Chandrakant, his tone bordering on exasperation. “This village was created by our ancestors, who came here before the time of Shivaji Maharaj. But with no road, our lives here are worthless today.”