Singapore: Inuka, the world's first polar bear born in the tropics, was euthanised today by the Singapore Zoo, officials said. 

 The 27-year-old bear suffered from age-related ailments including arthritis, and its limbs became too weak to support its over 500-kilogramme frame. The zoo said this resulted in injuries to its abdomen and paws which did not respond well to weeks of intensive treatment. 

 A team of veterinarians and keepers decided not to revive the bear after it was anesthetized Wednesday for a thorough health check. 

 "Looking at all the symptoms it is quite clear that from ... Inuka's point of view, he would have been suffering quite a fair bit of discomfort and pain," said Cheng Wen-Haur, deputy chief executive of Wildlife Reserves Singapore, which runs most of the country's zoos. "So we made the only right call that we can make under the situation," he added. 

 	Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments18​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​27-year-old Inuka, the world's first polar bear born in the tropics, was euthanised today by the Singapore Zoo on Wednesday. Roslan Rahman/AFP​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​Inuka suffered from age-related ailments including arthritis. Its limbs became too weak to support its over 500-kilogramme weight. Reuters​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​This resulted in injuries to its abdomen and paws, which did not heal despite weeks of intensive treatment. It was then that veterinarians and keepers decided not to revive anesthetized Inuka on Wednesday. Wong Maye E/AP​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​"Looking at all the symptoms it is quite clear that from ... Inuka's point of view, he would have been suffering quite a fair bit of discomfort and pain," said Cheng Wen-Haur, deputy chief executive of Wildlife Reserves Singapore. Wong Maye E/AP​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​Born in December 1990, Inuka was Singapore’s only polar bear and is likely to be the last. AFP​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailmentsIn the past few months, Inuka’s health had been deteriorating, following which the zoo said the polar bear may be euthanized depending on its suffering. Wong Maye E/AP​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailmentsVisitors left cards and messages to wish speedy recovery to Inuka and caught its final glimpses. Tim Chong/Reuters​Inuka, first polar bear born in the tropics, put down following age-related ailments ​In the wild, the life of male polar bears is around 15-18 years. Their life span in captivity is 25 years. Reuters  

 Male polar bears typically live for 15 to 18 years in the wild and about 25 years in captivity, the zoo said. 

 Inuka was born in December 1990. In recent months, his health had been on a steady decline. Last week, the zoo said Inuka might be euthanised if a medical examination showed he was suffering. 

 Visitors flocked to the zoo to catch a final glimpse of the bear. Some left cards and messages wishing for a speedy recovery. 

 Inuka was Singapore's only remaining polar bear - and is likely to be its last. The zoo has said it will not keep any more polar bears.