Karnataka has been without the State Wildlife Board (SWLB) for nearly nine months now. While the term of the last SWLB ended in October 2023, the government is yet to constitute a new board headed by the Chief Minister.
 
Conservationists and wildlife activists say SWLB is a statutory body and has an important role to play in conservation of wildlife, among other matters surrounding it. In the absence of the board, policy-level issues are sure to take a hit.

“The state government has been running the show without the ­statutory body in place. SWLB members, with required field ­expertise, and knowledge of wildlife laws and policies, are involved in critical decisions surrounding wildlife in the state. They also have grassroots-level experience and a scientific bend of mind to approach important issues surrounding wildlife. Who is dealing with these policy-level issues for the last nine months in Karnataka?” questioned a wildlife conservationist.

As per the Wildlife (Protection) Act (WLPA), 1972 that was amended in 2022, SWLB consists of the Chief Minister as chairperson, the Environment and Forest Minister as vice chairperson, three members of the state legislature, three persons representing non-government organisations dealing with wildlife, and ten eminent conservationists, ecologists, and environmentalists to be nominated by the state government, apart from others.

The members are appointed by the government under the provisions of WLPA and guidelines prescribed by the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife Rules, 2006. 

Standing committee
Much to the dismay of experts, the state government constituted a standing committee of SWLB in February. This was done through a government notification, stating the committee was formed by approval of the previous SWLB members.

Experts say while the standing committee is merely a project clearance body, SBWL is responsible for making policy-level decisions. The Board also advises the state government in selection and management of areas to be declared as protected areas, in the formulation of the policy of protection and conservation of wildlife and specified plants, and measures to be taken for harmonising the needs of the tribal and other dwellers of the forest with Protection and conservation of wildlife.


  While the board should have been constituted immediately after the tenure of the last SWLB, the delay could have been due to poll code— Senior officer, Karnataka Forest Department
Experts also underline that the Wildlife Act states that the standing committee should consist of members nominated from the board itself. When BM enquired with officials from Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), they said the list of recommended SWLB members has already been sent to the state Environment Ministry. “The list of recommended members was sent to the Karnataka Forest Minister a few months ago. While the board should have been constituted immediately after the tenure of the last SWLB, the delay could have been due to poll code,” said a senior officer from the department.

According to a source in the Environment Ministry, while the list of recommended SWLB members has been moved to the Chief Minister’s office, any decision on formulation of the board is expected during the upcoming cabinet meeting.