Bangalore-based conservationist Charudutt Mishra plans to run for 24 hours straight to raise funds for the snow leopard

The snow leopard lives high up in the mountains, at anywhere between 9,000 ft to 15,000 ft, in habitat that is cold, precipitous and dangerous for human beings. Its whitish grey colouring also provides the perfect camouflage among the rocky, alpine terrain.

You’d think that the fact that it lives beyond the reach of most humans would keep it safe. But no. “These extreme environments have, historically, allowed the snow leopard to persist,” says Charudutt Mishra, executive director of the International Snow Leopard Trust, and co-founder of the Bangalore-based National Conservation Foundation. “But things are changing fast. Most of these areas are becoming more reachable with new roads and new infrastructure. Places that were remote even 20 or 30 years ago are much more accessible today.”

Poaching and sport hunting of this beautiful big cat, fueled by a global illegal trade in wildlife, has begun in many of the 12 countries where it is found. In India, tour operators have been running ‘snow leopard trail’ holidays. Vacationers get to go deep into the animal’s territory — at places like Ladakh, Spiti, Uttaranchal, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim — with the promise of ‘assured’ sightings. “It’s a mixed bag,” says Mishra. “Worryingly, there is an increase in poaching. But with tourism, local communities who live in proximity to the snow leopard, and used to view it as a menace that killed their livestock and needed to be eradicated, now see it as an additional source of income. If the locals start to see the leopard as an asset, that’s the best hope for its survival.”

But every conservation effort also needs a hand, from time to time. So on September 12 Mishra is organising a 24-hour run to raise money for the snow leopard. Starting at 6 am, he will run in the Avalahalli forest area in Bangalore (where he lives) and then step out onto the streets. Once it gets dark, he will move indoors, to complete the run on a treadmill. “I should be able to manage at least 100 km, maybe a bit more,” says the ultra-marathoner, who has participated in international events as well, including the Boston marathon.

     Mishra , seen here at the 2019 Boston Marathon, is an ultra-marathoner
Mishra is also inviting people from all around the world to join him virtually. Participants can run, walk or carry out a fitness activity of their choice and log their support — and their step-count — using the run24snowleopard hashtag. “If you register, you will receive a bib with a number over email,” says Mishra. “Take a printout, pin it on, take photos while you work out and then send it to us.” The team is also trying to figure out a way to use popular runners’ apps for participants to register their activity. “So far, about 300 people have signed on,” says Mishra. “We’re hoping for many more, especially from countries that still have snow leopards.” Besides India, that includes China, Mongolia, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan and some other countries in Central and South Asia.

The run is an initiative of NCF, which is the India arm of a five-country snow leopard trust partner network of conservationists and scientists. The network is currently studying the incidence of disease in the dwindling snow leopard population. India is believed to have between 200 and 600, while the global estimate is between 4,000 and 6,000. But it’s a deeply endangered population. Traffic, a wildlife trade monitoring network says a snow leopard is killed every week. Technology to do a proper count, given the leopard’s inhospitable habitat, has only just become available, and the network is deploying that too.

In 2010-2011, four leopards in Spiti died because of an unknown disease. With the numbers already going down, such sudden, mysterious fatalities become a matter of great concern. “We’ve been doing some research in disease prevalence in snow leopards,” says Mishra, “and trying to understand the threat of disease, both to snow leopards and to humans who live close to them. Global models of disease hotspots typically show large swathes of mountains in South and Central Asia — snow leopard territory — as being relatively risk-free. But these areas are opening up and getting integrated with the larger country now. In India, there has been increased movement of goods and people between the snow leopard landscapes and the rest of the country, and this provides a greater chance of pathogens jumping from animals to humans.” These landscapes are also highly susceptible to climate change, which poses a great risk to the snow leopard, to wildlife in general in the area, and even to people living there. “The idea behind the run, in this time of a pandemic, was also to bring the disease aspect to the forefront,” adds Mishra.

The funds raised will go towards conservation and awareness, as well as push for better research about the leopard’s habitat and those who live on its fringes. “Particularly the diseases in those ecosystems and how best we can manage them,” adds Mishra. The last thing the world needs is an outbreak that will decimate the snow leopard population. If people didn’t understand the hazards of that before, the coronavirus would certainly have made them more mindful of it now.

█ We’ve been doing research in disease prevalence in snow leopards...The idea behind the run, in this pandemic, was also to bring the disease aspect to the forefront