By Farheen Hussain 
 
 
 Summer and snakes often make a scary combo. Here is a survival guide
 
 
 Vivek Urs with a cobra he rescued
 
 A parked autorickshaw in Jakkur had an unlikely passenger last week. Possibly fed up of the hot tarred roads, a snake decided to crawl into the parked auto but was spotted by a passer-by at the right moment. The panic stricken auto driver immediately called Vivek Urs, a snake rescuer, to avert a crisis. While the auto driver and onlookers closely watched the snake’s movements, Vivek reached the spot. He was told that the snake had snuggled into the engine of the auto at its rear.
 
 To rescue the snake, Vivek had to topple the auto with the assistance of three-four passers-by and was out of the spot with the rescued cobra within 10 minutes. The rescued snake was then safely released into the nearby forest area. Snake rescuers like Vivek are kept on their toes with summer setting in. The scorching summer is not only driving away the feel-good weather but is also a force that makes snakes crawl out into human spaces to ‘cool down’.
 
 Though the cold-blooded reptiles need sun’s light for heat and energy, higher temperatures push them to find comfort in cooler spots. Rahmath Ataaz, professor of zoology in the city’s Al-Ameen Degree College, specialised in herpetology, and who has been rescuing snakes since 1979 spoke to Bangalore Mirror highlighting the effects of summers on snakes
 
 “The body temperature of snakes has to be about 28 degrees Celsius. Anything above 30 degrees Celsius leads to a condition called hyperthermia and forces the reptiles to find cool spots. Similarly, when the body temperatures goes below 20 degrees Celsius, they go in search of heat. In fact, among reptiles, a number of snakes die in summers than in winters as unlike lizards, snakes are constantly in touch with the heated ground,” he said.
 
 
 WHY ARE SNAKES ‘OUTGOING’ DURING SUMMERS?
 
 According to city snake rescuers, snakes are generally not the kind to roam around for no reason but during summers in particular one witnesses a larger number of snakes outdoors because it is the mating season for few species. It is the mating season for cobras with the females of the species emanating a scent that attracts the males, according to Mohan K, snake rescuer from Quick Animals Rescue Network (Vanamitra) said. “They eat only once a week, so the chances for the hunt are slimmer, but they do come out in search of water, and cool places,” he said.
 
 Different species of snakes have a different time period of the day that they choose to venture out. According to experts, most venomous snakes come out during the night. “For instance, the viper is a nocturnal snake, which is common and poisonous. However, most snakes are wanderers and mean no harm as they crawl around” said Vivek Urs, who has been rescuing snakes for the past nine years.
 
 
 DON’T KILL A SNAKE IF YOU SEE ONE
 
 Finding yourself with a snake in the same room is a scary experience. People are paralysed with fear and at times even react in an unexpected manner. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, city snake rescuers gave tips on how to avoid attracting snakes and should one be confronted with the reptile, how to react. “To begin with, I think we all should keep our vicinity clean, check for rat burrows and fill them with concrete if found, as snakes follow rats and then infest the area,” Ataaz said.
 
 If one encounters a reptile, they are advised to be mindful and not kill it “no matter what”. “First of all, people believe that a snake will chase them and bite. That never happens. If you find a snake, do not panic. The snake can detect ground vibrations, so once you see a snake, quietly back-off. Do not disturb it. A snake leaves a trial while entering a premises. It will follow that trial to leave the place. So once we create a distance, it helps the snake get away. Next, call a professional. Most importantly, when you notice a snake, close the door of the particular room, not the main door while leaving that room open. Let professionals handle snakes and don’t find ways to kill it,” Vivek, who is also a wildlife lover, said.
 
 He stresses the importance of snakes. “I am an agriculturist as well and understand the kind of role snakes play in the eco-cycle by eating away rats and keeping people safe from several diseases that rodents spread. People should understand that snakes are equally scared and petrified of humans. It only finds a way to get out. So give it that space and don’t corner it,” he added.
 
 
 NOT ALL SNAKEBITES ARE VENOMOUS
 
 To clear a misconception, experts stress that snakes are not very eager to bite and waste their venom, which takes up to 15 days to regenerate. In fact, according to Vivek, snakes give out warnings to people to stay away and bite only when they are not left alone. Even then, there are two kinds of bites – dry and wet. Dry bites are generally just scratches and wet ones are venomous. However, one is advised to visit the hospital for either kind of bite.
 
 “Sometimes, people are not actually affected by the venom but may be allergic to it. So they have to be treated that way. Also, an adult snake bite is way less dangerous than the bite of a baby snake. An adult snake knows the quantity of venom that it will inject while the baby snakes just gives away all the venom it would have,” Ataaz, who is a victim of a viper bite himself, said.
 
 He had to have a thumb amputated and a lung surgery to recapitulate completely. But that has not deterred the snake rescuers’ spirit and he is still involved in the mission of rescuing snakes.
 
 
 
 
  Snake catchers like Mohan (top right) have rescued the reptiles from the most unlikely of human spaces, from toilets to washing machines
 
 
 THE TO-DO LIST WHEN YOU ARE IN A SPOT WITH A SNAKE
 
 
 1. Stay away from the snake – at least 20 feet away
 2. Don’t panic
 3. Call a professional for help (BBMP forest cell, Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Trust etc)
 4. Be careful when you visit trekking spots, parks or bushy areas
 5. If bitten, do not cut or disturb the wound; do not run, do not drink or eat anything till treated
 
 
 HOTSPOTS OF SNAKES DURING SUMMER
 
 
 1. Parked cars
 2. Bathrooms and cooler areas in homes
 3. Parks and gardens
 4. Sheds and well-sheltered areas
 5. Water sumps and tanks
 
 
 SPECIES OF SNAKES IN BENGALURU
 
 
 Out of 300 species of snakes in the world, 270 species are non-venomous and only 30 species are venomous. There are 30-32 species of snakes in Bengaluru. Among them, the venomous species are rarely found in the urban areas of the city. The following are the most seen in the city:
 
 1. Rat snake – non-venomous
 2. Russell’s viper – venomous; harms the kidneys
 3. Cobra – venomous
 4. Common krait – venomous (found mainly in outskirts of Bengaluru)