Saad Bin Jung on cricket, wildcats and his latest book, Matabele Dawn. Released Saturday evening, this is the royal’s third book. But there is more to the author than words
 

 	His is not a book to be read in one sitting. Matabele Dawn, 54-year-old Saad Bin Jung’s labour of love for over seven years, straddles three continents — Southern Africa, Central India and Europe — over timelines and generations. Lord Karan Bilimoria, Chancellor of University of Birmingham, describes it as “an epic work of historical fiction.” 

 	 The tome tells the tale of two protagonists, one born in the African bush and the other in Europe in times of war and violence; it speaks about the Matabeles of Lobengula, the Maasai of Mbatiany, the Nawabs of India and the Gonds of Bastar. An ordinary person might be unfamiliar with these worlds, but for Saad they are familiar territories. Familiarity breeds queries and that “developed into a story as it was easier to put it down on paper,” says Saad who has an uncanny resemblance to the dashing cricketer, the late Nawab Mansur Ali Khan Pataudi. The latter was his maternal uncle. 

 	Going back in time
 	Saad comes from the erstwhile royal lineage of Bhopal, Pataudi and the Paigahs of Hyderabad. His father Basheer Yar Jung is from the aristocratic Paigah family of Hyderabad. Saad laughingly informs that his grandfather’s harem produced 28 children. “Think about what happened to the children once the royal Privy Purse was abolished,” he says. We can only imagine! But then, today we are not talking about erstwhile kingdoms — today, the spotlight is on Saad’s Matabele Dawn. 

 	He had earlier written Wild Tales from the Wild (stories from the Mangala Valley near Bandipur) and Subhan and I (detailing the saga of angling a hump-backed masher in Cauvery River). Add the Matabele Dawn to the list and you can pretty much ‘read’ into Saad just by browsing through his oeuvre. 

 	A wildlife conservationist, eco-tourism promoter, an expert angler, he has been successfully running wildlife resorts — Bisor Resort and Bush Betta — from the heart of Kabini, and has been organising customised safaris in Africa since 1995. He’s also an established wildlife photographer (some of his images has found its way in Matabele Dawn).
 	  	However, before all this Saad was a cricketer (Ranji Trophy and international cricket) following in the footsteps of his uncle, till an illness — which required hospitalisation — cut short his cricketing career. 

 	By the Book
 	We settle down for a chat about his new book at his home near Indi-ranagar — his large and functional white bungalow is peppered with artworks and memorabilia from Africa; nothing much here to showcase his royal lineage, barring a few family photographs. His two pet dogs including a docile pit bull terrier are never a wag away. A quick look at the book jacket throws up an unexpected name: There’s a blurb by Satya Nadella, the CEO of Microsoft. “No surprise there,” Saad laughs softly. “He is a Hyderabadi like me.” Nadella, a few years junior to Saad at the Hyderabad Public School, writes: Having grown up watching awestruck, Saad’s languid elegance on the cricket field and now some thirty five years later to rediscover that expansive, creative style in a very different medium was a pure delight! “One gets to know people,” he shrugs, scanning the names on the book cover — Keith Elliot, Cha-irman of Angling Writers’ Association UK, Vivek Paul, former Vice Chairman of Wipro and so on.  	
 	Matabele Dawn is not just a journey through Africa, he says. There are layers to it — wildlife, history, philosophy— to be peeled and discovered. “Take a look at the acknowledgements at the end of the book,” Saad urges. The list is long. The sources range from Hindu cosmology to global black history, astronomy, healing chakras and more. 

 	“Do you know what Matabele is?” he asks. Before answering his own query: “They were very gentle people also called the Ndebele who settled down in Mashunaland and called themselves Matabele.” He speaks about the infamous Matabele wars in Africa and how a whole tribe was wiped out. 

 	Saad elaborates extensively about the soul and ‘out-of-the-body’ travels; both appearing in the book. And he quotes a verse: “You throw the light ahead of you…It’s from the Quran,” he informs. “It pertains to disembodied travel, something that the Sufis do. Why does science have to prove everything? Can we not just believe something our scriptures have told?” 

 	Writing brings about soul-searching, he believes. And writing Matabele Dawn has been an intense experience — through the late hours of night that extended to the wee hours of the morning. The process has now made him believe in karma. “I now believe in ‘do good, get good’. Your actions will dictate the path you take,” he declares. The long writing period has seen him change, go through life’s ups and downs and in the process, “my writing too has changed,” he says. 

 	The initial drafts of Matabele Dawn, saw Saad write about women protagonists: an African tribal, an Indian princess, an Indian African and a foreigner. And every time he sent the draft to the editor, it was sent back to him with the portions highlighted. “But, no suggestions at all,” he recalls. After a bit of back and forth, he decided to read the portions yet again. Then it struck. “I was writing like a Hindustani Musalman. They were all painted with the same brush of judgment irrespective of their origin or moralities. Who am I to judge any woman?” he questions not only himself but a mindset in spite of his progressive upbringing. 

 	The other half
 	His wife Sangeeta (“a beautiful woman” to whom Saad has dedicated the novel) works closely with him towards the cause of conservation and according to Saad, the duo has been making inroads into the deep recesses of Bandipur where they have actively tried to resolve the issue of conflict between the locals and the authority apart from other social issues since the mid-eighties. The first step was to gain the trust of the locals who had every reason to suspect their motives. “When I first visited the area, the Kuruba tribe people would roam around in the nude and lived a life not different from the bush people of Africa,” he recalls. 

 	The Jungs started off by adopting 1000 homes at a time and from each house trained one member to earn a livelihood. Saad says that it took them about five to seven years to gain the trust of the locals and to understand their issues. They have worked in eastern Bandipur (Mangala), eastern Nagarhole and western Bandipur National Park (Kabini backwaters) and the Cauvery Wildlife Division in Kanakapura. 

 	He claims that the conflicts between the locals and the authorities are usually written off as man-animal conflict by the forest officials. “People talk about cats trespassing out of the forests,” Saad points out. “But that’s something the cats have been doing all the time. Only difference is that the locals treat it as a natural issue whereas urban milieu raises a hue and a cry.” He has been working on the buffer conflict resolution and says, half in jest, that his work has made the authorities “hate” him. 

 	According to him, the difference between India and Africa is that the minute one works for ecotourism and wildlife conservation, they are thrown out. “Whereas in Africa, you are welcomed with open arms.” The last straw, says Saad, that will stifle ecotourism in India is the decision to allow only 20% of the national park for tourism. Why the need for such a rule, he deplores. According to him, ecotourism does not leave footprints and by restricting the area, the demand will only go up resulting in rising costs. 

 	Call of the continent
 	Disillusioned with the approach to ecotourism by the Indian authorities, Saad plans to settle down in Africa leaving his son Shaaz Jung (27), a naturalist and cat tracker, to run the resorts. “Indians will respect you for the money you have,” he says dismissively. He is saddened by the end of a love affair with the forests of Bandipur that begun in the eighties. 

 	Things have changed in Africa too, he knows. He was recently stopped at the immigration because of the prefix to his name —Muhammad — a first in more than two decades. But life will be better there, he believes. “Where logic ends, Africa starts,” he says. And it may also be the start of a new book. “Who knows?”