By Rajmohan Sudhakar

A living entity that can put the gamut of mechanical noises in the city to shame is the barbet. The barbet is quite the common bird of Bengaluru canopy if you are the sort of person who stops to listen to birdsong in the urban cacophony. Well, you don’t have to really stop to listen to this bird. Oftentimes, it is right in your ear.

I would say quite overlooked too, this avian, for its peculiarities — the bizarre call, shy nature and somewhat ‘relentless’ demeanour — whiskers, brows, cheeks and all — perfectly blending into the green as it is meant to.

The only time of the year that you get a good look at the barbet is perhaps the fall when some trees shed leaves exposing the bird’s dominion.

The barbet lives almost all its life in the canopy, nesting in tree hollows and gathering grub from trees — mainly fruits, the occasional insect, worm or tiny gecko.

Most of us could immediately associate with the bird, as I mentioned before, not recognising the creature by sight but with its peculiar call that reverberates in neighbourhoods — kutur… kutur… kutur… kutur…; has an unabashed feel to it. Perhaps, a warning to approaching ‘cutters’ of wood, eager to fell branches to make way for urban infrastructure, you see.

In most cases, there will be more than one barbet in the neighbourhood calling, as though answering each other’s call just as the koels.

You could call it nature’s way of getting back at shrill horns and engines, earthmovers, concrete mixers, chainsaws, drills and hammers at work that almost tear the ear diaphragms of all living beings in the city day after day — even of the perpetrators of the noises themselves. The barbet’s is such a sonorous call for a small greenish bird, pretty much as though meditating on it.

Now, the reason why I bring up the barbet’s call is the noise in the city, the hum of life, or perhaps of human life, in the urban expanse. The other day, BM reported how the mechanical sound of the city has breached the prescribed levels as recorded at stations set up for the purpose by the state pollution control board.

While authorities adopt awareness drives to keep decibel levels at the permissible limit, it is critical to understand how this noise interferes with life in the city.

Perhaps the barbet evolved such a deep call to counter the urban noise drivel and locate other barbets that may be far off, as humans push the decibels with the machines. Nature does come with its own communication design. Of late, especially our cities are jamming primeval bio-networks of flora and fauna that sustain urban wildlife.

As soon as a bore-well sinking unit pulls up in a neighbourhood — legal or not — all the fauna in the canopy there scurry for cover, including the barbets, koels, bulbuls, wagtails, swallows, squirrels, sparrow hawks, parakeets, the occasional oriole, tailor birds, crows, humming birds and lizards such as the rock agamas and many more. The deafening sound of the generator that powers the drill into the heart of the earth in search of water, displaces the barbets and other animals, at least for the day.

Demolition of old constructions to make way for new is another source of noise pollution — the hammers and drills go on to work again — vehicular noise notwithstanding. The coronavirus lockdown was a breather somewhat bringing these terrible sounds to a halt amid the migrant workers’ exodus. Now, once again the works are on.
 
The mechanical hum of the city is interfering with the life cycles of urban wildlife and in all probability has been tormenting our sound lives too — the barbet just being a single case in point that relentlessly sounds a call an octave higher to catch up. Sound is an overlooked factor in the urban scape as there are no clear cut regulations during a normal workday to what constitutes noise in residential neighbourhoods.

On a typical holiday, or a lockdown day, as all mechanical sounds come to a halt is when you realise there are so many subtle sounds that contribute to the urban calm which is a rarity today — the barbet being the loudest of contributors to the calming sounds.

Every city has sounds that make it unique such as the peacocks of Delhi and barbets of Bengaluru.
 
Quite often, as is the tradition, we observe a minute or two of silence while paying respects or prayer. This is indicative of how important a moment of silent introspection is in life - human or animal. When we let mechanical sounds takeover the urban setting, we must not forget to take into account the ‘natural’ fallout, for us and fellow living beings.