Students make, sell calendars to help raise funds to aid animals in need and spread awareness about wildlife issues

The simplest of ideas can at times translate into projects that change the world.
  
Last year, four students of Legacy School -- Manu Kartik, Avinash Gantotti, Neel Nair and Sannara Steiger -- as part of a mandatory school project, decided to create and sell calendars to help raise funds for animals and spread awareness about wildlife welfare too. Not only did they sell over 350 calendars, they also raised Rs 1,98,500 at the time. A big chunk of the funds went to the Wildlife Rehabilitation and Research Centre (Bannerghatta centre), an organisation that helps nurture animals that are injured or at risk due to habitat destruction, and releases them back into the wild.
 
So successful was the initiative, that a few months ago, WRRC decided to make their calendars their official partner.
 
A year on, the four teenagers, fuelled by their initiative’s success, are more ambitious and have bigger targets in mind. The group of spunky teenagers spearheading this has also become bigger, and other than the four, students Anoushka Kartik, Esther Fernandez, Pranav Ravikiran, Vridhi Priti and Aadithya Shashi Bhaskara are part of the team.
 
“Being the official calendar partner for WRRC was the turning point. We realised that there’s so much more that we could do. With the funds we raised last year, we helped invest in baby formula for baby monkeys, infrared heat lamps to keep cold-blooded animals warm, and our biggest investment at the WRRC centre: a mobile surgery light (Rs 96,000) that allows the expert to examine the animal in its enclosure, reducing its trauma, and making the process of releasing them into the wild easier,” explains Manu.
 
This year, with the help of the partnership, the group aims to print more calendars, raise more funds, and basically do more for animals and wildlife welfare.
 
WRRC is helping fund the calendars, and in return, the profits from the calendar sales will help the organisation take care of its animals.
 
“Our calendars are bigger this time, and they are made out of recyclable paper keeping in mind the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Design-wise, we also decided to include the marine animals this time, as we did not do so last year,” adds Manu.

.

 
“Marine animals are also in need of protection, so we felt it was necessary to talk about them,” he says.
 
With some of the funds by WRRC and some of the funds from the calendar proceeds this year, the group aims at investing in an X Ray machine for animal that costs nearly Rs 8 - 10 lakh. 
“Our goal is around Rs 4 -5 lakh,” he says.

  Our calendars are bigger this time, and they are made out of recyclable paper keeping in mind the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals–Manu Kartik 
Were they ever aware that their efforts would turn into something so big, I ask. No, comes the reply. “Our expectations were incredibly muted in the beginning. Today, knowing that we have become a ripple of change is wonderful, especially since this is our last year of school,” says Manu.
 
It’s great knowing we have started a legacy, he adds.
 
To contact: bindu.anil@lsb.edu.in or 99025 88008 (WhatsApp only)

Are you an East Bengaluru resident? We’d like to hear from you. email: seena.menon@timesgroup.com