The traditional honey bee farms in and around Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR) are buzzing with AI-based technology. This is after the reserve authorities have come up with a tech twist to encourage secondary livelihood opportunities among forest dwellers and promote good beekeeping practices for sustainable apiculture in the area. To increase the production and income of beekeepers, the officials are helping traditional keepers with a mobile application to monitor hive boxes.

Through the app, beekeepers can interact with ‘bee mitras’, a group of bee specialists and apiculturists, and get real-time suggestions on issues impacting the hives such as predators harming bees, fungal infection of hives, and so on.

“We have provided the necessary training to forest dwellers to operate the mobile application that has been sourced from a Bengaluru-based company. The application called Bee-Kind connects beekeepers to apiculturists and bee experts for solutions and suggestions. Farmers can get solutions to every bee-related problem through this app. They can share images of bees and hives to highlight specific issues,” said Nilesh Shinde, deputy conservator of forests, KTR.
 
Officials told BM that the company engaged by them has worked with beekeepers of the Sundarban Tiger Reserve in West Bengal, Simplipal National Park in Odisha, and Valmiki National Park in Bihar.

According to KTR officials, the initiative, called Adavi Jhenkara, has been taken up due to a lack of best bee-keeping practices and poor market support for honey and bee products in the region. Apart from helping farmers adopt the best beekeeping practices of FAO-UN 2021, the programme also encourages secondary livelihood opportunities for forest dwellers by developing a market for organic medicinal honey and bee products in the region. The initiative is expected to promote apitourism in the region and involve the community in forest-wildlife conservation activities.

.

“KTR has just nearly 2% of its area exposed to tourism. We need to gain the confidence of locals; so we wanted to start an initiative wherein people can improve their livelihood. We decided to help them understand the scientific aspects of beekeeping and connect them to the market. Such activities with locals ensure that we get unconditional support and help in conservation efforts,” said another official from KTR.

Through the programme, KTR authorities are working towards creating clusters of beekeepers for knowledge sharing and support.

“Cluster building is important to ensure community support and knowledge exchange. It helps in making the profession sustainable. After this, we will support them in market intelligence. Continuous monitoring, handholding, and knowledge exchange are the keys and the AI-based mobile application is helping us achieve these goals,” said the official.

Farmers can get solutions to every bee-related problem through this app— Nilesh Shinde, DCF, Kali Tiger Reserve
The programme currently has 75 beekeepers. However, the department has identified 100 more beneficiaries in the area who will soon be trained in using the application.

“We wanted to encourage women and fine-tune their skills as they are naturally good at beekeeping. We have 75 beekeepers and will soon have 100 more from hamlets in and around the reserve,” added the official.