Guess what is harassing chief minister B S Yeddyurappa a lot these days?

If your answer is former PM Deve Gowda’s family or his detractors within the BJP, you are wrong. The real culprit is a snake!
The CM’s family and staff at the Race Course Road residence have been a terrified lot for the last two days, what with a snake making an appearance on two occasions. The ‘snake-show’ has happened at a time when Yeddyurappa is busy comforting his party head honchos who have descended on Bangalore to take part in the BJP national executive committee meet.

Is the snake a good or a bad omen? That is the question being asked in BJP circles as the party prepares to fight the coming Lok Sabha and Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike elections.

A drama unfolded when a snake emerged from a hole in the premises of CM’s residence on Saturday afternoon while demolishing a wall. Ambarish, a labourer, noticed the snake and alerted the police, who in turn launched a search operation by roping in wildlife activist Sharath Babu. In the meantime, the CM’s family members were informed and subsequently the snake-talk got high decibel. But a three-hour search for the snake proved futile.

Three days ago, another worker Shivalingaiah noticed a cobra in the backyard of the CM’s residence. He was so scared that he developed a fever. Precautionary measures have been taken after this latest development in the premises of Yeddyurappa’s house by the police.

Gowda got a visit

Snakes have turned out to be a major headache for politicians in Bangalore. Last year, a snake sent former PM Deve Gowda into a tizzy by foraying into his bedroom. Many dubbed it a bad omen, and subsequently Gowda’s party lost the assembly polls.

In Yeddyurappa’s case too, astrologers have begun to rework their calculations. 

Sarpa dosha

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, city-based astrologer Sachhidananda Babu said: “We have witnessed both solar and lunar eclipses in less than a month. Keeping this in mind, the fact that the snake has appeared second time at the residence of the Chief Minister suggests some kind of Dosha. However, it requires a detailed analysis of his chart (kundali). At the outset, it is suggests that till February it will be a tough period for the CM.” When asked about the remedy to resolve the probable ‘dosha’, Babu said: “Generally for any kind of ‘Sarpa Dosha’ people visit Ghati Subramanya and offer prayers. Even though such kind of major prayer is not required, the family should visit Anjaneya temple on Saturday, Subramanya Temple on Tuesday evening and offer prayers.”