Experts lament flouting of eco-sensitive zone norms issued by Supreme Court at state’s wildlife sanctuaries

The potential violations of construction norms in the Eco-sensitive Zone (ESZ) of Bandipur Tiger Reserve by Kannada actor Ganesh has once again fuelled the conversation around ineffective implementation of ESZ rules in Karnataka.

A few days ago, officials of Bandipur Tiger Reserve sent the actor a notice regarding the nature of construction work on his 1.2-acre property in survey no 105, Jakahalli, Angala hobli, Gundlupet taluk in Chamarajanagar district. This was after the range forest officer in the region noticed heavy machines being used in the ESZ area for construction. The department served the actor with the notice stating that the permission sought for the construction of a temporary structure was not in line with the work being carried out. The department asked the actor to appear before ESZ committee members with an explanation.

However, wildlife conservationists and experts highlight that ESZ guidelines by the Supreme Court are being flouted in all protected areas and wildlife sanctuaries across the state. They say the negligence of the ESZ monitoring committee and the indulgence of its member in building a ranch in the eco-sensitive zone has undermined the very essence of the SC-defined ESZ.

As per the guidelines on ESZs around national parks and wildlife sanctuaries, the land falling within the 10-kilometer boundary of National Parks and sanctuaries should be notified as ESZs, zones that can act as shock absorbers for protected areas. The guidelines say no permanent structures should be built and free animal movement should be allowed. However, a large number of homestays and resorts have been built across all ESZs in the state.

“It also states that no animal waste, plastic, and other waste items should enter freshwater streams in the area. If these structures are allowed in ESZs, many such other rules are bound to be broken. Moreover, temporary farmhouse structure provision under ESZ is being exploited too.
 
The traditional concept of a farmhouse is a small shed to monitor the crop and field, which is not how modern farmhouses are made. There is a lot of political interference in the Forest Department’s work leading to such violations,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

While Ganesh has challenged the Karnataka Forest Department’s lacuna in not issuing notices to others who had built permanent structures in the ESZ, experts say if the court allows the actor to go ahead with construction, more and more investors will start constructing farmhouses and ranches in the area, leading to an escalation in man-animal conflicts in the region.

Haven or hell?
“His property, inside the Kundhkere range, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, has been fortified with double-layer solar fences, including tentacle solar, to keep elephants away from the film star’s to-be haven. Though he had been given permission to build a temporary structure, he had raised concrete pillars to build his farmhouse. Heavy machinery had also been employed to alter the existing landscape in the eco-sensitive zone. Part of a hill slope had been destroyed against regulations. The revenue department should be held responsible for these anti-forest developments. Farmers, who have been battered by extreme climate events, will have to bear the consequences of elephants destroying their crops,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.