United Nations India’s “unique” AgasthyamalaBiosphere Reserve is among 20 new sites added by the UN’stop cultural body UNESCO to its World Network of BiosphereReserves. The International Co-ordinating Council added the newsites during a two-day meeting on Saturday in Lima, capital ofPeru, bringing the total number of biosphere reserves to 669sites in 120 countries, including 16 transboundary sites.  	The newly adopted sites include 18 national site and onetransboundary site shared between Spain and Portugal. “Located in the Western Ghats, theAgasthyamala biosphere reserve includes peaks reaching 1,868metres above sea level.  	Consisting mostly of tropical forests,the site is home to 2,254 species of higher plants includingabout 400 that are endemic,” UNESCO said. “It is also a unique genetic reservoir of cultivatedplants especially cardamom, jamune, nutmeg, pepper andplantain. Three wildlife sanctuaries, Shendurney, Peppara,Neyyar and Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger reserve are included inthe site,” it said. The Agasthyamalai Biosphere Reserve (ABR) was establishedin 2001 and is spread across the two states of Kerala andTamil Nadu. Biosphere reserves are places for learning aboutsustainable development aiming to reconcile the conservationof biodiversity with the sustainable use of natural resources. New reserves are designated each year by the InternationalCo-ordinating Council of the UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere (MAB) programme, which brings together elected representativesof 34 UNESCO member States.  	“A number of tribal settlements are located in the reserve.They largely rely on biological resources for their sustenanceand recent projects have been set up successfully to reducetheir dependence on the forests,” UNESCO said. There are 18 biosphere reserves in India out of which only nine, including the Nilgiris, Nanda Devi, Nokrek, Gulf ofMannar, Sundarban, and Great Nicobar, had been included in thenetwork. Biosphere reserves in India protect larger areas ofnatural habitat and often include one or more national parks and/or preserves, along with buffer zones that are open tosome economic uses. Protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of, but also to the human communities whoinhabit these regions, and their ways of life