Documentation drives by conservationists led to spotting of rare species in forests around Bengaluru, and experts couldn’t be more excited about it
 
 A team of conservationists and researchers, who had set out to document the number of leopards, were in for a wilder surprise. They were awestruck with the presence of animals around Bengaluru that were either unseen or undocumented.
 
 A few of the species spotted by the conservationiste, while rummaging through heaps of camera trap images, included a rare honey badger or ratel (Mellivora capensis), Chinkaras (Indian Gazelle) and smooth-coated otter (Lutrogale perspicillata). Interestingly, all the animals have been found in the span of last two-and-half-years around Bengaluru. While the honey badger was documented in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary abutting Bannerghatta National Park, scores of Chinkaras were spotted at Bukkapatna village near Tumakuru. The smooth-coated otters were discovered at Roerich Estate on Kanakapura Road.
 
 This documentation of rare species, headed by Sanjay Gubbi of Nature Conservation Foundation, has sparked a debate in the conservation circles. Commenting on the documentation, Sanjay Gubbi, who is also member of the State Wildlife Board said, “These species are found only outside the protected areas and mostly in private lands. This suggests that there is ample scope for conservation even outside the protected areas. The very presence of these species attests that these areas require protection for the propagation of these mammals. It is indeed a good sign that these species have been documented scientifically with photographic evidence.”
 
 HC Poornesha, researcher at NCF said, “It is for the first time that ratels have been photographed. They are protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Act. Ratels have appeared in pair on seven different occasions. Ratels live alone in self-dug holes and are nocturnal in nature. Ratels are usually omnivorous. The unique feature is that they have very loose skin allowing them to twist and turn within.”
 
 Similarly, the researchers were ecstatic on sighting chinkaras. “It is known that they exist across North Karnataka but it is for the first time that they have been documented scientifically near Bengaluru. Karnataka is believed to have three species — black buck, four-horned antelopes and chinkaras — out of 6 species of antelopes in India. Bukkapatna has all the three antelope species and perhaps the only documented place in Karnataka for all the three antelope species,” explained Aparna Kolekar, another researcher.
 
 Smooth-coated otters are the latest species to be added to the list of newfound species around Bengaluru, according to researcher Sharath T. Roerich Estate at Tataguni on Kanakapura Road surrounded by BM Kaval reserve forest has revealed the presence of otters. “Otters are categorised as vulnerable on IUCN list and on declining trend. The disappearance of wetlands had affected their population as they are largely found in rivers, large lakes and reservoirs. In fact, the otter that was captured on the camera was just 700 meters away from the Vaderahalli Lake,” explained Ashritha Anoop, another researcher. 
 
 The team led by Gubbi has been studying leopards in collaboration with Karnataka Forest Department (KFD). “The department has also been excited and surprised by these findings. The images and documentation have also been submitted to the department for further conservation,” Gubbi explained.