State pollution board’s recent report reveals poor water quality 

The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board’s (KSPCB) recent report on the water quality of 98 lakes in Bengaluru has once again highlighted the deteriorating state of the water bodies.

While 19 out of 98 lakes have recorded water quality under Class E (water suitable only for irrigation, industrial cooling, and controlled waste disposal), the rest of the lakes (79 lakes) have been categorised under Class D (water suitable for the propagation of wildlife and fisheries). Some are sitting on the fence, only to be pushed to ‘below Class E’ any day.

According to the officials from KSPCB, the main reason lakes fall under the Class E category is the discharge of raw sewage. While the government is augmenting the underground sewage network and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) are being set up, bringing down pollution of Bengaluru’s lakes is a complex issue. Moreover, measures to control water pollution have to be taken either by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) or BWSSB.

 “While steps are being taken to reduce pollution levels in lakes, there are some roadblocks along the way. The National Green Tribunal has given an order to which STPs cannot be built within the buffer zones of lakes and stormwater drains. This is an impediment. Now, the government has to acquire lands to set up STPs. However, it is agencies such as BBMP, BWSSB, and the urban development secretary who should be answerable for steps that are being taken to provide underground drainage to all residential establishments in the city. Many STPs are not getting sufficient sewage as the UGD network is incomplete,” said Prabhash Chandra Ray, Member Secretary, KSPCB.

Ray further added that KSPCB can play an active role in controlling water pollution in industries discharging effluent in waterbodies directly. “We have closed down many industries in the past because they were discharging untreated effluent. Any report of industries discharging untreated effluent is being taken seriously, and inspections of such industries are happening regularly,” said Ray.

However, water quality experts and environmentalists say high water pollution is mainly due to the State Pollution Control Board’s (SPCB) failure to take action against defaulters. They highlight section 17 of the Water Act, 1974, which outlines the main functions of the State Pollution Control Boards, KSPCB in this case, to prevent and control water pollution.

 As per the Act, SPCBs are directly responsible for planning a comprehensive program for the prevention, control, and reduction of water pollution and to secure the execution thereof.
 
State boards are also to advise the state government on the prevention, control, and reduction of water pollution, along with collecting and disseminating information related to the issue.
 
SPCBs are also supposed to collaborate with the Central Pollution Control Board in the prevention, control, and reduction of water pollution.

    The NationalGreen Tribunalhas given an order: STPs cannot bebuilt within the bufferzones of lakes andstormwater drains– Prabhash Chandra Ray, KSPCB
“KSPCB is directly responsible for not only sending notices but also taking action against defaulters. There is no distinction between commercial/industrial or residential sources of pollution under the Water Act. KSPCB has not applied its mind in converting Section 17 of the Act to a step-by-step process so the board can fulfill its duties. This process would have given them clarity on resource requirements.
 
However, KSPCB has neglected to take responsibility for the last 17 years, and thus, such issues related to water pollution remain unaddressed. It is no surprise that our lakes are deteriorating,” said Nagesh Aras, a city-based lake activist.