Vehicular traffic in the Bandipur National Park at night has been stopped for over a year now. The National Highway 212, which runs inside the park, has witnessed the death of many wild animals due to accidents.  
 The road continues to take a toll on the animal population, with over a hundred of them, including six elephants, two tigers, two leopards and dozens of deers and antelopes, having died due to injuries sustained in vehicular accidents. Trucks have been the prime culprits. Now, a public interest litigation in the Karnataka high court, filed last week, has sought a complete stop on the movement of trucks in the stretch that runs through the forest.
   On Thursday, the HC issued notices to the forest department and the National Highway Authority of India (NHAI).
   NH 212 runs for 17 km inside Bandipur forest. It connects Karnataka and Kerala, with the latter even protesting the night ban on vehicles citing economic reasons. No vehicle can traverse the 17-km stretch between 6 pm and 6 am. 
   In a related PIL, the HC had directed NHAI to take all measures to bring down traffic density and speed of vehicles on this stretch of road. The state government was directed to ban vehicular movement at night. The PIL says that even this is being violated by trucks. The PIL, filed by advocate G R Mohan, says, “Bandipur is a tiger reserve and there are about 85 tigers in the forest. Karnataka's forest department has failed in its duty to check the illegal movement of vehicles during the day and night.” 
   NHAI has been blamed for not coming to the rescue of endangered species by preventing accidents and death of animals by constructing proper roads and barricades. As an interim prayer, a stay has been sought on the movement of all trucks in the NH that goes through the forest.
   Bandipur covers an area of 874 sq km. Along with the adjoining Nagarhole National Park, Mudumalai National Park and Wynad Wildlife Sanctuary, it is the largest protected area in South India. Bandipur is home to endangered species like tigers, leopards, dhole and sloth bear. 
 
  NH-212 links K’taka and Kerala. The latter has opposed the night ban citing economic reasons