As water levels drop in lakes, activists say more birds are visiting waterbodies

With summer at its peak, many lakes in Bengaluru are sporting low water levels. While at the outset, it may sound like a troubling trend, many lake activists and bird enthusiasts have reported sightings of winged guests who otherwise snub the water bodies if water level is too high.
 
This has again fueled the debate on the unscientific soup bowl approach of BBMP for lake desilting.
 
“After a gap of at least two years, Doddakallasandra is again home to two near threatened bird species along with seven grey herons, whistling ducks and other birds. Shallow waters boost the biodiversity of any waterbody. While naturally occurring lakes have shallow zones, BBMP’s half-baked approach to rejuvenate the city’s lakes is depriving us of a rich biodiversity that our wetlands can sustain,” said Raghavendra B Pachhapur, a city-based lake activist.
 
Lake activists and experts, citing Justice NK Patil Committee report, say while the report recommended that foreshore region should start with a depth of 1 foot and go deeper towards the bund region, this recommendation has been completely ignored by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) while rejuvenating the water bodies.
 
“Depth of the lakes of Bengaluru varies between 10ft to 15 ft, depending upon the water holding capacities; this depth bans majority of the birds to forage into Bengaluru lakes. Extent of lakebed desilting do not allow for shallow waters in the foreshore region of the lake. After every monsoon, water is filled in the lake up to 8 feet to 10 feet, thereby not allowing a variety of bird species from entering the waters,” added Raghavendra.
 
Those living around Chunchaghatta lake, another waterbody located in south Bengaluru, have also reported presence of near threatened bird species such as Painted Storks and Oriental Darters recently. They say Gray Heron, Night Heron and Whistling Ducks are arriving in big numbers too.

. 
To safeguard this biodiversity throughout the year, experts say BBMP should earmark a land area of at least 2 acre in the foreshore region for shallow water.
 
They highlight that although improving habitats and boosting biodiversity is listed in BBMP Lakes Department’s objectives, it is not being put into practice.
 
“Shallow inlets, which are missing from all the lakes rejuvenated by BBMP, allow plant and fish diversity to flourish, which in turn leads to a richer aquatic bird biodiversity. The civic body should look at enhancing biodiversity by bringing in plants such as Vetiver plant, which grows faster and consumes nutrients from the water, thereby reducing the nutrient level keeping it safe for wildlife and fish. It also provides shelter for water birds from its predators and increases scope for breeding,” said a city-based lake activist.