Three stone quarries have emerged less than 600m from the park 
 
 Illegal mining has once again reared its ugly head in the corridors of Bannerghatta National Park, posing a threat to wildlife, including the elephant corridor in the vicinity.
 
 In the latest instance, three stone quarries have emerged less than 600 metres from the park within the buffer zone that has been declared an eco-sensitive zone.
 
 The blast and dust from the quarries are disturbing the animals, and even after forest officials have written to the mines and geology department nothing has been done to stop the mining.
 
 Now a complaint has been lodged with the department by activists to stop the mining immediately and to give sanction to prosecute the officials who have permitted the mining.
 
 Letters from BNP officials to mines and geology officials to stop the illegal mining has gone unheeded.
 
 RTI activist Dinesh Kallahalli has filed complaints with director, mines and geology department and also with DCF, Bannerghatta National Park.
 
 “Three companies have been given permission for quarrying after hiding the fact that survey number 205 (2, 3 and 4) at Varadappanahalli village is within a kilometre from the national park. Samrat Granite Pvt Ltd (4.5 acre at a distance of 600 meters from the park), Sardar Ahmed Granite (3 acre, at a distance of 650 meters from the park) and HN Balanarasimhiah of BC Granite (3.5 acre at a distance of 600 meters) are quarrying within a kilometer from the park in the Kodihalli wildlife zone,” Kallahalli’s complaint states.
 
 In his complaint, Kallahalli said that forest officials have brought the matter to the attention of mines and geology department three times till January 2015, but no action has been taken.
 
 “According to Supreme Court order (WP, Civil, No 460/2004), permission cannot be given to do mining and quarrying within a range of one kilometre. But here in Kodihalli range, permission has been given, and from many years the quarries are illegally working and disturbing the habitat and the elephant corridor” Kallahalli says in his complaint.
 
 The recent letter from the range forest officer, Kodihalli wildlife zone to deputy director, mines and geology department clearly mentions the previous attempts to apprise the department of the matter. All the letters have been received by the mines and geology department but nothing has been done. “The DCF between 2013-2014 has written in details about the illegal quarrying in the area. But illegal quarrying continues in the area. Blast and the dust from these quarries are harming the wildlife habitat and these quarries have to be stopped,” the letter from forest officials said.
 
 “I will be personally checking it by visiting the field. If the quarries are found to be within a kilometer from the park, I will immediately take action and also write to the department officials concerned. I will also take action against our officials who are part of it,” deputy conservator of forest, BNP, Sunil Panwar, said.