KFD census reveals 92 tigers in Nagarhole National Park
 
 
  	Putting an end to the confusion over the actual number of tigers in its reserves, Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has come out with scientific figures by way of camera trap method. With more than 800 camera traps donated by CSS corp, a tech-support firm, the KFD estimated there are 92 tigers in Rajiv Gandhi Tiger Reserve, more popularly known as the Nagarahole National Park.  	The camera trap method involves using of a remote activated camera fitted with motion or infrared sensor to capture the image. It contrasts with the line transect method being used until some few months ago, that revealed 101 tigers in Nagarahole. The camera trap method is recognised by the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA), and was used between January and March of 2015, during the fourth phase of the all India tiger estimation.  	Nagarhole had deployed more than 800 camera traps across 643 sq km of its areas in Kodagu and Mysuru. The results, though, have raised many questions over the earlier tiger estimates. “In less than 60 days, traps were laid out at 60 different sampling locations. Our personnel were able to capture 637 individual images of tigers. As per the analysis, Nagarahole has 8.6 tigers per 100 sq km area. Even though 92 tigers were found, we could capture the images of only 72 tigers (59 with both flanks, 13 with right flank),” R Gokul, chief conservator of forests, Ballari and former director of Nagarhole, explained.  	Another senior CF rank officer said camera trap estimates could not be considered too accurate either. “In many cases, animals avoided passing between cameras and made a detour,” he said.  	The officials also explained that as Nagarahole borders Kerala and Tamil Nadu, and tigers may have roamed into territories in those states. “The officials collected data from cameras oncein two days, and using a software, stripes were matched to arrive at an exact estimate,” said HC Kantharaju, current director of Nagarhole NP.  	Camera-shy big cats  	Ravi Ralph, principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife), said, “The harsh, luminous camera flash scares animals and they may not pass through that area. We need to work on minimising the flash intensity.” Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests (HOFF), said, “Soon, the results of similar exercise carried out in Kali Tiger Reserve, Dandeli, will also be released.”  	Tiger Ramesh, CEO of CSS corp, that supported the census, said, “We have done our bit towards scientific tiger census. Tigers are at the apex of the ecosystem and extremely critical for the survival of future generation, and we continue to support KFD in all their endeavours.”