Zafar Futehally, the renowned birdwatcher and conservationist, passed away this Sunday, August 11, 2013, in his ancestral home in Kihim. He was ninety-three years old. 
   In his early years, he lived in Bombay with his wife Laeeq, in a beautiful bungalow in Andheri. When they found themselves surrounded by high-rise buildings that cut off their air and light, they moved to Bangalore. In 1973, they rented a house near the Raman Research Institute while they constructed a bungalow in Doddagubbi on six acres of land. It was a haven — with mango trees, beautiful lawns and flowering shrubs, all planned and laid out by Laeeq with her trademark touch and green fingers. 
   For 15 years, they lived in this sylvan retreat and entertained a vast circle of friends from all over the world. They were caring and gracious hosts, and the conversations at their home were scintillating. An armed robbery and a need to be closer to medical help made them sell the property and move, first to the cooler climes of Kodaikanal, and then, into a flat in Koramangala, in Bangalore.
   Zafar was always active in matters close to his heart. He was witness to the degradation Bombay had suffered in the wake of its growth, and was determined to prevent Bangalore going the same way. Realising that a formal organisation was needed to engage with the government on environmental issues, he roped in a few friends, including the late Professor Satish Dhawan, and registered the Bangalore Environment Trust in 1987. He cast his net wide, tackling noise pollution from horns, smoke pollution from vehicles, reckless driving on city roads, the cutting down of trees for road widening, the pollution of lakes leading to their slow death, the breaching of storm water drains, and the misuse of civic amenity spaces to name but a few. If there is some amelioration in these matters over the years, it is due in no small part to his untiring efforts.  Zafar was a keen birdwatcher from his early years, his interest kindled by no less a figure than Salim Ali, the legendary ornithologist and bird-lover, who was a relative. He ran the Bombay Natural Historical Society for many years, and was elected to the governing board of the International Union for Conservation of Nature. More importantly, he was founder-editor of the Newsletter for Birdwatchers, which he continued to produce until 2003. 
   Nissim Ezekiel, the poet, was so inspired by his work that he wrote a poem in Zafar’s honour called Paradise Flycatcher. “Birds and horses are my passion. They’re better than wine and women,” he used to say. He was presented with a pony by his father when he was a child, and the early initiation enabled him to develop a special rapport with horses. He kept a horse when he lived in Doddagubbi and on weekends, used to ride into Bangalore on horseback. During annual visits to his summer retreat in Kihim, where his son Murad kept horses, he would ride every morning. It brought him great joy that one of his granddaughters became an exceptional rider.
   He was the recipient of numerous awards, prominent among them the Padma Shri (1971), the Karnataka Rajyostava Award (1983), the Salim Ali International Award for Conservation (1997), Order of the Golden Ark (1981) and Member of Honour of the World Wildlife Federation (1994). He wore these plaudits lightly, remaining a genial and self-effacing person all his life.
   Well into his eighties, he brought together several birdwatchers’ associations in India under one umbrella organisation — a necessary step to obtain international recognition. At a function to announce the new set-up, a guest asked about the disappearance of the common house sparrow in Bangalore. Several theories were advanced, none convincing, till Zafar stood up and said, half-jokingly, “You don’t see them any more because you have stopped cleaning rice and dal in your backyard and prefer to buy them in plastic packets.” 
   Zafar authored several books on birds and wrote innumerable articles on birds, the environment and our ecology. His writing style was simple and natural. He was no absolutist: he saw the need to balance environmental protection with economic development. 
   At home, he was a loving husband and fond father and grandfather. Laeeq designed gardens, worked for many decades as an editor, and is the author of several books herself. His daughter Shama, until her untimely passing from cancer nine years ago, was a celebrated writer and translator. His daughter Zai has an altogether younger fan-following from her twin careers as a teacher and author of much-loved children’s books. Murad, his son, ran the family engineering firm, Dynacraft, for several years, and now manages a business of his own.
   Zafar had an old-world charm. He was a rare soul and a true gentleman. For me, as for thousands of others whose lives he touched, it was impossible to meet him and not come away charmed by his gentleness, modesty and kindness.