By Saumyangi Yadav

Experts say that Bengaluru is seeing more floods due to rapid, unplanned urbanisation

Over the past week, rain has created havoc across the city with several areas being flooded in knee-deep water for days. Experts have pointed out that one of the major reasons that the city has been witnessing increased waterlogging every year is rapid and unplanned urbanisation.

Environmentalist Dr AN Yellappa Reddy told Bangalore Mirror that a lack of proper land-use and water-use policies are leading to this situation.

“Bengaluru used to have around 70 per cent of land area that was under agriculture, horticulture, and wetlands. More than 60 per cent of the land had good vegetation, so whenever there was torrential rainfall, water would be absorbed and directed towards the root. This would recharge the groundwater as well. Then all the trees were removed to make space for buildings, roads, and footpaths,” he said.

Reddy added that because of the concrete roads and poor drainage system, there is no place for rainwater to get absorbed anymore, which leads to flooding.

Engineers, he said, made a huge blunder while creating the drainage system as it lacks landfills as well. The drains get blocked by garbage and negligence by authorities is very common.

“White topping, metro work, construction of skywalks seems to be the priority of the authorities right now, but the question to ask them is: for whom are we urbanising the city when there is no capacity?” he questioned.

Experts are of the opinion that Bengaluru is expanding much faster than its capacity.

“If we expand any further, the city will break down. We have seen what the rain did to the city in the month of May and again in August. Every second year it’s the same condition during monsoons,” said Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board.

If we expand any further, the city will break down. We have seen what the rain did in May and again in August–Joseph Hoover,                        president, United Conservation Movement
What’s the solution?
Experts suggested that authorities should look into vertical expansion of the city instead of a horizontal one. Vertical expansion essentially means building upwards and within a smaller area of land.

“We should also try to shift the IT industry and major companies to Tier 2 cities like Mysuru instead of Bengaluru. So many people are moving to the city every year for employment, more than the city has capacity for,” said Hoover.

He also added that restricting the encroachment of lakes, stormwater drains, and rajakaluves are also of extreme importance to avoid flooding.