A male wild elephant aged between 13 and 15 years was electrocuted and found dead near the Haruvanahalli village in Chikkamagaluru. The carcass of the elephant was discovered by the forest officials. As per the reports from the veterinarian, the elephant died due to electrocution. According to Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) officials, the elephant died after it came into contact with electric wire fences installed illegally on farm land.

The elephants being electrocuted due to illegal fencing of electric wires on farmland is a tragic and distressing issue that highlights the devastating consequences of human-wildlife conflict. In many regions, farmers use electric fences to protect their crops and properties from wild animals, including elephants. However, when these fences are set up haphazardly or illegally, they pose a severe danger to these creatures.

According to the Assistant Forest Conservator (ACF) of Bhadra Tiger Reserve, Lakkavalli Division, Veeresh Gowda, the farm land is close to the Gurupura forest, and the forest is adjacent to the Bhadra Tiger Reserve. Since the wild animals keep moving around during the night, the elephant from the Gurupura forest tried to enter the farm land, and it was electrocuted. “The cultivation is carried out illegally, and it is on unauthorised farm land. In order to protect their crops, they had fenced the land with electric wires,” he said.

An FIR was registered at Lakkavalli police station in Chikkamagaluru district. On November 6, the elephant had come to farmland in search of food. The incident was highlighted the following day. After the incident, the accused was said to have removed fencing so that it did not come to the notice of the forest officials. “When the officers reached the location, we could not find any wires, and the accused stated that they had not installed any electric wires. However, the elephant did not have any injuries, and only after the vet checked did it come to notice that the elephant was electrocuted,” added Gowda.

Gowda pointed out that it is important for the electricity department to carry out regular surveys and check for such illegal electricity connections that are being used for the interest of man and wildlife.