After man has close shave with lethal nylon thread, Bengalureans start online petition to seek a strict ban on threads used by some kite-fliers 

I t was just a matter of time that nylon threads aka manjas came in the spotlight for their lethality. As bird rescuers kept talking about the number of birds that become prey to these threads, after a recent incident where a scooterist was injured when a nylon thread got entangled around his neck, a group of Bengalureans have decided that enough is enough. They have started an online campaign to enforce a strict ban on the use of nylon threads (manja). The petition stated that apart from the incident of June 23 when Mallikarjun KH was injured at Adugodi, there have been multiple incidents across the country involving the threads.

The petition also cites another incident from Pune reported on February 12, 2018, where a woman died when her neck was slit by a sharp string. In another incident, a 32-year-old Jaipur man also lost his life. The petitioners say this is even more worrying when schools reopen as children can get injured if a ban is not enforced. Manja also poses a huge threat when it comes into contact with live overhead electric wires, leading to kite fliers’ and others’ electrocution as well as grid failure, the petition said. “How many rescuers will break their necks and limbs climbing trees and buildings to rescue trapped, terrified birds? This year, a wildlife rescuer Sridhar fell from a height of 30ft while rescuing two birds trapped in Manja and had to spend six months post surgery and rehabilitation before he could walk again.

   Mallikarjuna KH was severely injured recently near Adugodi traffic police station
 Let’s also take a moment to think about the thousands of birds who sustain grievous injuries and are entangled in manja thread, dangling in a slow agonising death across Bengaluru every day. No living thing needs to suffer such torture – just imagine if a thousand people were cut by manja thread and were hanging from trees throughout Karnataka – would we not take this issue more seriously? The government has done the right thing by sternly banning sales & possession of manja, an unbreakable, non degradable, nylon - and yet the stranglehold continues. It’s time for us to ensure that the actual enforcement matches up to the government’s orders.”

  Man injures neck due to 'killer' nylon thread, popularly known as Chinese manjha01:19
Many bikers in Bengaluru have had a narrow escape on Outer Ring Road where manja have caused havoc. N Yadunandan, a law student, narrated to Bangalore Mirror his close shave with a manja. “I was on my bike on the Outer Ring Road stretch from Magadi Road to Nagarabavi. After I crossed the Magadi road flyover, my bike started making an unusual sound. Later, I was shocked to see a thread surrounding my bike. 

When I tried to break it with my hand my hand got cut. Then I realised it was a manja. I have to thank my stars the thread was wound up on my bike and not on my neck,” he said. He said that it was necessary to pass on the information to bikers as many bikers use the ORR. “After my brush with a manja thread, I realised how it can affect the birds,” he added. His friend Aditya N, who was riding pillion at the time said manjas can be really dangerous and in Ahmedabad, bikers are cautioned about going out during Makar Sankranti season.