When seven-year-old Preethi K N was cycling in Adarsh Vista housing complex early Tuesday, she spied a huge cat on a bamboo tree in the premises of the gated community. Preethi immediately alerted her mother, Anuradha N, who in turn called other residents to check out the animal. Out came the mobile phone cameras to shoot it lest forest staff don’t buy their story.   The panic-stricken residents actually felt relieved at having spotted their ‘leopard’ which, well, was not spotted. For the last five months, they were living under the cloud of being mistaken for a loony lot. They had reported in December 2012 to forest officials that a ‘leopard’ was sighted in their 196-villa upscale housing complex, but their complaints were received with skepticism, except from Bangalore Mirror which reported about the residents’ fear then.   The cat spotted on Tuesday was certainly not a leopard. It was about four feet long, powerfully built and had a thick growth of white whiskers. Residents immediately informed the forest department, but by the time officials arrived — two hours later — the animal had long scampered off.   If the cat is what a couple of wildlife enthusiasts in Adarsh Vista suspect to be — a caracal, humans have little to worry, though one cannot vouch for its behaviour in such an unfamiliar milieu. Caracals are known to prey on those that are smaller than 5 kgs, including gerbils, mice and even birds, but don’t have reputation to be maneaters.   The big cat (the forest department is still ascertaining the species) which Preethi and residents of the housing colony saw on Tuesday is probably the ‘leopard’ which was feared to be on the prowl in Vibhutipura and Belthur areas in the ITPL corridor, having been spotted in December 2012.   Residents of Sai Layout in Belthur first reported sighting the ‘leopard’ and had even photographed pugmarks as reported by Bangalore Mirror (With a leopard on the prowl, terror stalks families in IT corridor, ). A few days later, the maintenance staffer of Adarsh Vista, a few kms away from Sai Layout, stumbled on a big cat—this too was reported by BM (Another cat call keeps residents indoors,). The forest department had set up huge cages to trap the animal, but with little success.   Following the first sighting at Adarsh Vista, the housing complex residents association sent out a mail to fellow residents which stated, “Cheetah has been spotted inside our complex at about 9 pm near the clubhouse and in the lane nearby. We request residents to be cautious and avoid going for late night walks and to keep your (sic) windows and doors closed.”   That mail sparked panic among residents, who for months lived in fear of an attack. About four days ago, when a dog was found mauled in Adarsh Vista, residents knew that they had had a visitor from the wild.   “There are two such animals lurking in the community,” said J Srinivas, a resident. “One with the tan colour of the animal we saw today and another blackish one. One of our maintenance staff had stumbled on the other one late in the evening a few months ago. He mistook it for a leopard.”   Adarsh Vista is located in Vibhutipura off Marathalli and has marshy land and the Doddanakundi Lake as its backyard. Anuradha believes that the cat must have strayed from the marshy land.   “The animal spotted on Tuesday was about four feet long, bulky and scary,” Anuradha said. “Its thick white ‘moustache’ like a military man, was the standout feature. While some said it could be a caracal (a rare species of the cat family), others said it may be a leopard cub.”   Dipak Sarmah, principal chief conservator of forests, also thinks the animal must have strayed from the marshy area. “One of the residents had alerted me and by the time our people arrived, the cat had fled,” Sarmah said. “We are examining the pictures and I have sent them to the department experts for their opinion.’’   Residents go a guessing game – Caracal or leopard? Caracal, also known as the desert lynx, is a wild cat that is found across Africa, central and southwest Asia including India. The animal is considered rare in the central Asian republic and India. Caracal has long tuft on the tip of the ear and is a slender, long-legged cat of medium size. But the animal spotted in Adarsh Vista on Tuesday doesn’t match any of the features of caracal. On the contrary, the cat is wide, with hefty legs and paws and a distinct moustache. On the other hand, a leopard is spotted, has relatively short legs and a long body with a large skull. It is similar in appearance to the jaguar.