According to the elephant mortality data by the Karnataka Forest Department, the mortality rate of elephants in Karnataka has improved considerably in 2022.
 
As per the official data, while 79 elephants were reported dead due to various natural and unnatural causes between January and December 2021, only 52 elephant deaths have been marked by the department in the same period in 2022.
 
Deaths owing to unnatural causes such as electrocution have gone down too. While 12 unnatural deaths due to electrocution were recorded in 2021, nine such incidents have been observed between January and December 2022.
 
According to the officials from the Karnataka Forest Department, while multiple factors are at play when it comes to wildlife mortality, a lower number of elephant deaths can be attributed to various measures taken by the department in recent days.
 
“Our mandate is to manage unnatural deaths mostly by electrocution and poaching. These cases are being detected and legal actions under the Wildlife Protection Act are being taken immediately. We are involving the police and electrical inspectorate too in the process,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.
 
Awareness among villagers and farmers along forest fringes created by the frontline staff might be yet another factor behind the drop in cases.
 
Recently, the state government announced that the ex-gratia amount in case of crop loss or death of people due to attack by wild animals would be doubled from the current compensation amount. Officials say this step will help in reducing the number of elephant mortality cases further.
 
“Farmers or villages living close to forest areas resort to extreme steps such as electrocution or firing to save their crops and fields from being raided by the elephants. If the government provides sizable compensation for the damage caused, the farmers will not go that far as such actions involve risk. The Chief Minister’s decision to double the ex-gratia amount both for crop damage and life loss will improve the situation further,” said Kumar Pushkar.
 
While deaths due to electrocution have gone down, it has not improved much looking at the total number of elephants dying. While 12 out of 79 death cases were due to electrocution in 2021; during January and December 2022, as many as 9 out of 52 elephants died due to electric shock.
 
Through 2020-21, while 13 elephants died of unnatural causes, 11 of them were electrocuted; during 2019-20, nine unnatural deaths were recorded, all due to electric shocks.
 
Wildlife researchers say the department should take up preventive measures to further put a check on unnatural deaths.
 
“The department should conduct a combing operation and work closely with the electricity supply companies to catch hold of the offenders who are tapping into power lines illegally to draw such high voltage wires. They must be stopped. While the forest department cannot register cases against such offenders, the local electricity board can take up such cases,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.