Various measures have been put in place; 19 jumbo deaths recorded so far in 2024

Between January 2021 and now (May 2024), Karnataka lost 31 elephants to electrocution. Out of these, 12 cases were recorded in 2021, nine in 2022 and 2023 each, and one death due to electrocution has been registered this year. Overall, as many as 43 cases of unnatural deaths in jumbos have been recorded in the given period. These include gunshots, electrocution, road and train accidents, and snaring. However, recent data from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) also points to a drop in elephant mortality in the state over the last four years. While 27 deaths were recorded between January and May 2021, this number dropped to 21 in 2022 for the same timeframe. In 2023, 25 deaths were recorded in the given months. This year, only 19 cases have been reported so far.

“Measures taken by the department have and will certainly yield results. We have been speaking with villagers and farmers and spreading awareness about installing solar-powered fences instead of drawing current from the power supply. Solar power fences generate 9.9 volts of direct current in pulses that do not harm wildlife, unlike the 20-volt current from the power lines that kill elephants. Electricity supply companies have also tightened their vigilance activities. However, this trend in elephant mortality has to continue for a longer time for us to say with certainty that our initiatives are yielding results,” said SK Malkhede, principal chief conservator of forests, wildlife, and chief wildlife warden, KFD.

Last year, the forest department convened a meeting with power-supplying companies to discuss the issue of illegal tapping of power lines after media reports highlighted an increase in the number of elephant deaths due to electrocution. KFD then met BESCOM (Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Limited), HESCOM (Hubballi Electricity Supply Company), and other electricity supply companies in the state to discuss this issue and understand the reasons behind unchecked illegal tapping. “After that meeting, night patrolling, in association with power supply companies, has been happening regularly. The purpose of the patrol is also to keep a check on other illegal activities, such as poaching and illegal felling of trees. Although the department cannot book cases under the Electricity Act in cases of illegal tapings, we have instructed the vigilance department of electricity supply companies to book cases,” added Malkhede.

While KFD statistics show a slight drop in elephant mortality and electrocution cases, wildlife conservationists say even one electrocution is a matter of concern. “The number of natural deaths in summer increases due to lack of water, fodder, etc. However, even a single elephant’s death due to electrocution is a matter of concern.

 While the department has started night patrolling in coordination with ESCOMs, the exercise should be more rigorous and implemented strictly,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Concern over littering
Minister for Forests Eshwar Khandre said that measures are necessary to prevent entry into villages; solar fencing, suspension electric fencing, elephant trenches, and railway barricades are being installed to control the entry of elephants. He also said that the department is taking swift action to build a rapid wall in areas where the problem is severe, and the department has allocated funds for the construction of railway barricades in the budget. He appealed to people, farmers, and estate owners to coexist with wildlife and also warned that unscientific electric fencing or trapping should not be done, as it can cause harm to wildlife.

The minister expressed concern over the littering of plastic waste on the road to Nagarahole National Park and appealed to tourists to be more responsible. He said that plastic waste should not be thrown in the forest area, as it can harm wildlife. He also inspected the water sources in the Nagarahole forest and said that the water level and availability of fodder are satisfactory. However, he instructed the forest officials to take precautionary measures to prevent water scarcity in the event of a delayed monsoon.