Furore over Gudibande municipal chief's order of releasing dogs into forests 
 
 
 Of late, more than poachers, municipal commissioners of various district civic bodies are turning to be the latest threat to wildlife. With their orders to catch stray dogs in cities and towns and release them into forest areas, the commissioners have put wildlife at great risk of contracting rare diseases through stray dogs. The latest to the list is a similar order by the Gudibande Town Municipality Commissioner in Chikkaballapur district adjoining Bengaluru.
 
 The callous and unscientific approach of municipal commissioners has not only left several wildlife activists angered but also put the Karnataka Forest Department on its toes to initiate legal action against commissioners under various clauses of the Indian Wildlife Act and the Indian Penal Code. Aiming to put an end to the stray dog menace in Gudibande town, the chief officer of the taluk municipal corporation, on March 14, ordered the capture of stray dogs in Gudibande town limits and their release into forest areas outside the district border.
 
 According to sources, the order was issued following a unanimous resolution passed by the council members. However, the order was in stark contravention to various clauses of the Wildlife Act and the Indian Penal Code. Several wildlife activists and conservation experts have expressed concern that these dogs could wipe out wildlife in those areas by being a medium for the spread of various contagious diseases.
 
 Praveen Bhargav, managing trustee, Wildlife First, and former member of the National Board for Wildlife, said, “Forests are meant to protect wildlife and are not to be used for dumping stray dogs. Stray dogs have historically been carriers of various disease-causing viruses and bacteria, and if released into the forests, they may spread the same to other animals, resulting in large-sacle deaths. The order by the commissioner is indeed shocking and dangerous for wildlife conservation.” According to him, stray dogs, in the absence of proper vaccination, could trigger diseases like canine distemper among wildlife. “The stray dogs may have been immune to these diseases, but wildlife is not immune to such outbreaks,” he clarified.
 
 Similarly, Sharath Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru Urban, said, “This is not the only case. Previously too, many town municipalities have taken such decisions posing a threat to wildlife. But the latest order comes as evidence to the growing threat and the government must act in right earnest and in the interest of wildlife.” Bhargav further explained, “The very value of wildlife comes from their rarity. Already we have taken over more than 90 per cent of their habitats. These dogs might prey on the kills left over by big cats, forcing them to venture out in search of food. This is nothing but poor understanding of ecological science as the decision would affect the ecological balance, thereby resulting in various conflicts.”
 
 The activists, citing various clauses of the Wildlife Act, said the government can initiate action against officers of the municipalities. “The order is in clear violation of Sections 27 and 29, 35 (6) of the Wildlife Protection Act dealing with trespassing into protected area and diversion of habitat of a wild animal. Violators can be booked under Sections 426 and 429 of IPC for playing mischief,” Bhargav revealed. As per the provisions, violators can be punished with imprisonment up to three years and fine of up to Rs 10,000.
 
 A few months ago, a 14-year-old girl had approached the High Court of Karnataka over cruelty meted to stray dogs by the city municipality. BM in its edition dated December 31, 2015, carried an article about the PIL before the HC. While about 700 dogs were allegedly culled, more than 300 dogs were said to have been released into Muthhatti forests. The HC had rapped the municipal body over the unscientific decision. Yet another activist said, “Municipal bodies have various funds to deal with the stray dog menace. It is not proper that they wash their hands of the problem in this manner. There are NGOs and groups working for stray dogs and the administration must involve such groups in their troubleshooting efforts.”
 
 BJ Hosmath, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) said, “We are shocked by the order and in fact have directed all our deputy conservators of forests at the district level to take note of such orders and initiate legal action against erring personnel. We have been consistently following the issue and will not allow release of stray dogs into forests across Karnataka.”