The Bangalore University has issued an advisory asking students and staff to be extra careful while venturing out on the campus. This comes after news of a leopard being spotted near the campus.
 
BU Registrar N Mahesh Babu said, “We have read about a leopard spotting in the media. Hence, I have asked all the students, especially those staying in hostels along with teaching and non-teaching staff members to be extra careful while venturing out. As the campus is huge, they need to restrict walking out in the evenings. In case of any leopard sightings or pugmarks, then the university should be immediately alerted. We are coordinating with the forest staff to rescue the big cat at the earliest.”
 
A PG student added that the campus is so huge that there are chances of leopards hiding. Many areas of the campus are quite dark due to poor lighting. The news is definitely shocking as one needs to be extremely careful. Environmentalists say that with Bengaluru turning into an urban jungle and the nearby jungles being encroached, the sightings of wild animals are increasing.
 
Wildlife scientist Sanjay Gubbi had written to CM earlier stating that 50 per cent of the human-leopard conflict incidents occur in five districts (Ramanagara, Tum
kur, Mandya, Mysuru and Hassan). However, these days the number of conflict incidents is also on the rise in Ballari, Koppal and Kolar districts.
 
“Of the 27,418 revenue villages in Karnataka, there is an occurrence of human-leopard conflict in over 700 villages and is increasing by the day. Outside protected areas such as national parks and wildlife sanctuaries, poaching of leopards’ natural prey such as chital, sambar, four-horned antelope, barking deer, black-naped hare, jungle fowl and others has increased,” he said.
 
According to him, leopards shift their diet to domestic animals such as sheep and goats due to decreased natural prey outside protected areas. Increased use of CCTV and the recording of leopards in CCTVs are leading to the assumption that there is an increased occurrence of leopards. Similarly, the circulation of fake information over social media is also creating fear among people. The impact of human-leopard conflict is very high on economically underprivileged communities. Similarly, conflict also has a big negative impact on leopards. The government must take necessary steps to reduce conflict,” he added.
 
Gubbi has asked the State Government to start a minimum one-week training on human-wildlife conflict for Forest Watcher, Forest Guard, Deputy Range Forest Officer, and Range Forest Officer training schools.
 
While elephants have been spotted in east Bengaluru, another leopard sighting is being reported by residents of west Bengaluru. Meanwhile, wild elephants have been spotted near Anekal outskirts recently.