Wildlife activists slam forest department’s handling, alleging lapses in procedure & preparation

Wildlife conservationists and activists have slammed the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), citing a lack of preparedness among field staff during a recent tiger cub rescue operation in Pradhani of Uttar Kannada.

Conservationists and activists allege that some of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) put in place by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) for such rescue operations were not followed by KFD staff, mainly due to a lack of experience and preparedness.

“There were some lapses in the rescue operation of an abandoned tiger cub that was conducted a week ago. The most glaring was the ineffective crowd management strategy during the operation. There were thousands of people on the spot. Moreover, officials had chased the cub for a long time, and the animal was exhausted,” said a conservationist.

The guidelines by NTCA underline that in all instances of wild carnivores like tigers/leopards straying into a human-dominated landscape, the district authorities should ensure law and order by imposing Section 144 of the CrPC. This is essential to avoid agitation and curious locals surrounding the animal spot, which hampers capture operations, leading to serious injuries to people and staff.

The rescue operation of a six-month-old male tiger cub was started after the animal was spotted by villagers of Pradhani. The cub was separated from his mother and landed in the village.

Some wildlife activists claimed that while NTCA SOP mandates the constitution of a committee in the case of the rescue operation of an abandoned tiger cub, it was not framed before carrying out the operation.

As per the SOP, to deal with abandoned tiger cubs, a committee should be constituted for technical guidance and monitoring on a day-to-day basis. It should include a nominee of the Chief Wildlife Warden, a nominee of NTCA, a veterinarian, a local NGO representative, a representative of the local Panchayat, and a KFD official (field director/protected area manager/DFO).

However, KFD officials say the committee, as directed under NTCA guidelines, was constituted.

“We have followed NTCA’s SOP and constituted a committee for the operation. We had also formed five teams to conduct a combing operation to locate the mother. We also gathered information from locals, and we got to know that the cub had been on his own for more than ten days before we rescued him. Our veterinarian also said the cub had been starving for more than a week before we found him, indicating his mother was not around. Efforts to reunite the cub with the mother have been called off,” said Dr Prashantkumar KC, DCF, Haliyal territorial division.

However, according to trusted sources on the ground, the rescue operation was marred by a lack of appropriate equipment and trained/experienced staff, leading to ineptness among officials during the operation.

The need of the hour is to have dedicated tiger/leopard squads with forest officials having some experience in handling such rescues–a wildlife activist
“The need of the hour is to have dedicated tiger/leopard squads with forest officials having some experience in handling such rescues. The team conducting the operation on the ground was created by random picks. Those who proactively wanted to come to the rescue were sent. Moreover, the department should consider upgrading rescue equipment such as gloves, nets, and rescue suits. The staff should at least receive periodic training to handle such situations,” said an activist.

“All staff members are given this training during induction. Hands-on experience can come only when staff is exposed to such situations. We conducted a workshop for frontline staff where they received training and they could interact with However, there is scope for improvement,” clarified Dr Prashantkumar.