50 killed every year; most of the poaching occurs outside protected areas; forest department to recruite more guards and watchers
 
 While accidents and electrocution were presumed to be the major causes for death among wild animals in Karnataka forests, the state government’s shocker on Wednesday pointed at unabated hunting to be the main cause. Around 50 animals are being killed in the state forests every year by hunters.
 	  	It now appears that the high density of wildlife in the state forests is attracting poachers/hunters; and it is not speeding vehicles and electric fence which are killing wildlife in large numbers, as has been claimed by animal activists so far.
 	  	Every year, an increasing number of wild animals are being slaughtered by poachers who are steadily expanding their network across the four forest-rich districts in southern Karnataka – Mysuru, Chamarajanagar, Hassan and Kodagu.
 This was revealed by forest minister Ramanath Rai in the legislative council on Wednesday when JD(S) MLC Sandesh Nagaraj sought details about death among wild animals due to various reasons.
 	  	Statistics disclosed by the minister revealed that ban on vehicular traffic at night to prevent wild animals being run over by speeding vehicles was itself being exploited by the poachers who now had a free run in the absence of others moving about at nights.
 	  	However, the minister said the ban on traffic at night had in fact brought down the deaths among wildlife to a mere single digit. The statistics pertaining to last three years made available by the minister revealed very few cases of road-kills while exposing the poaching network in a big way.
 	  	A senior forest officer told Bangalore Mirror, “There is hardly any poaching in protected areas. What is worrying us is the poaching activities outside the protected areas where the department has less manpower; and where much of their kills are herbivores and other small mammals intended for meat and local trade.” Requesting anonymity, a noted wildlife activist confirmed this. “(Forest department) staffers are focussed on protected areas, core areas and tiger habitats. As a result, forests outside the protected areas have become vulnerable to poaching. Knowing that not many staffers are on ground in non-protected areas, poachers blatantly making these their hunting grounds and walk away with a rich haul. These poachers range from native people to migrants from neighbouring Tamil Nadu and Kerala.”
 	  	Clarifying on the protection measures, minister Rai said, “The department has intensified the patrolling activity in both protected and non-protected areas. All RFOs have been provided with advanced weapons. Front-line staffers have been equipped with communication gadgets for alerting higher officials and the control room.”
 	  	The minister also pointed out that in only four incidents reported from Hunsur in Mysuru district cases have been closed due to lack of evidence; all other cases are in various stages of trial in the courts.
 	  	Between 2012 and 2015, a whopping 145 animals were killed by poachers while only 11 animals died due to accidents and eight animals due to electrocution in the same period. Another senior forest official said, “Once the recruitment and training is done, we will have larger manpower at our disposal to ensure protection even in non-protected forest areas.”