He is a PU I dropout and is just 20 years old, but he has already killed two elephants to mark a disturbing similarity with the dead and once-dreaded forest brigand Veerappan who too had started young. But the trail of the missing two tusks led to the city police cracking the case, which is likely to conclude with a conviction as the cops have recovered the weapon the youth used to kill the elephants. In doing so the police have likely nipped a young Veerappan-in-the-making in the bud.
 
 In a chilling confession, Prashanth, a resident of Kadushivanahalli – a village close to Karnataka’s border with Tamil Nadu on the fringes of Kanakapura forest division – has revealed that he had killed two elephants but said he had taken the tusks from only one of them. However, the police who started the probe with a seizure of the two tusks, were able to trace the weapon used by Prashanth – a country-made single barrel muzzle loader rifle – and are hunting for the other two tusks on a suspicion that Prashanth had taken all four.
 
 Prashanth hails from a family of farmers and cattle-grazers (just like Veerappan) who subsequently got into the bad company of poachers – a menace on the interstate border of Karnataka-Tamil Nadu which was once Veerappan’s turf; it is now known for activities of the infamous Anchetty gang. Prashanth is suspected to have learnt about weapons and the wildlife trade from the gang and used those skills to kill two elephants, a forest department official told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Sources privy to the probe have said the boy, upon dropping out of college, was influenced by the illegal trade and bought a rifle after getting trained to kill elephants.
 
 “He is a lesser known name in the area. He was never under our radar; nor had we heard of his activities. His parents are into farming for livelihood. However, we reached him after the Varthur police came in search of him. Later, a detailed probe has been carried out and it was found that he is from a village in Karnataka and the elephants were shot in forests that fall under Tamil Nadu jurisdiction. The city police are carrying out their probe. It seems there is a bigger group involved in these areas abutting Kanakapura and Jawalagiri forests, and the police are probing it. They had been here twice – last Sunday and Monday – and arrested Prashanth. We are cooperating with them,” Narasimha Murthy, deputy range forest officer, told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 Prashanth (left) with his accomplice after the arrest
 
 “Confessing to have killed two elephants, he (Prashanth) has told us that he had bought the rifle from one Rajappa, a local from Kanakapura. This, after he got trained on the basics of handling the weapon. He has also narrated and shown us the place where he shot down the two elephants in Jawalagiri forests few kilometres away from his village,” a source told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 HOW THEY FOUND OUT
 
 It all started with a pair of ivory tusks weighing 10 kg seized by Varthur police last month. That led to an intense probe, further suspecting an elephant killing in recent days, sources said.
 
 Muninanja, also from Kadushivanahalli (Prashanth’s native place), was arrested while trying to sell the tusks.
 
 Muninanja spilled the beans during interrogation which led to Prashanth being nabbed. When Prashanth was apprehended, the entire episode unfurled, the source added, including the seizure of the weapon used in the crime.
 
 “Prashanth first showed the place in a rocky area where he had hidden his rifle he used for killing the elephants. Then he told us he had shot two elephants back to back in Jawalagiri forests with a gap of a short period last year. He also took the police to the spots in the forests where he shot the elephants. These were videographed. But he said he could take the tusks of only one elephant while he fled out of fear of being caught while trying to take those of the second elephant ,” sources added.
 
 The forest department, which checked with their Tamil Nadu counterparts, found that two elephants were found dead during the time Prashanth had mentioned about the killings of elephants a year ago. “Prashanth confirmed killing two elephants. But our Tamil Nadu counterparts’ records show the deaths were due to electrocution. Now to complete the case a forensic examination of the tusks seized is all what is required. It will be sent to Forensic Science Laboratory. Once it is done, and if it matches with that of records maintained by TN forest department, the case will conclude as hunting and the investigation will be complete,” an officer explained.
 
 SECTIONS PRASHANTH WILL BE BOOKED UNDER
 
 Elephants being protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA), the accused are booked under sections 40 (acquiring and dealing with wildlife products), Section 9 (prohibition of hunting), Section 39 (wildlife is government property) and Section 11 (hunting wildlife animals without permission), which is punishable for not less than three years of imprisonment, if proved.