Move to protect 5,000 acres of grassland, likely to end commercialisation in area
 
 
 	The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) is in the process of declaring about 5,000 acres of open land in and around Hesarghatta Lake as a conservation reserve. The decision is likely to put a blanket ban on commercial exploitation and illegal activities in the area.
 	
 	  	Based on the recommendations by a team of experts comprising Mahesh Bhat, Seshadri KS and Ramki Sreenivasan on declaring Hesarghatta as ‘Greater Hesarghatta Conservation Reserve (GHCR)’, the state government has directed the Forest Department to initiate process and submit detailed proposal. 
 	
 	  	According to sources in the state government, the KFD officials have already held three rounds of talks with conservationists, locals and other stakeholders like Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB), and the Animal Husbandry Department, which operate from the fragile ecosystem.
 	  	
 	Sources close to forest minister B Ramanatha Rai revealed to Bangalore Mirror that the recommendation had been pending before the government since 2013. 
 	
 	  	“The issue gained momentum only a few months ago due to increased illegal activities leading to frequent law and order problem around the area. 
 	
 	  	The minister was convinced about the proposal and importance of safeguarding such ecosytem and directed the officials to submit a detailed plan in this regard last month,” a senior officer at the forest minister’s secretariat said.
 	  	
 	Vinay Luthra, principal chief conservator of forests (HoFF) told BM, “We will soon have a meeting with the owners of the land around Hesarghatta and will take all stakeholders into confidence. Once it is declared a conservation reserve, there will not be any scope for commercial activities and status quo will have to be maintained. Any commercial activity or construction will require prior permissions.”
 	
 	  	According to officials, the state government can declare any land, excluding the designated national park or sanctuary, as conservation reserve under the Sec 36 C of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. 
 	  	
 	“While the ownership of the land remains with the original owners, the land will remain the same facilitating the movement of wildlife. In fact, owners can promote ecotourism activities in the area and develop it as an earning module,” yet another senior officer of KFD said.
 	
 	  	The experts’ recommendation, a copy of which is with BM, explained, “The proposed reserve would include about 5,000 acres around Hesarghatta Lake comprising the larger water catchment of Byatha and Kakolu Lakes. Though these lakes do not cater to the water needs of Bangalore today, they possess immense potential in doing so in the near future. The existence of these lakes also has significant effects on the groundwater table as well. Lack of conservation intervention has left hundreds of species of flora and fauna at potential risk. Hence, the lakebed and surrounding grassland be declared as conservation reserve.”
 	
 	  	Bhat, a Hessaraghatta resident, said, “The place has several species categorised under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Act, like the Lesser Florican and the Indian Leopard. Yet, such areas remain outside of the protected areas of Karnataka, and face severe threats. Of late, the grassland has been degraded due to numerous commercial and other human-induced pressures. The area has also been unscientifically dissected by BDA who planted trees in high density.”
 	
 	  	BM had published about the severe damage caused to the grassland ecosystem, in its edition dated August 9, 2015, following which police officials were posted to monitor the area. Locals, too, joined hands to help protect the ecosystem.
 	
 	
 	Hesarghatta: a brief history
 	
 	
 	 		Located about 20 km from Bengaluru, Hesarghatta once supplied drinking water to the city. The tank reached its fullest capacity for the last time in 2014. Subsequently, the surrounding areas have undergone tremendous change. The drying of the lakebed, in recent times, has set in motion an ecological succession on a massive scale. Massive tree planting drive had caused damage to the grassland habitat. Unrestricted, heightened human activity in the area has affected the habitat and biodiversity that it supports.
 		
 		
 		
 		What is affecting the area?
 		
 		 			*  Unregulated vehicular movement 		 			*  Sand mining 		 			*  Tree plantations 		 			*  Hunting 		 			*  Commercial establishments 	 
 
 Details of flora and fauna
 
 	*  Native plants (including grass species)39 	*  Invasive plant species in grassland 4 	*  Tree species (planted recently)12 	*  Mammal species 10 	*  Reptile species 5 	*  Bird species 133 	*  Amphibian species1 	*  Spider species 3 	*  Butterfly species 14
 	
 	
 	Extent of the reserve (Subject to notification by the govt)
 	
 	 		The proposed reserve around Hesarghatta include
 		 	 		*  Hesarghatta grassland356 acres 	 		*  Byrapura lake (dry)383 acres 	 		*  Byatha lake (dry)165 acres 	 		*  Water spread area in Hesarghatta lake1,356 acres