By: Kushala Satyanarayana
 
 
 The newly formed BTAC is tourism dept’s attempt at making Bengaluru a global tourist phenomenon
 
 
 	The young IT, BT and tourism minister, Priyank Kharge, already has a vision for Bengaluru: one in which the city becomes a global tourist magnet. And his newly created Bengaluru Tourism Advisory Committee (BTAC) is an attempt at building this brand of Bengaluru.
 	
 	  	Following the resignation of members from the erstwhile Karnataka Tourism Vision Group (KTVG), who were largely industry captains who stepped down to pave way for the new dispensation, Kharge floated this Bengaluru-centric ideating and implementing body.
 	
 	  	On July 22, a government order was issued, which talked about forming the BTAC to develop the city as a brand and a global tourist destination. To be headed by the minister himself, the committee has members from legal, urban, architecture and heritage sectors.
 	
 	  	“The idea is to ensure that people explore the city better; there is tourism potential here. That is why I have brought together people to give ideas on projects, to brand Bengaluru, tap into the local knowledge. The idea is not what the minister wants but what the people want. I will hold the first meeting of the committee by this month-end and take it forward,” Kharge told Bangalore Mirror.
 	
 	  	The almost-480-year-old city has avenues such as a great history, heritage, science, wildlife, higher education, spiritual, wellness, culture and adventure circuits that need to be explored better, says the order.
 	
 	  	Kempegowda International Airport recorded over 18 million passengers in 2015; over 0.64 million foreign travellers and 12 crore domestic travellers visited the state. 	“It is felt that a lot more needs to be done for exploring the possibilities of showcasing Karnataka, and Bengaluru in particular, as a tourist destination to the global audience. There is a need for constituting a committee to advise and prepare road map to make Bengaluru a global tourist destination, to explore and experience Bengaluru better.” 
 	
 	  	The KTVG, which functioned under Kharge’s predecessor RV Deshpande, had about 15 tourism projects on its plate, of which many were under the adoption scheme. The scheme eventually lost steam — take for instance the adoption of Venkatappa Art Gallery, which saw vehement protests from the artist fraternity. Watching the backlash, many corporates firms that had volunteered to adopt a few tourist hotspots, backtracked.
 	
 	
 	However, these 15 projects will be handled by the tourism department.
 	
 	  	V Ravichandar, member of BTAC who was also a co-chair of KTVG, said: “Bengaluru’s hard infrastructure is under stress. The minister’s focus on Bengaluru is welcome. Through these tourism initiatives, we can improve the soft infrastructure that makes our public spaces come alive. A city that has multiple leisure alternatives for its citizens will be a cool city for tourists too.”
 	
 	
 	 		WHAT IS EXPECTED OF THE COMMITTEE
 		
 		

 		 			* Prepare an action plan for developing Bengaluru as a global tourism attraction and Brand Bengaluru
 			
 			 		 			* Devise ways to increase tourism sector’s contribution to local economy and employment generation
 			
 			 		 			* Identify various tourism circuits: science, pilgrimage, heritage, wildlife, eco, adventure and colonial trails
 			
 			 		 			* Give ideas for souvenirs and merchandising products for Bengaluru
 			
 			 		 			* Explore use of new technologies to promote tourism; draw annual calendar of events
 			
 			 		 			* Explore possibility of enhancing tourism experience through promotion of various activities such as art, culture and festivals
 			
 			 		 			* Suggest PPP partners, coordinate with sister cities, conduct road shows and outreach programmes.
 			
 			
 			 				PEOPLE WHO MAKE BTAC
 				
 				
 				People who make BTAC
 				
 				 					Tourism minister is chairman
 					
 					 				 					Principal secretary / secretary - tourism department, director - tourism department
 					
 					 				 					Retired IAS officer Subir Hari Singh
 					
 					 				 					Urban expert V Ravichandar.
 					
 					 				 					Urban landscape and planning expert Naresh Narasimhan
 					
 					 				 					Siddartha Raja, legal expert
 					
 					 				 					Sunder Raju, hospitality expert
 					
 					 				 					Narendra Pirgal, architect
 					
 					 				 					Satyaprakash Varanasi, convenor INTACH, Bangalore chapter
 					
 					
 					
 					THE MANY SOBRIQUETS, GOOD & BAD
 					
 					

 The Silicon Valley of India
 						
 						 					 						The pub city
 						
 						 					 						The garden city
 						
 						 					 						City that never moves — the infamous traffic crawl
 						
 						 					 						The bumpy rides — potholes and moon craters
 						
 						 					 						The garbage hub
 						 					
 					
 					PROJECT IN THE PIPELINE
 					
 					

 					 						One of the most ambitious projects for Bengaluru — the Swarna Maarga or Palace-to-Palace corridor — has been approved by the state Cabinet and is waiting for implementation. Designed and mooted by architect Naresh Narasimhan, this is a 5-km heritage stretch, which starts from Chamarajpet and ends at Bangalore Palace. It is dotted with 40-odd heritage buildings. The project is aimed at turning the stretch into a heritage corridor and the government had sanctioned Rs 5 crore in the first phase. The single road starts from Bangalore City Institute in Chamarajpet, which was originally the south gate of Bangalore Palace, and traverses through Makkala Koota, Tipu’s Palace, Victoria Hospital, Bangalore Fort, enters Avenue Road crosses Rice Memorial Church, Mysore Bank Circle, Palace road, Maharani College, SJI Polytechnic, Central College, Carlton House, KPSC building, reservoir, Raj Bhavan, Balabrooie, Manikyavelu mansion and Bangalore Palace. The project talks about refurbishing the corridor, providing basic infrastructure like pavements, walkways in the building premises, toilets, signages, information boards and some physical interventions.