Kali Tiger Reserve saw 40 cases between 2017 and 2023; 26 at Kumbarwada alone

According to data from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), a total of 40 encroachment cases have been registered in Kali Tiger Reserve between 2017 and 2023. Out of the seven ranges in the reserve, cases were from four ranges, namely Phansoli, Gund, Anshi, and Kumbarwada.

One case of encroachment was registered in Phansoli, 11 cases were from Gund. two from Anshi and with 26, Kumbarwada had the highest cases in the reserve in the given period. Out of the 40 cases, as many as 35 were reported in the last four years. The information provided by KFD also suggests that no actions so far have been taken against encroachments in Anshi and Kumbarwada ranges.

“Tiger reserves have been accorded the highest protection levels. However, the encroachments in areas with elevated protection status only go on to show poor protection in forest areas.
 
If this is the situation of a tiger reserve, the plight of territorial divisions is unimaginable,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.
 
Conservationists and wildlife activists highlight that, as per the Karnataka Forest Act, the Forest (Conservation) Act, an order passed by the Head of Forest Force, KFD, 2018., and as stated in the Supreme Court order of 2002, no fresh encroachments on forest patches should be allowed and in case there are any, evictions must happen immediately. In cases of violations, the Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) and Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF) of the sub-division should be held liable for dereliction of duty. “None of the rules and regulations are being followed in forest encroachment cases. There are hardly any disciplinary actions against officials,” said the conservationist.

As per the Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has the power to evaluate and assess various aspects of sustainable ecology and disallow any ecologically unsustainable land use such as mining, industry, and other projects in the tiger reserves. The act also states that NTCA has the power to ensure that the tiger reserves and areas linking one protected area or tiger reserve with another are not diverted for ecologically unsustainable use, except in public interest and with the approval of the National Board of Wildlife.

“NTCA has statutory obligations to ensure that forest land inside the tiger reserves is not diverted for ecologically unsustainable usage. Being a statutory body, NTCA can initiate legal action with or without a report from KFD or the Karnataka government. They should probe into the number of visits made by officers from their regional office to inspect these encroachments and should also look into disciplinary action taken by NTCA officials into these cases,” said a wildlife activist.

None of the rules and regulations are being followed in forest encroachment cases—City-based wildlife conservationist
When BM reached out to NTCA officials, they said NTCA per se cannot take any action unless the state government explains these activities through a report. “I do not remember so many cases of encroachments in Kali Tiger Reserve. However, we have written to the state government repeatedly and asked for factual status, but they have not replied so far. Land is a state subject and the Chief Wildlife Warden has to take action in such cases, even inside tiger reserves. Once we receive a report from them, we can issue an advisory on the next steps,” said NS Murali, Inspector General of Forest (IGF), NTCA regional office.