By: Barkha Kumari
 
 Daniel Fernandes is back in town this weekend with his brand of socio-political, dark and realistic comedy
 
 It’s the best time to be a comedian in India today, standup artist Daniel Fernandes (33) will tell you. The Goan’s confidence comes from the fact that he can rant about everything from student suicide to the Clean India campaign, marital rape, terrorism, the Syrian conflict and other hard-hitting issues in his gigs. “We have
 gone past the days when comedy was about men dressing as women and stuffing oranges in their bras. Now, comedy is thought-provoking; it questions your beliefs,” says the Mumbai-based artist, who has made a name with his brand of socio-political, dark, satirical humour. 
 
 On Sunday, Fernandes will be in town again to do his don’t-leave-your-brains-behind comedy show. What issues will he rake up this time? He will only tell us that it will feature content from the past one year, and a lot of impromptu jokes, audience interaction and witty comebacks, if hecklers in the house need some.
 
 Sure the comedy scene in India is growing by leaps and bounds, pushing the envelope with roasts, web series and improv shows every year, but at the same time an intolerant attitude is gripping the country like an epidemic. 
 
 So how easy or difficult it is to be a comedian in the country at a time when anything can offend anybody?
 
 The ad professional-turned-standup artist isn’t riled by these developments, and says coolly, “It’s largely t he people who are online, on social media, who tend to take offence or get ruffled the wrong way. I don’t see the same happening on the ground, during my live shows.” He goes on to add, “Taking offence is not an Indian thing; it has become a global pastime. When it happens in a foreign country, there is some logic to it, but here people will get offended if I breathe the air they breathe because I am taking away their share of oxygen. We, comedians, have become immune to the trend. If we see nobody taking offence to a topic by Tuesday, we get a shock.”
 
 That doesn’t mean comedians must not do their homework. Be aware of your audience and their cultural sensibilities, advises Fernandes, who broke into the circuit six years ago with ‘observation comedy’ before changing gears to social commentary, has written for the comedy show Son of Abish, and collaborated with peers such as Kanan Gill and Aditi Mittal.
 
 Sharing his two cents, he says aspiring comedians must build a strong online presence to stay relevant and in competition. Fernandes, as a case in point, uploads content on his YouTube channel, and has of late dived into the world of podcasting by launching his own show.
 
 Called You Started It, the podcast gets comedians, actors, radio personalities, journalists and “anyone with an interesting story” together for a relaxed chat. The agenda is to talk about how fans, haters, and trolls react to their works over a span of seven episodes, on topics such as sexism in Indian comedy, feminism and plagiarism, among others. “Podcasting is the future of content in comedy. I will start working on the second season soon. Then, I am also preparing fresh material for my upcoming shows,” he says. He likes to keep a good work-life balance, so when he is not cracking jokes on stage or online, he likes to unwind with his family and girlfriend, or indulge in outdoor activities such as fishing and scuba diving. A wildlife enthusiast, he is also trained in rescuing snakes. 
 
 Lastly, “be yourself, and create material that you are convinced about”, he says. “Socio-political relevant comedy is number one in the world of comedy today, across the globe. Sadly that’s because people are sexist and homophobic like never before, and are communicating with each other more than ever. And as they say comedians make sense of these things better. That’s what I am doing.” True, the world can do with a little bit of humour. 
 
 The comedy gig will be held at 8pm on August 6, at Vapour Pub, Indiranagar. TICKETS: Rs600, bookmyshow.com