Blessed with thick natural vegetation and a variety of flora and fauna, Sandur, a small town in Ballari district, enjoyed the sobriquet of ‘Scotland of North Karnataka’ until the sudden mining boom post-2000 ravaged the place. Now, more than seven years after the Supreme Court’s blanket ban on mining, the region has regained its green glory. One reason is the reduction in the use of explosives for such mining.Proof of the change is the repeated wildlife sightings that have kept Sandur in the news over the past few months. Locals and wildlife enthusiasts have reported spotting panthers, four-horned antelopes, jackals and avian species which had almost disappeared from the erstwhile princely state. 
 
 	Though this turnaround has brought to the fore incidents of human-animal conflict, it is heartening to note the area has reclaimed its position on the state’s wildlife circuit.
 	  	Sources in the Karnataka Forest Department told Bangalore Mirror that in the past two months, over 20 sightings of leopards have been reported in and around Sandur, particularly in Swamimalai and Donimalai areas. Four-horned antelopes and jackals have also been spotted by villagers and wildlife photographers. Both Sandur and Hospet together had nearly 70 per cent of iron and manganese mines in the district.
 	  	Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Takat Singh Ranawat, deputy conservator of forests, Ballari said, “It is true that Sandur is back to its past glory after the ban on mining activities. More and more areas of Sandur have come under green cover now and this has turned out to be a welcome development for the wildlife that was pushed to distant locations in search of a safe habitat.”
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Venkatesh Reddy, a resident of Sandur, said he has heard about leopards and other wildlife in the vicinity, but never had a chance to spot them in the wild. “However, during our weekend trips to the nearby forest areas, we have observed several species of birds and wildlife like antelopes and bears. Unfortunately, three people have died due to leopard attacks in the past two months.” Wildlife experts say lesser prey density in the forest areas has made leopards stray into nearby villages in search of livestock. 
 
 
 
 	
 	Though the forest department is convinced about a spurt in the population of wildlife, it is clueless about their actual numbers. “We have not conducted a census to ascertain the exact population of either leopards or other animals. But frequent sighting of animals by locals and others reveals there has been steady increase in their population,” said Takat Singh.