A spatial analysis of lakes conducted by a city-based NGO shows that nearly half the lake area in Bengaluru is covered by trees and shrubs. The study done to assess the impacts of planting invasive species on Lakes in Bengaluru Urban and its surrounding districts also shows that while 49% of lake areas in Bengaluru Urban are covered with vegetation, lakes in Anekal Taluk have a higher coverage at 57%. In Bengaluru rural, over 40% of lake areas consist of tree and shrub cover.

According to Paani, the NGO that has carried out the assessment, though trees in the peripherals of lakes play crucial roles in maintaining ecosystem health, when trees, especially invasive and exotic species, are planted directly on lake beds, they pose problems. This misplacement transforms lakes into woodlands, altering their ecological and hydrological functions.

“Trees planted around the peripheries of lakes maintain lake ecosystem health by filtering pollutants, stabilizing shoreline soils, providing habitat for diverse wildlife, regulating water temperature through shading, maintaining stream channel structures by reducing runoff velocity, and absorbing excess water during heavy rainfall to mitigate flood risks,” noted the assessment report.

The results showed that around 47% of the lake area in the Hesaraghatta catchment has been affected by plantation activities as of 2023. In Chikkaballapura, as much as 35% of lake areas have tree and shrub coverage, in Kolar, it is 38%, and in Tumkuru, tree and shrub cover accounts for 38% of lake areas. These invasive species have transformed large portions of the lakes into forest-type woodlands, which has significant implications for water storage, water quality, and aquatic biodiversity.

The assessment report underlines that trees and shrubs in lake beds lead to higher levels of nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus in water as the organic matter decays. This leads to the rapid growth of algae, which blocks sunlight from entering water bodies. Eventually, the algae die, and bacteria digest the dead plants, using up the remaining oxygen. This leads to reduced levels of dissolved oxygen in the water that can stress or kill fish and other aquatic life that require oxygen for survival. Also in water bodies with low oxygen levels, further decomposition of organic matter can also produce hydrogen sulfide gas, causing a rotten egg smell. Invasive species such as Prosopis juliflora also produce special chemical substances from their roots, leaves, and fruits to prevent other plants from growing too close. Leaching of chemicals from its leaves can then be washed into nearby water bodies, leading to changes in water quality.

Experts argue that the changes in water quality and the physical environment can alter habitat conditions, affecting the biodiversity of aquatic ecosystems. Some species may thrive, while others may suffer or decline due to altered conditions.

They suggest that further tree planting on lake beds should be discouraged and non-native large trees such as eucalyptus, or Acacia and silver oak should be removed from lake beds. “Efforts to control invasive species should be increased. Trees should be restricted to the catchment areas and peripheries, not the lakebeds. Collaborative efforts among stakeholders, including the Minor Irrigation Department, local panchayats, and citizens, are crucial to rectify the consequences of past inappropriate planting practices by the forest department,” noted the study.