He last scored music for a film in 1988, in Mira Nair's Salaam Bombay. And now, 24 years later, acclaimed violinist and composer Dr L Subramaniam will return to cinema with Ananth Mahadevan's Gour Hari Dastaan - The Freedom File. 
   Dr Subramaniam, who is generally skeptical about scoring film music, has made a special exception for the national award-winning director.  When contacted, he confirmed the news and added, “I was drawn to the film since it is based on a true story. Also, Mahadevan has dealt with it very sensitively. I have seen a rough cut of what he has made. After Salaam Bombay, I did a few English and South Indian films. I work very selectively.”
   The film, based on the freedom fighter Gour Hari Das, stars Vinay Pathak in the lead role alongside Konkona Sen Sharma, Ranvir Shorey and Tannishtha Chatterjee. 
   Mahadevan was very clear about the kind of music he wanted for his project from the very beginning. It had to be in the realm of Western and Indian classical music. 
   He had first met Dr Subramaniam during the recording of Kavita Krishnamoorthy's version of the classic Kya Janoo Sajan for his directorial debut Dil Vil Pyar Vyar in 2002. And so, a decade later, Mahadevan decided to meet the famous musician for his latest venture. However, getting Dr Subramaniam to agree wasn't easy. 
   Though, Dr Subramaniam was impressed with the subject of Gour Hari Dastaan, it was Mahadevan's earlier film Mee Sindhutai Sapkal, that sealed the deal. Dr Subramaniam and his daughter Kavita were impressed with the award-winning movie. And that's how they decided to compose tunes for the director's next. 
   Mahadevan told Mirror, “It is an honour to be working with Dr Subramaniam. Maestros like him don't indulge in film compositions. I am on cloud nine.”
   Mirror has learnt that Dr Subramaniam plans to blend Western orchestra with Indian elements and create a fusion soundtrack for the film. In fact, he plans to record a few symphonies with Philharmonic orchestras in Germany and Austria next week. And though both the composer and director Mahadevan have decided to refrain from having too many songs, one theme number will be created. 
   Subramaniam’s consent  completes an already star studded list of technicians for Gour Hari Dastaan- The Feeedom File. Oscar winning Resul Pookutty is in charge of sound design, six National awards winning editor Sreekar Prasad will edit the film and renowned wildlife lensman Alphonse Roy will wield the camera.