By Prajeet Nair 
 
 60-year-old Lakshmi is being treated in TN before being brought to her retirement haven in Kolar district
 
 
 
 For Lakshmi, a 60-year-old elephant, a safe retirement haven awaits in Malur in Kolar district of Karnataka with enough green space, a pool and a new friend Aneesha, an elephant which was rescued in May 2015 after a severe arthritis problem.
 
 But it is still a long way to Malur from Rajapalyam in Virudhunagar district of Tamil Nadu, where Lakhmi is being treated for one of the worst cases of foot rot ever seen by those attending to her.
 
 Her foot was split into many parts and she has been treated and made to wear special shoes created by the doctors of Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, which has also started a crowd funding initiative to make sure that Lakhsmi is treated and makes her journey to Malur.
 
 Lakshmi, which was captured as a baby, has been in captivity till she was rescued. She was owned by a businessman based in Palani in Tamil Nadu, and was used mostly for commercial purposes like carrying load, temple rent etc.
 
 After several warnings from wildlife authorities, the owner handed over Lakshmi to the forest officials after not being able to look after her properly. By then her foot condition had worsened and the infection had spread to her bone; now she has a chronic foot rot which makes standing difficult.
 
 In May 2016, Lakshmi was rescued and taken over to Rajapalyam, where she is housed by Animal Care trust, an organisation based out of Tamil Nadu, where treatment for her foot is going on.
 
 Suparna Ganguly, trustee, Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC), says, “There are many cases like Lakshmi out there and government needs to take a strict action against private owners who refuse to look after them and only use animals for personal gains. Lakshmi is right now under 24/7 medical supervision by our vet, who is living there with her till she gets better. We hope Lakshmi will be ready to travel by Mid-January, 2017.”
 
 She added, “She suffers from terrible medical neglect, with one of the worst cases of foot rot ever seen. Most captive elephants are prone to foot problems for example foot rot, and overgrown nails, these problems do not occur in the wild because they are walking on natural surfaces that take care of these issues.”
 
 After being rescued from Palani, the WRRC is now running a crowd funding campaign to send her back to Malur, where 2 acres of green grassland has been created for Lakshmi and other animals to have the freedom to walk around and get used to nature, after many decades of being locked up.
 
 The funding campaign aims to raise Rs 5.45 lakhs for travel and expenses such as food, medication etc.