Those upholding the law must be above suspicion. If accused of wrong-doing, they should come clean in a trial, the high court has said.    Justice Venugopala Gowda made these comments on Saturday while hearing a criminal revision petition by seven policemen of the forest department who are accused of eating more than 80 Wild Grey Francolin birds seized from poachers.    The accused have failed to persuade the judge to quash the case in the lower court.   The seven-member team had caught poachers on December 20, 2009 at Gundal Reservoir Cross, Chamrajnagar forest range and seized 200 birds. But instead of arresting the poachers, they allegedly took a bribe and let them off while keeping 100 birds for themselves.    Sub-inspector Thomas, along with head constables Lokesh, Doorai Swamy, Mahesh, K R Madeshaiah, Mahadev and Srikanta Swamy, allegedly cooked the birds and ate them at a party in their mess.    A local resident, Nagendra Swamy, informed the Hanur police, Kollegala, who registered a complaint on December 20. During the investigation, they found 19 birds in a cage and also 'leg pieces' of the ones that had been cooked. The accused were booked under the Wildlife Protection Act.    A local court took cognizance of the offence and initiated proceedings. The accused approached the HC seeking quashing of the trial claiming to have eaten 'grey partridges', which are not a protected species.    Justice B V Pinto dismissed their appeal on January 7, 2012 saying the trial should take place since there is dispute about whether the bird is protected or not.   The accused filed a revision petition and the case came up before justice A N Venugopala Gowda.    When their counsel sought quashing of the case in the lower court, Justice Gowda said, “Do you think Rama suspected Sita? No. But he wanted her to undergo a trial so that all doubts were cleared. Likewise you too should undergo trial and come clean.”    Noting that their offence should not go unnoticed, he said they could all the way to the Supreme Court.    “Let the judges there also know what you have done,” he said.   He rejected arguments that the accused would find it difficult to attend hearings. The judge offered to facilitate their transfer to nearby places. The advocate for the accused said it would be difficult for him to travel to remote courts. The judge said that the local police would take good care of him and may even prepare some non-veg biryani for him.    When the case came up for hearing again on Monday, the court 'dismissed the petition as withdrawn'.
 
 
 The Grey Francolin
 The Grey Francolin (Indian grey partridge) is known as Gowjala hakki in Kannada. It is common in all wild areas across the sub-continent. It can fly short distances.
 
 They are hunted using decoy birds (Francolins already caught and tamed) and nets laid on the ground. It is a protected species under schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act.
 
 The Grey Francolin is often mistaken for the Common Quail (called Barli or Sipale hakki in Kannada).