The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has initiated a Bandipur Yuva Mitra programme for the underprivileged students residing in the villages and taluks of Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BTR) to create awareness about the wildlife. The participants would become volunteers and create awareness amongst the villagers on how to reduce human and animal conflict.
 
According to KFD, the reserve is surrounded by 136 fringe villages with a distance of one kilometre from the tiger reserve boundary. The villages belong to five taluks, Gundulpet, Chamrajnagar, Nanjangud, Satgur and HD Kote Taluk.

Earlier, there was a close association between the BTR and people. However, after BTR was declared a national park, the movement of villagers was prohibited. Also with animals coming out to farmers’ fields, it has developed human- wildlife conflict.

In order to address this issue, the nature education programme for local students will create awareness about wildlife. The students attending the programme are said to become ‘Yuva Mitras’ in creating positive park and people relation, and to create awareness on the do’s and don’ts to be followed when they see an animal straying out.
 
According to the KFD officials, there are over 800 government schools and 30 colleges in the taluk, the students from these institutions are underprivileged and are deprived of visiting the BTR. This programme will give them an opportunity to visit and understand about the reserve.
 
The programme connects communities through an approach T-C-C-P-C (teacher to child, child to child, child to parents, parents to community), whereby the forest and wildlife protection related issues will be addressed.
 
It also creates close coordination among different stakeholders like the forest department, education department, social welfare department, District Mineral Fund (main sponsor of this programme), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).

The students will get an opportunity to undertake nature related project activities as per New Education Policy (NEP) and enhance positive relationships between the communities around BTR with forest and wildlife.

There will be a module prepared linking with the curriculum, and training will be provided to teachers with field visits to BTR and free wildlife safari. Post the programme the students and teachers will be rewarded.