For those residing on the outskirts of Bangalore, a hi-tech approach method promises to keep in check an ‘elephantine’ problem. Lasers beams are being proposed as the new weapon to prevent elephants from straying from forest areas.
Laser beam fencing, according to wildlife enthusiasts, will replace electric barricades on the fringes of forest areas in the future — a move aimed at mitigating human-animal conflict.

When it comes to keeping alive what’s left of our wildlife, there is no single solution, said Thomas Mathew, the executive director of Asian Nature Conservation Foundation (ANCF), which believes that technological interface coupled with human participation will assist in trying to work out a conservation solution.

“It will be just an experiment now that will determine whether this could be an option for the long term,” said Mathew. Designed and developed by G V Srinivas and G M Suresh from ANCF, the fence will be installed at Thattiguppe village on A Rocha India’s (a nature conservation organisation) field study centre, just outside the Bannerghatta 
National Park.

“Two poles, one which will throw the laser beams across the path and the other which will hold a sensory device, will be set up in opposite directions. Beams will be set at three levels across the poles for both small and large animals and will be invisible to the naked eye. When an elephant walks past the fence, it will break the passage of rays between the poles. An alarm will go off, alerting the farmer that there has been a breach,” explained G V Srinivas, Project Adviser, Conservation Technologies, ANCF.

The main objective of the early warning system is to give the farmer the opportunity to get the herd of elephants out of his land before they begin to forage, else it is a strenuous task, said Srinivas.

As part of Phase I, the equipment, which is designed to work on renewable energy resources, will also include a ‘chilli dispenser’ (content of green chillies diluted in water) and sprinklers installed around the fence. “Soon after the alarm, the dispenser will act as the second deterrent for the herd,” added Srinivas.

The method obviously needs to tried and tested under different conditions for several months before any conclusion is made. “Enough field data needs to be collected to base the future of the device. It is an intriguing concept and since it is a community-based approach, a lot of its functioning depends on the involvement of people, both locals and us,”said Mathew.

On it being a feasible option, Mathew and Srinivas felt that if it becomes functional, the concept used during the experimental stage can be replicated to make it affordable for future use.

The pilot project will be set up in a few weeks’ time and monitored for several months before the results are out.