A desolate mother loris who lost her infants plays foster parent to an unattanded baby loris, grooming it to face the big, bad world
 
 A mother loses her two babies due to an inability to nurse them. A child is orphaned by an unknown mother. The two need each other, but that they will accept one another is uncertain. The staff of Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre, headed by Salim Hameed, are up against a difficult task but not an impossible one, they know. They are going to do all they can to unite the two… lorises. A slender loris and two infants were rescued from the Indian Institute of Science campus and shifted to the centre on May 11. The mother was too weak and not lactating, so could not nourish her babies who were less than a week old. Even though the WRRC staff tended to them relentlessly, the two baby lorises did not survive, while the mother did. 
 “The babies became malnourished due to the lack of colostrum – an essential ingredient produced in the first 48 hours of delivery – in their mother’s milk. This led to the weakening of their immune system. We hoped against hope that the babies would survive under our intensive care though we knew the odds were heavily stacked against them,” a rehab expert of the centre told Bangalore Mirror. Though the mother recovered from her ailments, she continued to be listless, moving very little at night mostly sitting in one place, and barely grooming herself. Her release was called off due to her condition.
 		 	 		Then comes the baby 	 		On June 11, an unattended 2- or 3-month-old slender loris baby with road rashes, was rescued and brought to the rehabilitation centre. After a week’s intensive care its wounds healed and despite a head injury, it started recovering, the expert went on to narrate. “However, in the absence of its mother, teaching it survival skills was a challenge for the rehabilitators. Making sure the baby is not imprinted and remains wild was a big challenge. The baby was taught to climb trees and forage for food in tree crevices at the rehabilitation’s green environment,” the expert added. “All was going according to plan for the baby, but to have a chance to survive in the wild, she would need more than what she had learnt – she needed a mother to guide and protect her,” explained Salim Hameed, who cared and treated both.
 		 	 		That’s when it was decided to bring the two lorises together. That lorises make good foster parents is a known fact, and WRRC was willing to try it. “First the baby and the mother were kept in side-by-side cages, so they could get used to each other’s scent. Once they settled down, the visual barrier was removed between the cages so the foster-mother and baby could see each other and their reactions were noted. The baby was the first to approach the foster-mother but she was still aloof and indifferent. For a week, the baby would keep reaching out for the foster-mother, stretching its arms out of the cage; but the foster-mother would ignore the baby,” Saleem recapped. 	

 	 		When things began to look up 	 		“The foster-mother started showing interest in the baby in the second week. The two would sit close to each other in their side-by-side cages,” added a caretaker. “Then the baby was gradually introduced into the foster-mother’s cage during feeding time and returned to its own cage afterwards. No aggression was noted from the foster-mother. Three days later, both the foster-mother and the baby were moved into an outdoor enclosure with lots of connecting logs and hiding places. Within a couple of days after that, the baby was observed to be clinging on to the foster-mother who was grooming the baby as if it were her own. After a week of being together, the bond between them grew so strong that the foster-mother would herd away the baby with the baby clinging onto the mother’s belly or its back, whenever it sensed human presence. The mother’s mentation also improved significantly. It now moved with a sense of purpose, always alert and on its guard. The baby also started moving nimbly among the logs and started showing typical loris behaviour such as hanging from the logs and searching for food,” Saleem added. The mother and baby were released into a conducive habitat last week, to make it a perfect ending.