Beyond humans
Indian Institute for Human Settlements (IIHS) and Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) are organising the book launch of Bird Business by Rohan Chakravarty. Chakravarty, a cartoonist, illustrator and the creator of Green Humour, a series of cartoons on wildlife and conservation, has won awards by the UNDP, Sanctuary Asia, WWF International and the Royal Bank of Scotland for his work. He will be in conversation with Nandita Jayaraj, co-founder of Life of Science. Amoghavarsha JS, a wildlife photographer and filmmaker based in Bengaluru, will launch the book at the event. 

 WHERE: Indian Institute for Human Settlements, 16th Cross Rd, Sadashiva Nagar
 WHEN: 6pm, August 1 
 TICKETS: Free

 Let’s make music 
If you’re a musician or a singer or simply an admirer of music, Jamming Adda is a place built for you to lose yourself in the glory of music. So whether you want to sing or play an instrument or simply sit and enjoy the company of music and musicians, this meetup is open to all.

 WHERE: Dialogues, Koramangala, 4th Block 
 WHEN: 7pm-10pm, August 1 
 TICKETS: Free CALL: 6363556436

 Good times
Why go anywhere else when the city has the best local standup comedy talents? Ketan Giri, Anand Rathnam, Abhinav Anand, Arvind Sunder, Abhijeet Ranka and Mohit Vaid will have you in splits with some fine jokes and great comic timing. Who says you have to wait till the weekend to have fun? 

 WHERE: Loft, HRBR Layout 2nd Block, Kalyan Nagar
 WHEN: 8pm, August 1
 TICKETS: `149, bookmyshow.com

Roll the dice
Table-Top Thursday is all about telling people that there is a whole new world of board games beyond Monopoly and Scrabble. Find out at this meetup. The organisers will teach you the rules and then you can get straight to manipulating and deceiving your friends, surviving a zombie apocalypse with your SO, or saving the world from deadly diseases and making some friends in the process.

 WHERE: Lahe Lahe, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar 
 WHEN: 7pm, August 1 TICKETS: `200, at the venue CALL: 9886294444 

Frames of freedom
To celebrate the patriotic fervour and the upcoming Independence Day celebrations, this gallery is exhibiting a vibrant set of original paintings under the theme Freedom Celebrations. The painting ‘Gateway to Freedom’ features the majestic India Gate, bathed in the hues of our tricolor. Then there is a series on Ganeshas with patriotic hues.

 WHERE: Magnitude Gallery, 1st Floor 13th Main, JP Nagar WHEN: 10am-6.30pm, till August 15 CALL: 9900117201

 Musical tribute
Winterchild is a rock band from Bengaluru formed in December 2018, comprising a diverse group of musicians ably led by veteran bassist Noel D Gama. Their zones of interest lie across varied artists such as Pink Floyd, Sting, Steven Wilson, Metallica, etc., but what makes this particular set special is the fact that they’ll be performing a tribute to Poets of the Fall, one of the most celebrated new age bands from Finland. They also derive influences from bands like Scorpions, Eagles, Megadeth and Porcupine Tree. Catch them live. 

 WHERE: Hard Rock Cafe, St Mark’s Road WHEN: 9pm, August 1 
 TICKETS: `750, bookmyshow.com