By: Durba Ghosh
 
 
 ​Attakkalari’s Sankshipta dance course is empowering working professionals to move in style. Experts give it the thumbs up
 
 
 	She had a death grip on the banister, thinking she was going to stumble on the stairs. But then she said to herself, “I am not going to fall.” A year earlier, halfway down the same wide marble staircase, she had slipped and hurt her ankle. But today, she hops on and off stairs, bus thresholds and past puddles, because she believes in her core strength. This, dance has taught her. 
 	
 	
 	“Dance can do that to you. It changes the way you move, talk and behave, because it gives you a certain freedom and self-expression,” says Sapna Pius (36). She learnt Bharatnatyam as a 9-year-old, but soon the pressures of academics and then a corporate job (which she started in 2002), took the steam out of that hobby. Until now, when as the mother of an 8-year-old boy, she came across Bengaluru-based Attakkalari Center for Movement and Art’s three-month certification dance course for working professionals. 
 	
 	  	Sankshipta is one of Attakkalari’s recent ventures – a short-term certification course in contemporary dance and allied disciplines. It aims to rope in people like Pius and help working professionals and full-time college students pursue their passion for dance. Sankshipta, which means concise in Sanskrit, intends to introduce the participants to varied movement disciplines through short modules in Ballet, Bharatanatyam, Kalaripayattu and Chau. 
 	
 	  	The batch of 30 from varied backgrounds – from software professionals to writers, wildlife scholars and homemakers – hit the floor amidst their busy schedules at 6.30 am. “The class ends at 8 am, so I have time to go home, take a shower, take my time getting ready and then leave for work. I binge on dancing, and I love to start my day with it,” 30-year-old Anjaly Ariyanayagam, Creative Head of Smitten Advertising Agency, Bengaluru, says. Although Ariyanayagam has dabbled in several dance forms such as Jazz and Contemporary in her teens, she is largely self-taught. Picking up bits and pieces from TV dance shows and live dance recitals, she found her style in contemporary, but never learnt it formally. She even worked as a freelance copy writer for a year, to be able to take up dance more seriously. “But it was too difficult. When we have time, there’s no money, and when there’s money, there’s no time. But this format fit into my schedule perfectly.” 
 	
 	  	Like Ariyanayagam, some of us work just so we have a chance to dance. Just so we can invest in our classes, workshops, performances and dance-wear. 31-year-old Sharbani Das is one of them. Coming from a family where both her parents are artists, Das was encouraged to explore her creative side since she was a little child, “like all Bengali families are known to do”. But like in many Bengali families, the pressure to excel at academics was equally strong. She went on to train as a software professional and somewhere, the “joy of dancing” was lost. “I also started a dance startup, but couldn’t find time to do it full-time myself,” she says. With Attakkalari, Das has found a new confidence and plans to revive her startup – Left Foot Right Danceworks. 
 	
 	  	Azmat Kirmani, one of the few male participants of the batch, saw an “exceptional” change in his body. A medical research manager with Eurofins, Kirmani was never interested in dance. But realising that he is becoming a “couch potato”, he decided to do something physically strenuous. A friend suggested dancing, and he landed in Sankshipta. “I am fitter and able to run for longer durations. I am not lethargic at work, even when I start my day early,” he says.
 	
 	  	Mythri Shankar, Physician at Apollo Hospitals, agrees. “Taking to dancing after 30 is a good idea, because that’s when bodily wear and tear begins. Dance improves body posture, muscle movement, mental state of mind and also burns calories.” As does a report by Professor Tim Watson and Dr Andrew Garrett of the University of Hertfordshire, which compares members of the Royal Ballet with a squad of British national and international swimmers. The dancers scored higher than the swimmers in fitness. An Italian study in 2006 has also shown that dance is very good exercise for heart patients compared to other aerobic exercises like cycling. It also mentions that because people enjoy it, it adds to fitness levels. Dance also increases core strength which can improve balance, coordination, and posture. 
 	
 	  	The course focuses on Contemporary dance, which takes inspiration from other dance forms such as Jazz and Ballet and even Yoga. The aim is to initiate or engage people who have an inclination for dance, but are not able to pursue it. “Although dance requires years of practice and discipline, it doesn’t mean that one cannot pursue it as a hobby. Everyone should have the freedom to do that gives them happiness,” Jaychandran Palazhy, Artistic Director of Attakkalari says. The various dance forms taught for the course, train the body at different levels. For instance, Ballet is about moving out of gravity, while Kalaripyattam teaches moving with gravity; Bharatnatyam is a combination of geometrical and angular movements, and Chau, which has elements of Odissi, teaches how to shift weight from one foot to the other. “Dance makes a lot of people happy. It is therapeutic. That’s why you will see a lot of people with two left feet break into a jig when they are happy. And that state of mind has a positive effect on health,” says Shekhar Sheshadri, Psychiatrist and professor of the Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry at NIMHANS. Sedentary corporate life creates health risks. Dance and creative outlets are a huge antidote, he added. 
 	
 	  	The first batch of Sankshipta will present their studio performance in Bengaluru today, where the dancers will be certified by Sheshadri. 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	WHY DANCE?
 	
 	
 	 		Dancing can be a way to stay fit for people of all ages, shapes and sizes. Here’s why:
 		
 		 	 		» Improves condition of heart and lungs 	 		» Increases muscular strength, endurance and motor fitness 	 		» Increases aerobic fitness 	 		» Helps in weight management, stronger bones and reduced risk of osteoporosis 	 		» Better coordination, agility and flexibility 	 		» Improves balance and spatial awareness 	 		» Improves self-confidence, self-esteem and social skills 	 		» Studies have demonstrated a considerable correlation between dancing and psychological well-being