By  Amit Kumar
 
 Airlifting ‘not an option’ for shifting the two-year-old cub being gifted to Guwahati zoo which, in turn, will send an Asian black bear and pelicans
 
 In an animal exchange programme, a tiger from Sri Chamarajendra Zoological Gardens (popularly known as Mysuru zoo) is heading for its new home in Assam State Zoo, Guwahati, by train – covering a distance of 3,124 km in two days and 11 hours.
 
 The two-year-old tiger will be moved into its specially equipped compartment on March 9. On board will also be two blackbucks that are part of the exchange programme. They will reach Guwahati on Sunday.
 
 In most such projects, for short distances, animals are transferred either by road or by air. The decision to use train to transport a tiger over such long distances is mostly unheard of. It also poses many challenges, especially because there is a tiger involved.
 
 Officials from the Guwahati zoo, who are in charge of the animals now, will arrive in Mysuru on Wednesday. The team will also be assisted by a Mysuru Zoo official, who will accompany them to Guwahati.
 
 A special goods train that is used by the Army will be employed to transport the animals. That apart, elaborate effort have been made to ensure that the tiger (which will have a special metal cage) is comfortable.
 
 A veterinarian and three animal keepers will be on board, carrying all the required medications. The animal keepers will be from the Guwahati zoo. Food items such as milk, bread, meat and vegetables will be stocked up for the length of the journey.
 
 
 
 A goods compartment used by the Army will be employed to transport the animals
 
 
 Mysuru zoo executive director Ravishankar told BM: “The authorities have taken care of each and everything to ensure nothing goes wrong. The reason these animals are being moved by train is because we’ve noticed that going by road takes more time. Besides, lorries are also very uncomfortable for such long journeys and animals often end up getting sick.”
 
 “We had earlier considered moving them by air, but we couldn’t find any proper airlift option suitable for these animals. Train seems like our best option now so
 we’re going ahead with it taking all precautions. The Guwahati zoo officials also arriving in the city to help move the animals,” he added.
 
 In the Central Zoo Authority- approved exchange programme, Mysuru zoo will get an Asian black bear and pelicans from Shillong.
 
 However, experts believe that the train journey is not the best for such long distances. Founder of Wildlife Conversation Foundation D Rajkumar said: “Airlift would be a better option than train as it would be less stressful and traumatic. Zoo authorities should ensure that a vet is always available while moving the tiger.”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How the exchange works
 
 Animal exchange programmes are initiated only after obtaining consent from the Central Zoo Authority of India. In general, zoos across India share animals. If a zoo has surplus population of one animal, it will exchange that animal for other animal which the zoo is eager to have. There are multiple options to transport animals, and a decision is usually taken together by two zoos involved in the exchanged programme. The cost of transportation is borne by the receiving zoo.