20 enthusiasts from across the state participated in recording 26 species of frogs
 
 
 	In an attempt to encourage citizen scientists, Bengaluru-based Gubbi Labs, along with Kudremukh Wildlife Conservation, organised the ‘Bisle Frogwatch’, an initiative to document frogs around Bisle, educate people about frogs and raise awareness on the importance of their conservation.
 	
 	  	The 20 participants managed to record 26 species at Bisle Ghat. The resource persons included Gururaja KV, Sudhira HS and Ramya Badrinath and team was led by Vineet Kumar, with crew members Rohit S Rao and Godwin Rodny D’Souza.
 	
 	  	 Gururaja KV, chief scientist at Gubbi Labs, and batrachologist (one who studies amphibians) said it was the fifth edition of the frogwatch programme. In 2012, a group of likeminded people had come together to launch it. “We restrict the number of participants to 20. Of these, about 15 are newcomers. In the last five years, about 100 enthusiasts have been educated in amphibian studies. In the first year, the team had recorded about 14 species. Identification caught everyone’s attention. Every year, the team has been adding new things.”
 	
 	  	 “This year, we have introduced ecological experiments. We studied the number of frogs in a specific area, breeding, weight, etc. These have long-term implications. If we quantify now, a few years down the line, we will have a clear idea on conservation,” he said.
 	
 	  	 Gururaja was recently honoured with the biodiversity award by the Karnataka Biodiversity Board at the Pilikula Nisargadhama in Mangaluru for his contribution in the field of amphibian research.
 	
 	  	 At the event, interaction was informal. “We did have a proper presentation on identification. Our idea is to promote ‘citizen science’. People can go back and watch frogs in their backyards. They now know how to get a frog without touching it, to prevent the spread of fungal infection. All precautions are taken while handling frogs. We do not photograph unnecessarily either. Focus is on ethical photography,” said Gururaja.
 	
 	  	 He said they also wanted to open the programme for forest department officials and local people, because ultimately, it is not only the nature enthusiasts but the local people whose efforts matter in conservation.
 	
 	  	 Gubbi labs organises such programmes annually at Honey Valley and Mavinagundi. Gururaja observed that various species of frogs were now thriving and people had started showing interest in conversation.