Accused of subjecting reptiles to shock and stress on TV shows under bright lights, complaint blames him for publicity mania
 
 Celebrity snake rescuer-cum-corporator from Mysuru, Snake Shyam, is in the dock as a complaint is lodged against him with the state forest department and Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI). He is accused of obsession with live snake shows on television and schools subjecting the reptiles, protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA), to extreme shock and stress, while they are supposed to be released in conducive habitat immediately after a rescue.
 	  	M S Balasubramaniam aka Snake Shyam’s awareness stints of displaying live snakes listed under schedule II of the IWPA, amounts to illegal confinement, transportation and display, and has been cited as such in the complaint dated July 12, seeking action against him.
 	  	“The consequences of using live snakes in school and TV shows are well known to Snake Shyam. Despite this, he goes around doing just that. While we appreciate the conservation efforts of the popular snake catcher, we have chronically failed to communicate to him the blunder he commits each time he is on electronic media displaying live snakes, and the wrong message it gives out to the innocent and ignorant public,” the complaint states.
 	  	Those who have taken up the issue claim that twenty-one species of snakes like cobra and rat snake displayed by Shyam at various forums are listed in schedule II of IWPA. 	
 	“To rescue and release snakes in a conducive habitat is an important aspect of wildlife conservation. Displacement of a rescued animal is a sensitive issue and could have serious implications on the rescued animal. In this case, they are stocked in improper housing, transported unscientifically and exposed to heavy lights in studios causing them a lot of stress. So are school exhibitions. Reptiles are extremely prone to stress. These acts cause extreme stress and shock that could even kill them,” revealed honorary wildlife warden Sharath R Babu.
 	 

 	Forest brass view 
 	  	“The issue had come to our notice even in the past and we had asked him to release rescued animals in conducive habitats immediately after their rescue. It is not right to exhibit animals in TV shows or schools. However, we will issue a notice again asking him not to conduct such shows with animals as live exhibits,” V Karikala, DCF, Mysuru told Bangalore Mirror.
 	 

 	Snake Shyam’s say
 	  	“I have been rescuing snakes since 1980. Because of my awareness programmes, many snakes are being spared. Because of the awareness I have been creating, even children think of rescuing snakes instead of killing them. That’s the change I have brought in. I could even create awareness with pictures. If I do so, those spotting snakes can’t distinguish between. I’m not doing any business out of this. I’m not making money out of it. I’m only trying to create awareness and educate people with live snakes. I later release them in their habitat as ordered by the former CCF. If my service is a problem to anybody, then I will stop,” he said.