23 banyan trees, 3 peepul trees, 10 tamarind trees will make space for road-widening

Twenty three banyan trees, three peepul trees and around ten tamarind trees are all set to be destroyed for widening a 5-km stretch in Sarjapura. Local residents and environmentalists say both the Karnataka Road Development Corporation Ltd (KRDCL) and the Forest Department ignored all the alternatives to save trees. They insist on converting the tree line as a divider, similar to what is done on Jayamahal road.

The stretch is part of the 39.48-km road proposed for development between Besthamanahalli near Anekal and Hoskote road that passes via Attibele, Sarjapura and Whitefield. The project is expected to bring down over 3,637 trees including many heritage trees. On some parts, the Forest department has already started axing trees, while the KRDCL is simultaneously preparing to widen the two-lane road into a four-lane road. 

 This stretch should be considered as a heritage area by widening the road slightly up to the line of trees without cutting any of them­–S Nityananada, Trustee, Bangalore Environment Trust
Citizens group Voice of Sarjapura says KRDCL has chosen the easy way by cutting down the trees for widening the project instead of acquiring land or altering the design to save many trees. Researchers from Azim Premji University, volunteers from Bangalore Environment Trust (BET) and citizens group have separately conducted a survey of the road to highlight the environmental damage caused by the road widening project.

“There are around 23 banyan trees which are large to medium in size and form a keystone species for this area as they support a lot of wildlife and help in pollution control and oxygen generation. This stretch should be considered as a heritage area by widening the road slightly up to the line of trees without cutting any of them,” S Nityananda, Trustee of BET said.
 .

Environmentalist Nidhi, who also surveyed the stretch, suggested converting the tree line into a median. “How can KRDCL justify cutting down of trees on both sides of the road while not acquiring an inch of land for the project? Trees have been taken for granted,” she said.

The KRDCL, they said, has not even given a space to create tree line once thousands of trees are axed. “Forest officials had planted 1,600 trees on the four-km stretch in Chandapura road after the road was widened. 

Similar provision could have been given in Sarjapura stretch towards Attibele but it has not been done,” a forest department official said.

 .
In all, the KRDCL is widening six stretches including Budigere Cross – Mylanahalli, Nelamangala – Madure, Madure – Devanahalli Road, Kanchugaranahalli – Jigani. These projects will come in place of over 8,561 trees along the 152-km stretch. Some of the species include honge, jamun, banyan, neem, teak etc.

“The City’s deteriorating green cover needs to be protected for the environmental benefits as well as for the health and well-being of its residents. This is even more critical in these times, when India faces an impending climate emergency. Thus, cutting of trees on the outer road must be stopped immediately, and the heritage trees must especially remain untouched,” a detailed report titled ‘Environmental and ecological impacts of tree-felling and road widening of Bengaluru’s surrounding roads’ had stated. The report was prepared researchers – Seema Mundoli, Ranjini Murali and Harini Nagendra – of Azim Premji University.

 .

The proposed stretches, the report showed, passes through crucial biodiversity habitats that include the Junnasundra Mini Forest, and the Anekal Reserve Forest contiguous with the Bannerghatta National Park as well as scrubland and agricultural fields.

KRDCL MD M. Shivakumar did not respond to queries.