It’s not as indifferent as Mumbai, unsafe as Delhi or conservative as Chennai. Despite its problems, Bengaluru, with its melting pot culture, offers activities, ambiance and an ethos that allows its singles to breathe freely
 
 We asked: What’s it like being single in Bengaluru? They answered: Fun. Safe. Free. Happy. Comfortable. Respectable. We would be fibbing if we said we weren’t a wee bit surprised. After all people have been crying hoarse about how the city is not safe anymore for anyone — single or not.
 
 Why Bengaluru scores over Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad or even Mumbai with our singles? “It’s a city that lets you do all that you want and at the same time respect you for it,” says Ayesha Tabassum, 31, born and brought up in this city and who has also lived and worked in Mumbai for sometime.
 
 Tabassum lives with her parents in Bengaluru. And while the tag of being a Muslim, single woman comes with its own pressures, she is “grateful to be in a city” that, by and large, lets her be. She candidly admits that the community and matchmakers often pity her for her dusky colour and assume that she is too “bold and forward” for marriage, given her Master’s degree and previous experience in journalism. But her singledom does not stop her from having an active social life — with her penchant for travel, and the independence to go anywhere in the city on her trusty bike. “And no one has ever made me feel uncomfortable about my single status or my faith. I don’t drink, pray five times a day when I can and fast – of my own volition.
 
 But I hang out with friends who drink, the husbands of my married friends, and enjoy vegetarian food when I eat out. It’s a city that allows you the freedom to be yourself (if you want to).”
 
 Vikram Madyam Raju, 34, agrees. “In Bengaluru, I believe there are conservative and non-conservative people. Often, people behave conservatively to appease and satisfy other people. But that’s never stopped me from enjoying life. I do the things I am passionate about.” There’s more to Raju than his job at IBM. When he’s not in the office, he’s reading comic books, watching superhero movies, spending time with friends, pursuing his hobby of photography or learning Ninjutsu (a Japanese martial art) at a Dojo on Palace Cross Road, thrice a week. He is single and open to mingle but, “that doesn’t mean I don’t have a life,” he says, categorically. “In fact, it’s highly unlikely that single people in their 30s are without a hobby in Bengaluru, because the city is a hub for various activities.” Photography, running, cycling, book clubs, cookery clubs, entrepreneur meets, nature, food and heritage walks, wine appreciation...and the list goes on.
 
 At the Dojo Raju has made friends who have, over the years, become an extended family. “We even go on Ninjutsu training camps away in the jungle. I’ve even travelled to Japan with this group to learn more about the art,” he says. When he has time to spare from his daily routine of work and Ninjutsu, he attends art exhibitions in the city, “by myself” if he has to. Raju is one of many singles in the city who are living it up. Helped by a cosmopolitan culture, avenues and activities for people who are sans partners, a fairly safe housing situation and an outlook teeming with curiousity and enthusiasm, these people are making the best of what Bengaluru has to offer.
 
 For international cricketer Karuna Jain, being single and living in Bengaluru means comfort, safety and a whole lot of fun with close friends and family – albeit with some caution. She says, “The city is definitely not like Delhi or Hyderabad where some of my teammates come from. They don’t always feel safe as single women in their native cities. So they don’t go out very often, are always in groups and never reveal their relationship status. But Bengaluru is not like that. We have people who are more open minded.”
 
 That is not to say she hasn’t faced the odd over-enthusiastic male overture. “When people get to know I am an international cricketer, they chat me up and ask for my number. Hence I have two separate numbers. Recently there was a man who kept pursuing me with messages on my personal number. But when I told him I would complain, he backed off. I am happy that at least men here can accept a ‘No’ for an answer,” she says. That’s another reason that makes this city endearing for many singles. Nobody’s going to pull out a gun and aim for your third eye if you say “no”.
 
 Many singles feel that the city affords them so many opportunities to know themselves that the lack of a relationship isn’t really a void. Communications specialist Anita Iyer (name changed) who moved from Chennai to Bengaluru five years ago was initially apprehensive. Her first encounter was with an errant auto driver. “As the days passed, I realised that the public transport system here was not good. At that point I did feel that if I had a partner, life would have been easier. I felt that I was fighting at every step,” she says. But, over the years, she came to enjoy her single life in the city. Today Iyer says her initial yearning to be in a relationship subsided when she discovered the city intimately. Three years ago, when she joined a runner’s group, her lifestyle changed completely. She begins her day at 5 am with a practice run for the monthly marathons she takes part in. Her weekends are packed with early morning cycle trips to the airport — when she’s not travelling. “And since I cycle to office, I no longer have to deal with auto drivers,” she says, laughing.
 
 Today, her parents have also moved to the city. “My parents would definitely like to see me with a companion, but they don’t pressure me. Personally, I’m content. I don’t have the time to even feel lonely. I wouldn’t be doing anything differently had I been in a relationship,” she says. While extended family has taken on the task of hooking her up, Iyer says a plus point of being in Bengaluru is that she “can go on a casual date without being stared at. I’m talking in comparison to Chennai where the set-up is more formal,”she says. And compared to Mumbai, this city has “spaces” where couples can go to on a date without feeling “crowded” “jostled” or “overwhelmed”.
 
 If Iyer is not running at Lalbagh (by herself on weekdays and with a group on weekends), cycling or at the gym, the South Bengaluru resident catches up on both Hollywood and Bollywood movies at a multiplex near her place. “Every Friday, a small group of friends and I watch the big release of the week. Sometimes, if that doesn’t work out, I head for a night show by myself. There’s never really a point that I have felt unsafe returning home at 12 post a movie,” she says. She also feels fine having a meal by herself at Church Street Social, Pizza Hut and Dominos.
 
 Most singles we spoke to say that unlike in “conservative cities” there isn’t much pressure on singles in Bengaluru. Even if there are they are allowed to be nonchalant about it. Like Raju. “I think only my close family and close aunts secretly feel sorrowful that I am still single. They might even feel that they could have done more in terms of hooking me up with someone,” he says, chuckling.
 
 With an illustrious cricketing history in Karnataka, Jain enjoys the support and affection of her compatriots, coaches and officials. Though she will soon turn 30, the pressure of being single has never bothered her for the city backs women who are focused on achieving greater things in life. “I am happy to be in a city like Bengaluru where women are respected. The officials and coaches don’t make me feel any different because I am a woman. And that is comforting,” she says.
 
 But don’t think the city is uncaring. It can get a bit intrusive if you are single, but it is not as intrusive as Chennai, say the singles. Tabsassum says: “Unlike Mumbai, Bengaluru can be intrusive at times. “First they’ll want to know what is happening.
 But if you’re guarded, they’ll let you be. They like to give people a chance and their space,” she says. A running enthusiast since 2012, Tabassum has also found friendship and acceptance among the city’s running community. The group of 65 runners, says Tabassum, don’t judge her and are there for her when she needs them — sometimes to pick her up at 4.30 am. “People won’t completely isolate you here.”
 
 Don’t get them wrong. The singles aren’t saying Bengaluru is a Garden of Eden for the singles. There are errant auto drivers, flashers, insensitive citizens, a vexatious transport system, exasperating neighbours….but they are standard fare in other cities too. “Stray incidents do not stop me from going out,” Jain says. If she ever has to return home alone, she is equipped with safety apps and ensures she passes on the number of the cab to a close friend or family. “Though Bengaluru is safe compared to Delhi, it’s good to be careful and cautious.”
 
 Tabassum believes having the ability to drive yourself to places breeds respect. Often in office till 10.30 pm on Fridays, she makes sure to take the main roads while getting home, and mentally maps routes with lighting and puncture shops along the way. And people, she feels, have by and large been helpful. “Once my bike got punctured near JC road at 10:15 pm. I asked passersby and they helped me. Another time, the silencer got blocked and they helped me push the bike to the nearest repair shop,” she says. “I don’t have to call my dad or brother to pick me up, and I run most errands myself – whether buying mutton, taking mom or myself to the physiotherapist or buying furniture for the house. I’ve seen that often, women in a relationship expect to be picked up. But I’m used to this now and don’t feel the need.”
 
 Bengaluru also being a start-up city attracts many entrepreneurs, who are more often than not single. And they come from as far as Agra. Like Anupam Singh (27), who started aapkapainter.com. Ask him why he chose Bengaluru to launch it and he says the city “understands entrepreneurship”. “Even an auto driver knows what a start-up is, and will talk to you in detail about the Ola model. There are examples of many successful start-ups here, from Red Bus to Flipkart. Before coming here I tried in Delhi, but no one there got what we were trying to do. They didn’t ‘get’ entrepreneurship,” he says. Coupled with events and mentorship for start-ups, the city is a great place to “launch ideas and get customers”, he believes.
 
 An added advantage of being single and living in a start-up city is you have an app for every single need in your singleton life — food delivery apps, grocery delivery apps, dating apps and all kinds of concierge services — essential to lead a happy single life — are available at the your finger tips.
 
 Moving along
 
 Life as a single mother in this city can be challenging, yet Bindu Vaz (44) prefers to live in Bengaluru over any other city in the country. When she and her daughter came to Bengaluru from Goa in 2007 to live closer to her parents, she had already been divorced for three years. In spite of Goa’s acceptance of various people and its offerings of hills to climb or seas to swim in, when it came to finding work or starting with a clean slate, it was Bengaluru that gave her solace. “There are several work opportunities…this city allows anyone to do meaningful work,” Vaz says. But it was not easy convincing people that she would stay independently from her parents. Finding a house was not simple. “In Indiranagar, I had selected a house because the owners, an elderly couple, lived in the ground floor which meant that my daughter would not have to return from school to an empty place. Just a day before I was to move in, the broker said the owners wanted to know who would pay the rent. Me, of course.” She didn’t get the house. Consequently, Vaz moved every year after the 11-month lease expired because the idea of renting to a single parent was unpalatable to most. As she says, four single girls sharing an accommodation will find it easier to get an apartment because the owners feel that ultimately their fathers will be responsible for the rent.
 
 Daily, she teaches Tai Chi at Lalbagh. Later, she goes to work at a brand consulting firm. She enjoys the diversity the city offers – people who are “well-travelled and wonderful to work with.” It is here that she can meet writers, film makers, wildlife enthusiasts, activists and dancers. Even members who are living life not accepted in conservative India such as those belonging to the LGBTQ community.
 
 Right now, life is simple. She has bought an apartment in RT Nagar “with help from my father and US-based brother”. A friend who has started a ‘dabba’ service delivers her meals. When work is intense, she comes home late, eats her dinner and goes to bed. Two years ago, Vaz took up a job that required her to travel for extended periods of time. “At the time, a residential school was the best option.” Which is where her daughter continues to study. She has yet to succumb to online shopping as she purchases whatever she needs from a local organic store. 
 
 When she doesn’t want to drive, she uses a cab service (kickstartercabs.com). “I feel safe in this city,” she says. Not overly into the party scene, she meets up with cousins and close friends and gets invited by couple friends to events. “My father now takes pride in the way I have handled my life.”
 
 
 Adda for singles
 
 High Ultra Lounge, Orion Mall
 A great place to enjoy the weather and ambiance of the city, and watch the sky change colour
 
 Bootleggers, Lavelle Road
 Friendly bartenders and often, the owners themselves will keep you company even if you’re on your own
 
 Opus, Palace Cross Road
 The karaoke night here is open to everyone. It’s a great way to have fun, make some friends, and just be by yourself if you want
 
 Food court, UB City
 Take your pick from among stylish restaurants and swish bars here. Great for a fun night with friends and centrally located too