Don’t call the BBMP’s wildlife rescue team if you spot a snake in your house. The civic agency’s taxation and finance standing committee has scrapped a proposal to renew the team’s Rs 7 lakh-a-year contract because it felt the contract was “a waste of money”. 
 
   The contract for the year 2012-13 — a period for which the team has %already performed — was rejected %by the standing committee, led by chairperson K V Muneendra Kumar. The proposal was submitted last year when the BBMP’s budget was presented but it came before the standing committee only in February 22, 2013. 
   Since its inception in 2007, the team has responded to calls from citizens, companies like Infosys, Wipro, Accenture, Mind Tree, and even the Chief Minister’s official residence. 
   According to records, from June 2011 to May 2012, the team rescued 2,365 reptiles, mammals and birds. The team rescued 56 cobras and 70 rat snakes in February alone. The numbers related to snakes usually treble during summer. 
   BBMP’s chief conservator of forests, Brijesh Misra, said, “We had sent a proposal to renew the  wildlife rescue team’s contract. The team has performed very well in the past six years. The BBMP had already made a budgetary allocation for the team for 2012-13. But the standing committee scrapped the proposal, saying that it was a waste %of money. We will once again send the proposal through the commissioner. We need the services of the team as %we don’t have any back-up plan to rescue snakes, injured birds and other wild animals.” 
   Sharath Babu, who heads the six-member team, told   Bangalore Mirror  , “Our work won’t be affected by BBMP’s decision. We will be glad if the corporate sector comes forward to adopt us. That would motivate our team members.”
   The team works under BBMP’s forest wing on contract basis and every year the contract is renewed with the BBMP making a budgetary allocation for its functioning. Its leader is paid an honorarium of Rs 16,000 per month, including petrol allowance. The remaining five members are paid Rs 9,000 per month as honorarium.