By: Nitindra Bandyopadhyay
 
 
 The Karnataka government has sent its final proposal demarcating ecologically sensitive zones around Bannerghatta park. However, environmentalists believe it’s too thinly sliced
 
 	

 	 		The state has finally sent its proposal demarcating ecologically sensitive zones (ESZs) around the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP). But environmentalists believe that the areas demarcated in the proposal are so thinly sliced that they would fail to meet the project’s objective of giving the protected area a wide berth from industrial activities.
 		
 		 	 		The draft was prepared by Karnataka’s forest department in consultation with state government agencies.
 		
 		 	 		In May last year, the state cabinet had recommended the demarcation of sensitive zones around 31 protected areas in Karnataka. The width of these zones, it was decided, would range from 100 metres to 2 km. The decision was taken to ensure that the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests does not set a default ESZ of a 10 km radius around its protected forests.
 		
 		 	 		The draft proposal for BNP has demarcated a total area of 26,896.15 hectares as ESZ.
 		
 		 	 		 However, environmentalists believe that the areas have been marked arbitrarily, ranging from 100 m to 2 km from the boundary of the national park.
 		
 		 	 		The declaration of ESZ has been a long-pending issue, but the pressure from parties interested in stone quarrying and real estate kept delaying it, said city-based environmentalist AN Yellappa Reddy. “I don’t know how the forest department has conducted the survey, but a recent National Green Tribunal order set a buffer zone of 75 metres around lakes. Then how can an area of 100 m from BNP boundary be called an ESZ,” he asked.
 		
 		 	 		The draft said that the width of the eco-sensitive zones varied from 100 metres to a maximum of 2 km, and these demarcated areas were mainly revenue lands, patta lands, roads, etc.
 		
 		 	 		The proposal forwarded to the central government after a survey was done while declaring the ESZ that covered a total of 77 villages and 17 hamlets falling within BNP boundary. According to the draft proposal, all enclosure areas have been considered as ESZ.
 		
 		 	 		“We forwarded the draft to the Centre recently after it was finalised by the district in-charge minister. We are expecting that an approval will come soon,” said Sunil Panwar, deputy conservator of forests, BNP.
 		
 		 	 		“Once the declaration is in place, all activities in an ESZ shall be governed by the provision of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and other conservation act that are in place,” he said.
 		
 		 	 		 The proposal has come up with a list of regulated and prohibited activities in the ESZ. Once approved, it is expected to provide the forest department some teeth to regularise activities that are detrimental to the fast-diminishing flora and fauna in the BNP area.
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		The buffer for ecologically sensitive zones
 		around the park ranges between 100 metres
 		and 2km, which greens say is totally inadequate
 		
 		
 		 	

 	 		Fear of consequences
 		
 		 	 		A senior forest officer, however, believed it would do little to reduce the adverse impact on BNP, which is already threatened by a surge in commercial activity in the area. 	 		 The officer said the draft was prepared under pressure. Last time, when the proposal was submitted, a highly placed minister in the current government got forest officials transferred to save the commercial interests of his followers in the area.
 		
 		 	 		BNP consists of the Karadikal-Madeshwara corridor, one of the most active Asiatic elephant corridors in the country, as declared by a draft report submitted by the Project Elephant taken up by the Centre along with the Karnataka forest department in 2015.
 		
 		 	 		The report suggested that developmental work such as quarrying and real estate projects were a major threat to elephants that moved along this corridor. And yet, stone quarrying and crushing went on undeterred in this area under political patronage from local leaders.
 		
 		 	 		 The declaration of ESZ aimed at regulating such activities, but the extent of boundary mentioned in the current report would fail to meet this purpose.
 		
 		 	 		 “BNP is one of the most ecologically diverse areas near Bengaluru and it needs to be protected to save the city from an ecological disaster in the future,” said TV Ramachandra from the Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science. “It houses many aquifers, which are being lost due to unchecked commercial activities,” he added.
 		
 		 	 		Recently, while conducting a study in the area, his team found through the aerial surveillance images that some big housing projects, by government as well as private parties, have been earmarked within 0.5 km from the BNP boundary.
 		
 		 	 		Dr Ramchandra said the government should step in and take action to prevent such projects to avert man-animal conflict in future. This area sees plenty of elephant movement and an ESZ should be demarcated in a radius of 5 km, and on the basis of the ecological sensitivity it should be categorised into various zones and commercial activities should regulated on that basis. 
 
 
 The green zone
 
 
 	Once demarcated as an ecologically sensitive zone, certain activities are prohibited or regulated in the area. The regulated activities go by the decisions of a monitoring  	committee. Here are a few of them. 
 	  	
 	
 	 		Prohibited activities
 		
 		 	 		* Commercial mining 
 		
 		 	 		* Setting up hazardous industries 
 		
 		 	 		* Commercial use of natural resources 	 		
 		
 		
 		 			Regulated infrastructure 
 			
 			 		 			* Hotels and resorts 
 			
 			 		 			* High-tension power transmission lines