The state, which recently got its first forest sniffer dog squad, is all set to go on an expansion mode. Three more squads will soon join the forest sniffer squad now being headed by Rana. Twenty-two-month-old Rana, a German Shepherd, proved his mettle as he sniffed out teakwood smugglers in Bandipur Tiger Reserve sometime ago. With wildlife crime - particularly pilfering of wood - on the rise, Karnataka Forest Department had strengthened its investigation wing with the addition of sniffer dogs. The new squads will come with additional specialisations, brass of TRAFFIC-India, which is providing the sniffer squads, told Mirror. 
 
 	The training to the new squads including its trainers will begin from January 1. Unlike Rana and its trainer Prakash S H, who were trained at Bhopal's 23rd Battalion of Special Armed Reserve Forces, the new squads will be trained at Border Security Force’s training centre at Gwalior.
 	  	The new squads along with sniffer squads from states across the country will be trained on special skills besides crime detection and sniffing out wildlife products such as tiger and leopard bones, skins, meat, bear bile, ivory, deer meat, live bird species, red sand boa, blackbuck, hare, python, rat snake, porcupine and weapons.
 	  	“Three squads will be allotted to Karnataka this time. The training will start from January and go on for nine months. More specialised training on sniffing varied species of wildlife will be imparted this time. This include sniffing out timber species, types of poisons used in man-animal conflict to kill bigger mammals,” Shekar Nirad, head, TRAFFIC-India, told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	While Rana is stationed at Bandipur Tiger Reserve, the new squads are being proposed to be stationed at sensitive territorial divisions like Nagarhole, BRT Tiger reserve, Anshi Dandeli Tiger Reserve, sources told Bangalore Mirror. One for Karkala is also being considered, added sources.
 	  	The sniffer squads play a key role of a deterrent in checking wildlife crimes, added sources. After inclusion in the department, Rana has proved to be a hit, playing a key role in two cases. He had sniffed out teakwood smugglers in his first case last October in Bandipur tiger reserve. “Expansion of the sniffer squads will strengthen enforcement and crime prevention activities within the tiger reserves, which are prone to poachingWith four squads, Karnataka will be one short of states such as Madhya Pradesh which have five,” a forest official said.