Kolkata: The last rites of Royal Bengal tiger, which died on Friday (April 13) in Lalgarh forest, was performed confidentially in Arabari forest Range of Lalgarh today, following its post-mortem. The post-mortem revealed multiple fractures in the skull and spear injuries.

 The post-mortem was performed following the National Tiger Conservation Authority's (NTCA) guidelines. The report revealed that the skull of the tiger was broken and the big cat died due an attack by some sharp weapons. The tiger was not poisoned, according to the post-mortem report.

 The post-mortem was taped and conducted in the presence of a representative of NTCA's tiger handling Committiee, WWF representatives and an independent veterinary doctor, apart from the forest officials.

 Chief Wildlife Warden, Ravi Kant, told Mirror today, “The post-mortem has revealed multiple fractures in the skull and one spear injury in the neck. Two people have been detained in this connection by police."

 Asked if the tiger was beaten to death since it has multiple fractures in the skull, Ravi Kant said, "We do not know whether it died due to spear injury or fractures. The skull might have been fractured after it was killed." 

 The Forest Department had lodged FIR under Poaching Act against two, who were named, and a general diary against a mob of 100, who rejoiced the death of the big cat and plucked hair from the dead animal. The ruckus that followed the animal’s death has been noted. 

 "We are trying to identify if any one present during the killing of the tiger, participated in the procession when the tiger’s body was brought out by the forest officials from the Bagghora forest,” a forest official said.

 The Royal Bengal tiger, which died in Lalgarh yesterday, was around 10-12 year old and weighed around 220 kgs. It was six-feet four inches tall.

 In the first week of March, the tiger was first seen in a camera trap image in Lalgarh’s Bagghora forest. It was found dead in the same jungle on Friday afternoon.

 According to the locals, the full-grown tiger was allegedly killed by local hunters in West Bengal’s Lalgarh. A number of injuries marks were spotted on the back and throat of the tiger with blotches of blood.

 Kant further told Mirror yesterday that injury was due to some sharp weapons like spear. The eyewitnesses also corroborated the view.

 BJP demands probe into the matter

 BJP Bengal President Dilip Ghosh demanded probe into the death of the tiger. He told media sarcastically, “The tiger was victim of Trinamool Congress-led government torture like the Opposition.”

 “The government and the forest officials simply failed to catch a tiger even after one month. Now after death of the tiger, the tribals are being blamed. I demand investigation into the matter and the accused should be punished,” Ghosh added.