International experts to convene on International Elephant Day; aim to devise comprehensive strategies amid rising conflict cases

In its quest to find scientific solutions to the increasing number of human-elephant conflict cases in Karnataka, the state’s forest department plans to embark on a unique journey. The department is all set to organise an international conference on the issue and has invited research institutes, civil society organisations, individual researchers, and forest communities from across the globe.

“The idea behind the conference is to come up with a comprehensive policy to reduce and deal with conflict cases. Over the years, the department has implemented various measures such as rail barricades, elephant-proof trenches, and solar fences. We want to explore other solutions implemented in different parts of the country and around the world to mitigate human-elephant conflict in Karnataka,” said an official from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD).

According to official estimates, between January and May this year, as many as 22 human deaths due to human-elephant conflicts have been recorded in Karnataka.

Sources from the Forest, Ecology, and Environment Department of Karnataka state that the conference will be held on International Elephant Day, August 12.

“We are also exploring AI-based technological advances in the field. Online paper submission for the conference will begin soon, and human-elephant conflict experts from various parts of the world, including Africa, are expected to attend. Experts from other states facing similar conflict issues will also participate. We will also have researchers from the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, who have studied elephant ecology and can help us understand the movement patterns of the elephants,” the source added.

Recently, Karnataka conducted a three-day elephant population estimation exercise in collaboration with the forest departments of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The exercise aimed to estimate the elephant population across 65 forest ranges and 563 beats, involving 1,689 staff members.

The estimation provided insights into population dynamics and potential conflict scenarios. According to KFD, the outcomes will aid in developing conflict management strategies.

In response to the high human-elephant conflict cases and the movement of elephants within the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve landscape, Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu established an Interstate Coordination Committee (ICC). In March, the three states signed an ICC Charter at Bandipur National Park, mandating synchronised population estimation exercises for wildlife in the interstate region.