Fearing the National Green Tribunal’s ire over damage caused by forest fires, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has sent out a circular to all circles and wildlife divisions across the state, asking for all precautionary works to be completed within December.
 
 The NGT has been bearing down on states to control wildfires and has also laid out plans to prevent such disasters. In Karnataka, raging wildfires consume thousands of hectares of forests. This year, the department even lost a frontline staffer to the fire.
 
 Now, with just a few months left for the ‘fire season’, the state wants all precautionary works done by December. Staffers, however, are wondering how they would accomplish this within a month.
 
 The circular issued by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (a copy of which is with BM) also directs officials to bring all their ground staff under insurance cover.
 
 The KFD has directed its field staff to obtain list of fire incidents in the past, along with imageries from its ICT wing, and prepare a list of firefighting works and a special action plan to prevent the fire.
 
 Shortage of funds has always posed a problem, and this year, the KFD has entrusted Public Works Department (PWD) and National Highway Authority (NHAI) to carry out fire line work along highways, cutting through reserve forest areas. Officials have been told to clear weeds and grass to make a 3-metre clearing on either side of roads that cut through forests.
 
 Fire tenders in national parks
 
 Rolling out special precautions in national parks such as Bandipur, Nagarahole and Bhadra Tiger Reserve, which have witnessed maximum fire incidents in the past, the department has ordered temporary deployment of fire brigade vehicles. “Make preparations to set up make-shift fire stations and decide on places from where vehicles can draw water. Ensure lodging facilities for the fire brigade staff at these temporary fire stations. In sensitive forest areas, set up forest fire control units and step up intelligence in tribal hamlets and nearby villages to gather information about miscreants who could set fire to the forest,” the circular said. 
 
 Fire line by December
 
 The KFD has directed all its circles to prepare fire lines by December and take up only vigilance and supervision from January to April.
 
 “All works of preparing fire line by burning weed, grass has to be completed by December and any works involving setting fire to weeds to mark fire line from January has been prohibited. Conduct drills and training session for front line staffers so that they will be active… If fire brigade vehicles find it tough to reach out to middle of the forest, deploy earth movers and tractor tankers…” the order stated.
 
 Further, the department has made it mandatory to cover its entire frontline staff under life insurance against any potential damage by fire incidents.
 
 Noticing that at times the frontline staffers are deprived of refreshments and gear, the KFD has ordered stocking up of jaggery, water bottles, torches, helmets, fire-resistant boots along with first-aid kits.
 
 “Identify food processing and distribution industries in the nearby areas and set-up a channel to ensure steady supply of food items from such industries during emergency situation to staffers,” the circular stated.