Experts say captive elephants at state camps are not managed properly; 40-year-old jumbo’s death back up their concerns

The death of Gopalaswami, a 40-year-old camp elephant, in Nagarhole on Wednesday has once again raised questions about the management of captive elephants at various camps across the state.

According to wildlife researchers, the death of camp elephants in the recent past could have been avoided. They say while elephant camp management is not an easy task, involving wildlife researchers in management activities and incorporating their suggestions on their behaviour might hold the key to preventing such instances in future.

“Every elephant’s behavior should be studied at these camps and handled accordingly. For instance, Gopalaswamy was an elephant of mild demeanour and should not have been allowed to venture inside the forest without other elephants accompanying him. While the department was open to suggestions from researchers earlier, it has stopped doing so of late,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

The death of Rajesh, another camp elephant, back in 2018 in Dandeli forests has then brought up the issue of the lack of internal resources in the department. The 57-year-old camp elephant, like Gopalaswami, was also killed by wild tuskers at Kali Tiger reserve. “Rajesh could not fight as he was tied and hindered by his chains. If he was in musth, instead of allowing him in the forest, the handlers should have chained him and kept him inside for some time. Even the case of Ranga, the camp elephant at Bannerghatta, should have been brought under the scanner. Ranga was captured at an older age and kept in the camp before he was killed in a road accident. We cannot keep losing elephants like this,” said Belagere.

Experts say the department is in the process of catching another elephant named Byra who has been in multiple conflict situations so far. The department has been relocating jumbos that are involved in conflict situations to various camps. A couple of years back, the department caught hold of 17 elephants from a herd in Alur, Hassan. The jumbos were then separated based on a process proposed by the department. However, researchers have a different take on the issue. “The elephants were separated based on the age group and calves were kept with their mothers. However, instead of separating the individuals of a herd, the researchers have a different opinion on how to deal with such situations. The forest department officials have been secretive about the issue of captive elephants and have not been entertaining science-based proposals in managing wildlife,” said another elephant expert.

Wildlife researchers also opine that while it is important to leave elephants for free-ranging, the department must have a guideline in place to ensure that conditions are conducive.
 
Moreover, it should bring in a consulting body of researchers and wildlife organisations that have been working with elephants for years. “The camp elephants should be allowed for free-ranging every day, or else their psychology gets affected. However, the department lacks an internal facility with wildlife researchers who can guide the young range forest officers in managing the camps. Currently, while this facility is missing, the RFOs appointed mostly do not have any experience in handling a crisis involving wildlife. In-house veterinarians are not missing. While there is plenty of expertise available, the department is not interested in availing their free-of-cost service,” said Daniel Sukumar Das, wildlife researcher and director, Wildlife Conservation Foundation,

Researchers say while there have been multiple research-based proposals in the past over the management of elephant camps, none of the suggestions have been implemented by the department so far.

Gopalaswami was an elephant of mild demeanour and should not have been allowed to venture inside the forest without other elephants accompanying him­–Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher

Between 2015 and 2017, CUPA conducted extensive research on elephant camps across the state and submitted a report with suggestions based on scientific research. An extensive management plan was handed over to the forest department. It was never implemented.

The Government of Karnataka has an eight-member Elephant Task Force to mitigate escalating man-animal conflict in Mysuru, Kodagu, Chikkamagaluru, Hassan, Shivamogga, and Uttara Kannada districts, but the constitution of the team has raised many eyebrows.

“Four of these members are from territorial and social forestry. They lack wildlife management experience, a necessity to handle man-animal conflicts. Two of these members are on the threshold of retirement,” said a wildlife activist.