Jackal may be victim of meat ball bomb placed by hunters 

Conservationists are worried about rampant hunting going on in several places of Koppal district. When Sadiq KNK- a civil engineer and wild life photographer from Yelburga was riding to Koppal, he spotted an injured jackal on June 19. 

He got down and captured the jackal on his camera and followed it for a kilometre. Since he could not trace it further, he left. Three days later, he decided to track the jackal and on the advice of his friend posted details about the injured jackal on the Facebook page Sanctuary Nature Foundation. The response was tremendous. Through a personal message from wildlife enthusiast Sujith Surendran- he got in touch with Wildlife SOS –a non-profit charity with the primary objective of rescuing and rehabilitating wildlife in distress across India. 

Sadiq told Bangalore Mirror that a team from Wildlife SOS visited and searched the area. “The team too could not trace the injured the jackal. We have been trying to analyse the reason for the accident and suspect that it could be a victim of meat ball bomb placed by hunters or a snare or could be a victim to stone quarrying or solar fencing,” he said.

Three friends Sujit Shettar- a businessman and wildlife photographer, his cousin Vinay and Sadiq have been working on wildlife conservation for the past one year through photography in various parts of Koppal. Sujit, who hails from Kushtagi, said there are certain tribes who hunt down wild animals. They are often wanderers and place meat ball bombs. The manner in which the jaws have been injured indicate the jackal would have been trapped by poachers who travel in the region.

“The state has very few patches left for the wild. The jackal could either be a victim of the stone quarry or solar fencing. We are trying to spread awareness in the region by interacting with locals and school children on the importance of wild animals and the benefits they have on the society. For instance, the deep holes that the wild boars and porcupines dig in search of vegetables act as natural percolation pits. The wolves help control the blackbuck population. About a month ago, a fox family with five pups lived near the main road for about five months near Yelburga. The fox have been missing and on visiting the site that they lived, we realised that the hunters had blocked all the exit points and lit a fire on one side so that they could probably catch them live.”

He said they have decided to appoint guards in certain areas for three days before and after the full moon day to curb hunting.