January’s soaring temperature has everyone complaining but the birds and animals are the most affected by it. Wildlife rescuers said that they are getting a number of calls for rescuing dehydrated birds every day. Some are being found in extreme dehydrated conditions. The most common among these are kites and pigeons.

 Mohan Kumar, a rescuer said, “I have been rescuing dehydrated birds every day since the temperature rose. Kites are the most common. When found, we immediately give them glucose water. It takes nearly half an hour for the bird’s body to absorb the glucose. We keep the bird under observation till then. Once the bird shows signs of recovery, we set them free. If critical, we shift the bird to the nearest wildlife rehabilitation centre, where they undergo treatment till they are healthy again.” 

Rescue calls for dehydrated birds are common from areas like MG Road, Shivajinagar, Banaswadi and Mathikere and others with more green cover, said rescuers.

 In fact rescuers expect the numbers of calls to increase as the summer progresses. Rajesh Kumar, another rescuer said, “It’s just January and the numbers of calls per day is already high. An adult dehydrated bird can be identified if it’s struggling to fly without any injury. Barn owls and kites are most exposed to dehydration these days.”

 Rescuers suggested that people must keep water bowls in their properties, especially terraces, for the animals and birds to drink. This should be done during the afternoons when the temperature is particularly high. 

Rescue calls for birds getting injured by Chinese manjha is also on the rise as the kite festival (Makara Sankranthi) was held earlier this month. The shops continued to sell Chinese manjha even after it was banned. 

Snakes need rescuing too
Snake rescue calls have also increased recently. “More snakes are coming out due to extreme heat and moving towards water bodies so we are getting a lot of calls to rescue snakes these days. If found dehydrated, one must immediately call the nearest wildlife rehabilitation centre or the Karnataka forest department or BBMP helpline (Call -1926) to rescue the birds and animals and offer them water as first aid,” Mohan said. 

You May Also Like to Watch:
White Adult (Leucistic) Cobra rescued near Yelahanka Bagalur cross00:40