Not just for safari visitors, lions can be seen in the zoo for a cheaper price

Home to hundreds of species of animals, reptiles and exotic birds, Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) has the highest density of carnivores in the country. Despite emerging as the top tourist destination of Bengaluru, BBP’s star attractions like ‘Grand Safari’ have always been out of bounds for the tourists from the poor and weaker sections of society. 

 Unable to afford the ‘Grand Safari’, many had missed out chance to see the majestic lions — the major attraction in Bannerghatta. Witnessing such trend in the recent times, BBMP officials have hit upon a novel idea and have now moved lions out of the Safari and displayed them outside.

 Starting from Thursday, the zoo area in BBP has a special enclosure accommodating lions which has been a main attraction for many. Determined not to disappoint any of its tourists and aimed at providing wildlife exposure to all, the BBP officials have created a new enclosure to accommodate lions. 
s a result, two lions and a lioness adjacent to the leopards’ enclosure have been drawing large crowd every day. Those who can afford to go on safari, 
will witness lions in safari areas and those who can not afford on safari, will see them in enclosure inside the zoo. 

Talking about the plan, R Gokul, Executive Director of BBP, told Bangalore Mirror that the park is meant for all and no person shall be deprived of seeing any animal just because he or she could not afford. 

“Lions are central to our safari and many go on safari just to see lions and tigers in an open environment. But for those who could not afford to go on safari, they missed out seeing lions in real. The disappointment was visible on their face. Hence, we decided that all animals be kept open for the public. If they cannot go on safari, they would at least see them in Zoo.”

Implementing their plans, the BBP officials bifurcated the large leopard enclosure using fabricated iron mesh structure. “The existing vast leopard enclosure has been divided into two parts. While the front portion has lions, the other side has leopards. We have got two lions and a lioness now. The initiative has drawn good response from the crowd as many visitors just stand in front of lions’ enclosure and admire the beauty of the animals,” said a junior official of BBP.
Lions are central to our safari and many go on safari just to see lions and tigers in an open environment. But for those who could not afford to go on safari, they missed out seeing lions in real. The disappointment was visible on their face. Hence, we decided that all animals be kept open for the public.R Gokul, Executive Director of BBP 

The ‘Grand Safari’ costs Rs 260 per person, who are aged above 12 years during weekdays and the cost go up to Rs 280 during weekends. Further, the BBP management has also brought about a complete change in the display of animals. 

“Earlier, the enclosures were located at distance and there was no continuity. Due to this many would have skipped one or the other enclosure. To avoid such incidents, we have made it a one-way circle from entry point to the exit,” Gokul said.