Two organisations, working in the area of conservation of animals, have come together to join a one-of-a-kind MSc Program in Wildlife Biology and Conservation programme offered by the city-based National Center for Biological Sciences (NCBS).

The program is aimed at producing well-trained wildlife biologists and conservation practitioners. Subject experts will provide students with a strong foundation in science that will help them design, implement, and monitor a range of ecological studies and conservation projects.

“A diversity of partners will bring a diversity of expertise and conservation viewpoints to bear on the program and enable a wider range of engagements in conservation research and capacity building,” said Jayashree Ratnam, Director of the program on the partnership.

NCBS said that to develop the necessary capabilities for excellent work, students learn about wildlife science and conservation through a multi-disciplinary syllabus.
The students are trained in fundamental ecology, project design skills, and the technical tools required to carry out scientific studies.

“As future conservationists, they are also exposed to the historical, social, and legal contexts that underlie the conservation process. Additionally, they also learn effective communication skills using a variety of media, while independent research work in remote field sites develops problem-solving skills, all key to dealing with real-life conservation issues. These skills have certainly come into the practice with the latest batch of students (2018-2020), who have been conducting the last leg of their fieldwork and thesis-writing in the midst of the pandemic,” it added.

“It is becoming abundantly clear, as brought home by the recent pandemic, that ecological and human well-being are deeply connected. Like never before, challenges that we encounter in the face of climate change and ongoing losses of biodiversity and ecosystem function will require the best training and keenest minds to meet them, “ said Prof Satyajit Mayor, Centre Director, NCBS on the program.