Rescue centres in city educate school children about impacts of glass-coated manja on birds, request all to use cotton threads instead

If you are planning to fly kites this Sankranti, here is a plea from animal rescue centres in the city: Use the traditional cotton string instead of glass-coated Chinese manja.
 
After hundreds of birds getting gashed by the deadly strings year after year, these centres are leaving no stone unturned in educating the public about the harmful impacts of Chinese manja on birds and discouraging them from using it.

From organising awareness camps in schools to making children pledge against using the deadly string and identifying manja hotspots in the city, rescue centres are on their toes as the festival of kites approaches.

“We have been reaching out to a lot of schools with audio-video presentations and taking a pledge from the children that they will not use Chinese manja to fly kites,” said Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA wildlife hospital.

“While we tell them to avoid kite flying altogether, we tell them to use cotton thread only in case they have to. Children also get a glimpse of our kite enclosure with birds that have sustained permanent wing damage,” he added.

PFA will soon have a workshop for veterinarians wherein they will be trained in treating the birds with manja injuries. Between January and December 2022, the rescue centre at PFA received 268 cases of birds entangled in manja.

Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Center (ARRC), yet another rescue centre in the city, has mapped manja hotspots to ensure faster rescues.

According to ARRC, Austin Town, Ulsoor, Shivaji Nagar, Frazer Town, SK Garden and surrounding areas are the city’s hotspots when it comes to the number of birds getting entangled in manjas and sustaining injuries.

“Manja is a year-round problem and most of the cases that we receive are from the heart of the city,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC.

“To address the root cause, we have been conducting manja awareness sessions at local schools and educating children, who are the primary users of manjas. We educate them about the dire consequences of using manjas and how it affects wildlife,” he added. The centre received over 2,000 manja rescue cases in 2022.

Drop in manja rescue cases in 2022
Data compiled from multiple city-based rescue centres shows that there has been a 30% drop in manja cases in 2022 compared to 2021.
Experts say while there was a spike in the number of manja cases post the covid-19, induced lockdown in 2021, the cases started decreasing steadily later on and have now come down to pre lockdown range.