A great swathe of the United States is gripped by the driest spell for 400 years. Now scientists have warned that much worse is to come
 
 	Since the turn of this century, the US south-west has spent more than a decade in drought. Last year was the warmest on record in California, which is in the middle of its driest spell for more than 400 years. But according to a new scientific study, that’s nothing compared to what comes next.
 	  	In the paper, published by the journal Science Advances, researchers from Nasa and Columbia and Cornell universities warn that a vast swathe of the US, including the south-west states and the central plains, should prepare for “unprecedented drought conditions” unlike anything in the past 1,000 years.
 	  	Within 35 years, the region’s millennia-long natural cycle of droughts and occasional rainfall is likely to bring an end to the relative dampness of the last century. “Nearly every year is going to be dry toward the end of the 21st century, compared with what we think of as normal conditions now,” said Ben Cook from Nasa’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, the lead author of the study. 
 	  	The long-term dry conditions could devastate the region’s agricultural capability and sending some food prices sky-rocketing. It would directly affect more than 60 million people from San Diego to San Antonio and from Oakland to Omaha, who depend on inc-reasingly scant water reso-urces and on infrastructure designed during an abnormally moist 20th century.
 	  	The scientists said the effects of a mega-drought, which would be especially pronounced in desert cities such as Las Vegas and Phoenix, should be considered a slow-motion natural disaster, of a piece with earthquakes or hurricanes.
 	  	Data discovered in tree rings shows that between the ninth and the 14th centuries, the region also endured lengthy periods of intense drought, an era referred to by paleoclimatologists as the “Medieval Climate Anomaly”, which is believed to have hastened the demise of some early civilisations. But decades of dry conditions, beginning in about 2050, could be even worse, the study predicts. A mega-
 	drought would lead to major water shortages, which would cause vegetation to dry up, bringing about regular, massive wildfires in Arizona and California. But while the drought in California and its neighbouring states has grabbed recent headlines, the study suggests a far larger area would be hit, encompassing all, or parts, of Nevada, Utah, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, Arkansas and Louisiana.
 	  	According to the study, there is a greater than 80 percent chance of a mega-drought of 35 years or longer occurring in the US this century, unless swift and aggressive action is taken to alleviate the speed and impact of climate change, which would lower the risk.  	Cook and Jason Smerdon, a climate scientist at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and co-author of the study, said their research differed from other recent reports in its level of certainty about future droughts because they had taken into account the rise in carbon emissions.
 	  	Their conclusions were based on the rate of rising emissions and on complex climate simulations produced by 17 different computer models, which all broadly agreed on the results. The natural cycle, they found, would probably bring far less rain and snowfall to the region than in recent decades. 
 	  	This time last year, President Obama’s administration announced a $200m drought aid package for California. But that will be of little use in combating the effects of a decades-long regional drought. “The droughts people do know about, like the 1930s ‘dustbowl’ or the 1950s drought or even the ongoing drought in California and the south-west today – these are all naturally occurring droughts that are expected to last only a few years or perhaps a decade. Imagine instead the current California drought going on for another 20 years.”
 	
 	
 	
 	 		What is a drought?
 		 	 		Drought is an extended period when a region receives a deficiency in its water supply, whether atmospheric, surface or ground water
 		
 		
 		 			WHAT ARE THE CONSEQUENCES OF A DROUGHT?
 			 		 			 Diminished crop growth or yield productions and carrying capacity for livestock 
 			 		 			 Dust bowls, themselves a sign of erosion, which further erode the landscape 
 			 		 			 Dust storms, when drought hits an area suffering from desertification and erosion 
 			 		 			 Famine due to lack of water for irrigation 
 			 		 			 Habitat damage, affecting both terrestrial and aquatic wildlife 
 			 		 			 Hunger, drought provides too little water to support food crops. 
 			 		 			 Malnutrition, dehydration and related diseases 
 			 		 			 Mass migration, resulting in internal displacement and international refugees 
 			 		 			 Reduced electricity production due to reduced water flow through hydroelectric dams 
 			 		 			 Shortages of water for industrial users 
 			 		 			 Snake migration, which results in snakebites 
 			 		 			 Social unrest 
 			 		 			 War over natural resources, including water and food 
 			 		 			 Wildfires, such as Australian bushfires, are more common during times of drought and even death of people. 
 			 		 			 Exposure and oxidation of acid sulfate soils due to falling surface and groundwater levels