An eight-year-old from the city has become the youngest girl in the country to conquer Kilimanjaro, which is renowned as the largest free-standing mountain rise in the world. At a staggering height of 19,340 feet, Kilimanjaro is the tallest summit in the African continent. Aadya Bennur, a 4th-grade student at Greenfield Public School, Jakkur, successfully reached the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro on June 20 at 11 am local time (Tanzania time).

Aadya told Mirror that she had heard about Kilimanjaro because her father had been there in 2018. “Preparing for a challenging mountain climb involves three main aspects: physical preparation, mental preparation, and getting your gear (clothing, boots, etc.) ready. Children my age tend to get bored with repetitive exercises. To keep me engaged, my father combined various fitness activities such as long-distance running, cycling, swimming, stair climbing, and long walks. My mother is my biggest source of motivation, and she was the one who prepared me for the trek. I had previously made it to the top of Everest Base Camp, which gave me the necessary experience to be mentally strong on a multi-day tough trek,” she said.

She explained that compared to Everest Base Camp, Kilimanjaro presented a much more challenging trek. “While we had worked on our fitness, nothing can truly prepare for what you will experience on the mountain. We had many days where I had to trek for over 12 hours a day. Scaling Kilimanjaro can be quite challenging as we pass through five different climate zones from the start to the summit. We begin in the cultivated zone (800 m to 1,800 m) and move into the rainforest zone (1,800 m to 2,800 m), where we get to see wildlife such as the black and white Colobus and the blue monkey. On day two of the trek, we enter the Afro-alpine moorland zone (2,800 m to 4,000 m), followed by the alpine desert zone (4,000 m to 5,000 m) across days four and five.”

According to her, weather conditions can be quite challenging. “The summit is situated in the arctic zone (above 5,000 m), where temperatures are extremely low, and there is no plant or animal life around us. Adapting to different weather conditions can be challenging. On high-altitude mountains, the weather can change within a few minutes from warm and sunny to freezing cold with strong winds. In fact, the summit night was the toughest. We had to start our trek around midnight and reach the summit by around 10:45 am. It was 6:30 pm by the time we descended to reach Millennial camp,” she said.

 .

On that day, Aadya had to trek for over 17 hours, which required tremendous mental strength to push her body beyond its previous limits, she explained. Aadya’s father, Harsha Bennur said it was due to her high fitness levels that Aadya faced minimal difficulties. “Keeping her mentally engaged during the long days of the trek was challenging. We played quizzes, sang songs, and told stories to keep her engaged. I even taught some of her favourite songs to the guide. The combination of low oxygen at high altitudes and steep inclines can be very demanding. Our appetite dropped, along with our energy levels. Another challenging section of this adventure was scaling the Barranco wall. The Barranco wall is an 843-feet-tall wall on the Lemosho route. It consists of steep and narrow rocky paths that require climbers to use all four limbs to ascend. This method of ascending is known as scrambling.”

First sighting
Aadya said that the first sighting of Mount Kilimanjaro occurred on day two, while en route to Shira-1 Camp. “Although it was far away, we moved closer to it with each passing day. It felt as if the great mountain was our companion throughout the journey, motivating us to reach the summit. Reaching the top of any large mountain requires digging deep within yourself.


 My biggest learning was the power of mind over matter. The human body may give up on numerous occasions when faced with challenges over many days, but it is the mind that needs to stay strong to keep moving forward– Aadya Bennur, 4th-grade student

Along the way, there are numerous lessons to be learned. I had to adapt to new foods (often not very tasty), sleep in small tents, and cope with freezing temperatures. While these challenges made me tougher, my biggest learning was the power of mind over matter. The human body may give up on numerous occasions when faced with challenges over many days, but it is the mind that needs to stay strong to keep moving.”

She said she did come close to giving up on the summit night due to the severe cold combined with low oxygen. “However, by pushing ahead one step at a time, I was able to reach the summit of Mount Kilimanjaro after taking tens of thousands of steps with my tiny legs,” she said.