By Abhijeet Kabad

At 27, Prateek Kushwaha has a lot of awards to his name. Having completed his postgraduate degree from National Institute of Design in Ahmedabad, the painter, designer and filmmaker won a gold medal in a national art competition from the Haryana government in 2017. He also won international acclaim when he was awarded the Mahatma Gandhi peace award in 2013 for his paintings.
 
Talking about his journey, he said that it started when he was 10 years old. The main themes that his paintings deal with are nature and wildlife. “I travel and sit and paint. I’m also working with the forest ministry of Maharashtra. Currently I’m working around wildlife like birds, flowers and waterfalls. I also dabble in live and portrait paintings.”
 
Explaining the project with Maharashtra government he said, “The aim is about creating museums in different states and cities. My role as art designer involves contributing ideas and execution. Currently we are working in Mantralaya in Maharashtra.”
 
“I started with oil pastel. Right now I do more than 110 mediums. Currently I follow acrylic colours as it dries quickly.
 
In his third year of graduation, he also started his filmmaking journey. He made an animated film called ‘Every canvas has a story’.
 
“Initially creating frame to frame was very boring. But when I saw the whole film, I was surprised. It was insightful. I got to tell my story without any language bar.” He added that the first film was interesting as he did not know how to animate! “I used to draw intricately. I then decided to animate the same. I realised that storytelling does not have to be very intricate. I learnt and started minimalism,” he said.
 
His second animated film is a project for the United Nations. The animated film is about a ragpicker. “The 11-year-old ragpicker is earns and educates her brother. Society does not acknowledge their services. They are doing a job and earning. People just neglect them, abuse and molest them.” He added that that they researched and talked to many ragpicker to form the story. All the places they go they are treated badly, he said. He has also worked on a project with the United Nations women for a gender equality project.
 
Emphasising on how he creates the artwork, he said, “I take pictures and put it together. Then I start to sketch. I usually take two - three weeks for wildlife painting.”