By Reya Mehrotra

NHAI engineers change alignment of NH169A highway, reduce number of trees to be felled

After a joint survey along with environmentalists, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) engineers and locals, the forest department on Wednesday reduced the number of trees that need to be axed for the widening of NH169A between Thirthahalli and Megaravalli (13.98 km) to 93.

The stretch passes through Agumbe Ghat and Someshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. Initially, the NHAI had planned a 10-metre asphalted road with provisions for road shoulder, drainage and electric poles on each side measuring 3 mt with the total width of the road coming to 16 metres. For this, 430 trees would have to be axed on the stretch.

However, when notified, the forest department made some changes in the alignment and brought the number down to 256. As per the Karnataka Tree Preservation Act, which requires public consultation for mass felling of trees for projects, a public hearing was also called in March at the Megaravalli RFO Office. It was further debated and studied and the number was again brought down to 107. But after the survey on Wednesday, where the officials, police personnel for protection, environmentalists and locals walked the entire 13-km stretch, the number was brought down to 93.

Anthony Mariyappa, DCF, Shivamogga division, says, “For each tree being felled (93 in number) we will collect funds from NHAI to plant 10 trees in other places. No more plantations can be done on the existing stretch as there is no space after finalising the present alignment where we have tried our best to bring down the number of trees being felled to 93.”

Ajay Kumar Sharma, a member of the United Conservation Movement, says, “We have been successful in saving 80% of the trees. While surveying, we suggested that instead of 16 metres, we reduce the width to 10, 12 or 14 metres at some points where trees were growing. Most of these trees are more than 100-years-old and we cannot afford to lose them. They are mango, jackfruit trees and most are native to the Western Ghats. We were successful in making the NHAI realise that it is not possible to build a 16-metre wide road in sensitive areas of Western Ghats is not possible.”