Aruna Chandaraju          It was meant to be one of the highlights of our trip — a long walk-through Sinharaja rain forest. This biologically unique lowland rain forest of Sri Lanka is also one of the world’s last remaining virgin rain forests with a tremendously rich vegetation and wildlife (birds included), most of it endemic. In view of its great value as a biological hotspot, Sinharaja was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1989.

However, like all rain forests, it has its leeches and for some that is enough to give up on all the fabulous beauty of its flora and fauna. And those included two members of our team. For the rest of us, confident after being fortified with anti-leech lotion, the walk was something to look forward to.

Cameras loaded, batteries and memory chips in place in our bags, and water-bottles and biscuits too packed in, we ventured into the forest.

The first few steps were rather difficult. This was the peak of the monsoon season, and the rains that had been battering this part of the country had left the forest-paths wet and slippery and leaves and flowers that had been blown out of the trees by the strong winds lay scattered all around. We treaded cautiously and moreover, we were looking out for leeches at every point. After about half a km or so, however, we got used to the terrain and even forgotten about the blood-sucking little things thanks to the lush green and breathtaking beauty of the forest.

The lush virgin forest, the exquisitely melodious birdsong that filled the air, emerald-green ferns, the riot of colourful flowers including exotic blooms on plants that lined the paths, and the butterflies that hovered overhead humming some unknown raga... it was all worth the trouble we had taken to make the trip to this country and also the long, bumpy drive to reach Sinharaja reserve.

Our guide filled us in with the statistics and botanical details. This evergreen forest contains hundreds of species of birds, butterflies, fish, reptiles, amphibians, mammals, barking deer, monk deer and vipers... and leopards too, he declared. We all gasped and I, for one, froze in my tracks. He grinned at our shocked expressions and said leopards were very rarely encountered or even sighted at a distance. The only evidence of their presence has been tracks and other signs. And vipers weren’t really slinking at every corner.

The forest, he continued, has an extraordinarily high degree of endemism. For example, of the nearly 220 woody trees identified so far, nearly 140 are endemic. Among the rare birds one could sight here were the Sri Lankan Blue Magpie (which we subsequently did), the Red-faced Malkoha, the Ashy-Headed Barbler and Green-Billed Coucal. 

He also pointed out many exotic flowers along the way including some rare orchids, most of whose scientific names I forgot very soon. For nearly three hours, we tramped through the forest, shooting hundreds of photographs and learning more about nature than we did in the many botany classes in school.

Even if it is only to see Sinharaja and its incredible natural beauty, it is worth making a trip to Sri Lanka.

WHAT ELSE TO SEE

Sri Lanka offers year-round wildlife-watching opportunities given its many wildlife parks. For those who want to go the guided-tour way, there are specialised packages such as those for bird watching, leopard-spotting, elephant safaris, primate safaris, rain forest tours, etc.

Sri Lanka has great beaches too. Bentota is close to the capital Colombo and truly beautiful. Also, check out Mt Lavinia, Negombo, Waikkal, Marawila and so on, which are all close to the capital. Further south is Hikkaduwa with fabulous coral reefs. The beach near Galle Fort is lovely. The east coast beaches are noted for their fine white sand and quiet lagoons such as Nilaveli, Marble Bay, Sober and Piegon Island.

WHAT TO BUY Sri Lankan tea is well-known all over the world. Pick it up from stores in small towns or from upmarket tea boutiques in Colombo supermarkets. Take home wooden masks, date-palm jaggery, wooden handicrafts, etc. And, of course, you cannot miss the Buddhas, which come in all sizes, shapes, styles, and in every material.

TRAVELLERS’ TIPS

When to g  Sri Lanka is, for the most part, a year-round destination. The tem-  perature is generally hot and humid, so carry light, cotton clothing.  Remember, the country is relatively expensive whether in accom-  modation, food, private transport (autorickshaws and cabs) or con-  sumer goods.

Where to stay:  Wide choice. From five-star to budget hotels, besides home-stay  options.

For details on Sri Lanka, visit: www.srilankatourism.org