By Shreyashi Mukherjee

While Chunchaghatta Lake is doing better than it was in July, fish are still seen gasping for air

Fish in Chunchaghatta Lake were seen gasping for air. Experts said that the lake has a history of sewage inflow. Until July, the lake’s water fell under the class ‘E’ category, which meant that the water could only be used for irrigation and industrial purposes.

According to a report by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), dissolved oxygen, which is the essence of all living beings underwater, had lowered in the month of July. While the ideal level for dissolved oxygen should be at least 4 mg/l, it was less than that. The biochemical oxygen demand, which should not be more than 3 mg/l, was found to be 50 mg/L. Additionally, the total coliform, which should not be more than 5,000, was found to be 2,40,00,000.
 
Raghavendra B Pachhapur, working with ActionAid India, explained that the dissolved oxygen was less because of all the sewage entering the water through the stormwater drain. “The sewage entering can also contain chemicals. The biochemical oxygen demand increased because there is more organic pollution in the water.
 
When it enters the water, it will get decomposed, for which the bacteria will need oxygen. Hence, the biochemical oxygen demand increases,” he said.

The recent report by KSPCB mentions that the condition of the lake improved a little in August. The dissolved oxygen level increased to 4.9 mg/l, biochemical oxygen demand reduced to 4.0, and the total coliform reduced to 9,200. The lake now falls under the class ‘D’ category, which means that the water can be used for propagation of wildlife and fisheries.

However, the dissolved oxygen is still low, which is why fish are still being spotted gasping for air.
 
Pachhapur also mentioned that the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) authorities had removed all plantations on the island present in the middle of the lake in the name of cleaning the place. “Clearing all the vegetation from the island of Chunchaghatta was a blunder as it is an ecological setback. BBMP should immediately plant tree saplings in consultation with the Forest Department. They should also access water quality reports from KSPCB and use it to strengthen water quality monitoring”, he said.

Hemanth S, a resident of the area, said that the lake has been receiving sewage for quite a long time now. “There should be some action taken to improve the condition of the lake. Fish are gasping for air, and if nothing is done soon, there will be another fish kill incident.”

A BBMP official said that they would look into the matter.