The rented apartment is spacious, spartan and lacking the warmth of a home. The owner looks woefully homesick, seeking solace in Tinkle comics which lie scattered on the coffee table, along with a few phone directories. "As a child I used to read Tinkle, Tintin and Astrerix, I still do. Not for inspiration but for entertainment," admits Prabhu Dheva who dropped out of school in the 11th standard, assisted his father, Mugur Sundar, for a year-and-a-half and at 15 became a choreographer himself. 	 		 			 				 					
 					His sons show no signs of following in his footsteps. Though six-year-old Adit Dheva does take him by surprise at times by teaching him a dance step or two, he's happier playing with his buddies. Ditto 11-year-old Rishi Raghavendra Dheva who aspires to be a wildlife photographer.
 					
 					"It's heart-wrenching to leave them behind in Chennai and come to Mumbai for work," he sighs, insisting it's as big a sacrifice as the one Ajay Devgn made when he gave up food and trained rigorously for two months to lose 17 kilos for a sword fight in his upcoming film, Action Jackson, and a few bare body shots.
 					
 					"I could have canned them without him going through so much trouble but Ajay sir wouldn't let me shoot. When he finally stripped off his shirt, we were speechless," he recalls.
 					
 					Besides the six-packs, everyone is also raving about Ajay's Elvis moves. "The choice was between Michael Jackson, Charlie Chaplin and Elvis Presley. We settled on the latter. When I demonstrated the steps, Ajay sir said, 'Very good Prabhu, Sonakshi (Sinha) will do them well.' When I told him, they were for him, he was aghast. I assured him he could pull them off and he did--comfortably and stylishly," exults the filmmaker, known as the Indian Rubber Man.The film was to open in June, it's coming six months later because Ajay wanted a perfect body to unveil. "It happens," he shrugs, nonchalantly dismissing the delay and the fact that a film with Saif Ali Khan hasn't worked out. His film with Girish Taurani after Ramaiya Vastavaiya too isn't rolling soon while another with Ekta Kapoor is still a work-in-progress. These things "happen". What's important is Singh is Bling with Akshay Kumar is on track.
 					
 					Can Akshay playing a sardar derail the project? "Akshay sir is a Punjabi, he'll make sure no one's sentiments are hurt," Prabhu says confidently, in awe of Mr Khiladi who calls him for a narration at 6.30 am and floors him with his professionalism. "That's how it is with Ajay sir and Salman sir too," he says. "Even Shahid (Kapoor) surrendered to me, starting his day at 4 am, shooting in the 45 degree Wei heat till 8.30 pm, then putting two hours in the gym because R... Rajkumar was his first action film. They're amazing!" B'town believes that it is Prabhu who is man with the Midas touch. Isn't that a pressure? "There's always pressure when a film comes up for release, even after 28 years . I can't sleep or eat, I feel like a newcomer again," he admits.
 					
 					Talking about newcomers, he feels like one on the ABCD 2 sets, insisting everyone is a better dancer than him. "I ask Remo (director Remo D'Souza) who will look at me with them around," he says, genuinely in awe of his coactors, including Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor. Will we see him act in other films too? "Where's the time? Direction is my priority. Remo adjusts his time to my schedule so I am learning ABCD again," he flashes his boyish grin that has made many actresses go weak at the knees. The grin turns bashful, "Arrey, after 28 years you think I have time for all this, what will my children think?"