Four teenagers from Legacy School have come up with an innovative way of helping wildlife and promoting co-existence

Four teenagers studying at Legacy School have come up with a novel way to help animals and promote awareness and sustainability by raising a fundraiser to create calendars and selling them to help the Wildlife Rehabilitation and Research Centre.
 
“As part of our Creativity, Activity, Service (CAS) subject in our IB curriculum, we are supposed to spearhead initiatives or projects that allow us to give back to society, and ourselves.

 Coming from privileged backgrounds, these help us make the world a better place. And so, when the four of us -- Manu Kartik, Avinash Gantotti, Neel Nair and Sannara Steiger – got together for this project, we started to bounce off ideas off of each other,” explains Manu.
 
That is when the four realised that covid initiatives and campaigns were largely revolving around humans, for humans. And they decided to change that, and turn the spotlight on animals and wildlife. “A lot of the fundraising recently has also been human-centric. We are also encroaching on animal land, among other issues. We need to ensure a sustainable ecosystem, and we need to find a way to do that,” he says.

.
 
The group then came up with two goals: a short-term goal, and a long-term goal. “The short-term goal was to help animals, and the long-term goal was to spread awareness to the point when we no longer needed to help them; we could simply live peacefully with them. Back in December 2021, we initially came up with a lot of ideas and calendars were the best way to achieve both these goals. Our short-term goal was to raise funds to help these animals, and our long-term goal was to spread more awareness among the public, through the calendars.


 Our calendar is designed around the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals – these goals need to be achieved by 2030.”
 
And so, the four students decided to do an initial fundraiser that would help with making the calendars. Initially deciding on 100 calendars, they decided to increase their limits and go for 300. “We had a target of Rs 40,000 – we ended up getting around Rs 76,500 from our parents, friends, close networks and even strangers who helped us.


. 
“In terms of challenges, we ended up learning a lot about costs and accounting. It didn’t help that after a phase of selling the calendars, our work had to take a backseat due to covid – we fell sick or someone in our families did,” he says.
 
But that did not stop the four. “So far, we have sold around 350 calendars, raising over Rs 1,20,000 and we have only a few pieces left. The responses to the calendars were very heartening -- from a cook who wanted to buy our calendars to a school in the Middle-East who offered to print 1,000 calendars and help add to our funds. A school in Singapore also reached out to understand how we can collaborate globally to increase the impact of such initiatives. A security guard at our school also wanted to display a copy at the front gate.

“In terms of funds, we are helping the Wildlife Rehabilitation and Research Centre (a sister concern of CUPA). WRRC helps nurture animals that are injured or at risk due to habitat destruction, and release them back into the wild, thus rebuilding ecosystems. We are also in touch with other organisations working on wildlife and marine-life protection and conservation.”
 
Order calendars: lsbcas2022@gmail.com

Are you an East Bengaluru resident? We’d like to hear from you. email: seena.menon@timesgroup.com