Five children, backed by friends, have embarked on a no-child’s-play assignment. The Pancharathna are at work, and Vidyaranyapura is watching. In fact, it’s more of a war — young Earth Warriors out to brave all sorts of hazards in order to save the environment by reviving a lake.
 
 Bhoomika R, Akaash, Anand and Adityan Ashok and Viraja Dayal: all aged between seven and 12 years; each of them determined to undertake any environmental mission; strong-willed, resourceful and stubborn to the core.
 
 “We want to preserve nature as best as we can,” Bhoomika, the youngest of the lot, said. Their first step towards that goal is to revive the dried-up Narsipura Lake in the neighbourhood. So focused are they on the job that even while talking to Bangalore Miiror, a couple of them ran out to dissuade a bunch of kids from trying to ride their bicycles on a flimsy plywood bridge in the middle of the dried up lake. “Obviously, problems don’t own a watch. We need to be on the lookout all the time. Only then can we help the cause,” the Pancharatna explained.
 
 The young brigade is quick to acknowledge friends and neighbours who have joined forces with them. “We started out as the Famous Five, and were later re-christened Pancharatna by the older generation,” Adityan, 12, said. “But it is no more just the five of us. The group has grown bigger, so we now call it Pancharatna-plus. You should be writing about our friends as they too have joined the crusade.”
 
 So, we were introduced to Siddharth, Suhas and Roshni. The eight are like a miniature case study of unity in diversity: all with varied interests, but a singular goal. There are some 16 more in the growing brigade, but the others were not available.
 
 Viraja Dalal, a ‘young politician in the making’, who can cajole others into agreeing with her, said, “We are avid birdwatchers. When the Narsipura Lake, spreading across the 5.8 hectares, was still in marshy state, we had identified at least 25 species with the help of Salim Ali’s ‘The Book of Indian Birds’ and a binocular. It worked as a boost, and in January, we launched our initiative to revive the lake.”
 
 Aakash, a precocious nine-year-old, spoke as if on cue, reeling off names of the birds, such as kingfisher, egret and waterhen, the group had identified. Not to be left behind, Bhoomika piped in, “We even have crows and parrots living here (the lake). We even made a presentation on them for the people of our neighbourhood and the authorities.”
 
 Spreading awareness is the primary goal of the children. “To solve the problem, we first need to spread awareness about it,” Suhas, 12, said. A daredevil, he recently took on a group of robust men who were cutting down clumps of bamboo shoots growing on the periphery of the lake. “I wanted to see their work order. They did not have any, so we sent them packing,” the boy said with a swagger.
 
 His job, however, did not end there. Armed with water pipe, and his friend, Siddhartha, he has taken it upon himself to water the plants and trees that are sprouting. “There have not been any rains for quite some time. The plants need water, so we water them every alternate day.” Siddhartha said. Once while on errand, they saved a turtle from the dried up lake and released it in the Hebbal lake.
 
 Twin brothers Anand and Aadityan, both 12, are the quietest of the lot. But give them a tree and the two come into their element. “They can climb anything. You have something stuck on top of a tree which needs to be rescued, then these two are the guys for the job,” Akaash said.
 
 Roshni, the latest entrant, too has done her bit by saving the life of a Labrador pup which was caged for more than two days in a pet shop.
 
 Putting together presentations on the local fauna, meeting experts in the field of conservation, rescuing animals, snakes, birds, turtles are all in a day’s work for these kids. Not surprisingly, some of them want to take this up as full-time career. “I would like to work full-time with snakes,” Akash, who can differentiate between a spectacled cobra and a water snake in a split second, said.
 
 “This crazy love for snakes runs in his blood, said the boy’s grandfather, whose house often serves as the meeting venue for the young crusaders. “My son (Akaash’s father) had kept a snake hidden in a cupboard for days without any of us finding it out.”
 
 But right now, the focus of attention is the lake. “JCBs have dug up the entire place and the birds have flown away. It is too painful, but it has to be done to clean up the lake which was filling up with sewage. We need to revive the lake. We need to plant fruit trees along its perimeter and the island that has been created in the middle. There is lots of work to be done,” Adityan said, sounding grim and a lot more matured than his age.
 
 And the next moment, the boy in him came through. “But the first thing we are doing is praying to the rain gods so that it pours cats, dogs , dinosaurs, bugs and cockroaches and the lake filled up fast.”
 
 Awareness drive at Narsipura on sunday
 Bangalore Mirror Earth Warriors initiative is strongly supporting this campaign to restore the Narsipura Lake. Towards that end, Bangalore Mirror Earth Warriors — in association with the Pancharathna-Plus — will organise an awareness and sensitisation programme at the Sri Sri Ravi Shankar Vidya Mandir at Vidyaranyapura on Sunday, July 15. Sharath Babu, Wildlife Warden, BBMP, will be conducting the three-hour (10 am-1 pm) workshop.