Damage to roads and homes apart, the night-long torrential rains on Friday and intermittent showers on Saturday put the residents in the low-lying areas of the city in a scary situation. As the knee-deep water which flooded their ground floors started receding, snakes and other reptiles started crawling into their homes.   Panicked, residents tried to shoo them away, but their numbers began increasing as the day passed by. Volunteers of the BBMP’s wildlife rescue cell said they received nearly 100 calls from across the city, complaining about the presence of snakes and other reptiles in their houses.    Wildlife warden Sharat Babu said, “Our volunteers have rescued more than 50 snakes on Saturday alone. Luckily, none these creatures bit any of the residents, nor did anybody kill the reptiles. The rescued snakes have been released in the wild.” The reptiles included water snakes like chequered keelbacks, rat snakes and venomous ones like cobras and vipers.   Sources in the BBMP said the calls were received from Hebbal, Mahadevapura, Koramangala, Kanakapura Road, Magadi Road, Nagarbhavi, JP Nagar and Vidyaranyapura.    “We were drying up our basement on Saturday morning when we heard a hiss from a corner where some muck was deposited under a table. As I went closer, the snake raised its hood. We immediately alerted the BBMP, who in turn sent volunteers to catch it. While one snake was hiding beneath the mud, there was another coiled onto the leg of a table,” said Raveesh A, a resident of Mahadeshwara Nagar on Magadi Road.   A senior researcher from IISc said, “Rainy season is often the time when snake eggs begin to hatch. They get displaced when water inundates their holes. As a result, they end up inside houses along with floodwater.”    BBMP volunteers have also collected eggs abandoned by snakes following the flood. “More than 40 eggs were recovered from various places. Our volunteers have brought them and we have arranged for incubators to help them hatch,” Sharath Babu said.