Authorities feign ignorance despite a number of activists’ complaints to the PCCF
 
 
 After the man-eater episode a couple of months ago, Karnataka’s youngest tiger reserve – the Dandeli-Anshi is at the thick of trouble yet again. The forest department’s decision to lay down a new road and construct a bridge within the limits of the tiger reserve, despite a ban on such activities by the National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA), smacks of gross negligence and apathy.
 	  	Sources in the forest department attached with the reserve told Bangalore Mirror that construction of a new road has been taken up between Bargadda and Goyar. “The work has been going on in full swing since February 19 in the Anshi Wildlife Range within the limits of the tiger reserve. This apart, work on a new bridge across the Sakali stream in the same range, has also been commenced at the cost of Rs 1.85 crore. The bridge connects the Dandeli-Anshi tiger reserve with the Karwar Territorial division,” the official said.
 	  	A conservationist working at the tiger reserve said, “A few months ago, the assistant inspector general of forests, NTCA Southern Range, invoked the NTCA advisory, Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, Wildlife Protection Act (1972) and the direction of SC in his report against the illegal widening of roads and other developmental activities inside the reserve. Yet, the forest department appears to be in deep slumber and continues to ignore the wildlife population in core areas of the tiger reserve.”
 	  	Sources said that the contractors had obtained no prior permission from the authorities concerned. Interestingly, neither has any authority initiated legal action against the goings-on nor were the agencies associated with conservation aware of the issues. “The subcommittee on guidelines for roads in protected areas has recommended that no new roads shall be planned in these areas. Officials have not taken permission from the NTCA either. Despite repeated complaints to the PCCF (Wildlife) and additional chief secretary, the works are still being carried out illegally,” another wildlife activist said.
 	
 	 		The issue evoked surprise among the senior forest officers. Commenting on the developments, Vinay Luthra - principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) - said, “Laying a new road or widening an existing road inside a protected area or tiger reserve is completely illegal. We have permission only to carry out maintenance work on existing roads. Even for repairs or asphalting, we need permission.” He said the ongoing works had not been brought to his notice despite his regularly monitoring the reserves and protected areas. He promised to seek reports and check for violations. He said severe action against errant officials and contractors would follow.
 		
 		
 		 			SPACE FOR STRIPES 		 			
 			 				Clubbing the Anshi National Park and Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary, the union government in 2007, declared it as Project Tiger Reserve. Spread across 340 square kms, it is not only the youngest tiger reserve of the state, but also promises to hold more tigers. 			 				Currently, according to forest officials, the reserve has six tigers per 100 sq km of area against the 15 to 18 tigers per 100 sq km in Bandipur-Nagarahole Tiger Reserve.