Govt-sponsored re-rendering of Baarisu Kannada Dindimava becomes huge hit 
 
 Last weekend’s blockbuster was not a film, Rahul Gandhi’s travels in Karnataka or the issue of beef. It was Kuvempu! The government sponsored re-rendering of the song Baarisu Kannada Dindimava in a modern setting has become an overnight sensation. It has gone viral in online media and in just over a day, notched up 1.25 lakh views apart from thousands of shares.
 
 The poem by Kuvempu has been set to tune earlier and is one of the most famous patriotic songs in Kannada. The Information Department wanted a new rendering of the song for the new generation. The result has surprised them too. Director of the department Vishu Kumar said, “For people like me who are 50 plus, Kuvempu’s poems are imprinted in the voices of Mysore Ananthaswamy and Ratnamala Prakash. We wanted to create something to connect with and attract the youth. So a Western or pop style rendering of this song was envisioned. Last year, we invited makers to submit their proposals. Krupakar-Senani Picures (of the famous wildlife photographers) was shortlisted. They brought together a very good and highly qualified team. Krupakar-Senani had earlier made Mayaloka, a documentary on Poornachandra Tejaswi (Kuvempu’s son, also a famous litterateur) for the department.” The song cost Rs 5 lakh to make.
 	  	The official launch of the video will be done by the CM on November 1. 
 	
 	
 	A screengrab from the video
 	
 	 		But the response to the test launch last weekend has surprised everyone. “There is an overwhelming response and the video has gone viral. We knew the song has come out very good, but this kind of response is not what we had expected. Everyone who has seen and heard it are praising it and promised to help promote it further,” Vishu Kumar said. The comments for the video on YouTube had many celebrities voicing their approval and applause. This song is a rousing rendition that urges Kannadigas to shed their inhibitions and take on the world.
 		
 		
 		
 		Kuvempu
 		 	 		The music for the song was set by Poornachandra Tejaswi (of Lucia fame) and along with him, eight others have sung the song. Sunil R, who was an assistant director in Lucia and has a number of short films to his credit, directed the video. The video tells the story of the situation of Kannada in Karnataka. It starts with shots of people speaking in various tongues and then a few come together to sing Baarisu Kannada Dindimava. The use of multiple cameras, drones and a public location (somewhere in Karnataka the makers say. But a popular spot in Mysuru), give the video a rich look. The video looks like it happened instantaneously, though it was the result of nearly a year of preparation.