Eviction notices backfire as plaintiffs claim contempt of court with ownership being disputed
 
 A contempt of court case has been filed against the Forest Department (FD) officials for sending eviction notices to some parties in Kadugodi – an area that forms a major chunk of the IT and industrial corridor.
 
 In what came as a major breakthrough for the FD on April 23, the District Administration (revenue authorities) ruled that 711 acres of forest land, worth Rs 7,000 crore in Kadugodi, originally belonged to the FD. The DA further directed the tahsildar to mutate the entire patch in Serial No 1, measuring 711 acres in Kadugodi plantation, Bidarahalli hobli, in the name of the Government Forest Department. The DA also ordered changes in RTCs (rights, tenancy and crops), as per rules in May.
 
 Subsequently, eviction notices were sent to 8 of the 26 industry establishments in Kadugodi on June 1. Some of the industry owners moved High Court and filed a contempt petition. Their stand was that the Forest Department’s ACF (Assistant Conservator of Forest) court issuing eviction notice, when the dispute over ownership of the land was being heard by the High Court, (which is higher than the ACF court), amounted to contempt.
 
 However, the department has made its stand clear. In its reply to the notice on Tuesday, the FD told HC that it had acted only after the land was transferred to their name by the revenue authorities with changes in all land records. “In 1989, the land officially came under the (authority of) the Forest Department. However, some are still disputing the ownership. But the recent change in land records, after a thorough scrutiny, considering all parties and orders in the past by the revenue authority, who ordered the transfer into the department’s name, makes it very clear that the land belongs to the FD. We will abide by whatever decision the HC takes,” a senior officer of the department told Bangalore Mirror. The brass also maintained that at least a hundred acres would be reclaimed once the High Court decides on the issue, as government land was illegally encroached upon. Those residing in the land in question, include residents of over 300 households and 26 industries, a source revealed.
 
 Some of the plaintiffs have claimed they had been allotted lands by the KIADB (Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board), and some others have claimed to be the original land owners.
 
 The April 23 order had come as a major boost to the department which is fighting against encroachments and land-grabbing in several areas like Kengeri and Banashankari. Another breakthrough for the department came on June 29 with the High Court, while hearing a PIL on land granted to the memorial of thespian Vishnuvardhan, ruled that laws cannot be bent by the government to accommodate the memorial in the forest land. The HC had also ordered the govt to find an alternative place while disposing a PIL by city wildlife warden Sharath R Babu, who challenged the government decision (to allot forest land to memorial), taking a stand that the land was buffer zone of the forest land.