250+ tourists stuck in Karnataka, Min says they need not worry

Max Hartman, a 26-year-old toy designer from Stuttgart, Germany, arrived in India with plans -- like many Israelis and Europeans -- to explore the country on a motorcycle. He planned to go from south to north India and arrived in Gokarna two weeks. But now with travel restrictions in place and the last flight to Germany having left Indian shores, he finds himself stranded in Gokarna.

“But it’s a good thing that I got got stuck in Gokarna and nowhere else. There is such a nice feel of community here and I feel absolutely safe. This place has barely any contact with the outside world and we have food and water here. I planned to spend to spend the next four-five months exploring India but now tithe Coronavirus outbreak, I will wait and watch and won’t travel right now. I feel privileged to be in Gokarna. Now we have to prepare for multiple outcomes and think of ways to keep the mind and hands busy,” he told Bangalore Mirror over the telephone.

Max is one of the 250-odd tourists stuck in Uttara Kannada district due to Covid-19. And not everybody is as calm as Max. Another German tourist living in the same place as Max decided to make a dash for Bengaluru when he heard that the last flights will leave early Sunday morning. He was panicking as he had heard that things were looking ugly for tourists. “But in Bengaluru airport, people were sitting out and chilling… it looked like Florida. No stress, no hustling and everybody wearing masks. Maybe the problem was in the countryside. It will be bad for us white people in villages, we thought,” he said after reaching Dubai from where he was to board a flight to London.

Every year, Gokarna sees a huge influx of foreign tourists during the winter season and many find accommodation at the various resorts and guesthouses around Kudle Beach, Om Beach, Half-moon Beach, Paradise Beach and Nirvana Beach. The foreign tourists start arriving by November and stay put till March. This season too it was no different until the outbreak of COVID-19.

“Normally, foreign tourists start leaving for their countries by mid-March. However, this time around they are still in Gokarna as they cannot fly back to their countries. As many international flights have been cancelled several tourists from France, Italy and other European countries along with many Israeli tourists are stranded in Gokarna,” Sitaram Hosmane, secretary, Kudle Beach Hotel Owners Association told Bangalore Mirror. 

Though resorts and guesthouses are not accepting fresh bookings due to the virus outbreak, the tourists who cannot fly back home are allowed to stay put till travel restrictions are eased out.

Asked about how the foreign tourists are handling the visa expiration date issue, Hosmane said that most of the tourists’ visas are yet to expire; however, those whose visas have expired have contacted concerned agencies and got them extended.

Kumar Gouda who is also associated with the Kudle Beach Hotel Owners Association said that 85 per cent of the foreign tourists who had come to Gokarna had gone back to their countries. 

'Will take care of guests'
Tourism Minister CT Ravi said that he had been informed about the tourists stuck in some parts of Karnataka and the district administrations had been authorised to take suitable action. “The local administration will test and quarantine the tourists if needed. We have already begun this process,” he said.

Ravi said that the government will help tourists who are stuck in Karnataka and it was for their respective embassies to make arrangements for taking them back. “Even our citizens are stranded all across the world. We will deal with these (tourist) cases sympathetically,” he said.

Tourism takes a hit
Karnataka tourism is the fourth largest in the country and attracts close to 10 lakh foreign tourists a year. With the complete lockdown announced on Sunday, the tourism industry will take a big hit.

The government has already shut major tourist destinations including the Mysuru Palace, Hampi and other sites of historical importance, adventure activities and wildlife sanctuaries. All zoos and major temples have been been shut down and the Golden Chariot train, which was scheduled to start services from March 22, has also been put in cold storage. 

A tour operator in Gokarna who refused to be identified summed up the situation: “Storm created a havoc in the beginning of the season, and now Coronavirus has abruptly ended the season. I had never experienced a situation like this in my 20 years’ experience,” he said.

ON 'LAST' DAY OF INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS...

With the government imposing a ban on all scheduled airlines from entering or exiting India till March 29, close to about 1000 international passengers landed at the Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) on the intervening night of March 21 and 22. 

Flights to and from Dubai, San Francisco via Delhi, Singapore, Bangkok, Doha, Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Addis Ababa took off and landed at KIA.

The flights from Singapore and Dubai saw the maximum load factor with 205 and 189 passengers respectively, while the flight from Abu Dhabi had the lowest load factor with 37 passengers. One international flight from London was cancelled. The last international flight to land and take off was the Emirates flight from Dubai.

The flight landed at KIA at 8.50 am on Sunday and took off to Dubai later in the day with 189 passengers and 136 passengers respectively.

On the intervening night of March 21 and 22 several passengers who had their flights scheduled for Sunday had assembled outside the airport Terminal. Many of these passengers came to the airport in advance fearing there would be no public transport due to the Janta curfew. 

Eateries located outside the Terminal started to shut down after 12 pm to follow the Janta curfew order.

Both government operated buses and cabs were few in numbers and many passengers had to wait before boarding their buses and cabs towards the city.

Police personnel who were posted outside the departure were checking on international passengers if they were stamped with the home quarantine stamping with indelible ink.

A few passengers were also taken in the Ambulance to the nearby to the designated quarantine center.