A mountain lion was caught after trying to slip into a casino in downtown Reno, Nevada, ahead of the breakfast rush on Friday.  
   Guests who were finishing a night of drinking were in for a mighty surprise when they saw the early morning visitor — all of 100 pounds — trying to enter.   Witnesses at Harrah's Plaza said they watched in disbelief as the big cat tried to enter the revolving doors. When it could not figure out how, it just walked away. It then went to an outdoor stage nearby, where it hid until moving on to the garbage cans behind the casino.   State wildlife officials responded to the scene and a warden climbed a ladder to get to a higher position. He fired three tranquilliser shots to put the cat down as quickly as possible.   The cougar was then transported by truck to Nevada Department of Wildlife's field office in Reno, and then to the department’s office in Carson City, the Reno Gazette Journal reported.    The roughly 2-year-old cat was later released into the wild after it was tagged for participation in a University of Nevada, study.   The animal was unharmed and no injuries to people were reported.   KOLO-TV said that a little after 5 am on Friday, the police began getting calls about the big cat roaming the area around the hotel.   Officers who arrived on the scene set up a perimeter, warning people to stay away and shutting down the main road through downtown Reno.   Wildlife officials speculate the mountain lion was chased out of the nearby Sierra Nevada foothills by the drought or by an adult cat that didn't want competition for a mate. They believe the mountain lion followed the Truckee River into Reno.   Mountain lion sightings have been reported around Reno in the past, Nevada Department of Wildlife spokesman Chris Healy said, but not in the downtown casino area.   Healy said the young male cat's behaviour was “almost the equivalent of being a stupid teenager''. He said coming-of-age cougars often end up where they shouldn't after being chased out of a territory by adults.   ""The mountain lion is unlikely to stay in any area until it finds an area of its own,"" Healy said.   “The best-case scenario is we never see it or hear from it again,” Healy said, adding that the cat will probably have to be put down if it is spotted in the city again.