All about snakes
Watch the documentary Defanged: Myths & Misconceptions, made by Eyeris Media, in association with Kalinga Foundation. Produced by the Karnataka Forest Department, the film explores common myths and misconceptions about snakes that pose a threat to their survival. Following the screening, there will be a panel discussion on the role of films in conservation. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of Forest Force) Karnataka, Punati Sridhar, renowned herpetologist Gowri Shankar, NatGeo explorer and wildlife filmmaker Sandesh Kadur, filmmaker Sairam Sagiraju, alongside the makers of the documentary Abhilash Krishna and Trishala Ashok, will be part of the panel discussion. Well-known snake rescuer and wildlife conservationist from Mysore, Snake Shyam too will be present. 

 WHERE: Xavier Hall, Post-
Graduate Block, St Joseph’s College, Langford Road 
 WHEN: 4pm, June 22 ENTRY: Free

All about women
The Sister Library is a project, started by Aqui Thami which aims to explore the literature, showcase the art and celebrate the contributions of women in the creative world. The goal is to create an interest in understanding the accomplishments of women writers and artists. At this Art Bazaar, artwork by 50+ local artists from Bengaluru, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Kerala will be on sale to raise funds for Sister Library. The Art Bazaar will be infused with workshops, a live drawing booth by @spreefirit and a poetry pharmacy in collaboration with Bangalore Busking. 

 WHERE: Church Street Social, Cobalt Building, Church Street WHEN: 12pm-7pm, June 22-23 
 ENTRY: Free CALL: 91520 17971

Natural skincare
Do you actually know what goes into the skincare products you use? Skin can absorb everything that it comes in contact with. We are ingesting these harmful chemicals into our bodies unknowingly. Come and learn how to make some basic everyday skincare personal products using ingredients that are easily available and can be made in your kitchen. You will learn to make moisturizer, lip balm, body scrub and kajal. And you can take home 25ml of lip balm with you. You will also get written material and on-call support for two months after the workshop. 

 WHERE: Jus’Trufs, Jakkur Road, Jakkur
 WHEN: 12pm, June 22 
ENTRY: `1,500
 CALL: 9844016984

Food for thought
Words and Visuals is organising a learning programme on creative writing and book reading for children between 10-12 years. The activities will focus on sharpening the creative thinking and writing skills of children, and also enable them to absorb and enjoy literature and review stories. Creative writing activities will include lateral thinking exercises, word games and audio-visual stimulation. There will also be reading through interactive reading sessions, book reviews and roleplay.

 WHERE: 110A, Westminster Building (Above Chung’s), Cunningham Road
 WHEN: 10am-1pm; 2.30pm-5.30pm (book reading), June 22-23 
 ENTRY: `2,000 per session CALL: 9900567140

Watch a film
Nothing builds an inclusive community better than love. And nothing teaches you more about love than the movies. This June, in honour of PRIDE month, watch Oscar winning film Call Me By Your Name. It’s the story of 17-year-old Elio’s unexpected romance with 24-year-old graduate student Oliver, who’s staying with them for the summer, assisting Elio’s archeologist father. Tender and languid in mood and visual style, this film will make you believe in love and serenity more than anything else. 

 WHERE: Courtyard Café, KH Road, Opp. Corporation Bank, Shanti Nagar 
 WHEN: 7pm, June 22 CALL: 9916662656 ENTRY: `300, instamojo.com

 A lesson in books
How to make your work publisher-ready? Shinie Antony, author of The Orphanage for Words and Barefoot and Pregnant, and the novels, When Mira Went Forth and Multiplied and A Kingdom for His Love, and the co-founder of the Bangalore Literature Festival and director of the Bengaluru Poetry Festival, will teach you. This workshop will give you a brief insight into the publishing industry in India and the points to keep in mind during submissions.

 WHERE: Atta Galatta, 4th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 2pm, June 22 ENTRY: `500
 CALL: 41600677 / 9632510126

Intricate work
The Shyam family from the Dindori district in Madhya Pradesh displays their centuries-old art form. Their intricate portrayal of the forest and animals reflects their animist beliefs and their oneness with nature. All members of the family have their works displayed, and interestingly, they work on each others’ art works too. The next generation does justice to the illustrious and national awardwinning pedigree of the Shyam family. 

 WHERE: Tamaala Art Gallery, 24th Main Road, 7th phase, JP Nagar
 WHEN: 11am – 8pm (closed on Tuesdays), till July 21 
CALL: 8884816333