The recent flooding in the city has laid bare that streams or channels that connect to various lakes are clogged with garbage.

You can see this near Chikkabanavara where two channels that connect to Arkavathi are being used to dump garbage.

A spot report by Bangalore Mirror near the tank bund area from where excess water flows towards an Arkavathi channel, shows that it has been converted into a garbage transfer station. The garbage from nearby areas is dumped here and then processed. Santosh M, who works in an MNC said this place could have been an beautiful picnic spot due to the greenery and the water. However, one needs to pinch one’s nose due to the stench while walking by this area. “It is really a pity to see the sad state of affairs,” said Santosh.

Manjunath SK, a techie by profession and a wildlife photographer by passion said that he used to spend hours capturing many migratory birds here with his camera. But, today, he is unable to spend even a few minutes due to garbage strewn around the area and the stench.

       .
Tarabanahalli viaduct, is another dump yard. The Tarabanahalli viaduct is considered a historic structure by water experts as this viaduct was a lifeline decades ago when water from the Hesaraghatta river was supplied to Bengaluru city but since then it has been lying in a state of neglect. The neighbouring areas find it convenient to dump garbage here without realising that the very same water reaches Arkavathi and thereafter to river Cauvery, from where it is once again pumped back (after purification) to Bengaluru for drinking.

Untitled Carousel Video: There is a wet garbage crisis looming in BengaluruThe waste processing plants at Seegehalli, Subbarayanapalya and Lingadheeranahalli have closed for the last six months.

Manjunath S, who has been actively involved in the rejuvenation of Arkavathy for a while said that there had been grand plans to rejuvenate the dried-up river neither the government nor the people were keen to protect our water resources. Environmentalist Doddy Shivaram who had been at the forefront of Arkavathy rejuvenation said, “This is a clear violation of the state government’s directive which mandates zero pollution near river beds.”
Mahesh Bhat, a wildlife photographer and a green activist said, “In and around Hesaraghatta, panchayats and people are dumping garbage around Arkavathi. All I can say is that by dumping today, we are killing our own children.”