Actor Shiva Rajkumar on Tuesday warned those supporting dubbing of film and TV content into Kannada, saying he would not mind giving up his life to uphold his father’s values. 
 
 Speaking on the sidelines of the 84th birthday celebrations of Dr Rajkumar, Shivanna said, “If anyone goes against our values, we will not keep quiet. We are not against any language. Even I watched the Tamil film, ‘3’ recently, called up Dhanush and congratulated him. We will watch your films, but it will be just that. If there is an attempt to enter in another way, I swear on my father, I will not keep quiet, nor will my brothers or my family members.”
   Hitting out at attempts to dub content from other languages into Kannada, he said, “If it is required, I am ready to give up my life for the ideals my father believed in.”
   While the latest dubbing row is over Aamir Khan’s ‘Satyamev Jayate’, there is speculation that 200 non-Kannada films have been  kept ready by various producers to be dubbed into Kannada.
   Rajkumar had not only opposed dubbing of films but also tele-serials. It was because of his disapproval that serials like Ramanand Sagar’s Ramayan and Sanjay Khan’s The Sword of Tipu Sultan were stopped from being dubbed.
   The agreement between Kannada film industry and the other industries about dubbing came about in the 1960s. Most Kannada films released in those years were dubbed from other languages. 
   The Kannda film industry had all but died and actors and technicians had no work. Since not a single film was produced in one of those years, actors and technicians like Rajkumar, G V Iyer, Balakrishna and others formed a cooperative to produce the film Ranadheera Kanteerava. But dubbed films had captured the market. At this time, writers like Aa Na Krishnamurthy, Nadiger Krishna Rao and others started a people’s movement against the dubbing culture.
   In the last couple of years, some producers, citing high remuneration of the Kannada film stars and losses in production, have been talking about dubbing films from other languages. There have been attempts on the small screen to bring dubbed serials, but they have failed due to opposition.
   However, some categories of television programmes like cartoons, wildlife, science and others are not restricted from dubbing.
   An online group has been actively soliciting support for dubbing in the last few days in what it terms “an effort to bring efficiency in the Kannada film industry through competition and providing better entertainment to Kannada consumers”. Shivanna’s remarks comes in the backdrop of such efforts.
   Meanwhile, the birthday celebrations of Rajkumar were marred by an unsavoury incident that saw ministers R Ashok and V Somanna and Rajkumar fans association president Sa Ra Govindu stepping on the samadhi of the late actor.
   Writer and filmmaker Baraguru Ramachandrappa gave them a tongue-lashing at the function organised outside the memorial.