(L to R) Nabajit, Gauri and Ashok                  
If the name of a restaurant described its ambience and the set-up in general, then Panache would score heavily. When it comes to the food, however, there are areas where the food takes a (slight) backward step when compared to the look and feel of the restaurant. While the surroundings do have a style quotient to it, the food seems to have a little catching up to do. Genesis: The restaurant is the brainchild of Aneesh Nair, a former employee at the Taj, whose love for North Indian cuisine 
and a passion to start something on his own resulted in Panache. The entire building was designed by him and was constructed specifically for the restaurant.

Signature dish: Kurkure khumb, murgh shalgam ka mel, among others. Cost: Rs 1000 can get you a starter, breads + side dish, biryani, and dessert. Venue: Dine with…Panache, #84, S.T Bed, Koramangala 4th Block, Bangalore. Phone: 42124141.


Foodies'feedback


Flamboyant folks: Nabajit Das, and IT professional and his wife Gauri, a market research analyst, who recently undertook a 5000-km road trip across central, western and southern India, and Ashok Varma, another market research analyst with a flair for anything that comes out of the kitchen and plans to visit every major wildlife sanctuary in the world during his lifetime. 
Décor: Probably the one thing very notable here is the effort taken to do up the place. It looks bright, right from the table cloth to the staff's uniform. The way they have focused even on minute details needs a special mention. They also have an alfresco option on the rooftop, usually a preferred one.  
Food: Panache serves you typical North Indian food, ranging from Punjabi to Mughlai as well. While most of the dishes are reminiscent of what you’d find at other places serving North Indian food, there are a few dishes that delightfully stand out. 
Food with verve: Surprisingly, it was one of the vegetarian starters, the kurkure khumb – mushrooms halved, stuffed with bell peppers, bread-crumb coated and fried, served like a boat, that stole the show, in taste and presentation. Among the meatier options, the bhatti ki machchi was quite tasty, while the doodhiya murgh (a fancy name for malai kabab) was quite average.  Among the main course, the murgh shabnam ka mel, a dish with turnip, was quite terrific. The litchi kulfi, made in-house, was an instant hit at the table. 
Food that swerved: The taimoori ras, a mutton shorba with hot Indian spices, failed to bring out the flavours of the mutton, while the zafrani phirni was way too thick and hard for a phirni. The lagan ki boti, mutton cubes cooked over a slow fire with garam masala and yogurt tasted good, but could’ve been more tender.   
Service: Service was very good and efficient, with attention to detail being given and good suggestions made. 
 

Verdict: We went expecting to be completely wowed by the food, but were only satisfied. On its own, the food isn’t bad, but falls short of expectations for a restaurant that claims to redefine your dining experience. They do make up for it with some good service and certain dishes do leave a positive impression on you. But overall, average stuff. 
The writer is a product developer and an avid food blogger.


Bangalore Mirror  reviews anonymously and pays for its meals