Investigations by the CID Forest Cell, police and BBMP forest wing into the city’s wildlife trade show that trafficking of animals and their body parts are triggered by blind beliefs and superstitions. Bangalore Mirror takes a look at some of the animals that are being caught and traded in the city. monitor lizard
Locally called Uda, these lizards are said to have aphrodisiac qualities.These animals are often in the form of ghee, oil and other forms like pakoda, pickle and grilled barbeque. Parts of the body are used to treat sexual diseases by native doctors.  Elephant’s tail
Also called Aane Bangara (elephant gold), the hairs at the end of an elephant’s tail is a sign of prosperity and is used in gold ornaments. Many people wear rings laced with the hair of an elephant’s tail in the hope of good luck. A piece of hair is priced between Rs 10,000 and Rs 25,000. Jackal’s face
Getting to see a jackal, dead or alive,  early in the morning, is believed to bring good luck. The fact that it can be passed off as a street dog makes it easy for smugglers. Raids by forest cell sleuths a few months ago in Koramangala revealed that a jackal was kept inside the bedroom, making it convenient to see first thing in the morning. Those who cannot afford to keep the animal hang its tail from the centre of the bedroom. Each jackal is sold for Rs 1 to Rs 2 lakh while the tail is sold for Rs 25,000 to Rs 50,000. Sand boa
Nicknamed Double Engine or Double Barrel by smugglers, the two-headed snake shot to fame only in recent times. The very possession of a sand boa is believed to bring in wealth and prosperity. Villagers call the snake Bhagya Lakshmi. In Bangalore’s wildlife market, they are priced between Rs 50,000 and Rs 1 lakh. slender loris
This one’s the darling of black magicians. The very sight of a loris is considered a bad omen. Called Kaadu Paapa in Kannada, it is widely used for black magic rituals. The eyes of loris are said to be crucial for those trying to master the art of hypnotism.

Star tortoises

Code-named Twenty Channel by smugglers, star tortoises have been in great demand not only in India but in global markets too, particularly in Europe and America. The tortoises, regarded as the vehicle of Lord Vishnu in Hindu mythology, are believed to bring in wealth and prosperity and are stored in tanks at homes.

Barn owl

While some regard barn owls as auspicious, some others vehemently disagree. Owls are code-named two-wheelers for their nocturnal activities and are in great demand for black magic. A recent raid in Koramangala resulted in the recovery of a few owls that were used for black magic rituals. Each owl is priced at more than Rs 25,000.