This is her second time in the city in the last 15 years. She eats once a week, with a decided preference for cockroaches and mice. And people who’ve heard of her are lining up for a glimpse. Any guesses who the visitor is? It’s the Ornamental Tarantula, a five-inch, venomous spider that was rescued by wildlife volunteers, in the city last Saturday.   “Ornamental Tarantulas, found in the Western Ghats and dense forests, are rarely seen in cities like Bangalore,” wildlife volunteer Spoorti Achar told Bangalore Mirror. “We rescued a spider belonging to the same species eight years ago. This is the second time that we are finding it in the city.”   Wildlife experts think the spider could have reached Bangalore through vegetables or wood transported from dense forests.   The year-old spider, known as the Indian ornamental tree spider (poecilotheria regalis), was rescued from a workshop in Peenya. At first, people were shocked, but on realising that it was rare, they called BBMP.   The spider is known to survive for more than 32 years in captivity and less than that in the wild. They have a delicate abdomen, which can easily break even if they fall from a height of 3-4 feet, leading to death, Achar said.   There are other interesting facts about the spider that are making people flock to it. Unlike most spiders which weave symmetrical webs to capture prey, the ornamental tarantula doesn’t weave a web at all. It lives in holes, boroughs and woods and kills prey with its venom. The poison, though not fatal to human beings, can cause severe irritation and pain, Achar said. “It is being fed with cockroaches as of now. After eating a cockroach, it doesn’t eat anything for at least a week. If it eats mice, then it doesn’t need food for 10 to 15 days. It should be fed only after it digests the food completely,” Achar added.   Apart from not feeding every day, there are other qualities the spiders share with snakes. Moulting, for instance. A fully-grown spider moults its entire skin twice a year while younger ones moult whenever they grow in size. So, even if it loses a part of its body – a leg, for example – it is regenerated during moulting.   “These spiders are very rare in urban areas. It’s new even to our boys. Due care is being taken to ensure it is not disturbed. Thankfully, it was not killed. We will soon release it into its habitat after ensuring it’s healthy,” said Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden.