By Aditya Magal

The perils of living in a big city never cease to amaze. We have our more than fair share of regular issues like powercuts, potholes and water scarcity. There is also the depleting green cover and the issue of burning lakes. Our traffic snarls are of course legendary. So legendary in fact that we as proud Bengulareans boast about our traffic. We tell outsiders with great detail how congested our traffic is. Apart from being a giant headache, it has become a tourist attraction.

For the past few days, the civic authorities have been on the road in Bengaluru. The traffic police’s tigers have been towing away abandoned vehicles parked without care all across the city. Now if you’re reading Bangalore Mirror, you must be aware that these vehicles aren’t just normal everyday run of the mill automobiles parked in the wrong spot. These are vehicles that have broken down and left to be scrapped. ‘Operation Khataara’, as it is called, is a city-wide Khataara removal endeavour. 

‘Khataara’ is the name given to scrap. For ages, two and 4-wheelers that are meant to go into the scrapyard have wound up on our roads. They’ve been left there with careless abandon. When we just throw away something on the road, we call it littering. Take someone chucking a newspaper sheet, an empty bottle or a biscuit packet out of a moving car. That’s when we tell people to maintain clean roads and use dustbins. What happens when instead of chucking litter from the car, some people chuck away the car itself?!

This is why we need an operation Khataara. Automobiles are basically left to rot on our roads. Maybe the people who leave Khataara vehicles are planning to compete with the Statue of Unity. A couple of weeks ago, I wrote about the Statue of Unity and a whole host of statue projects that have been lined up across India including the ‘Cauvery Mata’ statue at KRS Dam. People parking Khatara are those who are aiming to provide enough metal to the state so that in time we can build statues bigger than the Statue of Unity. 

Khataara aficionados are also those who realise that leaving stagnant vehicles for months and years on end eventually leads to a build-up of a variety of wildlife. The recent Operation Khataras in Hebbal and Indiranagar showed that a lot of these vehicles were infested with rodents and snakes. People leaving Khatara on roads are probably only trying their best to provide safe homes for rats and snakes. In time the plan is for Khatara to attract more wildlife and eventually make Bengaluru the wildlife hub of India. 

After all, real estate prices in the city are through the roof. We have to often compete with nature. The government is trying its best to introduce schemes like flyovers and elevated corridors that will wipe out trees. These good souls are trying to compensate by providing safe and comfortable homes to animals of all sizes. 

All jokes aside, these people must realise the value of their vehicles. The responsibility of their cars and bikes doesn’t end with just buying and riding them but also in disposing them off properly. Do inform your local traffic station about Khataara vehicles and keep our roads clean.

Follow Aditya Magal on twitter @jhunjhunwala