Following the poaching incidents in February, April and July this year when two leopards and a wild boar were killed by poachers inside the Bandipur reserve, the forest department had launched a strict vigilance drive across the reserve. But, despite their intense efforts, poachers have managed to lay traps at strategic locations in the the park.

Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, field director, Project Tiger, B J Hosmath, who led the combing operation said: “Based on a tip-off, our staff launched a combing operation in the ranges of N Begur and Gundre within the reserve and detected as many as 45 snares. After the poaching incidents,  especially the one involving the tragic death of a young tiger on April 30 in Gopalaswamybetta region, we had further intensified our operations.”

Senior forest department officials said they were conducting vehicular patrol daily. However, following the spurt in poaching activities using snares, officials were asked patrol the reserve on foot to curb such practices.

“Most of these snares were made of steel cables, but a few were made of telephone cables and natural tree fibres. We suspect this to be the handiwork of poachers from neighbouring villages at the behest of professional poachers. Though snares are used to catch deer and boar for meat, on several instances tigers and leopards were caught and killed on the spot,” an official said. 

The department suspects that the notorious poacher Paapa and his associates Nagarajaswamy, Govinda, Shivaraju and Kumaraswamy could have played a major role in setting these snares. The same gang had poached a tiger in February 2010. 

Commenting on the trend, Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife conservationist and member of the state wildlife board said, “Snares have become a serious problem. Unlike major poaching equipments, these are difficult to detect. This incident highlights the importance of patrolling on foot.” 

Hit by Staff crunch
The acute shortage of ground level staff in the department has marred plans to safeguard the population of big cats. According to officials in the forest department, Bandipur and the adjacent Nagarhole and Mudumali regions have the largest population of tigers – estimated to be about 300 – in the country.

“We have not given up despite the acute shortage of ground level staff,” an official said. “More staff would help us further augment the combing operation,’’ another senior official said. 

Karnataka is the only state in the country which has a Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF).