The state’s thriving tiger sanctuaries are a great attraction for wildlife enthusiasts. But while the department struggles to enforce its laws to keep trespassers from protected sanctuary areas, it is a shame when its own officials can’t practise what they preach.
 
 	A guard at the DB Kuppe Range of Nagarhole National Park was allegedly transferred after he stopped a vehicle ferrying ‘important officials’ who had apparently lingered on in the protected forests way past deadline on Monday.
 	
 	  	Sources in Nagarhole revealed that the guards at Udbur Gate in DB Kuppe Range reportedly stopped a jeep belonging to Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) that was returning from Tiger Tank (a watering hole for big cats in the range) late in the evening. The jeep was ferrying two additional principal chief conservator of forests (APCCFs) and a State Wildlife Board member, Dr Shivaprakash.
 	
 	  	When the guards refused to allow the jeep to pass through, citing late hours, they had a verbal duel with the driver. The jeep was allowed to pass after the jurisdictio
 	nal range forest officer and the ACF intervened.
 	
 	  	Interestingly, the next day, guard Shivalinge Gowda was relieved from gate duty and orally instructed to report to anti-poaching camp along the frontline in the same range.
 	
 	  	A guard requesting anonymity said: “The jeep was stopped between 8 and 8.30 pm at Udbur gate when it was supposed to have come out by 6 pm. The driver Mahadev (aka Chotu) had a verbal duel for stopping the jeep. As per the rules, we stopped them, and only after verification and intervention by senior officers did we allow them to go.”
 	
 	  	However, HC Kantharaju, field director at the tiger reserve, told BM that the alleged incident happened on Sunday, not Monday night (as claimed by the guard). “The incident had happened on Sunday evening when all of them were returning from an official programme at Tiger Tank.
 	
 	
 	 		In fact, PCCF (wildlife) was also present and the incident was brought to his notice as well. Stopping officials and guests who were on duty was not received well and orally the guard [Shivalinge Gowda] was asked to report to the Anti-Poaching Camp.”
 		
 		 	 		Dr Shivaprakash, a member of the State Wildlife Board, said: “It is a misnomer that my name has been brought into the controversy. I was there in my official capacity to attend a function at Tiger Tank. In fact, soon after the event, there was a heavy downpour because of which we were delayed, but came out well within the stipulated hours.”
 		
 		 	 		“Being a member of the wildlife board, I am aware of the rules and would not compromise on them anytime. In fact, I had checked out on Monday morning along with other guests from Kabini JLR and I was in Mysore by afternoon as I had official functions to attend. This being the case, how is it possible for me to be there in the forest on Monday night?” claimed Dr Shivaprakash.
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 	 		In fact, guards had revealed that previously too ‘guests’ in the name of government servants and members of the board had stayed overnight at the tower and guest houses 	 		and, reportedly, partied for several hours.
 		
 		 	 		Interestingly, in 2012, the forest department had initiated action against an ADGP (additional director general of police) rank officer for allegedly entering into the core area. He was stopped at Dammana Katte check post. Experts revealed that as per the Wildlife Protection Act, Section 27 (A), entry into sanctuaries by those other than public servants on duty was prohibited.