Rahul and Aarti Chawda on their honeymoon in Koh Phangan, Thailand          Planning a honeymoon is a serious business. Ask Rahul Chawda and Aarti Chawda (nee Karwayun) who were married in April of this year. “We wanted to go to Thailand. We are self-confessed beach bums, the clichéd sun, sand and sea was what we wanted. But we didn’t want the regular sun, sand and sea. We didn’t want Pattaya!” says Rahul. That’s when he sought the help of  ‘experiential honeymoon travel planners’. These guys are super(wo)man in formals; they can bring you the moon if that’s what you want for your honeymoon! 
 
 No, not exactly, we’re kidding… but, yes, they can give you the honeymoon that you’d dreamt about from the time you learnt about birds and bees in a ‘different’ context. 
 
 Says Bhawna Rao, an experiential travel planner, “Experiential travel is all about living a destination rather than just visiting it. Everybody has the money to spend on a trip, but the idea is to make it more meaningful.” 
 
 So, when vegetarians Akshay Ananth and Smita Murarka went on their honeymoon to Phuket and Bangkok, their EHM planner gave them a personalised travelogue that included a choice of vegetarian restaurants and the Thai translations for important vegetarian dishes. After all, one has to eat even if they are on their honeymoon and when one does not get their choice of food, no amount of honey can help the trip from turning into a nightmare. They say, “Planning a honeymoon, the reservations and the itineraries can be quite difficult when you are also planning a wedding. Having a professional understand our taste and plan a holiday for us took the burden off and ensured us a great time.” The couple stayed at Kathathani and Aquamarine Resorts in Phuket and Baiyoke Sky hotel in Bangkok for a week. Their planner also included, in their personalised plan, places to shop that were not run-of-the-mill. They also enjoyed a visit to a weekend flea market, Chatuchak and a cruise dinner by the Chao Phraya River.
  
 
 Trip becomes an experience 
 Every time friends come back from a trip, they regale you with stories of what they did and where they went. Often you keep all this information for the time you decide to visit the destination yourself. The only hitch is that you will be experiencing the place exactly the way your friends have — nothing more. 
 
 Travel, says Bhawna, is an extremely commercialised line right now. “Especially when it comes to honeymoon couples, there are so many ‘deals’ that are targeted at them. For around Rs 25,000, you can get a package deal for a honeymoon that is run-of-the-mill, with overbooked hotels, staid meals and jam packed itineraries. It is no different from the honeymoon that so many other couples will be going on. If you want a honeymoon to be absolutely memorable, then it has to be customised exclusively for you.” 
 
 Rahul Chawda and Aarti Chawda wanted exclusivity on their honeymoon. And their planner gave them an exotic honeymoon at an island one hour by boat from the popular tourist island, Koh Samui called Koh Phangan. The best thing they got out of the honeymoon, they both agree, is the brag value — “We didn’t go to Pattaya like everyone else, we went to a remote island!” 
 
 For Rohit Bahadur and Anju Aradhya who married in May this year, the idea was to go to Spain especially the islands — Ibiza, Mallorca and Barcelona, because they felt that it was not common and relatively untapped. The couple agrees that the exquisite property they stayed at was something they would not have found on their own. Rohit says, “Having a professional deal with last minute changes in decisions allowed us to quickly redraft our itinerary, multiple times.”
    
 
 Planner becomes a butler 
 What is it that an EHM planner gives that an ordinary planner can’t? First of all, they get it that a honeymoon, for you, is a special experience. Bhawna explains, “We understand that in a couple, interest levels vary. While the man might want to laze on the beach or go pubbing, the lady would like to go to spas and shop. As experiential travel planners, we insist on speaking to both people while planning the trip. We ask about their preferences and more importantly what they don’t want in a honeymoon. The idea is not to go with the flow, but to create something totally unique. Once we know what the couples like and don’t like, we can accommodate requests for surprises to be included, where one spouse wants to do something special for the other. We also keep the client’s budget in mind and make all the arrangements. 
 
 An advantage with EHM planners is their local contacts, says Rohith. “Making use of local contacts of the professional planner particularly helped Anju and I enjoy our honeymoon  to the maximum, since all our concerns were addressed locally.” 
 
 An experiential travel planner is also available round the clock, so if you feel stuck for something to do, you could also call in your planner and ask for some quick advice.
 
 Currently, a honeymoon planned by an EHM planner can cost you between Rs 1.2 lakhs (South East Asian countries) to Rs 7 lakhs (European countries). However, the planners feel that it is not all that costly. Bhawna says that all you need to customise the honeymoon is maybe 5 to ten per cent more than the average budget and “it will be worth the experience.” 
 
 
 Destinations
 Tuscany – for those who love peace, seclusion and culture
 Tokyo – for adrenaline seekers
 Borneo rainforest – for adventurous wildlife fans
 Scotland – for outdoors and history lovers. And whale watchers too.
 Road trip through South America –for adventurous film fans
 Cruise the Rhine –for traditional sightseeing
 Source: Global Grasshopper