Dance - Contemporary

As part of Attakkalari India Biennial 2009 festival. there will be two performances on February 10 at Ranga Shankara.

Natya Stem Dance Kampni

The Kampni will present an amalgam of excerpts from its Mandala, which is based on the premise that formlessness gains articulation when translated into design. Divine forces are propitiated in the form of symbols in all cultures of the world; triangles and circles represent the various transformations of reality that culminate in the universe of mind and matter. Apart from ensemble pieces like Ushas and Taraana, Madhu Nataraj and Janardhan will present two solo works – 

Bindu — The Womb Of Brilliance and Naadaantaa respectively. Group: Mixed Bill Attakkalari Centre for Movement Arts

Inspired by the Tamil epic Chilappathikaram, Attakkalari’s multi-media dance production is an episodical journey, traversing layers of temporal and physical locations that often defy conventional notions of space and chronology. Establishing a link, between the landscape and the emotional as well as spiritual mindset of the protagonist, images from ordinary human existence encounter the intervention of inexplicable forces.

Group: Chronotopia

Film - Documentaries on Wildlife

As many as nine environmental filmmakers from UK are in Bangalore as part of the Wildscreen Film festival which kicked off here on Sunday. Using the power of the visual medium and wildlife imagery and photography, wildscreen illustrates the beauty of the natural world not only to promote and encourage conservation but also to enthuse a whole new generation of conservationists worldwide.

The Mountains of the Monsoon by Sandesh Kadur is based on Western Ghats. Although less than 10 per cent of the Western Ghats remain untouched, remain untouched, these mountains continue to be one of the most biologically diverse places left on the planet. Their unique beauty and mystery are embodied for Sandesh in a chance sighting a strange, all grey feline 10 years ago. Upon research, Sandesh learns that localites call it as pogeyan. Is this enigmatic cat a new species? SCHEDULE:

Feb 10: Earth: The power of Planet (59 min)
Feb 11: The Mountains of the Monsoon (50 min)
Feb 12: Life in the Cold blood: Armoured giants (60 min)
Feb 13: Earth Pilgrim (49 min) 

All these documentaries will be screened at British Library and the show starts at 6.30 pm. For further details contact, British Library at 22213485/22489220.

Books - Mughal Art

There will be an interactive workshop on appreciating Mughal Art by Suhag Shirodkar the author of Captured in Miniature: Mughal lives through Mughal art. At the end there will be a quiz and painting competition based on the book. Captured in Miniature unveils the secrets of miniature paintings, allowing children (and adults) to experience the joy of their creation and interpretation. 

At the height of Mughal power, the imperial studios hummed with the activity of hundreds of papermakers, calligraphers, painters and bookbinders, all producing books for the royal libraries. Many manuscripts were illustrated with exquisite miniature paintings, in which the Mughals took a special delight. Today these books and paintings, treasured by museums around the world, offer us unique perspectives into Mughal lives.

Music - Ustad Amjad Ali Khan in Action

Seagram’s 100 Pipers will present Samagaam, a live concert featuring Ustad Amjad Ali Khan and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra conducted by David Murphy. The tickets are available in the denominations of Rs 300, Rs 500 and Rs 1,000. Other than the auditorium, the tickets will be available at Icon mall, 12th Main Road, 5th Cross Road, Near Sagar Clinic, Indiranagar; Commerce @ Mantri, At Shoppers’ Stop, Ground Floor, N. S. Palya, Bannerghatta Road and 2nd Floor, Garuda Mall, Commissariat Road, Magrath Road Jn.

Venue: Chowdaiah Memorial Hall, Gayathri Devi Park Extension, Vyalikaval Date: 16 February ‘09; Time: 7:30 pm onwards.

Art - Photography Exhibition

Mahua is having is its first photography exhibition. Six artists have come together from Delhi, Kolkata, Bangalore and Kerala, exploring life, through their unique sensitivities from behind their lenses. Life, whether it is in the joy of the absurd, the beauty of the unseen or its still presence in the  grounding realities of mundane life are featured in these photographs. Featured artists are Ajay Rajgarhia, Ashok Koshy, Karan Khanna, Leena Kejriwal, Sandeep Biswas and Vivek Mathew.

Venue: Mahua - The Art Gallery, 344/8, 1st floor, IV Main Road, Sadashivnagar

Contact: 23616971

Food - Valentine’s Day Dinner

A luxurious evening awaits you with fine foods on Valentine’s Day. Enjoy an exclusive candle light dinner at the Raj Pavilion, the 24 hour coffee shop at ITC Windsor on the day. 

For reservations, call: 22269898.

Exotic Kebabs 

Lido at Ista presents Kebabs and a Pint. Relish an exotic kebab menu specially created by Executive Chef Subroto Goswami with a refreshing pint of beer. Every evening till February 15. 

Venue: Ista, 1/1, Swami Vivekananda Road.  For reservation, call 25558888.

Time: 7 -11 pm.