Under DC’s guidance, four students undergo a month-long study of govt departments
 
 A request made by a student of Symbiosis Law School, Pune, has turned out to be a unique learning experience not just for students aspiring for administrative services, but also for the decision-makers in the system.
 
 Law student Shivani L Shenoy, who comes from Udupi, spoke to Mirror about it: “My course demands that I complete 20 weeks of internship. I was wondering, what’s the point if we don’t understand the core administrative work in our district. When I approached the deputy commissioner, he suggested that it would be ideal to learn in a group. I contacted my friends and managed to convince two of them. The DC has drawn a 30-day timetable and we are visiting departments, accordingly.”
 
 After clearing interviews, Shivani was joined by three other students — Careena Monis from Manipal University, Nireeksha N Bhat from NMAM Institute of Technology, and Vishal S Shenoy from Dr TMA Pai Polytechnic — for the month-long internship that started on June 1.
 
 “We meet him [DC] almost every day and give him our feedback. It has been a wonderful learning experience so far. Take for instance, when we told him how a lot of people were frustrated about the reservation system, he saw to it that we attended a meeting of the SC/STs, visited a gram panchayat and the department of integrated tribal development project (ITDP). We saw the ground reality there,” she said.
 
 Nireeksha got to know about the internship programme through the media and applied for it. “My dream is to clear the UPSC exam and this programme is helping me a lot. It was my science teacher, Jyothi Prabha, who encouraged me to take up competitive exams. At the interview, I was asked why I was interested in taking up the internship, my perspective on administration and so on. Though many students applied for the programme, when they came to know that the DC would be conducting the interview, some of them backed out,” she said.
 
 Vishal aspires to join the army. “This programme is helping me understand the many problems. We have noticed that every department is facing a staff shortage,” he said.
 
 Careena believes they have a unique opportunity to learn. “It is not every day that a student gets to go around departments, understand how they work and then give their feedback,” she said.
 
 The programme allows students to visit almost all government offices and departments, including the women and child development department, ports and fisheries, tourism, Nirmithi Kendra, wildlife, mines and geology, labour, tahsildar’s office, district treasury, among many others.
 
 The deputy commissioner, R Vishal, said the programme was a first of its kind in the state and would help students understand the inner workings of state departments. “This experience will also add value to their CVs,” he said.
 
 “Only when someone goes through the system can they understand it well. The programme comprises a morning session of field visits. The students have to present their daily observations once in three days or once a week. They bounce off ideas and observations against my explanations. To my surprise, I’ve found that a probationer can bring in a completely different perspective of things. This not only helps me work better, but also helps us focus better on results,” he said.