About 400 farmers have adopted the low cost crop and elephant protection measures
 
 A five-year-old project to conserve the elephant population in Haliyal and Yellapur divisions of Uttar Kannada district with community participation has set an example for others in finding ways to manage and avoid man-animal conflict.
 The project, ‘Conservation of Elephants in North Kanara Landscape’ initiated by Pune-based Wildlife Research and Conservation Society (WRCS), trained and motivated local resident farmers to participate in the community-based conflict management programme.
 	  	From 2009 to 2014, about 400 farmers adopted the low-cost crop protection measures and were successful in protecting their crops from elephants. In the wake of elephants constantly being spotted in Sullia and Puttur and bordering areas of Karnataka-Kerala, WRCS hopes to popularise these measures undertaken in the programme with the help of the local community and forest officials.
 	  	Prachi Mehta, wildlife scientist and executive director (Research) WRCS, told Bangalore Mirror that a lot of research was carried out on how man-elephant conflict could be mitigated, but there was little relief for the farmers and the elephants when it came to protecting crops and giving a safe passage to the elephants.
 	  	“Our research team worked on a daily basis with the local field staff and helped them in elephant-chasing operations during the crop raiding season, which is generally from August to February. We have been sharing the results of our field research with senior forest officers in order to keep them informed of the progress of our work,” she said.
 The project was initiated in 2009 with the support of the Asian Elephant Conservation Fund, and included Prachi and Jayant Kulkarni as principal scientists, and Sangram Parida as the research biologist.
 	  	Prachi said, “In 2013, we interviewed 75 farmers from the study area to assess the impact of the crop protection measures. Out of them, 40 per cent reported no crop damage due to the use of crop protection methods; 40 per cent reported reduced crop loss after using the measures, while 20 per cent comprised those who incurred crop damage as they did not use any crop protection measures. Through our project, we have been able to identify 36 individual elephants from the study area for the year October 2013-February 2014,” she said, adding that this was the very first confirmed record of elephants in the area.
 	
 	
 	 		How to keep elephants away
 		
 		 	 		Chilli pasted ropes: Elephants are extremely sensitive to chilli as it irritates their eyes and nostrils. A spicy chilli mixture acts as a good barrier against the pachyderms. The local variety of Guntur chilli or the spicy green chilli is considered the best. A spicy variety of chilli pods is powdered and a thick paste is made with grease and engine oil. This is applied to a coir rope. The rope can be hung around the boundaries. Chilli curtains can also be made using the same method; and old clothes dipped in chilli mixture can also be hung on coir rope.
 		 	 		Chilli smoke: An old used tin can is hung on the boundaries. These tins should contain coal, tobacco, dried hay, human hair and chilli pods with burning paper to cause chilli smoke spread through the air. Such burning tins on the boundaries can keep elephants away.
 		 	 		Burning chilli dung: This is also popular among farmers. Fresh cow dung is mixed with broken chilli pods, tobacco, and human hair and to make a dung cake. The dung cakes are placed on the farm boundary on a wooden pole. When the dung cakes are lit, the chilli smoke persists for 2-3 hours.
 		 	 		Lemon power: Farmers were also encouraged to grow lemon trees on their boundaries as elephants are repelled by the smell of lemon.
 		 	 		Trip alarm: These have been very successful. To set up a trip alarm, a farmer needs to purchase a thin nylon rope and a door bell. The nylon rope is placed on the border of the farm. One end of the rope is attached to the toggle switch of a door bell that is installed on the tree-watchtower. At night when elephants try to enter the farm, the rope gets pulled and sets of an alarm for the farmers to take evasive action, probably by using chilli smoke.
 		  
 
 Grieving elephant calf attacks man
 
 	 A grieving male elephant calf standing guard near its dead mother, went berserk and injured a man when people attempted to drive the carcass away from the spot in a forest area in this hilly district today.
 	  	The calf, estimated to be one-and-half year old, refused to move away from the spot, where the carcass of her mother lay, and turned violent when some people started pulling it away.
 	  	In the melee, a 45-year old man sustained injuries, when the tusk of the calf pierced his back, forest officials said.
 	  	Local villagers gathered at the spot after hearing that the body of a female elephant was found near a river, after it apparently fell from a height of 30 feet at Athur near Gudalur, about 70 km from here.
 	  	The injured person has been admitted to the government hospital here after initial treatment at Gudalur.
 	  	Officials said forest personnel were taking steps to persuade the calf to unite with a herd which was roaming in the area.
 	  	If the calf failed to unite with the herd, it would be taken to Mudumalai Wild Life Sanctuary, they said.
 	  	Elephant calves usually find it very difficult to overcome the loss of their mothers and refuse to move away from the carcass, they said.