It took six hours to wound, maim and finally kill the tigress. She was already trapped in a net. The handful of forest officers present could not control the 5,000-strong mob. The tigress, they said, had killed their cattle, and even a villager. And so they stoned and clubbed her to death. And then rejoiced in their bloodlust with a victory parade. 
 
 Outrage flooded the newspapers and online media. The next day, an investigation by the National Tiger Conservation Authority was ordered. A fact-finding team has been despatched. What ‘facts’ need to be ‘found’? The killing was in broad daylight. There were several thousand people present. Forest and wildlife officials were on the spot. The villagers said why they had done it. Once these already-ascertained facts are ‘ascertained’, what then?
 
 Then our systems fail us. 
 
 The Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972 defines ‘hunting’ very broadly, and it includes this kind of killing. Spread over ten closely printed pages, the act’s schedules give a glimpse of the sweep of India’s biodiversity. But unlicensed hunting invites little effective punishment: at best, a three-year jail term and Rs 25,000 fine; and for some species like the tiger, 3-7 year jail term and fine not less than Rs 10,000. Imprisonment sentences are even more rare than the tiger.
 
 One would imagine a killing like this, in tiger habitat, would invite severe penalties. It does not. The incident occurred in the Bhakrutola area near Rajnandgaon on the Maharashtra-Chhattisgarh border. The tigress may have been the one recently released in the Navegaon National Park in Maharashtra’s Gondia district, part of the Churia forest range. The Wildlife Act limits a higher punishment (jail terms of 3-7 years, but a Rs 50,000 fine) if the offence is in relation to the core area of tiger reserve. This was outside the core area; no such punishment can follow. 
 
 In any case, with an entire community guilty of slaughter, these statutory provisions are meaningless. Nobody will be successfully prosecuted; no fines will be imposed. We will hear the usual excuse: ""enforcement is the problem"".
 And our tiger population is down by one.
 
 A very late arriviste in the natural order of things, man is the only creature that needs to constantly expand his physical area of domination to survive. Conflicts with other living beings are inevitable. That does not mean that animals must always be sacrificed to human need, because human need — unlike that of animals — is insatiable. In this case, it is still unclear whether the tigress was ‘introduced’ into the wild from a long period of captivity. The overwhelming evidence is that these experiments do not work. As neighbouring villages and communities grow, demanding more land for pasture and field, tiger habitats shrink; and with that goes the tiger’s natural prey. 
 
 The problem is therefore often of our own making, and our legal system has no means of addressing it. How do you, by statute, inculcate responsibility, especially to the future? Providing for paltry punishments is insufficient deterrent, and it is also insufficient to only provide deterrence. If wildlife habitats are to be secured, then they have to be secured from us. That raises complex questions of relocation, always an expensive and traumatic business. In itself, relocation is no guarantee against conflict, and that is where our wildlife laws need a major overhaul: it must be accompanied with more authority and power to field officers, many of whom are dedicated and committed and work against great odds, more training, equipment and personnel. It is unrealistic to expect that four officers will ever be able to control a crowd of 5,000.
 
 In India, part of the explanation for our violent reactions to animals may also be cultural. Historical edicts and teachings  proscribe killing; but there are also ancient texts that tell of the most wanton ecological destruction (the burning of the Khandava forest to found Indraprastha, for instance: ""no living thing escaped""). Our instinctive reaction to animals in the wild is, consequently, one of fear; and nothing engenders violence so much as fear, especially fear fertilized by ignorance and weaned on stupidity. Those into beating, torturing, mutilating and killing animals need have no worries. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act prescribes the awful fine of Rs 10-50; Rs 100 for repeat offenders. That’s less than the price of a movie ticket.
 
 We should carry in our heads images of the animals we kill to remind us of what it means to be human. The eyes of these dead are often open. They do not judge us for what we have done to them. But, if we look close enough, there is perhaps that most unanswerable of questions: not why they died, but why they ever lived.