In two years, Karnataka sent 130 elephants to various states across the country. While 56 tuskers were sent in 2020-21 period, 74 elephants were leased in 2022-23 to various states such as Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, and Goa.

Out of these elephants, 81 were males and 49 were females.
 
Conservationists and researchers expressed concern over why increasingly more elephants were being sent out of the state. According to Ramesh Belagere, a wildlife researcher at the Foundation of Ecology and Education Development, in 2016-17, the Karnataka Forest Department sent only nine elephants and in 2017-18, 31 jumbos left the state. “The recommendation to send elephants to other states to be used by forest departments was given by us after we conducted a study on captive elephants in Bandipur Reserve in 2014. It was based on our observation of the carrying capacity of various elephant camps in the state. All the camps were bustling with captive elephants and the department was struggling to manage with limited resources. Having said that, the number has surely gone up and is a worrying trend,” said Belagere.

The increased number of jumbos being made captive and sent out is because of the rise in incidents of human-elephant conflicts, say experts. Moreover, as more elephants are being caught from high conflict zones, the elephant camps in the state have already hit maximum capacity.

According to the data from KFD, there are currently 103 elephants in 10 elephant camps across Karnataka. AM Gudi camp in Bandipur division currently holds 20 captive elephants, Sakrebyle in Shivamogga has 20 elephants, Mattigodu elephant camp in Nagarhole has 18 elephants, Beemanakatte elephant camp has five elephants, Doddaharave Kaveri elephant camp has a single elephant, Belle in Nagarhole has four jumbos, Phansoli in Dandeli division has four, K Gudi in BRT has one, and Dubare and Harangi in Madikeri division have 22 and eight elephants respectively.

“With all the elephant camps reaching maximum capacity in terms of resource availability, the only option left with KFD is to send captive elephants to other states. The only solution here is to reduce the elephant-human conflict,” said a city based conservationist.

Experts said such a high number of elephants being captured, with the majority being males, will impact the genetic health of wild elephants, adversely affecting elephant conservation.

 They stressed on the exponential spread of invasive plant species taking a toll on the natural habitats and feeding grounds of elephants is yet another factor aggravating human-elephant conflict incidents leading to more elephants landing in the camps.

  With all the elephant camps reaching maximum capacity… only option left with KFD is to send captive elephants to other states…— city based conservationist

“Elephants are being captured by KFD left, right, and centre. The negative impact of restricting so many elephants in captivity will surface over some time due to the loss of genetic diversity. Moreover, invasive plant species have blanketed most of the forest landscape leading to scarcity of lush fodder for elephants. While the department has started removing these plants, it is happening at a much smaller scale due to the lack of manpower and other resources,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.