CESC is considering future transition to low-watt LED lights in Mysuru; this shift in coming years is expected to halve power bills, say officials

After Bengaluru, it will be the turn of Mysuru to switch over to low-watt LED lights. During Dasara, Mysuru transformed into the City of Lights, a spectacle that came at a cost of Rs 1 lakh per day for the lighting in the heritage city. This amounted to Rs 21 lakh for 21 days, consuming 1.45 lakh units of power until November 5. In response, the Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Corporation (CESC) has devised a plan to use low-watt LED lights in the future to reduce the electricity bill by at least 50%.

While LED bulbs were used for lighting in Mysuru this year, the majority were nine-watt bulbs, with only a few streets employing three-watt LED bulbs. CESC officials noted a 50% reduction in power consumption where three-watt LED bulbs were used, prompting the decision to implement them extensively in the future. This year’s LED lighting in Mysuru cost Rs 6.15 crore to illuminate main roads, circles, and statues. The lights were operational from 7 pm to 11 pm for 21 days. A senior CESC official said, “We had an overwhelming response from tourists and residents. The shift to low-watt lights in the coming years is expected to halve the power bill. We also benefited from private company sponsorships, with several roads and circles receiving sponsorships totaling up to Rs 80 lakh. Overall, the power bill came to Rs 21 lakh for usage in 21 days.”

The lighting also drew huge crowds. In fact, even after Dasara, many from Bengaluru and other cities visited Mysuru just to see the lighting spectacle. Many travel to Chamundi Hills in the evening so that they can get an aerial view of Mysuru Dasara lighting. In fact, during Dasara, Mysuru experienced a surge in visitors, particularly on October 24, the day of Jumbo Savari. An estimated 1 lakh people arrived in Mysuru by train alone, with an additional influx through other modes of transportation. On average, 29 trains operate between Bengaluru and Mysuru daily, and extra trains were deployed during Dasara.

We had an overwhelming response from tourists and residents. We also benefited from private companies, with roads receiving sponsorships–CESC official

Meanwhile, the Chamundi Hills are seeing a huge surge in tourists. As this is also a reserve forest, the forest officials have been taking disciplinary action to curb the crowd. Concurrently, the forest police intensified security measures at the renowned hills in Mysuru. Over the past few weeks, they booked 152 cases for various violations, collecting a total penalty of Rs 1,07,500. Violations included littering in the forest area (one case with a Rs 500 fine), 62 cases of illegal parking (Rs 62,000 in penalties), 88 cases of trespassing (Rs 44,000 in penalties), and one case of harming wildlife with a Rs 1,000 penalty.

Mysuru RFO Dhanyashree said, “While some individuals strongly react when our personnel collect fines, others offer encouraging support for our conservation efforts. We appeal to everyone to cooperate in preserving the greenery and fostering a peaceful atmosphere at Chamundi Hills.” Moreover, a vehicle ban has been in place in Chamundi Hills between 10 pm and 6 am since October 7.