Nirmalanandanatha Swamiji is the latest to oppose the state’s mining plan
 
 
 
  The deciduous forests are home to some of the endangered flora and fauna
 
 
 A saffron movement is fast gaining momentum across the state against the Siddaramaiah-led Congress government to safeguard the unique flora and fauna of central Karnataka.
 
 Putting up a strong protest against the state government over its decision to denotify 17,872 hectares of reserve forest at Kappatagudda in Gadag district to facilitate mining activities, seers of various maths have got together. Perhaps this is for the second time that Karnataka is witnessing such a huge united fight by religious leaders to safeguard the fragile ecosystem of Karnataka.
 
 Back in the 1990s, led by Gangadharendra Saraswathi Swamiji of Sonda Swarnavalli Math in Sirsi, Uttara Kannada, several seers had joined the people’s movement to save Aghanashini and Bedthi rivers from hydel projects. Feeling the heat, then state government led by S Bangarappa had dropped the projects which otherwise would have submerged vast stretches of Western Ghats forests in Uttara Kannada district. The Swamiji had earned the title ‘Green Swamiji’ for his fight to save the environment. Taking a leaf from Swarnavalli Math seer’s book, Siddalinga Swamiji of Sri Thontadarya Math in Gadag is spearheading the present people’s movement to safeguard the environment of central Karnataka.
 
 The state government, based on the recommendations of the State Wildlife Board, had declared 17,872 hectares of forest in Kappatagudda as a Conservation Reserve in 2015. Located close to the Western Ghats, the hill ranges in Gadag were known for their unique dry deciduous shrub forests and are home to some of the endangered fauna. The hill ranges received their first threat from the wind energy lobbyist as the area was identified as one of the few places in Asia to have high velocity winds. Though a few windmills were installed in the region, the core area was relatively free from any developmental activities.
 
 Besides these developments, the Kappatagudda hill range with its rich deposits of iron, manganese and bauxite ore caught the attention of mining lords who were already packing up from Ballari while scouting for mineral deposits in other parts of the state. Unable to spread their roots in the region due to the status of Conservation Reserve, the powerful mining lobby began exerting pressure on the state government to reverse its decision and denotify the entire hill range, to facilitate commercial interest in the region.
 
 The general belief was that Siddaramaiah, who was voted to power for his fight against illegal mining, would never allow any mining lords to enter Kappatagudda. However, in a surprise action, the CM led State Wildlife Board in November 2016 ordered denotification of Kappatagudda hills as a Conservation Reserve on the pretext that a proper public consultation was not held previously to declare it as Conservation Reserve. BM had reported about the government’s move. The decision not only exposed the double standards of the Congress government but also made seers of various maths, especially in Gadag district, unite against the government.
 
 While seers across North Karnataka have already lent their support to the issue, Nirmalanandanatha Swamiji of Adichunchanagiri Math joined the movement on Friday and vented his ire against the state government over its decision, which he said would destroy the precious eco-system of the region. A techie who has embraced spiritual life, Nirmalanandanatha Swamiji told media persons in Gadag, “The state government is known for its tough stand against the mining lobby. We hope it will not open up Kappatagudda for mining. Nobody will survive by degrading the environment. We will all support the movement by Thontadarya seer to protect Kappatagudda.”
 
 Former PM HD Deve Gowda too has come out in the open supporting the movement. “The state government took a wrong decision by denotifying Kappatagudda. We should not give a chance to anybody to loot the mineral wealth of our state. The government should not disregard the opinion of a religious seer. The JDS will strongly support the movement to protect the hills and if need arises, I will personally take part in the movement,” Gowda said.