A Facebook page with wildlife items such as pelt, teeth, nails and ivory articles helps crack down on an inter-state racket; 1 from Bengaluru arrested

Forest departments of three states - Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu - worked in tandem to bust a racket of people selling wildlife trophies and other articles including carved ivory articles and jewellery. Five people including one 34-year-old man from JP Nagar were arrested a couple of days ago.

And this was all possible thanks to social media.

The CID forest cell of the Karnataka forest department keeps a tab on social media postings on wildlife articles available for sale and stumbled upon a Facebook page where wildlife trophies, pelts, teeth and nails of wild animals and several ivory articles and jewellery were available for sale. The department contacted their counterparts in Kerala as there was information that the artisans who carve elephant tusks into ivory articles were in that state in some remote villages. Information from them led to a group of three people in Kanyakumari in Tamil Nadu where they had stocked several wildlife trophies and ivory articles at one of their houses.
 
A team was sent to Kanyakumari and along with the police raided the trio’s house and a lot of wildlife trophies and ivory articles were recovered and seized.


 Police have seized deer pelt, horns, tiger nails, ivory articles, chains, carrom board strikers, ivory sticks, jewellery, wild boar’s teeth, conches, shells and other items 
The forest officials took them into custody and after interrogation, they blurted out the name of one man named Pawan Kumar in JP Nagar in Bengaluru. Forest department officials here formed a team and with the help of the JP Nagar police, raided Pawan’s house.
 
During the raids, the officials found deer pelt, horns, tiger nails, ivory articles, beaded chains, carrom board strikers and dices, ivory sticks, bangles, finger rings, bracelets, beads, combs, wild boar’s canine teeth, conches and shells, porcupines spikes, batons and walking sticks made of camel’s bones, tortoise shells, kangaroo pelt, coral beads, sea horse, shark tooths, and other wildlife articles were stored illegally violating several sections of the Wildlife Protection Act.
 
Later, when Pawan was interrogated, he gave out the name of a contact in Kotagiri near Ooty in Tamil Nadu, where with the help of forest department of Tamil Nadu, they conducted raids and seized several wildlife articles and arrested the accused. All the five have been arrested, produced before respective courts in each of the jurisdictions and the accused have been remanded to judicial custody, forest sources said.