The state-run Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) is making an offer you cannot resist. It has decided to offer a 40 per cent discount at six of its resorts, which are located amidst wilderness.    If this was a private company, the management would have charged a hefty premium considering that the resorts are in some of the most exotic locations in this state.   The decision would help JLR shun its image of catering to the elite class. But the bottomline is that the move is expected to boost revenues at locations that are yet to make it to the must-go list of tourists.    While the resorts in the southern part of the state — Bandipur-Nagarhole National parks and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary — were packed, the ones on the coast and in north Karnataka hardly had any visitors in the last tourist season.    Hence, starting this month to September, JLR will offer a discount at Dandeli and Devbagh in Karwar district, Hampi in Bellary district, Blackbuck resort in Bidar district, Jog Falls in Shimoga district and Pilikula in Dakshina Kannada district.    Apart from the 40 per cent discount, two children accompanying their parents will be offered complimentary stay. This offer is valid till September 15 of this year.   According to sources in JLR, the occupancy rate at some locations is more than 75 per cent and at others it is less than 20 per cent.   JLR managing director P Anur Reddy said, “Kabini has an occupancy rate of about 98 per cent and Bandipur 80 per cent. However, the occupancy rate in resorts at Vilaspur in Bidar district and Hampi is only about 15-20 per cent. The major reason for this could be that all such resorts were opened only a few years ago as compared to the others, which have been functioning for the last 20-25 years. It takes some time to attract tourists.”   “We have been requesting our corporate customers and other MNCs to make use of this offer as over 70 per cent of our customers are from the IT, BT and BPO sectors, either from Bangalore or other states,” explained yet another senior official.     JLR is wooing Bengalis A senior JLR official, “According to reports, people from Kolkata in West Bengal top the list of domestic tourists in India. Unfortunately, their numbers in our resorts is not even five per cent. We want to attract more tourists from West Bengal.”
 
 
 Apart from 40% discount, two children accompanied by parents can enjoy complimentary stay