► Coronavirus: 830 confirmed cases; 177 in serious condition; 1,072 suspected cases

41 million people in 13 cities quarantined; temples and tourist attractions such as Disneyland, the Forbidden City, and a section of the Great Wall closed; Lunar New Year events cancelled

WUHAN/BEIJING Chinese authorities rapidly expanded a mammoth quarantine effort aimed at containing a deadly contagion on Friday to 13 cities and a staggering 41 million people, as nervous residents were checked for fevers and the death toll climbed to 26.

While the World Health Organization (WHO) held off on declaring a global emergency despite confirmed cases of in half-a-dozen other countries, China expanded its lockdown to cover an area with a total population greater than Canada’s.

Arange of Lunar New Year festivities have been cancelled, while temporary closures of Beijing’s Forbidden City, Shanghai’s Disneyland and a section of the Great Wall were announced to prevent the disease from spreading further.

The WHO said China faced a national emergency but stopped short of making a declaration that would have prompted greater global cooperation. The outbreak emerged in late December in Wuhan, an industrial and transport hub of 11 million people in China’s centre, spreading to several other countries including the United States. China is in the midst of its Lunar New Year holiday, a typically joyous time of family gatherings and public festivities.

Hospitals bustled with worried patients being screened by staff wearing full-body protective suits.

One 35-year-old man surnamed Li voiced the fears of many.“I have a fever and cough, so I’m worried that I’m infected,” he said. “I don’t know the results yet.”

Wuhan isolated

Most cases have been in Wuhan, where the virus is believed to have originated in a market that traded illegally in wildlife. With hundreds of millions of people on the move across China for the holiday, the government has halted all travel out of Wuhan, shut down its public transport and told residents to stay home.

Deepening the isolation, there were few flights available to the city. Besides Wuhan, 12 other smaller cities nearby have battened down the hatches, with most of them going public on Friday with various measures ranging from closing public venues and restricting large gatherings to halting public transportation and asking citizens not to leave their cities. Several of the cities have populations numbering several million, led by Huanggang, which has 7.5 million.

State broadcaster CCTV also reported that 40 medical doctors from the military were being brought in to help with intensive care.

Chinese authorities said the number of cases leapt to 830, with 177 in serious condition. There were another 1,072 suspected cases.

Officials also said that a virus patient died in Heilongjiang province in China’s far northeast, the second death outside the Wuhan epicentre.

Most of the cases and all of the deaths have been in China, but the virus has also been detected in Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Nepal and the United States.

VACCINE QUEST

There is no known vaccine or particular treatment yet.

“There is some work being done and there are some trials now for MERS (vaccines). And we may look at some point whether those treatments and vaccines would have some effect on this novel coronavirus,” WHO spokesman Tarik Jasarevic said on Friday. 

Coming up in 10 days: 1,000-bed hospital

China is rushing to build a new hospital in a staggering 10 days to treat patients at the epicentre of a deadly virus outbreak that has stricken hundreds of people, state media reported on Friday. The facility in the central city of Wuhan is expected to be in use by February 3 to serve a rising number of patients infected by a coronavirus that has left at least 26 people dead and millions on lockdown in an effort to curb its spread. Dozens of excavators and trucks were filmed working on the site by state broadcaster CCTV. It will have a capacity of 1,000 beds spread over 25,000 square metres, the official Xinhua news agency said. Construction began as reports surfaced of bed shortages in hospitals designated to deal with the outbreak, which has now infected 830 people across China