Find out how sloth bears of Bannaerghatta Bear Rescue Centre managed to chill

Even when the mercury levels rose and parts of the country experienced one of the hottest summers in the recent past, bears at Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre (BBRC) conservation managed to stay cool. All thanks to NGO Wildlife SOS that adopted unique measures to help the bears beat the heat.

The Wildlife SOS Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre in Bengaluru adopted several innovative measures to help rescued Sloth Bears cope with the summer heat. Water pools were available for the bears to swim in and cool off as well as water sprinklers that help soften the ground and create cool zones inside their free-ranging enclosures.

Established in 2005, the Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre is jointly run by the NGO Wildlife SOS and the Karnataka Forest Department. The centre is home to nearly 70 rescued Sloth Bears amidst the lush dry deciduous forest of the Bannerghatta Biological Park, making it the second-largest rescue centre for Sloth Bears in the world.

Maahi, Mithali and Bali are a few of the younger bears under Wildlife SOS’ care who take full advantage of the pools and spend hours splashing in them. The bears also enjoy the occasional spells of rain and use that opportunity to take mud baths.

 .
The most popular treat among the bears is the ice fruit popsicles, which are essentially delicious pieces of fruits frozen in blocks of ice to help keep the bears cool while also functioning as enrichments. “We take all possible measures such as multivitamin tonics and mixing electrolyte solutions in their drinking water to ensure that the bears stay hydrated. In terms of diet, fruits chopped into small pieces are mixed with milk, and once frozen they are served as ice popsicles. We also give the bears fruits which are high in water content, such as watermelons, muskmelons, grapes and apples,” said Dr. Arun A Sha, Director - Research and Veterinary Operations, Wildlife SOS.

 Fruits chopped into small pieces are mixed with milk, and once frozen they are served as ice popsicles–Dr Arun A Sha, Wildlife SOS
In addition to all the above, each bear has access to air coolers at their enclosures at the rescue centre, in order to prevent the dens from getting heated. The bears are given a special summer diet, and a major change includes hydrolysing components such as coconut water, especially for older bears. “Wildlife SOS aims to provide the rescued bears, a high degree of veterinary care, enrichment and high quality of life. Our team of veterinarians and care staff work round the clock to ensure the bears are able to stay cool in summer,” said Geeta Seshamani, co-founder and secretary Wildlife SOS.