Man-animal conflict has seen a drastic increase what with the city’s borders being pushed further and further into wild territory. The presence of a huge wild cat in the premises of an upscale gated-community in Vibhutipura on Tuesday is a prime example. But the forest department isn’t keen on doing anything about either the issue of man-animal conflict or the cat. ‘Leopard&rsquo; spotted yet again, and this time residents shoot it   Residents of Adarsh Vista had spotted the huge wild cat on a tree in the premises on Tuesday and had alerted forest department officials. The cat, however, had scampered off by the time forest department officials arrived on the scene two hours later. By then, residents had taken photos of the animal which they passed on forest officials. Now, forest officials say the animal is only a wild cat and residents have nothing to fear, this despite a dog being mauled, apparently by the cat, only a few days earlier. 
   Dipak Sarmah, principal chief conservator of forest, told Bangalore Mirror , “The area DFO has said that the animal is a wild cat and will not harm human beings. On Tuesday there was a call and we attended to it. We cannot just keep cage traps and catch animals that stray from the wild, only because residents complain or see them as a threat.” 
   Since the housing colony abuts Doddanekundi Lake, residents are used to seeing cobras in the premises and owls sitting on balconies. Residents have repeatedly asked authorities to clean up the lake, but nothing has been done.
   “The area has a lot of marshy land from where these animals stray,” said Anuradha N, a resident of Adarsh Vista. “Animals are as important as human beings, but keep them protected in national parks. Allowing them to stray into urban spaces will only worsen the situation. Moreover, the animals may be harmed. People will live in fear and often have to watch their surroundings. We have a lot of children in the colony and it is scary. The lake has not been cleaned for ages. This is the root of the problem.”
   Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife biologist who works extensively on tiger conservation in the Western Ghats, claimed the animal is undoubtedly a huge cat with facial features of a puma which is largely found in North America. “The forest department had sent me pictures of the animal. It’s neither a leopard nor a caracal, but features are interesting,” said Gubbi.