State records India’s worst forest fires between March 18 and 24

Karnataka recorded the country’s worst forest fires between March 18 and 24, according to the Forest Survey of India (FSI) reports. The state logged 437 major forest fire incidents over the last seven days, followed by Odisha (376), Maharashtra (249), Andhra Pradesh (180), and Madhya Pradesh (117).

Karnataka also features among the top five states when it comes to the number of fire alerts in 2022-23, since November 1, 2022. As many as 11,088 fire incidents were recorded in the state using spatial information through SNPP.
 
In the given period, Odisha had 17,055 fire incidents, Andhra Pradesh recorded 13,077 incidents, Telangana logged 7,740 fire incidents and Chhattisgarh had 5,627 incidents of forest fire.
According to the Karnataka Forest Department, higher fire incidents can be attributed to a combination of factors such as extreme weather conditions, high-tension electric wires, and disgruntled villagers.
 
“The number of fire incidents over the last three years, before this year, was less.
 
However, this has been a unique forest fire season due to the high temperatures and higher wind velocity. To add to that, more than average rainfall during the last monsoon season has also led to higher quantum of biomass, which implies above-average fuel accumulation on the forest floor. We have hardly had any rainfall over the last three months as well. All these factors have led to higher incidents of forest fire,” said a senior official from the department.

However, experts say it is a complete lack of preparedness, monitoring, and accountability on part of the department that has manifested itself in a higher number of fire incidents.
“The biggest problem is the budget allotment for forest fire management. Instead of planning and focusing on prevention, the department ends up with knee-jerk reactions.

This has been a unique forest fire season due to high temperatures, wind velocity. More than average rainfall last year led to higher quantum of biomass ­– Forest Department official 
Forest fire management takes the last priority in the department’s annual budget. They are more interested in carrying out civil work than devising prevention strategies for forest fire,” said DV Girish, a wildlife conservationist from Chikmagalur.

Some allege that while forest fire lines must be created between January and February every year, the department is often lagging behind concerning the task. To add to that, the lack of forest watchers or foot soldiers makes the situation worse.

“Decision-makers in the department have limited understanding of forest fire or field conditions as they are sitting in their offices. Fireline creation and watch and ward are the two most important aspects of managing forest fires. While the department is often late with fireline creation, foot soldiers are often unhappy as they go without pay for months altogether. This is because the budget allocated is probably not reaching the ground level,” said another expert.