Green activists express concern: Will the eco-tourism plan balance conservation and tourism?

While he was alive, forest brigand Veerappan was a thorn in the flesh of the state government. But now, it is trying to fill its coffers by milking his story. The forest department is planning to start a safari in the Gopinatham area, the former den of Veerappan, for the public. When Veerappan was active, people were scared to travel to these places. They were operated by either forest personnel or STF personnel involved in combing operations that went around the area. However, since Veerappan’s death, there has been a curiosity among travellers to explore the place. Currently, there is a property belonging to Jungle Lodges and Resorts mystery trails camps. Only those staying in the camps are allowed to travel around the trails, but the public is barred. Now, the forest department is planning to allow the public to take up safari.

Dr Malathi Priya M, IFS, Chief Conservator of Forests, Mysuru circle, said, “We are planning for a safari centre in Gopinatham, and the proposal is to allow the public. However, we are yet to chalk out the finer details. Soon, we will have a meeting with officials related to Cauvery wildlife sanctuary and discuss the feasibility of opening the safari trail and other facilities.”

The state forest department is revisiting the forest in a bid to turn Veerappan’s former stronghold into one of the major attractions of its eco-tourism package. Earlier, the department even roped in ex-associates of the notorious smuggler for a ‘Mystery Trail Camp’ at his village, Gopinatham, in the Male Mahadeshwara hills (MM Hills) near the border of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The camp was located between MM Hills and Hogenekkal Falls. It was built at a cost of Rs 1.3 crore to target wildlife enthusiasts, bird watchers, trekkers, and photographers who flock to MM Hills and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary as the government has invoked the legend of Veerappan to attract tourists. The government-owned Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) had come up with a program at Gopinatham, which was wound up due to poor response. Then another attempt was made by the forest department.

 We are planning for a safari centre in Gopinatham, and the proposal is to allow the public. However, we are yet to chalk out the finer details. Planning to meet the officials related to Cauvery wildlife sanctuaryDr Malathi Priya M, IFS, Chief Conservator of Forests

Sources said that the earlier attempt relied solely on word-of-mouth, and the officials had incorporated the best available facilities at the site. Facilities like tents that look like Igloos, the huts of Eskimos, which are not only rainproof but also capable of withstanding the harsh temperatures of this region, which is home to dense deciduous forests and shrubs. The forest department had made arrangements for water sports, like kayaking and coracle riding, bird watching, and mountain biking and tourists were treated to the native cuisine. “Earlier, a major attraction was a 17-km trek around Gopinatham village. It included a visit to the cremation site of IFS officer and Keerti Chakra recipient P Srinivas, who was beheaded by Veerappan in 1991. The memorial to Srinivas has been renovated by the department at a cost of Rs 1.5 lakh. The guides were former poachers and associates of Veerappan, who then served the forest department as anti-poaching staff. There were about 25 ex-poachers out of which six were in Veerappan’s gang. These people were narrating stories from their time with Veerappan and gave insights into his modus operandi, like hiding essential items in the forest, keeping tabs on the movement of cops and animals, and demonstrating survival skills that were adopted during adverse weather conditions. Now, we believe that the forest department’s proposed safari would be an unforgettable experience,” said another forest official.

However, green activists are opposing the move stating that Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary should not be open to the public as it will affect the precious flora and fauna.