This picture was taken by Nagraj, a 25-year-old confined to the wheelchair due to polio          
 There had to be something more, something meaningful to the weekends. Then again, his birthday was coming up and Siddharth Jain was not entirely feeling like going down the same old routine of partying. “I wanted to sponsor a meal at an institution when a friend mentioned The Association of People With Disability (APD),” says the 31-year-old.
 
 Siddharth not only enjoyed his birthday but came back from APD with an idea that wholly appealed to the photographer in him. “I wanted to teach photography to the students at APD and contacted the director.” That set the ball rolling and a notice put up at APD grabbed the interest of 10 students to the Happy Camera Club. Aged 16 to 52, some on a wheelchair, some stricken with polio, others speech or hearing impaired, Siddharth’s students were ushered into a new world during a workshop in April. “Some were holding a camera for the first time. I was teaching the subject for the first time too so it turned to be fulfilling,” says Siddharth.
 
 The group managed to create a lot of fun moments with field trips to Russell Market and Lalbagh. “For most,  family and nature were the first themes they responded to,” he says.
 
 The field trips definitely helped expand those. The outcome of it all is now on display at Ants in Indiranagar as part of its Environment Day celebrations. The exhibition titled I love Bengalooru comprises 21 colour A3 size photographs. “We have also made a slideshow and video of the pictures. By the way, none has been cropped. It was something I was taught when learning to photograph and it is something I have passed on to them,” says Siddharth who has worked as a freelance photojournalist in Delhi, his home city.
 
 A management graduate, Siddharth has quit the corporate life and is now focussing on Happy Camera Club for a sense of “social well-being” and will replicate the workshop in Bangalore and  other cities. For a “sense of entrepreneurship”, Siddharth will retail merchandise springing from his photography endeavours. At the I Love Bengalooru exhibition you can buy cloth bags and paper posters Siddharth has created.
 
 But most of all, it’s the participants for whom a new world is opening up. Polio has confined 25-year-old Nagraj to the wheelchair. A graphic designer with a latent ambition to become a wildlife photographer, the workshop gives him the hope to further his dream. “I learnt to focus on what I want and today I feel if not everything, there’s definitely something I can do towards being a wildlife photographer,” he says.
 
 
 I love Bengalooru on at Ants, Indiranagar from June 3 to 5.