The demand for octopuses usually comes only from large star hotelsand foreign-returned families ask for octopuses which they use for soups and pickles                 
Paul, an octopus, accurately predicted the results of the football World Cup matches. Fishermen in Mangalore are getting hundreds of calls every day for live octopuses. They are not able to meet the demand because of an embargo on deep-sea fishing. Also, they can’t legally go looking for octopuses.

The annual embargo, to help fish breed, is lifted in late July. Fishing folk rest in June and July. SELLING PRICE

Normally, dead octopuses are sold at Rs 70 a kg. The price of a live octopus is likely to be between Rs 5,000 and Rs 10,000, depending on its size.

“We didn’t know why so many people were asking for octopuses, and then it dawned on us. I have received close to 30 calls for live octopuses,” said Shashi Kumar, a trawler operator who works from Old Bunder (port) in Mangalore.

U T Khader, MLA, Mangalore, said, “Fishermen don’t go out looking for octopuses. They catch them along with the other fish, and then sort them and supply them to the hinterland.”

Bringing back live octopuses is something trawlers do all the time. When they go out to the deep sea, they stay out there for 20 to 30 days. Keeping octopuses live for that long has never been a priority. But all that could change this year.

A small quantity of the catch from Mangalore is sent to Bangalore and Hyderabad every year. The demand for octopuses peaks between August and November.

Vasanth Mogera, a fisherman, explained, “The demand for octopuses usually comes only from large star hotels and resorts. Some foreign-returned families ask for octopuses which they use for soups and pickles.”

But this year, many homes are looking to keep octopuses in acquariums, like pet fish.

Paul, who shot to fame during the FIFA World Cup with his predictions, is a common octopus at the Sea Life Centre in Oberhausen in Germany.

He was hatched from an egg in captivity in January 2008 and later shifted to a larger tank.

Paul’s career as ‘pundit’ began during the Euro Championship in 2008. But he hogged the limelight only this year. 

Jail for octopus owners

Owning an octopus is punishable under the Indian Wildlife Act. According to Sharath Babu, widlife warden with the BBMP’s forest cell, Octopuses are classified under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Act and are considered highly endangered. 

“Even to catch them you have to enter the sea or ocean which by itself is a punishable offence. Possessing a live octopus requires special permission from the chief wildlife warden of the state. Violators can be punished with a seven-year jail term,” he said.