As we pack our bags for our little adventure in the forests of Bandipur, my four-year-old son queried excitedly, “Will you get to see a tiger ?,” to which I mumbled, “Hopefully.” The next day as we got down from the Volvo bus at the entrance of the Bandipur National Park after travelling from Bangalore on a particularly sunny morning, there was no way of knowing that hope is not always rewarded.    

We are headed to Dhole’s Den, an eco-friendly safari  lodge near the National Park at the fringes of the Western Ghats. Pavithra Kumar, the manager of the property is there to receive us. “This is a good time for wildlife sighting. Only at 4 a.m. this morning we sighted a tiger and we were lucky that it stayed for almost 20 minutes,” Pavithra declares.

Obviously, those words got us excited. Growing up on and going back every once in a while to Ruskin Bond’s quaint stories about tigers in tunnels and bringing home tiger cubs, I had stirred up a quiet fascination for the beautiful animal. The chance of seeing it in the wild was one that could not be easily surpassed. 

ONE WITH NATURE
So after a quick lunch and a quicker nap, we decided to start just as the bright afternoon sun was making way for the soft evening rays. Enthusiasts of organic farming have it good here. The lodge allows the guests to “pick, cook and eat” from their own organic vegetable garden. The theme is eco-friendliness and what strikes you as you enter your room is the minimal energy consumption and use of simple methods of conservation. So it may surprise you to see no fans or ACs, but the presence wi-fi connection.  The rooms are built in such a way that the indoors are cool and breezy. “We wanted to be as close to nature as possible. So we did away with fans, ACs, tea/coffee makers and refrigerators in the rooms. Electricity is generated by a wind turbine and solar cells. The kitchen waste is turned into bio-gas in our bio-gas digester. Rain water harvesting is done and waste water is recycled,” says Karthik, owner of Dhole’s Den and a wildlife enthusiast. 

JUNGLE SAFARI           
A few minutes into the jungle in the safari jeep and we encountered many spotted deer and langurs. Later, the driver quietly stopped and Pavithra pointed to something black on the muddy path. I squinted in the sun to get a better look - a monitor lizard, a huge one, was sprawled across it. Those who have seen a bit of green in their lives, would brush this aside as commonplace. But this one was big, its length extending from one side of the path to the other. A little up ahead was a peacock on a low branch, quite unconcerned about our presence. While the blue jays, kingfishers and  woodpeckers kept coming, there seemed to be no sign of the majestic carnivore. However, a family of elephants a few metres away made my day.     

“Seeing a tiger is a matter of chance. People say they are spotted a lot in summer because they come out to the water holes to drink, but I feel that it’s not really about the season. I have searched for days in summer and had no luck while I suddenly come across one in the middle of November, when I least expect it,” says Karthik. 

A well-travelled man, he has modelled his lodge on the exclusive safari camps of Africa. “I have travelled to places like Kutandala where there are no more than five tents; stayed at wilderness camps and lodges in great places like Tongabezi. That is what we wanted to recreate here,” he says. 

NO SIGN OF MR FEROCIOUS
As the evening wore on, there was no sign of a tiger. By now we were deep in the forest and every water hole had been covered. Suddenly we stumbled on an unusual sight — a carcass of a deer high up on a tree branch. “That’s the work of a leopard,” said Pavithra matter-of-factly. As the twilight sky threatened a downpour, we decided to get back. Just as we were returning to the lodge, we encountered another party just back from a safari and the guide announced: “just two minutes back we spotted him; the tiger was almost by the side of the road.” 

As the rain came down, it brought in a beautiful night. What if we missed the king ? His spirit seemed to pervade all the forest.  

WHAT'S IN THE NAME
The name Dhole's Den is derived from the dhole, the Asiatic wild dog (Cuon alpinus), one of the most fascinating hunters in the Indian jungle with a unique social hierarchy. The dholes live in packs and are organised perfectly under the leadership of an alpha male and alpha female. The population of this animal has been coming down over the years, with a notable population remaining in the Kanha, Periyar, Nagarhole and Bandipur national parks.

GO WILD: Bandipur National Park, which is located at the foothills of the Nilgiris (Blue Mountains) is a great place for discovery, if you are a wildlife enthusiast. The park is inhabited by a variety of animals including tigers, large herds of Gaur, dhole, leopard, four-horned antelope, sambhar, spotted deer, sloth bear, wild boar and has the highest population of Asiatic elephants (about 750). There are also around 250 species of birds. The Nagarhole National Park, Mudumalai and Wayanad wildlife sanctuaries are close by.  You could also go on a nature trek, climb up a hill or sit around a camp fire.