Eat through Vietnam
This month-long Vietnamese food festival will treat you to Spicy Noodles Soup, Fiery Prawns tossed in sour and three-chilli sauce, Vietnamese Chilli Prawns in sriracha and Vietnamese sauce, Bahn Mi, the famous Vietnamese baguette sandwich, and Co’m Chiên Du’o’ng Châu, the Vietnamese-style wok-tossed fried rice with vegetables, chicken or shrimps, among others. 

 WHERE: Misu, 4th Floor, Halcyon Complex, Saint Marks Road, Ashok Nagar 
 WHEN: For lunch and dinner, January 7 onwards 
 CALL: 8971115511

 A photo show on Leh-Ladakh
Don’t miss this photography exhibition which captures the breathtaking beauty of Leh-Ladakh by wildlife photographer Prathap DK. The show is a visually enriching journey for the viewer to experience the stunning vistas. While Leh-Ladakh is famous for its monasteries, high-passes and iconic lakes, Prathap has taken a detour from the norm to bring out a fresh perspective. The images showcase some of the iconic and lesser-known landscapes, as well as vibrant lakes of Leh-Ladakh in an awe-inspiring way. 

 WHERE: Sublime Galleria, UB City, Vittal Mallya Road 
 WHEN: 11am-6.30pm, on till January 29

 Shop for change
Attend the ‘shop for change’ event that showcases a curated collection of handwoven products. From sarees and stoles to menswear and home furnishings, the event will have an exquisite range of handloom products from across the country. Along with the show, there will also be a workshop on ilkal weaves with a master weaver from Ilkal. As a part of the event, there will be a talk on ‘know your handloom’ for those who are keen to understand the nuances of handloom and build a community with fellow handloom enthusiasts.

 WHERE: Gocoop, 5th cross, 18th main, 6th block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 11am-7pm, on till January 14 CALL: 7829430109

 Indulge in some retail therapy
Cottage Utsava is an exhibition and sale of handlooms and handicraft that provides about 40 weavers/artisans, including national and state awardees from various parts of India, the opportunity to display their varied art and craft traditions. On display are apparel for men and women, linen, scarves, and jackets, to name a few. 

 WHERE: Srinivasa Sagar Kalyana Mahal, 264/266, T Mariyappa Road, 2nd Block, Jayanagar, near Ashoka Pillar 
 WHEN: 10.30am onwards, on till January 18

 Dance to stay fit
Have you been looking for a great way to get fit? Sign up for this contemporary dance workshop that will be led by some of the best teachers and performers in the city, such as Diya Naidu, Parth Bhardwaj, Nihal Pasha and Pia Bunglowala. This workshop can be extended from one month to four months. 

 WHERE: Shoonya, 4th Floor, Rear Wing, 37 Lal Bagh Road 
 WHEN: 7pm onwards, January 7 onwards 
 FEES: `3,900 onwards (per month), eventshigh.com