Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike’s (BBMP) tree canopy management team has become busier over the last few years.

Information on cases attended by 28 canopy management teams across the city shows that these numbers are rising exponentially every year.

While 15 teams across all the BBMP zones received 7,472 complaints between April 2020 and March 2021, the number went up to 12,107 between April 2021 and March 2022. The civic agency increased the number of teams to 21 in this time duration. Last year, the number of the canopy management team was increased to 28 and they attended to 17,948 canopy management cases between April 2023 and March 2024.

According to a member of the Tree Expert Committee (TEC), a large number of these cases are requests for trimming branches and trees from citizens.

“The number of canopy management team and staff has grown over these years, leading to a higher number of cases that they are attending.
 
However, many applications TEC has been receiving for trimming branches are from citizens. We get hundreds of requests from Bengalureans to cut trees or trim branches despite these trees being in their prime health. These requests are raised based on reasons such as nuisance due to wildlife and birds, and tree litter. In the recent past the number of such requests due to wildlife such as monkeys and snakes on trees has gone up,” said a member of TEC. 

Middle ground
TEC members say they have come up with a middle ground for pollarding a tree. “The number of applications by citizens to axe trees became overwhelming and thus we came up with the option to pollard trees. However, not all tree species can undergo pollarding,” said the TEC member. Experts say the high number of cases might also be due to exotic species outnumbering native trees along the city’s streets.

“Most of our avenue trees are exotic species that bloom and give fragrance. These are also very fast-growing trees and attain maturity much earlier than native species. Moreover, since they grow fast, their root system is not as strong as native trees such as Neem and Ashoka. Thus, their branches become weaker and more susceptible to breaking and falling during moderate wind speed too,” said C Nagarajaiah, professor and ex-head of the Department of Forestry and Environmental Science at the University Of Agricultural Sciences (GKVK), Bengaluru.

 Most of our avenue trees are exotic species that are very fast-growing trees and attain maturity much earlier than native species. Their root system is not as strong as native trees. Thus their branches are more susceptible to breaking and falling during moderate wind speed— C Nagarajaiah, University Of Agricultural Sciences (GKVK)

Last but not least, the large number of infrastructure projects being executed mindlessly are also weakening avenue trees, leading to higher cases reaching canopy management units.
“Poor urban planning is a major cause behind this destruction. Development work and infrastructure projects are being taken up in a big way with minimal regard to the city’s green cover.
 
Avenue trees sustain root damage owing to development activities such as road widening, flyover construction, metro track extension, etc. The density and circumference of a tree’s canopy are always proportional to its underground part. However, we are not providing enough space for the root system to grow and strengthen, leading to weak avenue trees and branches,” said Ravindra Reshme, a city-based botanist.