With the reserve forests of South India losing about 50 elephants every year due to unnatural deaths, it is high time that those entrusted with the conservation of elephants took their job seriously. 

Karnataka alone has contributed 39 elephant deaths in the last two years, and nine just a week ago, to the overall deaths in South India. 

The cause of recent jumbo deaths is yet to be officially ascertained by the forest department. These deaths have left the forest department with much to answer for. Why is it delaying in declaring the autopsy report of the recent deaths of elephants? And the larger question it must answer is, why has it failed to protect the country’s wildlife? While the bureaucrats and politicians indulge in the regular blame game, human-animal conflict in our forests is steadily rising.

Prof R Sukumar, chairman of the Centre for Ecological Sciences at the Indian Institute of Science, throws more light on why human-animal conflict is rising. He said, such conflict was not merely because of shrinking habitat but fragmentation of forest areas along with cultivation of commercial crops between forests and on the fringes of reserve forests. According to a conservationist in Mysore, over the past 3-4 years, there was a steady increase in the cultivation of commercial crops such as sugarcane around the periphery of forest reserves. About 90 per cent of the existing commercial crop growers around the reserves were recent additions, he said.

“There is no restriction on what people cultivate. When crops such as sugarcane and ragi, that are highly palatable for pachyderms, are grown so close, it is obvious that they will step out for it,” said Prof Sukumar.

At a time when human density and shortage of land are high, increasing forest cover by acquiring land is a pointless solution, feel most wildlife experts. “Land-use policy can help put a regulation on what crop must be allowed for cultivation in sensitive areas. Crops on the periphery, that do not attract elephants, can reduce conflict as it will act as a buffer zone,” said Sukumar.

If the advice of people like Sukumar is ignored, it’s a matter of time before the words of conservation biologist Rajkumar D come true. This man who works extensively in the reserve forests of Bandipur said, “In an age when we are tackling dwindling tiger population and escalating human-leopard conflict, I fear that we are going to lose our elephants as well.”