By Y Maheswara Reddy

After a spate of fire incidents, authorities had got cracking to keep Bannerghatta National Park (BNP), situated 22 km away from South Bengaluru, fire-free. They are also organising 
programmes to create awareness among the villagers on dos and don’ts.

“As of now, the forest is dry. We have engaged workers to create fire lines along the mud roads in the forest. This will stop the fire from spreading from one direction to the other. Workers burn dry grass up to 10 metres on both sides of the mud road to facilitate fire lines,’’ said Deputy Conservator of Forest Prashant Shankinamath.

The DCF said that cooperation of people living in villages along the forest is the need of the hour. “We have an agreement with the Fire and Emergency Services to attend fire calls. The forest department has deposited a certain amount with the Fire and Emergency Services towards the fuel expenses. Fire tenders can reach wherever fire breaks out in the forest. But it is difficult for the fire and emergency personnel to reach the spot and so, preventing fires is a must,’’ the DCF said.

He said forest officers are authorised to engage water tankers and vehicles as precautionary measures. “Our employees are trained to put out forest fires. We have also recruited fire watchers,’’ the DCF said.

The forest department has also been trying to create awareness among the villagers on dos and don’ts to avoid fire mishaps in Banneraghatta National Park that is spread over 260 sq km.
“So far, we have organised 10 street plays at villages near Anekal and 20 at Kodihalli,’’ he said.

He said that most of the fire mishaps are man-made. He said that it would be tough for the forest department employees to control any fire that breaks out at noon. 

“Some miscreants set forests afire for personal gain. Sometimes cattle owners set the dry grass afire to prepare the forest land for fresh fodder. Recently, we arrested one person for setting Bilakal forest afire. The accused has to serve three years in prison,’’ he said.

Neighbourly task

The major achievement is having a coordination meeting with Tamil Nadu counterparts on managing elephants and preventing poaching activities, and mitigating fire mishaps. The BNP shares a common boundary of 65-km with North Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary of Tamil Nadu.