Squealing visitors inside a reserve forest rarely do its wildlife any good. The tiger conservator puts down guidelines for safaris to end the menace
 
 Karnataka’s popular tiger safaris will now operate under stricter guidelines aimed at creating minimum disturbance and human interference while watching the big cats in the wild. National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), the apex body on tiger conservation in India, has directed the chief wildlife wardens of all states to crack down on unruly traffic and chaos inside the forest during safaris.
 
 It’s common knowledge how a tiger sighting turns out to be – tourists get excited, photographers gun for the windows trying to get the best angle, word goes out to other vehicles, which then rush in at top speed to join the ‘party’. Amid the squeals and chaos, animals often end up getting mobbed. The NTCA’s instructions aim to put an end to such practices, and come in response to an online petition that sought proper implementation of wildlife rules in national parks and tiger reserves across India.
 
 Now, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) has directed the directors of all tiger reserves to comply with NTCA’s directions and strictly implement the rules at national parks and tiger reserves, which include streamlining of safari traffic and cracking down on the number of visitors.
 
 Petitioners to NTCA said that wildlife rules on national parks and tiger reserves are often flouted and the park animals are put to great inconvenience. According to a copy of the petition attached with the NTCA order, a copy of which is with BM: “There are guidelines to be adhered [to] when going around in the park, especially when tigers are sighted. The guidelines include minimum distance between vehicles; tourists have to maintain absolute silence and should not disturb animals.
 
 Drivers and naturalists in every vehicle are responsible to ensure these guidelines [are followed].”
 
 
 
 
 
 People often do the opposite, says the letter. On sighting a tiger, there is a mad rush among safari vehicles. All vehicles plying on different tracks will rush to the area where the tiger was sighted, and encircle the animal from all sides in an effort to get as close as possible. Visitors chat on top of their voices while drivers and naturalists either ignore the ruckus or try to get the vehicle as close to the animal as they can. This apart, there are other violations in collusion with the local hotel lobby. Due to this kind of encroachment, animals have begun to wander into human habitats, triggering human-animal conflict, the appeal said.
 
 C Jayaram, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), acknowledged that the NTCA has issued a note in this regard. “In Karnataka, there is no such problem as safari and forest visits are taken up through a centralised mechanism.
 
 State government-run Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) is entrusted with the responsibility of taking visitors into the forests and all our safaris are well within the carrying capacity of the national parks. However, in the backdrop of NTCA guidelines, we have already communicated to field directors of tiger reserves to adhere with the rules.”