The district administration had allotted 100 acres of land for setting up the Gangubai Hanagal University of Music & Performing Arts on survey no 469 of Varakodu village, on the outskirts of Mysore, on July 13 2009. The records were handed over on Aug 27.

                                        The disputed land                 

The state government had granted Rs 5 crore for setting up the university and promised another Rs 5 crore in the forthcoming budget.

DISTRICT FOREST

However, Shashwathi Mishra, the Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF), Mysore division, objected to it, saying the land belongs to the forest department. In a letter to Mysore Deputy Commissioner P Manivannan, Shashwathi said the land was classifed as 'district forest' and transferred to the forest department in 1978.

""The place (land) is a hillock and a catchment area for tanks nearby; it is also a natural regeneration area for sandalwood. The area is rich in biodiversity and rare species like 'Acacia Cateatu', which has medicinal value, grow here. The land is also a natural habitat for leopards and wildlife and is classified as a 'natural scrub forest'. Using such land for non-forest purposes is illegal and requires prior permission from the Union government as per the Forest Conservation Act, 1980,"" said her letter.

RAISING VOICE

Later, the Association of Concerned and Informed Citizens of Mysore (ACICM), an NGO, raised a voice against the transfer of forest land to the university and filed an objection with the Union ministry of forests & environment.

Meanwhile, Prof Hanumanna Naik Dore, vice-chancellor of the university, was stopped by the forest department from entering the area when he went to inspect the land.

However, the district administration and the revenue department still maintain it is 'gomal land' and it belongs to the revenue department.

Though the land was transferred to the forest department in 1978, the same was not recorded in the revenue records, it is learnt. The district administration is said to have allotted the land before even conducting an inspection of the spot.

TIME SOUGHT

Meanwhile, the Deputy Commissioner, in his letter dated Feb 15, 2010, addressed to the chief secretary, admitted there was a dispute on ownership of the land and sought three weeks' time to sort out the issue.

""A detailed report will be submitted after three weeks on whether the truncated portion of 100 acres can be allotted to the music university or we have to go in for alternative allotment of land,"" he has said.