Govt decides against shifting the TB affected bears; isolation will make their disease flare up
 	
 	
 Tuberculosis affected bears at the Bannerghatta Biological Park will continue to stay at the rescue centre, with the state government deciding not to relocate them. A month back, the Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) had pointed to the nine animals, suffering from human TB, and told the state government that their presence might hamper permissions from the Ministry of Environments and Forests, for further expansions. It also implied that the rescue centre, run by NGO Wildlife SOS, was not functioning adequately. 

 The ZAK letter objected to the fact that the then Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF)had renewed the agreement with Wildlife SOS just two days prior to his retirement. 

 	M Madan Gopal, Additional Chief Secretary to State Government, Forest, Ecology and Environment department, told Bangalore Mirror, “It is true that ZAK had written a letter. But at this juncture we are not keen on reconsidering the extension of the agreement. No matter whether the PCCF has signed two days before his retirement or a day before remitting the office, it is a legal contract and inked only after bringing it to the notice of the state government. We will think about the ZAK’s request, but as of now the Bear Rescue Centre is functioning well and I have spoken to the officials of the BRC as well.” 

 	Wildlife SOS has clarified that the extension of agreement was signed only at the behest of ZAK officials. Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder and Chairman of Wildlife SOS, explained, “We were advised by the Member Secretary, ZAK to approach the Karnataka government to seek an extension of our earlier agreement for a longer period since Wildlife SOS had invested heavily in running the Bear Rescue Centre (BRC). Similarly, we applied to the government in 2012 and government deliberated on it for several months. In fact on November 22, 2013 when the orders were signed, both the ZAK Member Secretary and Executive Director of BBP were consulted by the government and they too had given no-objection for extension of the agreement. It is strange that they are now making statements contrary to what they had agreed to earlier. 

 	“We have incurred an expenditure of over Rs 17 crore since 2005 in running BRC. This is in fact not loss but revenue savings to ZAK and state government. Similarly, all other financial benefits like revenue generated from the safari and zoo goes directly to ZAK and BBP. Not a single rupee from this revenue goes to Wildlife SOS. Further, the Central Zoo Authority itself approved our requests to build infrastructure at the BRC since the inception till now. In fact, the CZA even issued permission to shift 22 rescued bears from West Bengal and Chhattisgarh to Bannerghatta,” Satyanarayan explained. 

 

 

 	Bears ailing from human TB 

 	Setting aside fears of tuberculosis threatening to snuff out other wildlife at the park, Satyanarayan clarified that the bears are ailing from human TB. “Most of the bears at BRC have been rescued from Kalandars and all of them have contracted TB from their human handlers, suggesting reverse zoonosis. In fact, our research has confirmed that the TB strain present in bears is a human strain (Mycobacterium tuberculosis). It can also be contracted by other wild animals from humans. This is emerging as a common problem in zoos across the world and India too,” he said. 

 	Madan Gopal said veterinarians have been keeping track of the infection. Keeping in mind the intensity of the disease, Wildlife SOS has deployed a 16-member team, including three veterinarians, to attend to bears on 24x7 basis. Dr A Sha Arun, Director (Research and Veterinary Operations) at BRC explained, “Their immunity levels are very low. A veterinary expert committee led by the director of the Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals (IAH&VB) examined these bears and certified that they should not be shifted or forced into isolation, as it would result in stress and flaring up of the disease. To our luck, the bears seem to be dead-end hosts to the TB bacteria as there has been no reported case of other animals being infected with bacteria.” 

 	The staffers working with the bears too have been regularly tested for the bacteria since 2005 and none of them have been infected. “We had gone as far as South Africa scouting methods to treat human TB in animals. In Western zoos, they just cull animals infected with TB. But we are trying our best to treat them by administering top quality medicines that have been used to treat humans. Even with the latest test to detect bacteria—Micro PCR test — some bears report negative. But after the death, it is reported positive,'' Dr Arun said. 

 	Even though the veterinarians at BRC are treating all the bear population as they are exposed to TB and viral hepatitis, nine bears have tested positive out of the 78 bears at BRC.