By Iffath Fathima

The 25-acre Doddakallasandra Lake, which was taken up for rejuvenation by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) last year, still shows signs of contamination.

A report of Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) indicated a marked increase in coliform bacteria in the waterbody.

According to a report by the Centre for Science and Environment, the amount of faecal matter in sewage is monitored through coliform count — a water quality parameter that acts as an indicator of pathogens that most commonly cause diarrhoea, typhoid and a host of enteric or intestinal diseases. While coliform is not a cause of illness, it does indicate pathogens of faecal origin such as bacteria, virus or protozoa.
 
According to the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the total coliform organism or MPN/100 ml (most probable number) for drinking water source, without conventional treatment but after disinfection, should be 50 or less.
 
For outdoor bathing, MPN/100 ml should be less than 500, and drinking water source after conventional treatment and disinfection, MPN/100 ml shall be 5,000 or less.

In Doddakallasandra Lake, however, the water sample showed much higher value at 350x102, showcasing a high amount of coliform bacteria, which does not qualify as safe.
 
Raghvendra B Pachhapur, resident of Doddakalasandra and ActionAid, India’s programme manager, said: “The high value of coliform indicates bad water quality.
 
Sewage is still entering the lake. Other parameters like pH, dissolved oxygen and conductivity are good.”

The report also showed an increase in biochemical oxygen demand. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) represents the amount of oxygen consumed by bacteria and other microorganisms while they decompose organic matter under aerobic conditions (when oxygen is present) at a specified temperature. The decay of organic matter in water is measured as biochemical or chemical oxygen demand.


  High coliform indicates bad water quality. Sewage is entering the lake… pH, dissolved oxygen, conductivity are good.— Raghvendra B Pachhapur, ActionAid

If the BOD levels are between 1 and 2 mg/litre, it signifies very good water quality and there will not be much organic matter present in the water supply. A value between 3 and 5 shows moderately clean water. Doddakallasandra Lake has 5 mg/litre BOD.
 
“The BBMP has been clearing the water hyacinth, which absorbs all the phosphates and nitrates. The hyacinth grows fast and covers the entire lake surface; as a result, sunlight doesn’t fall directly on the water and the lake is gradually deprived of oxygen, which leads to the death of fish. Now, with the clearing of hyacinth, the lake is refreshed. However, sewage entering the lake should be stopped immediately,” Pacchapur explained.

According to the report, Doddakallasandra Lake falls in the D class, which means the waterbody is best suited for propagation of wildlife and fisheries. The lake could not qualify for class A (drinking) or class B (bathing); class C indicates, with some treatment, water could be drinkable. Class E means the water can be used only for irrigation and industrial cooling purposes.

  Doddakallasandra Lake is still raising a stinkThe letter was addressed to Suguna, Chief Engineer Lakes, BBMP. It stated that that encroachment in the north of Doddakallasandra Lake hasn’t been cleared so far while the rejuvenation work is getting completed. The land encroached should be cleared and the area has to be levelled, the DLPC mentioned in the letter.
 
The residents pointed out that until last year over 106 lakes were monitored by the KSPCB; with the recent report, they wonder what is the next course of action: “Though lake rejuvenation is carried out by the BBMP, the civic body is not bothered about the water quality; they just maintain water in the lake. Even the KSPCB doesn’t tell us what steps need to be taken regarding the water quality,” said a resident.

Meanwhile, Doddakallasandra Lake Protection Committee (DLPC) had recently written to the BBMP lakes department, highlighting that more work still needs to be accomplished to regain the lake’s lost biodiversity. The residents asked for rainwater harvesting to be carried out as well. However, their demands haven’t been met yet.

“We asked the KSPCB to monitor more lakes. At least, with these reports, citizens can get to know the status of their neighbourhood lake and then work with the concerned officials to work on its betterment,” added Pachhapur.