Here’s a novel protest which hopes to tap popular symbolism to make a connection. A disputed memorial for a late Sandalwood hero in forest land at Mylasandra is facing resistance with residents and green activists planting sandalwood seedlings in the cleared land. 

 Last Monday (On October 13), a high level meeting chaired by chief minister Siddaramaiah had decided to lay the foundation stone for the Vishnuvardhan Memorial on November 6. Mylasandra residents who have been protesting the move launched their campaign the next day. 

 	They planted over hundred-plus sandalwood and other saplings in an area measuring around 4,000 square feet, which was cleared of trees for the construction work. “We thought the government would rethink on using the forest land after seeing our opposition,” Veeresh S, a Mylasandra resident, told Bangalore Mirror. “But Monday’s announcement was a shocker for all of us. Hence we decided to restore the land by ourselves.” 

 	The two-acre land earmarked for the memorial is part of the BM Kaval Reserved Forest spread over 500 acres. Vishnuvardhan’s family hopes to see a memorial come up here, complete with a film institute and exhibition on the life and achievements of the late actor. A trust led by chief minister Siddaramaiah has been set up to implement the construction. 

 	Plans for a Vishnuvardhan Memorial have run into controversies ever since the actor died in December 2009. Initially Abhimaan Studios was identified as the location of the memorial, but that plan was abandoned after actor Balakrishna’s daughter objected. 

 	It was then shifted to the present location where the state hurriedly carried out rituals in Vishnuvardhan’s memory in December 2013. Wildlife activists and Mylasandra residents were protesting the move ever since, but the government went ahead and cleared the area of tree cover. 

 	“There was no action by the forest department when the trees were cut. No cases have been booked till date against anybody for cutting trees in the reserved forest. Hence we have planted over 100 saplings and are caring for them on a day-to-day basis to restore the forest,” Manjula M, another resident, told Bangalore Mirror.