Pinarayi Vijayan gets a call an hour past midnight. It was an SOS from Athira,. TCS employee and her friends, saying they were stranded near a check post in Kerala-Karnataka border.' "Don't worry, child. It can be worked out," the CM replies and ensures they reach home safely.

Thiruvananthapuram: Kerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan was woken up by a phone call, shortly after midnight, in the small hours of Wednesday. 

It was an SOS call from a batch of female travellers heading to their native place in Kerala from Hyderabad, sources said.

The female voice faltered out of fear for bothering the CM at this odd hour. The caller Athira, a business executive with Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) managed to convey to the CM that they were stranded at Tholpetty (a wildlife sanctuary) check post, amid the darkness of wilderness, in the Kerala -Karnataka border. 

She and 13 others with her including a male need to reach Kozhikode. (well over 100 km still to go)

'Pedikanda mole, pariharamundakkam' (Don't worry, child. It can be worked out), the CM reassured Athira, a native of Puthiyara near Kozhikode. 

The CM's concern for their safety remained till they reached their homes at 9 am on Wednesday, the pro- CPI (M) daily Deshabhimani reported.

 Untitled Carousel Kerala: 9 new COVID-19 positive cases reported; Vijayan says not a single person will go without foodKerala chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Wednesday affirmed that not a single person in the state would go without food in the backdrop of nation-wide lockdown imposed to curb the spread of COVID-19.  

The batch comprising Athira's colleagues Theertha and Anjali Krishna had decided to head home on Tuesday morning when reports of lockdown started to trickle.

The Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI) Kozhikode district committee member M M Subeesh contacted deputy-collector Biju seeking permission for the journey of the batch. 

He got permission from Telangana government for the journey by road. The batch comprising Athira started their journey at 8 am on Tuesday. 

They were stopped by authorities at Bagepalli and asked to go back. The deputy-collector intervened again and after some discussions got permission for the journey through a different route.

When they were nearing Bengaluru the nation-wide lockdown was announced. Since it was not possible to return all the way to Hyderabad the van driver said he will take them only up to the Kerala border. Athira and her friends tried to hire another vehicle. But in vain. Finally, Athira decided to ring up the CM.

After reaching home Athira called the CM to thank him. He advised her, for precaution's sake, to place herself under observation at home for 14 days.

 Untitled Carousel Kerala: Brother-sister duo fly back to U.K without completing mandatory quarantine period, booked Police in Ernakulam district of Kerala have registered a case against a siblings from U.K who flew back on the sly without completing their mandatory 14-day home quarantine.