Snake, believed to bring luck, worth Rs 1 cr in illegal marke
 
 
 Chikkajala police have arrested four persons and have rescued a rare two-headed red sand boa, said to be worth more than Rs 1 crore in the illegal wildlife trade market. Police claimed that all four arrested were middlemen in a major smuggling racket involving rare animals. They would buy snakes from catchers and supply them to agents, who, in turn, would strike hefty deals from buyers. The rescued reptile was later released into the Bannerghatta National Park, in the presence of forest department officials, on Monday. The two-headed red sand boa is considered good luck charm, and used in black magic rituals in India. It is also in demand for its medicinal value in some Asian countries.
 
 
 According to the Chikkajala police, they received a tip-off at around 4.30 pm on Sunday afternoon that a gang was trying to strike a deal for a two-headed red sand boa in Army Layout near Venkateshwara College. A team of officials, including some plainclothesmen, was assembled to pose as potential customers. The accused were found inside a private vehicle trying to strike a deal with their prospective customers. The decoys approached them and struck a deal to buy the creature for Rs 1 lakh.
 
 
 Soon, they signalled to their colleagues to arrest the accused. The arrested have been identified as Munikrishna (28), Gopala (22), Punith (21) and Karthik (18). These snakes are largely found in Bagepalli and Mulabagal of Kolar, and Sira in Tumakuru besides other places in the state.
 
 
 “We managed to nab the gang at the first level of illegal transport. Two-headed snakes are sold for Rs 1 crore. Buyers believe these bring good luck, virility and protection from enemies. These snakes are also smuggled out to countries like Japan, Malaysia, Singapore and China. International markets fetch greater value for the smugglers than local ones,” said PS Harsha, deputy commissioner of police (north-east).
 
 
 Meanwhile, Chikkjala police was entrusted with the safe custody of the rare snake for almost 24 hours until wildlife officials took over and released it back into the wild. Forest officials had instructed the policemen to feed the snake a high-protein diet, mainly egg whites, at regular intervals. A case has been registered against the accused under the Wildlife Protection Act and IPC section 420 (cheating).