Chief minister D V Sadananda Gowda dealt another blow to Bangalore’s last standing grassland at Hesarghatta when he announced a proposed theme park there. A few days ago it was Bangalore Development Authority’s (BDA) Tree Plantation plan that horrified green activists. 
 More than a 1,000 people from various walks of life have come together to protest the controversial project which, they say, will endanger the fragile ecosystem. 
 Activists have also been signing an online petition to safeguard more than 300 acres of the grassland which is under the animal and husbandry department. The activists have decided to submit their petition to the forest department’s principal secretary, Kaushik Mukherjee, next week. 
 Mahesh Bhat, a resident of Hesarghatta for the last 10 years, said: “Grasslands are a unique and threatened ecosystem supporting specialised flora and fauna. A few birds even migrate from Europe and Central Asia during winter. Recently, a high level committee constituted by the Planning Commission stated that grasslands and deserts are the most neglected ecosystems. At a time when one needs to safeguard habitats like these, they are ruining it by raising theme parks.” 
 Being the only grassland around Bangalore, Hesarghatta has several unique fauna and avian species like Montagu’s harrier, Lesser Florican, jackals etc. 
 Another resident Shiva Prasad said, “The decision is ironic. On the one hand, the government is spending crores of rupees to rejuvenate Arkavathy river valley to quench Bangalore’s thirst. On the other, it wants to set up a theme park. Hesarghatta is crucial for the rejuvenation of Arkavathy river basin. Any damage to the area would only harm the rejuvenation.” 
 “Interstitial zones like Hesarghatta should remain untouched,” added an ecologist from IISc. “The grassland of Hesarghatta has been attested to by the British and even notified in their gazette along with other grasslands of Bangalore like Malleswaram, Yeshwanthpur and Hebbal. While all of them have been destroyed by our greed, Hesarghatta is the only remaining land that needs to conserved as it is,” the ecologist said. 
 Demanding legal action to safeguard the grassland, Mahesh Bhat said, “The petition is our first step to convince the government. Keeping in mind its importance, the government must declare it as a protected reserve either under Section 4 of the Indian Forest Act of 1927 or under the provisions of the Indian Wildlife Act of 1972. People will understand the importance of the grassland only if it is declared a reserve.”