Rescuers get about 20 calls each day about birds that have collapsed on the road

It's still early days of summer but the city is already witnessing high temperatures, as high as 39 degree Celsius. Wildlife rescuers are shocked by the spike in the number of birds collapsing from dehydration. 

A rescuer told BM that they were getting more than 20 calls a day to rescue birds that were falling down from dehydration, in different localities. They point out that this is due to many lakes drying up in summer and decreasing water bodies for birds to quench their thirst. 

Calls have come from areas like Shivajinagar, Banashankari, RT Nagar, Marathahalli, Peenya, Banaswadi, Yelahanka and Jayanagar, with reports of birds like kites, owls and sparrows being affected by the increase in temperatures. "From the last week of February, we started getting many calls to rescue birds. The maximum calls were from places where there were few trees. Birds fly from place to place in search of water and when they have to fly great distances, they get tired. When there are no trees for them to rest, they collapse from dehydration," said Hisss Mohan, BBMP wildlife warden.

Mohan also disclosed that not many people know that the bird has collapsed due to dehydration and most think that it is dead. “We have got calls reporting that a bird has died. Only if people have a close look, can they see that the bird is alive.Many birds are seen trying to fly but they don’t have the energy to do so,” said Mohan.

According to the rescuers, first aid must be administered immediately. Give them glucose water and place them in a cool place under observation. After two hours, the birds should feel better and ready to fly, says Mohan.

Many rescuers have also taken steps to provide water for the birds. Somu HN, wildlife rescuer from Banashankari, has cut 2-litre water bottles into half. The bottom half of the bottle is filled with water and hung on trees so that birds can drink from it. Somu has hung about 25 bottles and has treated birds in localities like Uttarahalli and Rajarajeshwari Nagar. “Birds require plenty of water. Dehydration can even prove fatal for them. Many birds drink water from the bottles I have hung on trees. I have told the locals to refill the bottles and they are doing it. I also carry about five litres of water with me to refill the bottles,” said Somu.

Wildlife rescuer Rashmi Mavilkure has kept bowls of water around her house and has encouraged her neighbours to do so as well. “Many of my neighbours have started keeping bowls of water for the birds. Mynah, munia, sparrow, turtle doves and crows come and drink the water and sometimes they even take a dip to cool off,” said Mavilkure.