Recently, a resident of the city, staying close to the Seetharampalya Lake, noticed a bird entangled in a ghost fishing net.

Ghost nets are fishing nets discarded in waterbodies which often prove dangerous to aquatic life; birds, fish or other animals accidentally get entangled in it and thereafter find it difficult to free themselves.
 
Ravi, a photographer by profession, was on his morning stroll at Seetharampalya Lake when he noticed a bird desperately struggling to move. Upon a closer look, he realised it was a great cormorant badly entangled in an abandoned fishing net. Soon after, Ravi alerted the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC).
 
Rescuers from ARRC rushed to the spot and were able to rescue the bird with the help of a local fisherman. He swam and retrieved the bird. The bird was then taken to ARRC for further treatment.

Initially, it appeared that the cormorant’s beak was entangled in the net. Upon further examination,ARRC veterinarian Dr Ashritha Carlo found that the bird had ingested some part of the net; the remains of the net was preventing the bird from feeding normally. “The situation was complex. We had to be careful to prevent further injuries to the bird. We took an X-ray to confirm the extent of the ingestion. Luckily the net had not gone very deep; there was no metallic hook attached to the net. We took the bird into emergency surgery to extract the net carefully through the oesophagus,” Dr Carlo said.
 
Post surgery, the medical team provided supportive therapy through fluids, pain medication, and antibiotics. The bird recuperated quickly and was kept under observation for a period of ten days to check for blockages in the Gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
.
 
Once the ARRC team had confirmation that the bird’s flight and GI tract were not affected, it was released back into the wild. “One thing that never fails to amaze us is the tenacity and resilience of the wild animals we work with.
 
Cormorants are sensitive birds that are highly susceptible to stress; we can only imagine the pain and trauma that this bird must have endured while it desperately struggled to free itself from the net. When it came to us, we were not even sure it would stabilise after the ordeal. But to our amazement, not only did it make it through the night, it battled against all odds and also made a miraculous recovery,” Subiksha Venkatesh, ARRC’s rescue manager, told BM.


.
 
Abandoned fishing nets or ghost nets pose a serious threat to wildlife. Made of nylon, these nets stay in the environment long after they have been discarded and continue to indiscriminately trap hundreds of animals, including fish, snakes, turtles and birds. In addition to the harm caused to individual animals, ghost nets can also have a negative impact on entire ecosystems by disrupting the balance of aquatic life.


...not only did the cormorant make it through the night, it battled against all odds to make a miraculous recovery— Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC

According to Jayanthi Kallam, ARRC’s executive director, while the cormorant was lucky, other animals go through gruesome ordeals, either starving to death, drowning by not being able to surface or not being able to escape from predators. “Since ghost nets can be found wherever there is fishing activity, it is important that we as a community, educate our fishermen to properly recycle or dispose of unusable fishing gear and support initiatives that work to remove and recycle abandoned nets. By working together, we can help to create a safer environment for all aquatic life,” Kallam said.