By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 There are we going?”, I gasped to the boy next to me. In the sleepy little colony in coastal Andhra Pradesh where my father was posted, if you saw a group of boys running purposefully somewhere, you ran along and asked questions later. Udumbu, he gasped back, and there was no need for further explanation. This was not a sight to be missed. We reached a sandy bank on the fringes of the colony, just in time to see a large dark-coloured reptile half-run and half-slither across the ground to disappear into one of the many small ponds that dotted the landscape. Going by the excitement levels in the group, a passer-by may well have thought that we had spotted the abominable snowman.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 The udumbu (in Tamil and Telugu), or uda (in Kannada) known to science as the common Indian monitor lizard is a creature that, quite literally, has India’s collective imagination firmly in its grip. A fully grown monitor can measure more than five and a half feet in length. With its scaly grey skin, long tail, clawed feet and flickering tongue, it looks like a direct descendant of the dinosaurs. On the ground, its gait can be slow and measured when exploring or stalking, and rapid when chasing or fleeing. The monitor is an excellent climber, quite at home on trees or rocky cliffs, and an adept swimmer, as well.
 
 
 The folklore surrounding this reptile ranges from enhanced reality to vivid fantasy. Let’s start with the udumbu pudi – the monitor lizard’s grip – an idiom which is used in several Indian languages to represent a hold over something that just can’t be shaken off. Legend has it that back in Mughal times, the monitor was an essential part of every army’s toolkit. To scale the walls of an impregnable fort, one had to simply tie a stout rope around the waist of this creature and send it clambering up the fort wall. The monitor would find a crevice near the ramparts and wedge itself firmly there, clutching the rocky wall with a grip so firm, a soldier could confidently climb up the rope and vault into the fort. Shivaji’s trusted lieutenant, Tanaji Malusare, is widely believed to have used a monitor lizard in the battle of Sinhagad, to scale the fort walls and capture it. In fact an entire clan of Marathas was named Ghorpade, after the ghorpad or monitor lizard that they used so skilfully to breach the enemy’s defences.
 
 
 If bearing the burden of hefty soldiers wasn’t stressful enough for the monitor, it has to contend with other beliefs and practices that are downright deadly. These lizards are prized targets for poachers. The fat deposits in their tail and body (meant to help tide over lean times) is boiled out to make medicinal oils that are reputed to cure a range of ailments. Their flesh is a much sought-after delicacy across rural India. Their blood is mixed with alcohol and to create an aphrodisiacal cocktail. Their leathery skin is used to make the drumhead of the kanjira, a south Indian percussion instrument. Humans have clearly become the nemesis for this unique reptile, which has few other enemies.
 
 
 What are the chances of spotting the common Indian monitor (also called the Bengal monitor) in Bengaluru? They certainly don’t exist within the city, but there are green belts on the outskirts – like the Bannerghatta National Park – where wild monitor lizards may be spotted with some luck. From time to time you may also come across news items about monitor lizards being rescued in Bengaluru. These creatures are unfortunate victims of the illegal wildlife trade, which thrives in the Hosur-Krishnagiri belt. They are trapped and brought to the city to be sold at exorbitant prices to wealthy customers. It’s high time the authorities clamped down on this despicable practice with a grip as firm as the monitor lizard’s.