By Garima Prasher

NGOs are working on human-wildlife conflict issues especially to protect elephants

Over the last six months (between January and June 2023), Karnataka has witnessed a large number of elephant deaths. According to the current data, a total of 22 elephants lost their lives, out of which six of them fell victim to electrocution. This alarming rise in electrocution cases has raised concerns among wildlife conservationists and researchers.

Out of the six, two deaths were reported from Virajpet, while one each was from Mandya, Koppa WP, DB Kuppe, and Biligiri Ranganathaswamy Temple Tiger Reserve. This includes the recent electrocution of an elephant in DB Kuppe of Nagarhole tiger reserve on June 29.

Interestingly, 17 elephants died between January and June 2022 and only two cases of electrocution were registered. Similarly between January and June 2021, while 32 death were reported, only two elephants died of electrocution.

“The committee consists of officials from Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), panchayat, local electricity supply company, and police officer. One of the ideas behind formulating this committee was to keep power thefts under check and protect the elephants. However, the large number of elephants dying due to electrocution only indicates that these committees are not on their toes,” said Joseph Hoover, a former member of the State Board for Wildlife and founder of United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.

“We got to know about the incident before the department could get the whiff. This indicates that something is amiss,” added Hoover.

However, according to the KFD, while the department is grappling with the electrocution of elephants as an issue, measures are being taken to keep such incidents under control.

“While some of the electrocution cases are due to sagging electric lines, there is no denying the elephants are being electrocuted deliberately as well. The department has taken a tough stand on the DB Kuppe case. Our entire team is working on apprehending the offender. Although the family responsible for killing the elephant has run away to Kerala, we will ensure that they are nabbed, and a case of poaching is filed. We will make sure that they are prosecuted,” said Kumar Pushkar, APCCF (wildlife), Karnataka Forest Department.

Experts say the need of the hour is to implement the Wildlife Protection Act (WLPA) to the letter and spread awareness about the issue among farmers at forest fringes.

“As per WLPA, the forest department can issue a non-bailable arrest warrant against persons responsible for the death of elephants, a schedule I animal as per the act. The offenders can immediately be arrested and prosecuted as per the law. However, the law is never implemented in true spirit. Sometimes, the process of filing an FIR takes months. The department should also consider spreading more awareness among the farmers about subsidies available in the event of such conflict,” said Daniel Sukumar Das, director of the Wildlife Conservation
 Foundation.
 
Conservationists say a case in point is that of the Bandipur area where the elephant death cases due to electrocution have reduced to zero.

“Many NGOs are working in the region exclusively on human-wildlife conflict issues. Farmers are being educated about it and immediate disbursement of compensation is ensured in the event of crop raids by elephants or other wildlife. We are trying to solve the farmers’ problems, and this leads to an increase in their tolerance levels towards wildlife,” said a conservationist working in the area.