By Shayaree Chanda

Forest department will organise two-day-long festival to raise awareness about frogs of Western Ghats

Karnataka’s forest department is organising ‘Kappe Habba’ (frog festival) in Shivamogga to create awareness about frogs and other amphibians in Western Ghats.
 
The two-day event will be celebrated on December 18 and 19 with several delegates, including the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and other important researchers and scholars specialising in Amphibian conversation.

This festival, a product of the forest department, aims to produce a similar effect as the Dandeli Hornbill Festival or Moth Festival in Doddaballapur, Bengaluru that celebrates the local fauna in the best way possible.
 
Taking into consideration the vast wildlife in Western Ghats, which is available in Shivamogga, the department thought they could highlight conservation issues at Western Ghats through this festival.

Earlier the event was supposed to be a small function catering to only 50 people but as different people enquired to join the event the limit has been extended to 150. As frogs are mostly active during the rainy season, during the months of June and July, it is when they plan to collaborate with around 500 researchers to practically document and update the overall database of frogs. The researchers will be divided into teams to scale 930 sq km of Sharavathi LTM Sanctuary to work on the project.

The main aim of the whole event and the upcoming project in 2022 is to understand why different species of frogs are endangered in Western Ghats.
 
Most of the areas where the frogs live aren’t penetrable by humans so this event will further highlight the indirect ways that we are causing harm to several amphibian species.
 
At the same time, solutions to prevent and conserve amphibians like frogs are to be discussed here. “Many kinds of frogs that were visible in the 1980s are not visible now. Our guess is, this is due to the predatory actions of bigger frogs against driver frogs of smaller size,” said IM Nagraj, Deputy Conservator of Forests.