Into the wild
Three wildlife photographers – Avinash Kamath, Haru Somasekhar and Vijakumar Pattadakali, are putting up an exhibition to create awareness about the rich biodiversity in our subcontinent. Called We/Me, the exhibition is a select presentation of 60 photographs that reflect species from six different ecosystems in 
our country – The Indian Trans-Himalayas, Himalayas, Aravalis and Vindhyas, Grasslands, Wetlands and Mangroves and Western Ghats.

 WHERE: Devraj Urs Gallery, Chitra Kala Parishath, Kumarakrupa Road
 WHEN: 10am-6pm, July 11-14
 CALL: 22261816

Watch a film
Thermae Romae is an eccentric sci-fi comedy about a conservative and staid Roman bath-house architect Lucius Modestus who, unable to keep up with the changing times, is unable to impress the Emperor Hadrianus. Morose and sullen, Lucius accidentally slips through a time portal that connects the ancient roman bath house to a bath house in modern Japan. Watch this adventurous film. 

 WHERE: Bangalore International Centre, 4th Main Road, Domlur II Stage
 WHEN: 6.30pm-8.30pm, July 11
 ENTRY: Free
 CALL: 9886599675

It’s the time to retro
Do you ever feel like you are born into a wrong era? We mean, do you still prefer listening to Michael Jackson, The Beatles or Madonna rather than Katy Perry, Justin Bieber or Avicii of the day? So here’s your chance to turn back the clock and relive the golden superhits from 80s and 90s at this retro party.

 WHERE: Felix Alter Ego, 1 MG Lido Mall, Trinity Circle
 WHEN: 6pm, July 11 CALL: 22086644

 Bring your own stories
What are human beings without stories? Stories have the power to convey underlying emotions, transfer information and tradition, and motivate many to take action. So tonight, join this meetup and share stories of all kinds.

 WHERE: Lahe Lahe, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar WHEN: 8pm-9pm, July 11
 ENTRY: `100, eventshigh.com

 Go on a musical date
Make your Thursday a rocking one with Iyer Filter Coffee. It is a garage/indie rock band drawing inspiration from icons such as the Strokes, Arctic Monkeys, RHCP and the Beatles. The four-piece outfit from the city is known for its high-energy and foot-tapping performances.

 WHERE: Indigo XP, 6th Block, Jyoti Nivas College Road WHEN: 8pm, July 11 ENTRY: `299, insider.in

Show me the money 
Indiranagar-based TapChief recently raised a lot of money from investors. Starting from a hostel room, today the team of 50 claims to have empowered 84,000+ professionals to earn by taking up short-term projects and consultations with businesses around the world. So if you are an upcoming startup looking fort Funding 101 tips, hear out the co-founder Shashank Murali at this session. 

 WHERE: Tribe Theory Startup Hostels, Koramangala
 WHEN: 7pm-9pm, July 11 CALL: 8762708173