13 lakes continuously fall under class E as observed in past 4 months; 59 lakes under class D and 41 lakes in class E

Statistics of Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) had shown until January 2023 over 21 lakes had come under Class E category, waters of which can only be used for irrigation and industrial cooling.
 
However, in March, the number came down from 21 to 13; lake activists said it is a sign of concern that there still are 13 lakes that have continuously come under class E as observed in the past four months.

There are five classes that categorise lake water quality. Class A signifies lake water ready for drinking without any treatment. Class B lake water can be used for outdoor bathing. Water from Class C waterbodies can be used for drinking after conventional treatment followed by disinfection. Class D lake water can be utilised for the propagation of wildlife and fisheries and Class E for irrigation, industrial cooling and controlled waste disposal. 

There are over 106 Bengaluru lakes where KSPCB carries out water quality sample tests every month. Lake water is far from qualifying for class A, B and C as the quality is quite bad. As of February 2023 statistics, over 59 lakes are under class D category and 41 lakes in category E. 

From November 2022 to February 2023, 13 lakes have continuously fallen under class E category water quality which is best used for industrial cooling and irrigation. The 13 lakes are Singasandra, Parappana Agrahara, Haralur, Kaikondrahalli, Rampura, Vibhutipura, Kammasandra, Rayasandra, Gangondanahalli, Machohalli, Jakkur, Singapura and Shivapura.
 
“Four months is a long period for the lakes to continuously fall under Category E. Like KSPCB is doing its bit by carrying out water quality analysis every month, the BBMP should constantly check out the reports to find where and how lakes are getting polluted affecting the water quality. Soon after, the civic body must closely check the lakes and stop the pollutants from entering. During rains, officials stated that along with rain water, sewage enters the lake. However now during the dry days it should be stopped. Dissolved oxygen levels, biochemicals, and coliform bacteria content are important parameters that need to be looked at as well,” lake activist Raghvendra Pacchapur said.

Citizens revealed Basavanapura Lake was recently rejuvenated by the BBMP — they said, however, in no time the lake was in bad shape and stinking.
 
“While the KSPCB provides water quality reports in terms of class category, it does not reveal other parameters. Many other states give a complete report where there is greater transparency,” he said.
 
A senior BBMP official from the lakes department team said while KSPCB is checking the water quality, the BBMP is continuously monitoring the lakes: “We are working on sewage diversion channels of the Bengaluru lakes to avoid the entry of sewage into the waterbodies. Furthermore, the BBMP has installed 11 STPs (sewage treatment plants) in some of the lakes.
 
KSPCB officials can give us some suggestions on the measures that can improve the water quality,” the official added.