By:Gautam C
 
 The new tourist attraction to be introduced from June will be the first in South India; ticket prices are being worked out
 
 Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP), which has the country’s highest density of carnivore animals, will feature another attraction starting from June: a 3D theatre on its premises. The theatre will exhibit some of the greatest wildlife and environmental movies from different parts of the world. 
 With this, BBP will become the first zoo in South India and second only to Sanjay Gandhi Biological Park in Patna to have a 3D theatre.
 Senior officials at both the BBP and Zoo Authority of Karnataka (ZAK) were struck by the idea of converting the existing auditorium adjacent to the museum into a 3D theatre. “As the whole city was adapting itself to the burgeoning multiplex culture, we too decided to cash in on the concept by deciding to exhibit films that are conservational and educative in nature. Initially we were only showing documentaries made by the department about various conservational aspects and had to stop owing to lack of visitors. Now we have obtained permission from both the ZAK and government for the 3D theatre,” Range Gowda, Executive Director, BBP told Bangalore Mirror. 
 	  	The seating arrangements in the auditorium have been upgraded to “world class” with proper acoustic modifications. “Initially, we planned to accommodate 150 people. Later, we decided to reduce it to 120 keeping in mind the audience’s comfort. The inside ambience is no less than any multiplex experience. The entire project has cost us Rs 1.4 crore and will be open for shows by first week of June,” Gowda said.
 BBP’s recent affiliation to World Association of Zoos and Aquariums (WAZA) has helped access some of the best movies on wildlife and environment conservation. Another senior official explained, “The management of the theatre will be outsourced to a multiplex operator. We will be providing them with the movies while they focus only on maintenance. The shows would help people experience real safari through latest technology. The work is on at full swing, and about 90 per cent has already been completed. Except for installation of the special 3D screen, everything is ready and we will be open to the general public in June first week.”
 	  	Gowda said tariffs are still being worked out. He said, “Each show will be of at least one hour duration. The ticket price will be based on the expenses we incur in maintaining and purchase of movies. But we hope that the cost will be affordable for the general public. If children and students visit BBP as part of their school or college tour, we are even thinking of offering discounts on the ticket price.”