Citing chief minister’s directions, member of legislative assembly representing HD Kote constituency S Chikkamadu and his supporters allegedly disrupted well-organised measures for tiger habitat protection which were in place in the core area of Bandipur Reserve Forest on Sunday evening.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The incident took place at the Beladkuppe Temple Fair that takes place every year in and around the core area of Bandipur Reserve Forest. This fair includes a series of events which ensures a large number of footfalls.
 
 
 With huge crowds expected to attend the fair, forest department officials and wildlife activists, including some from Bengaluru, had put in place measures to ensure that the tiger habitat was not disturbed. These included a newly-introduced rule that Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation (KSRTC) buses would be provided for those attending the fair, while prohibiting private vehicles inside. The tourists were asked to park their private vehicles about two kilometres from one of the main gates.
 
 
 Accordingly, ten KSRTC buses were parked at the point waiting to take visitors in. “We had planned this for a month in advance to effectively control and minimise the damage to the tiger habitat in Bandipur Tiger Reserve,” a wildlife activist told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 
 However, at around 5.30 pm, the HD Kote MLA Chikkamadu came in his official vehicle along with seven other private vehicles filled with his supporters, and allegedly created a ruckus, ordering shops to be shifted within the temple precincts.
 
 
 “They threw barricades installed by the police aside to let all the private vehicles – including ice cream trucks and those of other vendors – inside. The vandalism took place in a span of minutes. They shouted vulgarities and threatened the forest department officials of dire consequences like setting fire to the forest,” the activist said.
 
 
 It didn’t end there. The MLA and his supporters along with the temple committee proceeded to the Yeshwanthpura Gate, where the organised parking was maintained, and allegedly repeated the same ruckus, forcing people in the parking area to take their vehicles inside, disrupting the arrangements.
 
 
 “The police were missing when this incident took place and all the traders entered the forest with the MLA’s support,” the activist said. “All the efforts of the volunteers, wildlife activists and forest department officials have gone in vain after the MLA and his supporters stopped the forest department from carrying out its duties.”
 
 
 The arrangements were put in place after several meetings among the forest department officials, the temple committee and revenue officials, in which a set of guidelines were drafted – including banning entry of private vehicles and using KSRTC buses, limiting the number of shops and hotels etc. These regulations were also published in the local newspaper to inform all the visitors.
 
 
 “This incident highlighted how well-intended actions of the forest department are brazenly bypassed by elected representatives in clear violation of the law. A detailed complaint has been sent to the additional chief secretary and the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA); and we have appealed for an independent probe into the matter by the NTCA and the forest department,” the activist said.
 
 
 Wildlife activists and the forest officials are likely to file a police complaint as well.
 
 
 The MLA Chikkamadu, on his part, said: “The authorities should not hurt the sentiments of devotees who come to attend the fair. The chief minister (Siddaramaiah) had directed the forest department not to cause any troubleto the visitors; but the forest department have refused to follow this directive. I have just followed the CM’s direction and taken private vehicles inside. If it is wrong, then the police can arrest me.”
 
 
 Assistant conservator of forest Paramesh said, “The government has not given any directions on relaxation on prohibitory rules. We have performed our duty as forest department officials. The MLA refused to follow any rules and regulations. The MLA has broken the barricades and entered the area along with his private vehicles. Further action will be taken by the police department.”
 
 
 SETTING THE TREND
 
 
 » This Beladkuppe Temple Fair takes place every year on the last Monday of Kartika Masa (eighth month in a traditional Hindu calendar). Fire-walking is a historic event that takes place every year at the fair.
 
 
 » Every year, to attract more people towards the forest additional programmes are added. There is a 20-30 per cent increase in the vehicles and 10-15 per cent in the number of people visiting every year.
 
 
 » The events of the fair take place in an area of 25 acres inside the forest in the Hediyala region.
 
 
 » Since it is declared as a core critical tiger habitat in 2007, there are a list of regulations introduced in the forest, and people accept it.