By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 At the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre (WRRC) in Bannerghatta, Bengaluru, injured wild creatures are treated and released back into their natural habitat. But one former inmate keeps coming back. Most days, around dusk, a sharp kik-ki cry is heard from the trees at the periphery of the campus. “That’s our shikra. She’s  	calling for her evening snack”, smiles Dr Roopa, the centre’s veterinarian. 
 	
 	  	As we walk towards the designated feeding point, I visualise a bowl where small meat chunks will be placed, for the shikra to come and feast on. 
 	
 	  	But that technique, as it turns out, is for wimps. Dr Roopa holds up a piece of meat for the bird to see. Then she tosses it high in the air. The shikra launches itself like a guided missile towards the airborne titbit, grabs it with its claws and returns to its perch to devour it. This process repeats several times, and the shikra never misses its mark. As the bird flies off after its feed, I mentally kick myself for being so impertinent as to think that a bird whose name is derived from the Hindi/Urdu word “shikari” meaning “hunter”, would deign to eat from a bowl.
 	
 	  	The shikra is a small raptor (bird of prey) found all over Bengaluru. A fully grown bird is about the size of a large pigeon. It has a grey upper body with a whitish underside embellished with a fine brown banded pattern. Its thigh feathers are a striking white. The shikra has a sharp, hooked beak and fiery orange-red eyes. It has short rounded wings and a somewhat long tail. Male and female are almost identical, with slight differences in size and eye colour.
 	
 	  	The shikra relies on speed, guile and acute senses to hunt its prey. It moves rapidly with a typical flight pattern – a few quick flaps followed by a short glide. Its prey includes mice, squirrels, small birds and lizards – easily located thanks to its sharp eyesight. To capture its victim, the shikra accelerates and strikes it hard with its sharp talons. It then takes the stunned creature to a quiet spot and tears it apart with its sharp beak, clinically consuming every part of its body that is edible. No wonder then, that the very sight of a shikra in the distance sends these creatures into panic mode. 
 	
 	  	The shikra’s abilities as a hunter were recognised by falconers in India, Pakistan and China. It formed an important part of their flock, and was used to hunt birds and small game. Though not as powerful as some of the bigger falcons, the shikra built up a formidable reputation for being highly manoeuvrable in the air, striking hard at prey and quickly grasping instructions. These very instincts must have guided the bird I saw at WRRC to identify, call for and take food without any training whatsoever. Even today, in the world’s falconry hub, the Middle East, the shikra serves as a perfect “entry level” bird for a young falconer, and helps bring in prey that is used to feed the larger birds. 
 	
 	  	If imitation is an indicator of flattery, this pocket-sized predator has a large fan following. The drongo has learnt to imitate the shikra’s call, while the hawk cuckoo has evolved to resemble it in plumage. These features are used to scare away other birds and get exclusive access to food sources. The Indian Navy has a helicopter base called the INS Shikra, and the Singapore Air Force uses the shikra as a mascot for one of its squadrons.
 	
 	  	Bengaluru is a city that demands change. Most of its inhabitants have unlearnt old habits and skills, and picked up new ones that fit in better with the rapidly evolving city.
 	
 	In such an environment, it is indeed exciting to see a resident bird that holds on to its primeval hunting skills which it has mastered over millennia.