Rujuta Khade’s mind drew to a blank as the 73rd Glenmark Senior National Aquatic Championships 2019 came to a close in Bhopal earlier this month. The 23-year-old Mumbai resident was competing after a four-yearhiatus from swimming. She wasn’t too sure that she had what it takes to win.

“Oddly, I was more nervous than she was,” says swimmer Virdhawal Khade, Rujuta’s husband, and mentor.

But the hard work paid off. On September 2, Rujuta went on to win the 50m freestyle event in 26.72 seconds, becoming the fastest woman swimmer in India. Twenty-eight-year-old Virdhawal, who is India’s youngest swimmer at the Olympics (Beijing, 2008) and a 2011 Arjuna awardee, broke his earlier records at this year’s event, to clock 22.44 seconds in the 50m freestyle meet. Together, the Khades are now the country’s fastest swimmer couple.

For this handsome pair, it’s a match made in the pool. Their entire world revolves around the sport, from preparing for it to practising it. “We constantly push each other in the gym and the pool to train harder,” says Rujuta. “At home, we nudge the other to eat healthier, so it really helps.”

           Virdhawal (28) and Rujuta Khade (23) at their Khar residence; PIC: AKANKSHA MANKAR        
Virdhawal, who has several national and international swimming championships under his belt, took it upon himself to mentor Rujuta; though they formally train under the legendary Nihar Ameen at the Padukone-Dravid Centre for Sports Excellence in Bangalore. From helping her in the gym to sharing breathing techniques and other tricks, she’s almost his first student — coaching professionally is something he, in fact, intends to pursue in some time. “She has it in her to become the greatest Indian woman swimmer,” he says. “I’d like to help her achieve that.” It also helps that he’s at home with her as well, because Rujuta needs some help to wake for the 5am practice session — something that has led to the occasional squabble between them.

“He believes in me more than I believe in myself,” says Rujuta. “Sometimes it’s reassuring, and sometimes scary… I don’t know if I can ever live up to his expectations.”

For Virdhawal, it’s also about sharing his hard-learnt experiences. After all, he’s the first Indian to break into the World Top 100 rankings. “I have been through the drill, so I know what needs to be done,” he says. “I don’t go overboard in preparing her physically, and I make sure she enjoys what she’s doing.”

The Khades are currently training for the 10th AASF Asian Age Group Championships 2019 to be held next month in Bangalore. While Rujuta has set her sights on more national competitions, Virdhawal wants to achieve the A qualification (he’s already cleared B) for the Tokyo 2020 Olympics.

Their daily routine entails two hours of swimming in the morning, followed by a couple of hours in the gym, and then another session in the pool in the evening. “The rest of the time, we simply eat and sleep,” laughs Virdhawal, admitting that they are not very social and hang out with only a select group of friends.

The couple first met each other in 2015 at the Khar Gymkhana. Virdhawal, who hails from Kolhapur, had moved to Mumbai with a job with the Maharashtra Civil Services, in 2012. The two would meet frequently, till one day Rujuta — the shy one — asked him out. They tied the knot in 2017. 

Life has become a lot easier since their marriage, shares the duo. They have turned into serious athletes and find actual joy in the sport, something neither did as children. “I decided to get back to swimming just to get fit,” says Rujuta. “Then I found I was still good at it, and with Virdhawal’s help, I’m way more focused now about the sport than I ever was.”

           .        
They are also each other’s veritable support system. “Rujuta knows what an athlete’s life entails and what it should be like,” says Virdhawal. “When I decided to make a comeback and started training for the 2018 Asian Games, she supported me completely. She helped me get through the low phases. I think we were supposed to be… it all just fell into place.”

When they are not training, the duo loves watching movies and trying out new cuisines. “We have even driven a couple of hours to Vasai to try a new seafood place, and we often do the same in Bangalore,” says Rujuta. Weekends are about grocery shopping and sharing kitchen chores.

The sport takes them places too. “We travel quite a bit and we love wildlife. So even if we get a couple of days off in between training, we go off to the Kabini wildlife sanctuary near Mysore,” says Virdhawal, adding that they recently took a holiday to the famous Maasai Mara National Park. When there’s no time to travel, they sometimes simply check into a resort, order room service and chill.

And does literally being in each other’s company 24x7 sometimes get overwhelming? The answer is a resounding ‘no’ from both. “We enjoy being with one another,” says Virdhawal with a smile. Clearly, it takes two to win.

DIET FOR CHAMPIONS

► Breakfast is either eggs and bread or tuna and bread
► Lunch and dinner are always dal-chawal, along with chicken or fish