Bengaluru duo has created a story book for children that is personalised, based on each kid’s name. There are more projects on the anvil, all around the same idea
 
 As a teenager, Satvik Shahapur (now 30), read a book by Kenneth Anderson, a British writer and hunter who wrote about his adventures in the jungles of South India. The book on wildlife and nature has stayed with Shahapur ever since, and he credits his interest in wildlife and nature today to it. It was also the genesis of Story 31, a platform which develops personalised books for children between the ages of three and eight.
 
 “Every time we see kids using the iPad or the mobile phone, they are playing games. Parents are concerned about how they can wean kids off from these repetitive games. We want them to read, which will open up their minds to the idea of adventure, risk-taking and willingness to learn,” Shahapur says. That’s what the 20-page book My Name is attempts to do. It is a story of a kid who goes on an adventure to rediscover his/her name, meet various animals and other characters based on the letters of their name and in the end, after a hard but exciting journey, learn the full spelling of his/her name. “It is not just about discovering these letters or the spelling. The real adventure lies in the meaningful interactions the child has with these various characters – who have strong personalities and backgrounds. The magic lies in the twinkling of the child’s eye as they discover that they are the hero of the story, and that the story is about them,” says Shahapur, co-founder of Story31.
 
 Currently the personalised book is available on their website www.story31.in, where one has to enter the child’s name in order to get the printed copy. “We did not want to take up run-of-the-mill stories and animate them. What really sets the book apart from all the other storybooks, is the fact that the child who is reading the book is the protagonist in this story and each story is custom made as per the child’s name. A couple of pages into the book, and the child will be able to figure out that the story is based on his/her name,” he says. The story range, from animals to objects, based on the child’s name. Once an order is placed, it takes seven-10 days to get the book in place after which delivery takes two days.
 
 In 2014, when Shahapur and his friend from college (who is now the co-founder) Sunil Kumar Pissaye (31) had come down from the United States of America, the two took off on a bike ride. It was a conversation about the lack of catchy illustrations in children’s books, during the ride that finalised their plans. Pissaye quit his job with Disney as a development engineer, and came back to India to develop their product. “We simply didn’t want to sell books online. We wanted to build a technology for the next generation which would be interactive and animated,” Pissaye says. 
 
 As they were building the platform –Press 31, an animated book technology without the use of Flash — they got a request from Disney to make one of their books in the PDF format (they do not wish to mention the name) into an interactive format. “It was a sample that they wanted for internal use. The problem with the existing technology is that it is not compatible on mobiles or tablets,” he says.
 
 While they started building the technology eight months ago, in the last four months they started working on the personalised book. In the last one month that they have been selling the books, they have sold 65 copies, which Shahapur says is only through word-of-mouth. To find out how children were responding to the book, the duo personally delivered the first 50 copies. “We told the parents that we would get back to them in a week’s time to find out what the kids thought about the book. We found that most of the children connected to the book owing to the fact that it was built around their names,” he says.
 
 Namita Acharya bought the book for her 6-year-old nephew to spark his interest in reading. “He’s more into cars, and I wanted him to pick up the habit of reading. I didn’t tell him that the book is personalised but within the first few chapters he figured out. Suddenly, there he got excited when he realised the story was about him,” she says.
 
 The challenge the duo is facing is writing for children in an interactive, interesting and sensitive manner. Many words such as ‘useless’ ‘ugly’ and ‘problematic’ which is common parlance, turn out to be problematic while writing for children. “We want the books to be child-friendly without using demeaning words, and at the same time want the stories to have a takeaway,” says Shahapur, who is also working on the issue of scaling the business. For instance, they substitute the word ‘problematic’ with ‘adventurous’. 
 
 While they are concentrating on this book, the plan is to keep their future books perosnalised which, they say, is their USP.
 
 Spin a yarn as you spell your name.
 
 My Name Is, is available on their website www.story31.in The book (for characters between 3 and 10) is priced at Rs 1099.