From monkey-bitten coffee to filter coffee brulee, are you on-trend with the latest caffeine innovations in the city? 
 
 
 	Catching up with friends over coffee? Ordering a cappuccino or even a macchiato is passé. Instead, why don’t you get a cup of monkey-bitten coffee? Or better still, a bite of pasta cooked with coffee cream? For a city that loves its coffee, it’s not surprising to find an increasing number of innovative products in the market tailormade for the discerning caffeine drinker. Here’s a roundup of five such finds in the city:
 	
 	 

 	Eco-friendly coffee 	Black Baza Coffee; Rs 100 onwards for 250 gms 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	What started out as a PhD research project for Arshiya Bose has now turned into an entrepreneurial venture to create a market for sustainably grown coffee. In 2011, the then University of Cambridge student was documenting the coffee landscape in the Western Ghats. At the end of four years, the Bengaluru-based Bose decided to launch Black Baza Coffee. “We found that although India has one of the most sustainable production systems in the world, our coffee was moving rapidly from shade to sun grown. So we started selling coffee in 2015 to support coffee growers to follow biodiversity-friendly farming, which we define as coffee grown under the shade of indigenous forest trees, without chemical pesticides and with active re-forestation of wildlife-use areas on farms.” Working largely with small growers (35 farms in BR Hills and Coorg), they monitor the number of trees, biodiversity (endangered species of birds and animals) and guarantee buy back from these growers to encourage them. With six blends of coffee with unique names such as Aspire to Otter, The Ficus, Black Baza Roast, etc., each variant highlights and pays homage to the biodiversity of the area. 
 	 

 

 	Pasta with coffee sauce 	Crowne Plaza Bengaluru; Rs 650
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	When corporate guests at the five-star hotel would order a cream-based pasta for a working lunch, Chef Thomas Joseph, Executive Chef, Crowne Plaza Bengaluru, decided to add a shot of espresso to the sauce. “It worked both ways—enhanced the overall dish, the chicken, in particular, and also caffeine acts as a stimulant and keeps one alert for the rest of the day,” Joseph says. The whole wheat chicken tagliatelle with coffee cream, introduced eight months ago, is a regular feature in the hotel’s lunch buffet. 
 	  	
 	  	South Indian coffee brûlée 	Bricklane, Indiranagar; Rs 175
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	About two years ago, Bricklane, the rooftop restaurant at Escape Hotel & Spa, in an effort to promote local flavours and produce, decided to use typical South Indian style filter coffee decoction to flavour the classic crème brûlée. “The dish was introduced by our then Executive Chef, Chef Chris Canham. Using local flavours and produce was the concept behind the then menu at Bricklane, which included many south Indian delicacies with a contemporary take on it. Fresh filter coffee decoction and chicory beans are used as the base for flavouring the dish,” explains Dheeraj Varma, Executive Chef, and Prakash Sukkan, Bakery Chef, at Escape Hotel & Spa. Turns out the idea clicked with local diners—Bricklane sells close to 30-odd brûlées every week.
 	
 	 

 	Monkey-bitten coffee 	The Indian Bean; Rs 390 for 100 gms
 	
 	
 	
 	​
 	
 	
 	
 	  	This may sound farfetched but there is actually a company selling coffee beans that have been chewed and spitted out by monkeys. Why, you ask? “Because the monkey sucks out the nectar and the other gooey things, while the seed sits in its mouth for approximately 20-30 minutes. This is the most crucial stage for the coffee to get its flavour. According to the Head at Coffee Board Quality Lab, the enzymatic reaction that happens when monkey’s saliva mixes with the coffee, breaks down the acidity, making it very mild and mellow,” explains Kunal Ross, the founder. While this particular bean is sourced from Araku Valley, The Indian Bean also sells a range of premium single estate coffees.
 	
 	 

 	Monsooned Malabar coffee 	Flying Squirrel; Rs 620 for 250 gms
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	This variant of coffee is aged by exposing the beans to coastal or monsoon air. Interestingly enough, it’s not a new practice—it started during the British rule in India when a shipment of coffee was delayed, thereby exposing the beans to the sea air over an extended period of time. Ultimately, the beans appeared bleached and bloated and were rejected upon reaching England. However, one enterprising merchant decided to process the beans and ended up with a coffee that was woodier and smokier—a taste that appealed to quite a few. Flying Squirrel, which sells a range of artisan coffee beans and powders, introduced a similarly processed coffee—Clouds in My Coffee—in Nov 2015. A micro-lot of coffee beans is placed in shipping containers and exposed to the coastal air in Mangalore during the monsoon. “The result is a deeper, more intense and earthy coffee,” Ashish D’Abreo, one of the co-founders, says.