“The air is so clean, you can see Canada from Punjab.”

When the global lockdown was announced in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, nobody was quite prepared for even some of the unintended positive consequences of it. The extent to which the air and water has cleared up around urban centres comes as a welcome surprise, leading to memes around the world on how nature is reclaiming spaces that once belonged to it.

There were photographs and videos of snow-clad Himalayas visible from Jalandhar, of the India Gate visible from Rashtrapati Bhawan, and marine life visible in the water along the coast. In true internet fashion, there has also been a surge of humour on how far people can now see and how wildlife has now emerged in unexpected spaces, where one would least find it.

To anyone exposed to the toxic air quality in Indian cities or the chemical froth floating on its water bodies, these scenes of blue skies, pristine waters and animals on our streets have been a generation-defining moment. It has, for the first time, allowed many to visualise their cities and spaces untouched by the consequences of human economic activity. These scenes, however, come at a grave cost.

The plummeting levels of pollutants in the air and water have brought with it layoffs (with the unemployment rate breaching 25 per cent, according to CMIE), displacement of migrant workers (who found themselves stranded between their hometowns and places of work), grave financial risk (as banks face the threat of unpaid debts due to prolonged economic inactivity), and general economic recession that will impact the world in the months to come.

These images of Connaught Place, which were taken on March 24 and April 2, highlight how toxic the air gets in the capital

Such disruption has led to a drastic fall in air pollutants in India. An analysis of satellite imagery by Blue Sky Analytics shows a drastic fall in nitrogen dioxide levels across major Indian cities, including Mumbai and Delhi. Another one by NASA shows that airborne particles are at a 20-year low in north India’s atmosphere during the lockdown period. Ground-based sensors, too, showed that since the lockdown began, particulate matter levels have largely been under the safe limit.

These air pollutants, comprising various unwanted airborne particles, including nitrogen oxides and particulate matter, are known to cause grave health issues, including lung inflammation, bronchitis, asthma, strokes and heart attacks. Air pollution cumulatively kills over 3,000 people in India every day.

While it was well-known that economic activity and pollution are intrinsically linked, the lockdown has also given us a perceptible evidence of its extent. And if there is one thing that this disruption has taught us, it is that this is not the way to fight an environmental crisis.

In my book The Great Smog of India, I had listed 10 ways to think about and address the air pollution crisis. One of these was provocatively titled, “Don’t ignore the interest of the polluters.” The argument was that many of the ‘polluters’ in India were people who have no other affordable and viable options, but to pollute. They did so not because there was an inherently nefarious motive, but because they had to deal with the available tools, under existing regulations, as well as prices, taxes and other finances.

This, of course, does not apply to wilful polluters who skirt regulations, bribe auditors and cheat the system. This argument applies to those who are employed in the polluting sectors; those who run small polluting businesses; those who pollute to get by, but have no better options available, or have no say in the matter.

This includes taxi drivers of polluting vehicles (where non-polluting options are unaffordable); workers in polluting factories (who have no say in their management’s policies); small scale entrepreneurs, such as potters who need cheap sources of heat (and cannot afford cleaner alternatives); factory owners who wish to invest in expensive but clean technologies (but there exists no market for the higher priced goods they will produce); business owners who want to switch their coal-fired boilers to clean gas or electricity (but don’t have access to the funds to make that transition); farmers who burn stubble (and are forced to do so, due to a range of factors); and families who use firewood for heat and cooking (as it is all they can afford).

Given this ground reality, the government will have to find structural solutions to each function of the economy, to ensure we are able to transition to low carbon pathways across all sectors. This will include, for instance, the proliferation of electric vehicle chargers to ensure the uptake of EVs, the availability of inexpensive finance to any industry that wishes to transition away from coal, perhaps a carbon tax that makes the goods that are made by clean processes relatively competitive at the marketplace, policies that incentivise farmers to not burn stubble, and retraining of workers such as coal miners who’d get left behind when the transition happens. 
Fighting air pollution therefore requires a basket of solutions as part of a comprehensive action plan. It will need the involvement of all ministries, states, sectors and businesses. And it will need the proactive coordination of all these stakeholders by an empowered body. Currently, India has a range of laws, regulations and policies that impact emissions, but these plans have often been developed independently of one another.

As we await the reopening of the economy and the pandemic to pass, we expect air pollution to return. We expect animals to retreat into the forests and the fish into the deep seas. We expect our water bodies to froth with pollutants again. But it need not be that way. As countries look at economic revival plans, it is imperative that we focus on investing in new technologies, resilient infrastructure, and enabling policies that help us pursue the skies and waters we witnessed during the lockdown, but this time without the economic devastation and human suffering that went along with it.

The writer is an energy and climate policy expert, and the author of The Great Smog of India