By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 Pa, why don’t you write about them?”, asked my daughter, pointing towards the water. We were standing on the edge of Sankey Tank, engaged in one of our favourite Sunday pastimes – feeding the flock of geese that lived around this lake. “Well, I write about wildlife, and these geese are not exactly wild”, I explained, flicking another piece of bread into the water. “Of course they are”, she countered. “They don’t belong to anyone, and are free to go where they please. How can you say they are not wild?” She paused for a moment, and said with an impish grin: “Besides, if they were not wild, why would they have attacked you?”
 
 Low blow! My daughter had rubbed salt into an old wound, one that had shattered my self-image as a cool guy who knew how to bond with birds and animals. Just a few months back, this same flock of geese had come up on shore, and looked interested when I waved a slice of bread at them. “Let me show you how to feed them close-up”, I declared to the group of kids that were with me, and marched up to the birds. I failed to notice that there were two little goslings nestled under their mother’s wings. If there’s one creature you don’t mess with under any circumstances, it’s a male goose protecting his brood. I had to beat an extremely hasty retreat in front of a highly amused audience, with a furious Mr. Goose nipping at my ankles for a good 50 feet. Definitely not one of my proudest moments!
 
 Anyway, I crumbled under the weight of my daughter’s logic, so here we go. The geese you see in Sankey Tank and other lakes in Bengaluru belong to a breed called Chinese goose. They were probably introduced by the authorities in an attempt to beautify the place and aerate the water body. They are not wild in the sense that they have been domesticated by man since ancient times. They are members of the swan goose species, but for generations have been selectively bred to promote certain characteristics that make them more valuable to humans – large size (and therefore higher meat content), better egg-laying abilities and appearance. They are easy to distinguish from their wild cousins. They are much bigger in size, weighing up to 10 kg as compared to the wild goose’s measly 3.5 kg. They have large fat deposits in their rear ends, which weighs them down and forces them to walk upright. Chinese geese in particular have a well-developed knob on the upper side of their bills.
 
 Geese graze on vegetation, rather like cattle. They nibble on tender shoots that grow in or near water. Domesticated geese have lost none of the aggression of their wild counterparts, something that I can painfully vouch for. In the breeding season, the male goose (or gander) becomes extremely protective of his mate and chicks.
 The flock is very vigilant, quickly sensing the slightest of sounds or movement and raising a noisy alarm. Stories abound of how flocks of geese were used to protect remote airfields from intruders during the Vietnam War.
 
 Bengaluru has its share of wild visitors too. Bar-headed geese spend their summers breeding around the high-altitude lakes of the Tibetan plateau, like the holy Manasarovar. As the weather gets colder, they fly south, crossing some of the Himalaya range’s highest mountain passes during their journey. Small flocks of bar-headed geese end up spending a couple of the winter months in the lakes around Bengaluru. Surely they bring with them a whiff of the fresh mountain air and tales of the marvellous lands they come from? And perhaps our city-dwelling geese, sculpted by man’s avaricious hand, look longingly up at them and remember the time when they were sleek and wild, and rode the high winds just like their mountain cousins.