The poor state of rivers in Karnataka, as highlighted by an article in Bangalore Mirror, has prompted the National Green Tribunal (NGT) to take suo moto action and indict the Karnataka government along with various government agencies.

The principal bench of the NGT, in a hearing last week (February 22), sent notices to the State government and agencies after taking cognisance of the article.

In its January 10, 2024 edition, Bangalore Mirror highlighted the dismal state of Karnataka’s rivers.

The news report, based on a water quality analysis of 12 rivers in the state under the central government’s National Water Monitoring Programme (NWMP), underscored that nine rivers had stretches with poor water quality (class D).

“The news item discloses the poor water quality of rivers across the state of Karnataka. According to the said news item, a recent water quality analysis of 12 rivers in the state reveals that nine of them have stretches with poor water quality (class D). The cause of poor quality is stated to be rapid population growth, immense pressure from urbanisation, or inaction of authorities concerned. The news item also reveals that the number of industries along these river stretches has increased. The cities are discharging untreated sewage, and the concerned boards/authorities have failed to treat sewage generated by the city. Additionally, the sample collection protocols are not being followed,” noted the Green Court.

Based on these observations, the NGT has impleaded the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB), Deputy Commissioner, and District Magistrate of Bengaluru, as well as the State of Karnataka as respondents.

Upon receiving the notices, while the KSPCB, District Magistrate, Deputy Commissioner, and State of Karnataka have sought time to file responses, a notice has been issued to the BWSSB to file its response before the southern bench of the NGT before April 8, 2024.

In the article, Bangalore Mirror also underlined that while the water quality of these rivers is monitored at 38 locations, as many as 19 locations recorded water quality under class D – suitable only for the propagation of wildlife and fisheries. These locations include all five monitoring stations of Arkavathi and Lakshmitirtha, two stations of Tungabhadra, one station of Cauvery, both stations each of Kabini and Kagina, all three stations of Shimsha, two stations of Bhima, and both stations of Tunga rivers.

Under the NWMP, the KSPCB records the water quality of Arkavathi, Lakshmantirtha, Tungabhadra, Bhadra, Cauvery, Kabini, Kagina, Krishna, Shimsha, Bhima, Netravati, and Tunga rivers across the state.