By  Ananya Kashyap
 
 Photographer and friends came across a tigress in Kabini, who is taking care of two cubs from her dead mother’s earlier litter, giving the 5-month-olds a better shot at survival
 
 A natural history photographer and his wildlife enthusiast friends came across a sub-adult tigress, who has taken up the responsibility of looking after two cubs of her mother, who died on January 17 due to a tranquiliser overdose.
 
 The tigress who has adopted the cubs, is the dead adult tigress’ cub from an earlier litter.
 
 This sub-adult tigress is now one of the most popular tigresses spotted by naturalists, wildlife photographers and tourists visiting Kabini, Nagarhole. This tigress ventured into a banana plantation between the Udbur and Gendethur villages near Kabini backwaters.
 
 Natural history photographer Praveen Siddannavar and his friends sighted this family on April 3 in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, and the adoption of the two cubs touched their hearts. Siddannavar says, “None knew about their whereabouts until recently, when my friends, Aravind Srinivasan, Vishwanath Mukunda, and I found out about this. The tigress that died had two cubs in her previous litter – a male and a female, who are now fully-grown adults and had separated from their mother. However, on a few occasions, I had spotted a backwater tigress and her ‘daughter’ together, the last sighting being December 31, 2016.”
 
 The group spotted the junior tigress, who was initially resting on a mound, getting into a pond on April 30. “While capturing her images, we spotted the two cubs – one was shy and took cover under the bushes, while the other, I was lucky to capture a few images of. The cubs seemed to be suffering from malnutrition, probably due to a lack of mother’s milk. It’s amazing to know that their stepsister is playing the role of their mother now.”
 
 Mukunda said, “We first saw these two cubs in the morning safe with another tiger and when we went in the evening Safari, we saw the female sub-adult sleeping near the water fall at Hoskere Tank. Then we saw that she became cautious about something approaching her, and we saw that these were the same cubs that we saw in the morning. Then, we realised these belonged to the tigress that was tranquilised.”
 
 Siddannavar said they observed the behaviour of this family, which wasn’t typically that of mother and cubs. Cubs were seen sitting a bit far from their adopted mother, and no grooming of cubs by the sub-adult tigress was observed.
 
 “Typically, mothers have a lot of patience; but it was missing in this case. There was one instance when the adopted mother wanted the cubs to drink water, but they seemed reluctant. We even observed her charging at the cubs indicating her anger. These cubs may be just about five months old, since they have survived without their mother for almost four months. Although challenging, they should able to survive,” Srinivasan said.
 
 “She was not breastfeeding the cubs, but just sharing her kill with them,” he said.