HC puts the onus on the state to decide the fate of 302 acres of land with three claimants
 
 The Green Bench of the High Court of Karnataka has left the decision on what to do with the 302 acres of land in Hesaraghatta to the state government. A three-member committee comprising three ministers of the state government has the task of deciding the fate of this land. There are three claimants to it: the Kannada film industry, which has been trying to get a film city built there since the early 1980s, environmentalists, who claim it is a wild grassland and should be classified under the Wildlife Act, and more recently, Bangalore Turf Club, which had shown interest in shifting its race course there. 
 Disposing of a public interest litigation (PIL) by the Arkavathi Kumudavathi Nadi Punaschetana Samithi, the HC did not pass any specific orders but made observations. The PIL demanded that the natural grasslands in the Kodihalli village of Doddaballapura taluk be left to remain as it is now.
 	  	The HC noted that additional advocate general AS Ponnanna submitted that, “The state government was considering at the highest level the contentions and issues raised in the petition and have not made up their mind about proper utilisation of the land in question.” All departments concerned as well as State Wildlife Board will take all relevant factors into consideration and take a final decision and in the meantime, maintain status quo to preserve the land in its present form as grassland.
 	  	The petitioners sought that as and when the government takes a final decision in respect of the land in question, for the formation of any theme park, liberty to challenge such decision should rest with them or any others. The court said that when the government takes a decision, it has to be conveyed to the petitioner. 
 	  	The government, in the meantime, has constituted a committee comprising three ministers whose departments have a say in the matter: Law minister TB Jayachandra, Information minister Roshan Baig and Forest minister B Ramanatha Rai. 
 	  	Information department director Vishu Kumar said, “Until the government takes a decision, we cannot talk about it.” Sree Kanteerava Studio, which is under the Information department, was looking after the land and was even giving it for film shooting till now. 
 	  	A total of 325 acres was allotted for a film city in the 1980s to Karnataka Film Industry Development Corporation (KFIDC).