There are government projects that cannot take off due to lack of funds. And then there is the Night Safari at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) on which the state tourism department has spent close to Rs 10 crore for nothing. 
 
 Chief minister Sadananda Gowda said: Since 2008, Rs 54731.75 crore has been spent by the government to attract tourists. The amount also includes Rs 8 crore spent on the night safari project at Bannerghatta Biological Park. However, in reality the project was given a silent burial with thte state forest department filing an affidavit before the high court a few months back that they will not take up the project. On the contrary, the tourism department has managed to spend Rs 8 crore on the project which had remained on paper alone.
   While the government spent Rs 2 crore during 2008-09, the funding increased in 2009-10 to Rs 4 crore. In 2010-11, the project was given Rs 2 crore.
 
 When asked about the details of expenditure, Latha Krishna Rao, principal secretary, Tourism Department, said, “I do not know the details of spending in the initial days. It is true the government gave Rs 8 crore to the department. But in the last one year, not a single pie has been spent on the project. Of the sanctioned amount, Rs 2.5 crore has been used to rehabilitate people evicted from the core area around Virupaksha Temple at Hampi. Further, Rs 1 crore was spent to construct an office for the Deputy Director of Tourism at Mysore.”
   The project was mooted by former tourism minister G Janardhana Reddy along the lines of the night safari in Singapore. Even as the issue of the night safari made the forest department and tourism department lock horns, Reddy always defended his project. He prepared a detailed project report and sent it to the state cabinet. But, the cabinet did not give its consent. Adding to Reddy’s woes, environmentalists filed a petition before the High Court to stall the project that threatened wildlife and their habitat.
   The High Court directed both stake-holders to consult wildlife and ecological experts and submit the recommendations. However, even before going to experts, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) B K Singh had said, “The department had taken a decision to withdraw the project after holding a detailed meeting with the officials of the Zoo Authority of Karnataka.” In January, the department had filed the affidavit before the High Court, informing about withdrawal of the project.