Two trees in Chamundeshwari Layout have been slowly poisoned with mercury and sulphuric acid injected directly into their tissue
 
 
 We’ve heard about stray dogs being poisoned, but yesterday city forest sleuths come across a rare case of two healthy trees being poisoned to death. Over a period of days the trees, in Chamundeshwari Layout in Vidyaranyapura, were injected with acid and other chemicals using holes drilled into the bark.
 
 Acting on a complaint filed, the honorary wildlife warden and city forest department have taken up a case of tree killing. The method of ‘murder’, forest department officials and experts say, was unusual. Usually trees are killed by setting them alight so as to ensure a tree dries up and withers away. Trees are usually killed because permission to fell a healthy tree is hard to come by.
 
 Officials suspect the trees were injected with either mercury or sulphuric acid. The samples of the chemicals have been collected and will be sent to a lab for testing. A case has also been lodged and an investigation is on into the motive behind the poisoning, and the identity of the miscreants, officials explained.
 
 Further, as it is an offence under the Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, those behind it will be prosecuted, they added.
 
 “We have taken up a case immediately after receiving a complaint today on two trees being poisoned. The same has been forwarded to the principal chief conservator of forests. This is a serious violation as the trees are grown and healthy. One can’t cut a tree without the permission of the jurisdictional tree officer. As one can’t get permission, people resort to things like setting fire to it and injecting chemicals,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru urban told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 In this case, the two grown trees, Neolamarckia cadamba, famously known as Kadamba tree, about 12-15-years-old were also set fire to and have been injected with chemicals through a foot-deep hole. The complainant, also a wildlife volunteer, Arun Kumar C T, has sought action from forest officials.
 
 “They have set fire to them and chemicals have been poured inside. After pouring the chemicals in, they have sealed the hole. A complaint has been filed seeking action,” Arun told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Those working on creating a database of existing trees in the city say that injecting chemicals into a tree to kill it is a rare methodology, but there have been four cases reported in recent days in Jayanagar.
 
 “We documented four such cases in Jayanagar. Just as in animals, plants also have vascular tissues (xylem) that transports water and minerals from the roots to the leaves. The chemicals pass on to roots and other parts, killing the tree,” Vijay Nishanth, who is creating a database of Bengaluru trees through its vruksha.com told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 If a tree falls...
 
 The forest department which has designated two tree officers in the city exclusively to ensure the protection of trees, permit tree felling only when a tree is dead, diseased, has uprooted due to winds, has silviculturally matured, constitutes a danger to life or property, constitutes obst-ruction to traffic, is substantially damaged or destroyed by fire, lightning, rain or other natural causes, or is required to be removed for cultivation.
 
 The permission is granted only after opinion is sought from revenue authorities, and after a report from the assistant director of land records and a list of trees intended to be felled is recorded.
 
 All this can be done only after an application citing valid reasons for felling of a tree. However, in most cases, the trees are felled illegally. Forest officials maintained that any such case of illegal felling without permission would draw serious punishment under the Tree Act.
 
 “Felling tree without permission or such attempts to do so is a serious violation. The sentence, if the crime is proved, is six month jail or Rs 1000 penalty or both. Like any other such case, an inquiry will be conducted after registering an FIR through the range forest officer,” Lakshminarayana P, assistant conservator of forests and the tree officer in this case told Bangalore Mirror.