India took a jumbo leap this year by launching its first ever hospital for elephants in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh. Spanned over 12,000 square feet — the hospital is equipped with wireless digital X-ray, ultrasound, laser treatment, dental X-ray, a medical hoist for lifting elephants, among other facilities. 

Located near its Elephant Conservation and Care Centre in Mathura, where severely abused captive elephants in distress get rehabilitated, this hospital is designed to treat sick, injured and geriatric elephants. Currently, it is providing long-term care to 23 elephants rescued from different parts of the country. 

  A vet treats a wound of Asha, a female elephant, at the Wildlife SOS Elephant Conservation and Care Center. Photo: Reuters  
Mirror talked to the co-founders of Wildlife SOS, the non-profit behind the hospital, Geeta Seshamani and Kartick Satyanarayan, to get insights on what it takes to run an elephant’s hospital while many in the country continue to remain unaware on how to treat elephants right. 

Kartick said that creating public awareness is a big challenge. He believes that those working in the entertainment industry should refuse to work with elephants. 

He said, “Elephants belong in the wild. It is important for everyone to know that every single elephant you see begging on the streets, in temples, at wedding functions, at circuses or on joy rides have all been mistreated.”

“It might be your dream to ride elephants, but this is an elephant’s worst nightmare!” he sighed.

  A handler bathes Coconut, a female elephant  

A well-known fact about elephants is that they have a superb memory. So how hard is it to get an ill-treated elephant back to normalcy? 

Geeta said, “Building trust with elephants who have suffered great abuse by humans takes utmost patience and care.” She said that initially most elephants stay in a shell, but gradually develop a trust with the keepers. 

The duo have launched a campaign called Refuse to Ride that aims at educating tourists and travellers on issues surrounding elephant rides. 

  Wildlife SOS in Mathura-min  

The organisation has also rescued an elephant from Mumbai’s Mulund area. 

“Laxmi (an elephant from Mulund) spent her days outside a temple, begging for alms. Devotees would hand-over money to her outstretched trunk, or give her a handful of oily, sugary prasad that she would quickly gobble up. The elephant progressively turned obese to the point where she could barely stand, showing signs of early arthritis,” said Seshamani. 

Since she has been with Wildlife SOS, Laxmi has been put on a healthy well-balanced diet and a strict exercise regime consisting of long walks, and has lost considerable weight.