Action starts from Belagavi after draft guidelines; will be extended to entire state
 
 
 	Resorts and homestays operating illegally within the limits of eco-sensitive zones of protected areas will soon face the heat, as the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) is all set to begin a crackdown on such commercial activities with the publication of draft guidelines on eco-sensitive zones (ESZs). The department, till now, was only serving notices to illegal resorts, spas, amusement parks and homestays. It has sought the help of the revenue department to evict non-compliant illegal operators within the protected areas of national parks and sanctuaries.
 	
 	  	The deputy conservator of forests, Belagavi, has requested the Belagavi deputy commissioner to initiate action against such illegal units as they thrive on private revenue lands. What has caught the attention of KFD is the immunity developed by these illegal resorts to the repeated notices served by the department. In one such case, the Soutira Resort and Mini Water Park near Chikale village of Belagavi district continued to operate despite three notices and a suo motu case registered against them by the Karnataka State Human Rights Commission (KSHRC), since December 2015. Help from the DC, Belagavi, has now been sought in order to initiate the eviction of the illegal resort operators.
 	
 	  	Sources in the KFD revealed that except for an NOC from the local panchayat, the resort had no permission from the KFD, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), tourism department and other agencies. Further, as the resort is located in close proximity to the Bhimgad Sanctuary, it should have obtained necessary clearances from the National Wildlife Board too. Since December, three notices have been served to them and there has been no response till now, according to KFD officials.
 	
 	  	Basavaraj Patil, DCF, Belagavi said, “I have received a complaint and I have acted on it. The owners had no clearances from any of the agencies except for an NOC from the gram panchayat. Since it is located on private land, we have no authority to initiate action against them except to serve notice and recommend punitive action as per the law. Hence, I have personally approached the Belagavi deputy commissioner in this regard to help us in evicting the resort.”
 	
 	  	Another official said, “The owners had approached us after receiving the third notice. They said that they were only running a guesthouse to earn a livelihood, and had obtained permission from the development officers of the local panchayat. They said they were accommodating devotees of Iskcon, Gokuladhama and tourists under the tourism plan of the government of Karnataka. They said no illegal activities have been held in the resort. But we explained to them about ESZ rules and prohibition of resort and tourism activities within such zones. Further, they were supposed to possess valid documents by KSPCB and KFD as per the Environment Protection Act and Wildlife Protection Act. But they had none.” 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	The area is not only ESZ, but as good as part of the sanctuary itself
 	
 	
 	  	Similarly, the department has been sending out notices to several other illegal resorts and homestays operating within the ESZ of protected areas.
 	
 	  	Confirming the move, BG Hosmath, PCCF (wildlife), told Bangalore Mirror that he had visited the disputed area last Saturday. “I have directed the DCF to approach the DC who is the chairman of District ESZ Management Committee. The DCF is the member secretary of the same committee. If there is no action, then we will go ahead with our eviction work. The draft notification will be valid for 540 days and till the announcement of final notification. The area is not only ESZ, but as good as a part of the sanctuary itself,” he said.