A glimpse of tradition
It’s the last day to visit the Dasara Bombe Habba put up by JV Vidyapeetha, which has made a name for its display of festive dolls. From scenes from Ramayana to Mahabharata, Bhagavatha, Mysore Dasara procession, Indian villages and wildlife, it has put on display an interesting mix.

 WHERE: 6th cross, 11th main, RK Layout, Padmanabhanagar
 WHEN: 10am-4pm, October 4
 CALL: 26391509

One show, 20 artists
Twenty artists are displaying their latest works in a new exhibition called Breakthrough. Some of these names include Sachin Upadaye, Bhaskar Roa, Sunil Sarkar, Murukeson, Basuki Das Gupta and Dhan Prasadm. Together, their paintings capture everything from trees, farmers, kings and queens and more.

 WHERE: Crimson Art Gallery, The Hatworks Boulevard, Cunningham Road WHEN: 11am onwards, October 4-November 2

Get up and dance
Move your body to the Bollywood beats that you both know and love, as DJ Oppozit and DJ Rhea go behind the deck. And for those of you who are familiar with their sets, you will be in for a surprise as they plan to mash it up with dandiya beats and tracks. As for the deejays, they are known for their versatility, mixing Bollywood and Hollywood tracks to great effect.

 WHERE: Fandom, 1st floor of Gilly’s Redefined, # 413, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 7.30pm, October 4
 CALL: 9606443393

 Photophiles unite
ProPixer Meetup is essentially a gathering of photography and filmmaking enthusiasts. And while educational opportunities, lectures, workshops, competitions, field trips, etc. are amazing, they feel, even more important is to interact with fellow photophiles and get feedback on your work. So whether you are a hobbyist or professional, come over.

 WHERE: Salarpuria Sattva Magnificia No. 78, Doorvaninagar, next to KR Puram Tin Factory, Old Madras Road
 WHEN: 5.30pm-8pm, October 4
 REGISTER: Free, eventshigh.com

 Sounds of the world
The multi-national band Bosque Magico is touring India once again, this time with an addition of the legendary RA Ramamani. And the good news is, tonight they are making a pit stop in Bengaluru. 
In this gig, the sounds from Ukraine, beautiful guitar-work from Germany and energising rhythms from India will come together to create what Bosque Magico stands for.

 WHERE: Goethe-Institut/Max Mueller Bhavan, 716 CMH Road, Indiranagar 1st Stage
 WHEN: 6.30pm, October 4 ENTRY: Free CALL: 22511300

Discuss mental health
The latest session of ‘Nobody Reads the Fine Print’ will discuss what ‘madness’ represents in our society. In the words of somebody who’s suffering from mental health issues: “We literally embody things people fear at a profound level – unreason, challenge to social contract, highlighting issues people can’t tolerate such as the futility of living, familial abuse, vulnerability to violence and mortality.”

 WHERE: Atta Galatta, KHB Colony, 5th Block Koramangala
 WHEN: 7pm-8.30pm, October 4
 CALL: 9632510126

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’