The country’s ambitious plan of printing its currency on indigenised paper and ink on Mysuru outskirts been been put on hold as the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) rejected the proposal citing environmental violations. The NBWL, which met in the first week of June, rejected the proposal to set up the currency printing unit in Mysuru which is located within the Eco-Sensitive zone (ESZ) of Ranganathittu—world-famous for its bird sanctuary on the banks of river Cauvery.
 
 Planning indigenisation of Indian currency under the ambitious ‘Make in India’ programme, the Union finance ministry had decided to manufacture currency printing paper and ink in its Mysuru unit by 2015 end.
 
 The finance ministry’s decision had a valid reason: India’s higher denomination currencies were being printed using imported ink and paper.
 
 Recently, Union finance Minister Arun Jaitley, while inaugurating a similar facility at Hoshangabad in Madhya Pradesh, had said, “The Madhya Pradesh unit can only print about 6,000 tonnes of currency as against the demand of 20,000 tonnes. Soon the machinery at Mysuru will be ready and printing of currency will take place in the country.”
 
 Prior to it, the Union finance ministry had submitted a detailed proposal to the NBWL as the project is classified as category-2. Although category-2 projects can be assessed at the local level, absence of notification on ESZ around Ranganathittu made it mandatory for the project to get the consent of NBWL.
 
 The NBWL – a statutory body – met in New Delhi in the first week of June and went through the proposals in detail.
 
 The proposal was to setup a printing unit of currency of 12,000 tonnes per annum (TPA) capacity at the Note Mudran Nagar on Mysuru’s outskirts.
 
 Contrary to the general notion that Narendra Modi-led NDA government is liberal in granting permissions to projects, the board took a tough stand and decided not to consider the project.
 
 Sources in NBWL confirmed to Bangalore Mirror that the board has decided not to consider the project. “The ESZ for bird sanctuary Ranganathittu is yet to be submitted and notified by the government. In the absence of such recommendation and notification, it was observed that an environmental clearance was required and hence the project was not considered,” explained sources in NBWL.
 
 Acknowledging the proposal to set up a printing unit at Mysuru, Kamala K, deputy conservator of forests (Wildlife), Mysuru, said, “We were asked to provide the toposheets of the sanctuary and adjoining areas in the backdrop of the project proposal.
 
 Accordingly, we had submitted the details through PCCF (Wildlife). As per the 2006 Supreme Court ruling, in the absence of notified ESZ around a protected area, the 10-km area is considered as ESZ by default and any category project has to get clearance from the NBWL. The proposed unit falls within the 10-km radius of the sanctuary.”
 
 Sources in the ministry of environment and forests revealed that the project was located at about 8 km from the world famous Ranganathittu bird sanctuary on the banks of river Cauvery.
 
 The printing unit at Mysuru has the capacity to print about 12,000 tonnes of currency annually. The indigenous printing of currency was seen as a significant step in saving crores of rupees for the Central government besides reducing the diversion of paper to other destinations by fraudsters for generating fake currency.
 
 OTHER PROJECTS TOO REJECTED!
 
 The NBWL also rejected some other proposals sent by the state government. Four proposals of JSW steel plant near Daroji Bear Sanctuary were deferred as the ESZ around the sanctuary is yet to be notified.
 
 However, diversion of 0.0495 hectares of forest land in Kudremukh Wildlife Division in Karkala taluk of Udupi district for construction of a check dam and water supply work at Honnekadu stream near Balige village to Kalasa town in hikkamagaluru district were considered.