The govt officials expect that step will reduce man-animal conflict that has cropped up in the region in recent times
 	
 	 		More than a decade after getting its first elephant reserve, Mysore Elephant Reserve, back in 2002, Karnataka is all set to get its second one. In order to protect the habitat of elephants and help sustain their population, the Union government has in principle agreed to declare Anshi-Dandeli Forest in Uttara Kannada an elephant reserve. 	

 	 		The state government’s proposal to declare the forest areas of Uttara Kannada an elephant reserve has been pending before the Central government for several years. Despite repeated pleas to notify the region an elephant reserve, the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) had not cleared the proposal. Deliberating over the long-pending proposal, minister for MoEF Prakash Javadekar, who was in Mysuru last week, agreed to clear the project. 	

 	 		Anshi-Dandeli National Park, which is known for its population of tigers, will soon officially be home to Asiatic elephants. Confirming the decision to declare it an elephant reserve, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Vinay Luthra confirmed to Bangalore Mirror that the minister for MoEF had consented to clear the project at the earliest and thus declare the area an elephant reserve. The move is expected to reduce man-elephant conflict that has cropped up in the region in recent times. 	

 	 		According to Luthra, the state government had sent a proposal to declare the entire Dandeli forest area an elephant reserve. 	

 	 		“The reserve will not include the entire forest across Uttara Kannada; instead it will cover the forest areas under Anshi-Dandeli. In fact, member of parliament of Uttara Kannada Ananth Kumar Hegde has also consented to declare the region an elephant reserve. Following widespread co-operation, we had made the recommendation. The forest region around Dandeli has a population of 50 to 60 elephants, which is a healthy population considering the different topography of the area compared to southern Karnataka,” Luthra said. 	

 	 		Declaration of the region an elephant reserve will help the state get special funds from the Union government under Project Elephant based on which special conservation works can be taken up at the reserve, according to Luthra. 	

 	 		In 2002, the Government of Karnataka notified the 6,724 sq km area starting from the dry deciduous forests of Bannerghatta forests to the thick evergreen forests of Western Ghats in Shivamogga and Hassan districts covering Mysuru, Mandya, Chaamarajnagar, Tumakuru and Chikkamagaluru the Mysore Elephant Reserve.