Researchers and naturalists Zeeshan Mirza and David Raju have described a new species of gecko from Pachmarhi, Madhya Pradesh. The new species belongs to the genus Hemidactylus and has been named “Chipkali”, the Hindi word for gecko, the common name suggested being “Central Indian Leaf-toed gecko”.
 
 
 
 
 
 The lizard was discovered while the duo was surveying Satpura hills during the summer of 2014. The field trip also resulted in the discovery of another lizard which was named Eublepharis satpuraensis, after Satpura hills by the same team.
 
 Zeeshan said the new species Hemidactylus Chipkali lives on rocky outcrops of Satpura hills and was found to be common along the roadside cuttings leading to Pachmarhi town in Madhya Pradesh. The new species resembles geckos of the Brook’s gecko species complex, but differs in having a continuous series of seven pored scales above the cloacal opening and further differs in having seven sticky pads under the fourth toe of the legs. The lizard was found to be closely related to Treutler’s leaf toed gecko but differs in having 14–16 per cent difference in the portion of DNA sequence that was compared across related species.
 
 Zeeshan Mirza is an independent researcher interested in the study of reptiles and arachnids currently based in Bengaluru and has described over 30 new species. He has travelled extensively across India, and is presently working on projects to document diversity of snakes, lizards, scorpions and tarantulas of India.
 
 David Raju is a naturalist interested in wildlife and has co-authored a book on dragonflies and wildlife of central India. Currently David works at the Singinawa Jungle Lodges in Central India. “Discovery of yet another lizard species from the same locality merely brings to light the poor nature of biodiversity documentation across India,” said Zeeshan. Habitat destruction is taking a heavy toll. “Generally, funding goes to biodiversity hotspots or endangered species, but just one trip to the locality gave us two new lizards – that too from a place frequented by people,” he said. The funding agencies are biased towards endangered species or habitats and there is no money being pumped to the study of data deficient and unexplored habitat.