A gentle reminder as tourists return with a vengeance

The year 2020 was the year of ‘revenge shopping’ where people, stuck at home due to the lockdown, bought objects left, right, and centre. This year is the year of ‘tourism with a vengeance’, with people flocking to tourist destinations in Karnataka in the wake of the lockdown being eased. While businessmen are happy that their business is picking up, government officials are worried about covid protocols going out of the window.
 
Santosh Kumar, a biker, said, “We are part of biker groups and usually head out of the city on long drives during weekends. We had to stall our plans for the last couple of months due to the pandemic. Today was our first ride since the lockdown was imposed and a majority of team members were back with their bikes for a long ride.

 The best part was the monsoon ride as it was drizzling in the morning beyond Nelama­nga­la and other areas. We felt as if we were riding in those areas where the monsoon is very active.”
 
Farida Banu, a techie, also said that as a family, she had not got a chance to venture out due to the second wave. On her first outing, she headed for Nandi Hills with her family. “The cloudy weather and misty weather conditions at Nandi were a welcome treat for us. I was surprised to see a huge crowd at Nandi today.”
 
Officials who had sent people back a few weeks ago due to heavy crowds were seen welcoming guests on Saturday. There were repeated announcements on the public address system in multiple languages to the crowd to maintain physical distancing as well as to wear masks. Many of the wildlife safaris also saw heavy footfall.


For the last few months, we were stuck at home and were yearning to go out. So, we decided to explore the Ranganathittu bird sanctuary this time– Mohit Sharma, a businessman 
Mohit Sharma, a businessman, said, “For the last few months, we were stuck at home and were yearning to go out. So, we decided to explore the Ranganathittu bird sanctuary this time.” The personnel at the bird sanctuary said that they were witnessing a good crowd during the weekends.
 
 With restrictions lifted in Kodagu, many were seen heading to the hilly district. Hampi too witnessed good crowds. With the travellers back, local businessmen were happy that their livelihood was picking up. “During the first wave, our businesses were completely shut. However, it slowly picked up before the second wave completely stopped it again. We have been waiting for the restrictions to ease so that people can start touring our areas and many of the people whose livelihood is dependent on tourism are relieved now. We are happy to see people coming and we are following all the required covid norms,” said Nandeesh S, who runs a hotel in Hospet.
 
However, Dr K Sudhakar, Minister for Health and Family Welfare said that it had come to his notice that many of the tourist places were getting crowded. “Every individual should be responsible about Covid-Appropriate Behaviour (CAB). Though we try to enforce strict measures, the government cannot control every individual’s behaviour and everyone must be careful.”