From the various media reports, it appears that a significant chunk of the Chandrayaan-1 team is Bangalore-based. The irony of this is that we have folks in Bangalore who are smart enough to plan a moon mission, but we cannot find the talent to fix our infrastructure and traffic-related issues. One begins to wonder why the folks in BBMP, BDA, BTP, BMTC, BWSSB, BESCOM and other agencies are unable to get together and find solutions for our infrastructure; arguably a lesser challenge than a mission to the moon. One might argue that there are craters on the moon too, but I don’t want to digress! Most of the solutions that have been provided involve magic boxes and portable traffic barriers. I spent some time thinking about the many ways in which magic boxes and barriers can be used. 

Since magic boxes can be made in various sizes, they can be used to create storm water and other types of drains across our city. Many of our streets lack sidewalks. Why not use magic boxes to create subways for pedestrians? Then, during the rainy season, we might even be able to learn how to swim in these subways. Our traffic constables have to suffer as they are regularly exposed to sun and rain. Simply stack three magic boxes adjacent to each other and you would have a good substitute for a traffic umbrella. Our Kannada movie industry loves to paste posters everywhere. By increasing the number of magic boxes, we would be helping promote Kannada movies by giving them additional free space for their posters. Our political parties could sub-lease these magic boxes to put up their banners too. Instead of using concrete rings that were originally designed for open wells as garbage dumps, we could just stack up magic boxes and they would make for great dumps. Garbage dumps can be customised easily with magic boxes too. In commercial areas where the volume of garbage is high, simply use larger magic boxes. Likewise, use smaller magic boxes in residential areas. Some of our newer roads have a rather wide median on which trees are being planted — a rare gesture from our city fathers towards greening Bangalore. Why not use a solid stack of magic boxes instead of those flimsy wooden fixtures to protect these saplings? Most government offices have large signboards since they have to accommodate Kannada and English signage. Why not use magic boxes to create this signage? 

One could just paint on them and not have to waste time and money on making frames to hold up the signs. Many of our inhabitants, humans and animals, need a place to relieve themselves. Instead of spending big money to create plush toilets, just use magic boxes. They would provide the necessary privacy and would not get stinky since it can accommodate free flow of air. Once in a while, just hose them down and we are done. 

Those portable traffic barriers that have started to proliferate across Bangalore present additional possibilities.  Our cops have already figured out that they can rub the cost of obtaining those barriers by allowing the donors to advertise on them. Our RTOs should also use them to design obstacle courses for administering driving tests. In any case, driving in Bangalore is all about avoiding obstacles. These barriers could also be used to create elevated bridges for pedestrians. Just line up some fifteen-twenty of these in underlying areas on our roads and you can ensure that pedestrians do not have to wade through knee-deep water after a downpour. Why not allow political parties to sponsor some of these barriers? Just allow them to paint them with their party colours and they would be happy to contribute thousands of barriers. Most of our city drivers do not care for the lane markings because they are painted on the road. Use barriers to mark lanes and you would ensure that there are no autos or buses switching lanes. 

Prospective passengers waiting at a bus stop could be forced to queue up if they are made to enter buses from lines marked by metal barriers. 

I could go on and on; but the ideas listed here could keep our authorities busy for years. I wouldn’t want to make them think too much just as yet.

(Anand Adkoli is a global techie with wide interests in education, entrepreneurship, adventure sports and wildlife)