By:Chetan R
 
 Missive follows several BM reports on illegal use of elephants in festivals, magic shows and weddings
 
 The state’s wildlife department is under the Centre’s scanner following allegations of allowing elephants to be used for commercial purposes, ‘swapping’ elephants and corruption in issuing orders and clearing files.
 
 In a letter dated October 3, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror, S K Khanduri, inspector-general of forests, Union ministry of environment and forests, has sought a probe into the matter. The letter, addressed to G V Krishna Rao, secretary, forest ecology and environment department, says: “The matter be looked into and appropriate action be taken by the state government in view of the conservation priority accorded to Asian elephants in the country and the legal restrictions on the species related to its position in schedule I of WLPA 1972, and the guidelines issued by MoEF for handling of captive elephants.”
 
 The missive follows several Bangalore Mirror reports on the forest department turning a blind eye to the illegal use of elephants for commercial purposes, and will cheer wildlife activists, including CUPA (Compassion Unlimited Plus Action).
 
 In November 2011, in flagrant violation of Central and state wildlife rules, an elephant from the Bannerghatta Biological Park was ‘loaned out’ for the Rajyotsava celebrations in the city’s RV College of Engineering, allegedly at the behest of then home minister R Ashoka.
 
 In April this year, two calves from BBP – Drona and Champa – were swapped with two grown-up elephants – Lakshmi and Maasti -- of Suttur mutt in Mysore. Central Zoo Authority member Suparna Ganguly had said then that there was no provision in the law for swapping elephants.
 The same month, the office of the principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) had permitted the use of Kanchi, an 18-year-old elephant from Andhra Pradesh, for a magic show in the city. Wildlife enthusiasts had drawn the attention of member of Parliament Maneka Gandhi to the incident.
 
 In May, Rani, a 13-year-old elephant belonging to Sadguru Basavraj Deshi Kendra, Airani mutt, Haveri district, was chained and transported to the city for a wedding. With the bridegroom astride, Rani was made to walk in busy traffic and high decibel levels till the marriage venue at the Palace Grounds.
 
 Welcoming the order, Suparna Ganguly, formerly member of the national task force for wild and captive elephants and currently member of the Central Zoo Authority’s sub-committee on circus and zoo elephants, said, “I’m very confident that the government of Karnataka will take note of the Centre’s concerns. Though our state has some very good orders to protect elephants and other wildlife, they were severely compromised. ”