By Iffath Fathima

A wildlife rescuer came across a gruesome case during the rescue of a black kite recently. The bird’s feet and beak were cut off, indicating that the kite had been used for black magic.

Geethanjali, resident of Vijayanagar, spotted a black kite inside the compound of her house in an unconscious state, on March 11, around 2.30 pm. She kept a bowl of water near the kite, but it did not move. She reported the case to the People for Animals (PfA) Bengaluru. Anand Gowda went to the spot and saw that the kite was alive. He picked it up and saw that the bird’s two talons and digits of its left leg were missing and its upper beak was also cut off. 

“I asked Geethanjali how the bird got there and she told me it was quite unusual as there was no way for the bird to enter the compound. I kept the kite in the basket and rushed it to the PfA hospital in Uttarahalli,” said Gowda.

At the hospital, it was examined by veterinarian Dr Karthik. “This was a different case. The beak was missing. A heated rod, sheet or knife must have been used as the head of the kite’s beak was charred. This is a season of black kite fledglings,” said Dr Karthik. 

The team came to a conclusion that it was a case of black magic. “The kites’ aggressive facial features and black eyes have made them an easy prey in the hands of the black magicians in Bengaluru. After performing the ritual, the black kite is abandoned inside the person’s home against whom the black magic is done,” said a member of PfA. 

Gowda had got a similar rescue call about a black kite, three months back.“The left leg of the kite had been chopped of. It can’t be due to any injury. The trend of using aggressive birds for black magic is increasing. We need to stop it,” said Gowda.

Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Sharieff, General Manager and chief veterinarian at PfA. said, “Wild animals like slender loris, barn owls, turtles and black kites are common prey to black magic in Bengaluru.”

Despite the treatment, the black kite could only survive for a day. “Without essential parts like talons, digits and a beak, the kites can’t survive in the wild. Though the talons grow back after a long time, they would not be the shape the bird had. The chopped beak is a permanent disability,” said the doctor.