Action was initiated against Sharath Babu, who has been given an honorary post by the Siddaramaiah government, within hours of HC stay on Vishnuvardhan memorial
 	
 	
 	 		The whistleblower whose petition resulted in the High Court ordering a stay on the memorial for actor Vishnuvardhan might pay a price for taking on the government. Terming his act anti-government, the top brass has initiated action to rip the honorary wildlife warden of Bengaluru off his post.
 		 	 		On December 30, hours after the chief minister laid the foundation for the memorial at Mylasandra in Kengeri, the High Court, hearing a petition by wildlife warden Sharath R Babu and two others claiming that forest land was allotted in violation of norms, stayed all the works on the land. Bangalore Mirror had reported the development --  HC stays Turahalli activities (Dec 31, 2014). 
 		 	 		The government did not waste any time in retaliating. The same day, proceedings were started against Sharath Babu who had been appointed honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru Urban, just a month earlier, on November 27, 2014. This was his second stint, after an earlier one in 2009-2011.
 		 	 		The letter slamming Sharath Babu's action, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror , states that a government servant cannot file a PIL. 
 		 	 		“As mentioned above, in the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, (Central) Act No.53, Sri Sharath R Babu is appointed as honorary wildlife warden and he is subordinate to the principal chief conservator of forests, wildlife, and also a part and parcel of the government. He cannot file any PIL against the government without prior permission of the appointing authority. As his activities are against the government, he is not supposed to hold the above post. Kindly write to the principal chief conservator of forests to withdraw the appointment letter of Sri R Sharath Babu as honorary wildlife warden (sic),” a letter from the assistant conservator of forests, Bangalore South sub-division to the deputy conservator of forests states. 
 		 	 		Ironically, Sharath is getting the rough end of the stick for doing his job. He is said to have moved the High Court as a last resort as the land in question is part of Turahalli forest reserve which, besides having an expansive green cover, is home to more than 69 species of birds and animals. 
 		 	 		The Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA) assures protection to forest and wildlife staff for action taken in good faith. Section 60 of the IWPA states no suit or other legal proceeding shall be undertaken against any officer or employee of the central government or the state government for an act done, or intended to be done, in good faith under the Act. 
 		 	 		Legal experts criticised the government’s move, saying it was tantamount to gagging the petitioner’s legal right to uphold public interest.
 		 	 		“He is acting in public interest. It is not proper on the part of the government to initiate action for carrying out a task which is the duty of every public servant. No government can pass an order in violation of any law, more so protective law. 
 		 	 		We have judicial precedents where such work has been appreciated by the court,” C G Sunder, a senior advocate stated. I stand by govt decision: Forest Minister Minister for environment, forest and ecology, B Ramanath Rai, told Bangalore Mirror, the issue was sensitive and any final action would be taken after weighing the pros and cons of the case. 
 		 	 		“No doubt forest and wildlife is my first priority. However, in this particular case, I stand by the state government’s decision to allot land to the memorial for Dr Vishnuvardhan as there are provisions for land use and it is for a public cause. I will look into action taken against any official and any decision will be taken based on merits of the case,” Rai said. 
 		 	 		Meanwhile, when contacted by Bangalore Mirror, Sharath Babu said, “I can’t comment either on the case or subsequent developments as the matter is sub judice.”