Encroachment of forest areas seems to be easier than of any other type of land in Karnataka! While revenue officials go after encroachers of government land in urban and semi-urban areas, there is hardly anybody to question forest encroachment. This has come to light in the latest CAG report that was tabled in the Legislative Assembly by Chief Minister Siddaramaiah on Wednesday.
 
 According to the CAG’s performance audit on administration of national parks, forest encroachment, which was at just 42,518 acres way back in 1995, has shot up to a whopping 2,04,442 acres in 2014. “Encroachment of forests in Karnataka showed an increase between 1995 and 2011. In fact, the encroachment increased almost five times in the last 19 years,” the CAG report said. Even though encroachment was rampant in various parts, there was hardly any action initiated by the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), said the CAG report. The CAG assessed the encroachment of forest areas in all divisions and ranges and found that there were variations in data submitted by officials.
 
 While the KFD had submitted an affidavit to the High Court of Karnataka stating that a total of 2,04,442 acres of forest area was under encroachment till 2014, the CAG found that the affidavit did not include encroachment of 4,522 acres reported from Bandipur Tiger Reserve. The auditors revealed that most of the encroachments were for cultivation of food and horticultural crops and construction of houses. The increased encroachment of forest areas has resulted in the fragmentation of habitat, affecting the movement of wildlife and triggering human-animal conflict in several areas.
 
 “In 14 protected areas, a total of 4,393 families had encroached upon 9,524 acres till March 2016. But KFD officials had booked only 1,384 forest offence cases even though the Karnataka Forest manual provides for booking of offence cases immediately upon such finding,” the CAG report revealed. Further, the Karnataka Wilderness Tourism policy and guidelines that regulates operation of commercial activities inside eco-sensitive zones, the CAG scrutiny revealed, was flouted and the functioning of several resorts and homestays without the permission of the KFD was observed.
 
 In and around six protected areas, 51 resorts and 50 homestays were found operating. Out of these, 44 resorts and 15 homestays had not received approval of the KFD. Interestingly, four such resorts were found in the middle of the elephant corridor and 5 resorts within the enclosure of parks. A coffee plantation inside BRT Reserve was operating beyond the lease period, the CAG report said.
 
 The CAG recommended that KFD regulate the activities of resorts, homestays around protected areas in coordination with the tourist department.