A show of classics 
Tabla wiz Ustad Zakir Hussain, flautist Rakesh Chaurasia, V Selvaganesh on kanjira, Patri Satishkumar on mridangam and U Rajesh on mandolin will play together at a concert tonight. The concert is being presented by Pancham Nishad, a platform that has been showcasing the rich musical heritage of India for 20 years now. So don’t miss ‘Classical and Beyond – An evening of Indian Global Music’.

 WHERE: Dr BR Ambedkar Bhavan, Kaverappa Layout, 
Vasanth Nagar WHEN: 7pm, December 4
 ENTRY: `300 onwards, bookmyshow.com

Fear factor
Comedian Ramya Ramapriya will confront some of her worst fears – from poor ratings to pesky pachyderms, serpentine shenanigans and the perils of being a thankless Tambrahm – in this standup show. She will also spill the beans about the weird boys she’s met in the engineering college and on dating apps, and how she handled the weird compliments. 

 WHERE: Flax-healthy Living, 80 Feet Road, HAL 3rd Stage,Indiranagar
 WHEN: 8.30pm, December 4
 ENTRY: `149 onwards, bookmyshow.com


 Demon in the city
Baka is the story of Bakasura, the demon who tormented the town of of Ekachakra with his power and might. How the town experiences political and economic turbulence after the demon’s entry is what forms the crux of the story. It is directed by Vinay Shastry and written by MSK Prabhu.

 WHERE: Ranga Shankara, 36/2, R K Colony, 
2nd Phase, JP Nagar WHEN: 7.30pm onwards, December 4
 ENTRY: `150 onwards, bookmyshow.com

 The midweek gig
Have a musical Wednesday with this gig. On the line-up are the progressive jazz and funk fusion band Kelvikkuri as well as Kochi-based progressive rock quartet Chidakasha. While the former is a nine-piece band that conveys various emotions by painting a portrait in real-time on stage, Chidakasha’s music transcends genres and languages and takes the audience on an unforgettable trip. 

 WHERE: Fandom at Gilly's Redefined, 100 Feet Road, 4th Block, Koramangala 
 WHEN: 8pm, December 4 
 ENTRY: `300 onwards, insider.in

 Matters of the art
Journey into the imaginative and visual world of Bengal art with a solo show by Stuti Laha. For her show Coral Lights, this prominent Bengali artist and art restorer at the Archeological Survey of India, has devised a unique style of wash, which results in a semi-transparent layer of colour. 

 WHERE: Gallery g, Shanthala Nagar, Ashok Nagar, Lavelle Road WHEN: 10am-7pm, on view till December 24 CALL: 22219275

 Play with clay
Have you always wanted to learn pottery and did not know where to go? Look no further than this hand building and wheel course. Here, you will learn to make vases, plates, tiles, cylindrical vessels, miniature pottery pieces and many more articles using the techniques of pinching, coiling and slab-making. It's a six-day course, which you can complete by joining on any six Wednesdays.

 WHERE: Lahe Lahe Indiranagar, HAL 2nd Stage, Kodihalli
 WHEN: 11am-1pm, December 4
 ENTRY: `5,000, eventshigh.com

Soap opera
Learn the art of natural soap-making with different techniques such as pencil-thin line, swirls, peeks, hanger swirl, layers and botanical colourants. The session includes the detailed study of cold-process soapmaking with oil infusion, natural colorants, French clays, use of micas in soap, the difference between hard and soft oils, types of clays and more. After all the hardwork, you will get to take back the soap you will make.

 WHERE: Swati Nest, 2nd main, 2nd stage, Vinayaka Layout, Vijaynagar
 WHEN: 10.45am-4.45pm, December 4
 ENTRY: `4,000
 CALL: 9980956927

Tales to tell 
Attend the book launch of We, of the forsaken world, written by Kiran Bhat. The book tells the stories of four worlds falling apart through the structure of four linguistic chains, drawing from the lives of 16 strangers. These 16 stories connect along subtle lines, dispersing at the moments where another story is about to take place, and then they flow into each other

 WHERE: Champaca Bookstore, Library, Edward Road, Vasanth Nagar WHEN: 6pm-8pm, 
December 4 ENTRY: Free

One for the Earth
Echoes of Earth, Bengaluru’s very own eco-friendly music festival, is coming up this weekend. In its fourth season now, it will feature world music, live electronica, techno and acoustic and pop-up performances for children as well.
To prove that large-scale events can be executed sustainably and responsibly, the entire festival is made using upcycled and recycled material. Along with a solar-powered stage, Echoes will be powering many areas of the festival with renewable energy. And since this year’s theme is ‘The Sanctuary’, 
it will highlight the splendid yet endangered species of flora and fauna in 
India and the world.
Watch out for some of these highlights: The Mahseer installation by the Wildlife Association of South India, a flea market selling organic and sustainable products, opportunity to dress up as your favourite animal, chance to have brunch with your favourite artists, a highball lounge, 
a food court, a pet zone and a Nat Geo Wild Zone.

 WHERE: Embassy International Riding School, 149/223, next To Stone Hill International School, Tarunhunse Village WHEN: 1 pm onwards, December 7 and 8 ENTRY: bookmyshow.com 

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’