Kolkata: After eluding forest officials and villagers for over a month, the Royal Bengal tiger was caught by two village tribal hunters in Lalgarh’s Baghghora jungle. However, the tiger fled after tearing the net.

 Two villagers had entered the jungle for hunting on Friday morning. They were injured grievously as the tiger attacked them. Jayram Soren and Ponda Murmu, who secured severe injuries, were rushed to the government-run Midnapore Medical College & Hospital by the residents.

 The tribals in Lalgarh area performd a month-long hunting ritual during March as part of their culture. Despite the administrations’ repeated requests to stay away from the forest, the locals visited the jungle every morning

 Two other hunters, who were accompanying Soren and Murmu, captured the tiger in a net as it fell into a hole inside the jungle. The tiger struggled inside the net while the locals informed the forest officials.

Read Also:
Kolkata: Two forest officials die mysteriously inside night-vigil vehicle 
 The forest officials arrived with the tranquilizing team, who aimed at shot at the tiger, but the wild animal tore the net and fled from the hole under a culvert.

 When contacted, Divisional Forest Officer (Rupnarayanpur) Rabindranath Nath Saha said, “A team of forest officials were sent to the forest. But the tiger fled. Our team could not capture the tiger. We have also sent a team who have expertise in tranquilizing. The team is searching the tiger in and around the area. They will work till 5pm as evening falls quickly in the jungle.”

 The tiger was first spotted roaming inside the Melkhedia forest, a 50sqkm patch in Jhargram district, in Lalgarh on March 2 at about 4.30 a.m by camera traps of the forest department. There were no previous records of tiger sightings in Lalgarh in the last 50 years.

Read Also:
World's last male northern white Rhino dies in Kenya

 Last month, the villagers in Lalgarh had also informed the administration about alleged attacks on livestock. At least a dozen cows, calves and goats had disappeared or their corpses found near the forests over the past few months. On January 30, some villagers saw pugmarks and alerted the administration.

 Meanwhile, in another incident at south Kashmir’s Pulwama district, a leopard was killed after hit it got by a speeding vehicle on Thursday night at Rohmoo village.

 According to the police, the leopard was found dead on Friday morning near the Rohmoo village. The locals soon after spotting the leopard in a pool of blood informed the wildlife department about it.

 A team of the wildlife reached the spot very late and took the body into custody.

 Divisional Forest Officer for wildlife department Afshana said that according to the preliminary investigations leopard died after hit by an unknown vehicle.“The body of the wild animal was taken to the control room for post-mortem and other necessary formalities,” she said.

- With inputs from Anil Raina