The best news for conservationists and forest department officials in the year gone by was that the population of tigers in the country, especially in the reserves in the southern states, has increased significantly. On Monday, however, forest officials learnt that the battle to save the big cat from extinction was far from over. 
 The National Tiger Conservatory Authority (NTCA) has put the state forest department on high alert following intelligence reports that teams from the notorious Bahelia and Pardis tribes have moved into the state from Madhya Pradesh. The tribals are infamous for their skill in poaching wild animals and they primarily target tigers. 
 The NTCA, country’s supreme authority on protection of big cats, has instructed officials to step up vigilance in all the five reserves in the state. The alert comes just two days before the start of a workshop for forest department officers from the southern states and Orissa at Bandipur. 
 “The message could have been discussed at the national-level workshop, beginning at the Bandipur Tiger Reserve on Wednesday. But the threat was so serious and imminent that the information was immediately relayed on Monday morning so that the department could be put on high alert,” a forest department official said.
   B K Singh, principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) admitted that the department had received the alert, but refused to divulge details. Sources, however, reveal that the NTCA had warned that teams of poachers from the two tribes had already moved into the state from central Indian forests where they had been camping all these years. 
 
 “These two tribes are a big threat to conservation measures,” a sleuth from the forest intelligence wing said. “They make a living out of poaching tigers and they employ unique methods. They use deadly jaw-traps from which no animal can escape. Once the animal is trapped, they kill it instantly and with vulture-like efficiency, segregate the parts, making it easy to transport.” 
 Officials say jaw-traps are outdated, but these tribes have perfected the art of poaching tigers with these devices. 
 “These tribes have had considerable success in killing animals through this technique,” a top bureaucrat of the state forest department said. 
 “These tribes have been known as the Katni gang of poachers who were active in Central India around the Bandhavgarh National Park in Madhya Pradesh. Their poaching activities spread to forest areas near the Madhya Pradesh-Rajasthan border, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and the Indo-Nepal border. Dhariya, one of their top men, was arrested in 2008 and sent to jail. Thereafter, several members of the gang were arrested at Katni in Madhya Pradesh.” 
 But despite the arrests, officials say the threat has not receded.  
 “They operate at night,” an official said. “They camp in secluded areas and are equipped with kerosene stoves, utensils and various sizes of skinning knives. Unlike other poachers who drag the carcass after killing the animal, these tribes skin the beast on the spot. The flesh is fed to other animals while the bones are crushed to a powder and rendered odourless to make it difficult to identify. Sometimes they even disguise the bones as human bones to get past check posts.” 
 Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert, said, “Most body parts of the tiger are valuable and are smuggled to markets in China. The tribes keep migrating from reserve to reserve. The NTCA keeps track of their movements and alerts departments.” 
 The state department has already swung into action. The 64 newly-recruited personnel of the State Tiger Task Force have been deployed in the five reserves — Bandipur, Nagarahole, Bhadra, Anshi-Dandeli and Biligiri Ranga Tiger reserves. Existing staff have also been ordered to carry out extra beats. The department has also begun alerting people living on the fringes of tiger reserves so that they can tip off officials if they spot new settlers in those areas. 
 “Generally they move from state to state posing as agricultural labourers. Some pick up work in large orchards or coffee plantations surrounding the reserves. They dress differently and speak a language of central India so they are easy to identify,” a senior forest official said. Two poachers were arrested in Chamrajnagar in April 2010 and under questioning had revealed that they belonged to one of the tribes. Sleuths claim they were alerted to the methods adopted by these poachers at that time, but they could not prove whether the two poachers were actually members of the tribe.
 
 
 Jawtrap
 The jaw-trap is an old hunting device used by poachers to trap wild animals such as tigers, lions, leopards and bears. The traps are made of cast iron or steel and come fastened to an iron chain which is secured to the ground. The device consists of two flaps linked to each other by springs called the trigger. When an animal steps on the flap, it springs shut, trapping the animal. While some traps are big enough to trap the body of the animal, killing it instantly, others only trap the foot, causing serious injury to the animal.