Chinese Manja has killed 155 birds in past three years; harmful to humans too
 
 Watch out if you are flying a kite using nylon threads. You may be called a hunter under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act and booked for it. 

 	Kite fliers using nylon threads, famously known as Chinese Manja, which is believed to kill at least two birds a day in Bangalore and considered death trap for birds, will soon be liable for a crackdown. The wildlife department has indicated it in a letter on Tuesday to the Industries and Commerce, and Forest, Ecology and Environment departments. It has called for a ban on Chinese Manja — that is used exclusively to fly kites — in the entire state. 

 The ban is to be enforced by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), a source said. The move comes as a result of activists’ efforts from several years. Activists and bird lovers had been demanding a ban on the nylon thread. 

 The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra, who is also the Chief Wildlife Warden, said in his letter, a copy of which is with Bangalore Mirror: “Killing and injuring various species of birds amounts to poaching under Sec. 2 (16) of IWP Act, 1972. As per Sec. 9 of the same Act, it is considered hunting. Also using such nylon threads (importing, trading, selling and manufacturing) is prohibited under Sec. 52, IWP act. Hence, I hereby request you to direct concerned department to issues orders banning synthetic thread.” 

 “The wildlife department brass’ decision, while the city authorities are struggling to enforce a decision taken orally in the city council, is welcome. It will now be official and across the state. With the stringent sections mentioned by the department to deal with the menace, this will certainly help birds from being killed every year,’’ Sharath R Babu, wildlife activist and formerly wildlife warden, Bangalore, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	He pointed out that the Chinese Manja was dangerous to humans also. ‘’Our volunteers usually get hurt in the process of rescue, because of the nylon thread,’’ he said.