Night herons, long used to a delectable diet of aquatic food, have created a ripple among wildlife enthusiasts by turning to rodents for survival.
 
 
 Blame this rare phenomenon on the city’s shrinking water cover and increasing urbanisation. 
 The colony was first spotted in a peepal tree on Magadi Road near the leprosy hospital, a crowded and busy area. Comprising around 20 pairs of herons, apart from individual and small ones, they were found living in an alien habitat and feeding on rodents.
   Night herons are usually found around water bodies — on islands, riversides and near lakes — living on aquatic animals like fish, snakes etc. Even if they live away, they are known to travel to water bodies for food.
   “This is very strange and we haven’t seen something like this in the city before,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror. “Despite being water birds, they have started living like other birds in urban Bangalore. We are sensitising residents in surrounding areas to ensure that the birds are not harmed.”
     Result of urbanisation Experts say this is a result of rapid urbanisation that is constantly eroding the habitat of wild animals and birds. There have been many cases of wild animals like elephants and big cats straying into human territory. And now, birds seem to be following suit.
 
 “Lack of resources may have driven the birds here. Water bodies in the city are shrinking due to encroachments. Also, prolonged drought has dried up the lakes. All these may have forced these birds to change their dietary habits. Since these birds are opportunistic, they survive by changing according to the circumstances,” birdwatcher Arun Kaulige told Bangalore Mirror.
   “As these birds live in a crowd, a few of them died during the rains by falling from heights. However, we are ensuring residents do not harm the remaining ones by explaining to them that they were there since their habitats have been encroached,” Sharath Babu said.
   There are over 30 species of birds commonly found in the city. These include crows, common mynas, jungle mynas, tailor birds, Ashy Prinia and Koel. Aquatic birds found near water bodies in the city include pond herons, spotbilled ducks, lesser whistling ducks, common kingfishers, pied kingfishers, white breasted kingfishers, grey herons, and purple herons. The water birds, including the night herons, are found in and around water bodies in BTM layout, Hebbal, and Jakkur.