CZA orders probe against three individuals who posted pictures of themselves holding tiger and leopard cubs on social media, besides a Bannerghatta zoo official and an NGO
 
 The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) has taken serious note of the alarming trend of people posing with animals in Bannerghatta National Park and flaunting these pictures – which often go viral -- on social networking sites.
 Clearly indicating its intention to clamp down on this fad, the premier body for zoos and zoo animals in the country has ordered a probe into individuals and an NGO in instances that are allegedly in gross violation of CZA rules. Based on a directive from their central body, which dashed off a letter on Thursday, the Karnataka Zoo Authority is probing three such cases. Such tactile association poses potential risk to the young wildlife, authorities warn. 

 Wildlife activists in Bangalore first alerted the vigilance wing of the state forest department. The issue was also brought to the notice of the-now union minister Maneka Gandhi. Gandhi’s People For Animals then took it up with the CZA. 

 Under the scanner are an NGO, which allegedly facilitates pictures and selfies with wild animals, besides a forest official and individuals named in the complaint. 

 	In a directive to his counterpart in Karnataka on May 29, Bishan Singh Bonal, Member Secretary, CZA, ministry of environment and forestry, has stated, “Kindly cause an inquiry and take action as per the prevailing rule and regulations. Sub rule 5(6) of Rule 10 under Recognition of Zoo Rule 2009 (amendment 2013), reads, ‘The curatorial -- The animals shall be handled only by the staff having experience and training in handling the individual animals’. Whereas, as per photographs, it seems that general visitors are allowed to pose for photography in violation of RZR, 2009 under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Your early action with status report is solicited.”  	The whistleblower in this case is a 33-year-old MBA graduate Hari Krishna. Besides wildlife photography, he also runs adventure biking expeditions themed around nature and wildlife conservation. His team is also involved in sponsoring forest department initiatives and NGOs working for wildlife conservation, particularly in border areas where man-animal conflict exists. 

 Krishna saw a red flag when pictures of people posing with wild animals in parks and zoos started going viral on social sites, drawing others to do the same. He first reported to Additional Principal Chief Conservator of  Forests (vigilance), Karnataka, how officials at the Bannerghatta National Park rehabilitation centre were allowing access to people to pose with wild cats. The pictures splashed all over the social media were a clearly indication of their complicity. 

 	“People are getting easy access into the rehab centre and taking photographs with tiger and leopard cubs in their arms. If action is not taken, it will encourage others to follow suit, creating undue stress on the animal,” Krishna had stated in early May. He added this trend would also dilute the boundaries of accessibility between the wild and the humans, and trigger a copy-cat syndrome. 

 	 The petition was attached with three pictures of individuals posing with animals; an NGO was also named. Indicating a nexus in the entire business, Gauri Maulekhi, a close aide of Maneka Gandhi and PFA staffer, said in her complaint to CZA member secretary Bonal that the NGO was attracting membership for huge sums by promising an opportunity to get up, close and personal with the wild ones. “Some part of the money is paid to a zoo official to facilitate such photo sessions. This causes an increased desire to ‘own’ wild animals and, hence, poaching and smuggling when these pictures find their way into social networking sites,” Maulekhi pointed out. 

 	She said that while the NGO and the zoo official were making a quick buck, the lives of zoo inmates were under risk due to the unnecessary and unprofessional handling. “Please issue necessary instructions for the immediate arrest of the persons appearing in the pictures. Also, the official in Bannerghatta needs to be severely punished for his greedy and irresponsible act of corruption,” she stated. 

 	Potential risk to wildlife Handling animals in zoos and parks is not only a violation of rules, but also puts the animals, especially the young ones to risk, say experts. “The person may be carrying contagious diseases. It also causes tremendous psychological stress on young animals in the zoo and affects their behaviour. For example, most bears, above 90 per cent, which we have seized from madaris in the city and sent to the Bannerghatta rehab centre were found positive for tuberculosis. Similarly, animals, especially young ones in zoos, are easily susceptible to infections, viruses transmitted by humans,” Sharath R Babu, formerly honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore urban and a wildlife expert told Bangalore Mirror. He said people visiting these areas were not sanitized or checked for infections. “That’s the purpose behind the CZA rules that prohibit visitors handling animals.”