Forest officials deployed drones, thermal cameras in ongoing search, but leopard continues to remain hard to find

In the ongoing quest to locate a leopard that has been captured on a few CCTV cameras in and around Kudlu Gate, the elusive big cat remained untraceable as of Tuesday. The forest department officials have employed drones in their efforts to track the leopard but have met with limited success. Despite this, they maintain optimism that the application of cutting-edge technology will eventually lead them to the leopard’s whereabouts.

Forest Minister Eshwar Khandre said, “Our Forest department personnel are using modern technology. Drone cameras are being used to track the location of leopards. In the night, thermal cameras are being used to track the elusive leopard. A 23-member team is pressed into service. We have got a specialised team from Mysuru to Kudlu Gate. We are confident that we will rescue the leopard at the earliest but request people to be careful. A personnel part of the combing operation said, “We have come from Mysuru for the operation since morning; we have not been able to track the leopard; we have not even found any pugmark.”

As the news spread about leopards, there has been a debate over whether it is one leopard or more than one. Sources said the leopard could have sneaked from Bannerghatta, although there is no clarity on it. Wildlife experts say that leopard sightings don’t mean an exponential increase in leopard numbers. Still, they are a pointer to shrinking forest space or habitat due to rapid urbanisation.

An official said leopards’ natural habitats, such as forests, rocky outcrops, and shrub land, vanish, and their natural prey, such as deer, antelope, hare, porcupine, wild pig, and others, are lost due to illegal hunting. They turn to livestock, leading to conflict. In such situations, understanding safe livestock guarding practices is essential. “If there are unfortunate accidental incidents of human injuries or deaths, they have to be dealt with in a completely different manner. However, if the injuries or deaths continue in the same location, efforts should be made to identify the individual leopard, and the animal has to be removed from the population. If we do not take a firm stand in such situations, aggrieved communities can resort to extreme steps such as poisoning, torching, or other means of killing every leopard in the area. It also leads to large-scale animosity towards wildlife conservation. Hence, instead of trying to save an individual animal, we should focus conservation efforts towards saving populations of leopards.”

Our Forest department personnel are using modern technology. Drones are being used to track the leopards–Eshwar Khandre, Forest Minister
Another official said that during leopard sightings, one should not spread fake news or sensationalise information as earlier there were pictures of cheetahs (which are extinct in India) and images of footprints of dogs were circulated, saying leopards were still lurking around. According to him, unnecessary pressure should not be exerted on the forest department to capture the animal. Capturing or translocating leopards until there is a serious problem will not solve any issues. People should coexist with leopards. Many rural communities do this; it is just that most urban people aren’t used to large wildlife being next to their doorsteps, so they panic. However, if there is good outreach, they can coexist.
 
He suggested that first and foremost is to educate the communities towards safe practices and instill confidence that leopards are not dangerous and they keep to themselves. Carrying out outreach activities to ensure safe practices would go a long way for both leopards and people and reduce the pressure to capture the animal. There should be interdepartmental cooperation (e.g. forest-municipal authorities, forest mines and geology) so that suitable mitigation measures can be implemented. For instance, if there are meat/chicken shops or apartment complexes disposing of waste that could attract leopards’ prey, municipal authorities should ensure that waste disposal is done scientifically. Police personnel are trained to manage large crowds; hence, they have the responsibility if there is a large gathering when leopards are seen in highly human-dense areas.