By: Disha Dinesh
 
 
 This art-gallery turned shop stocks a variety of items, crafted for a good cause
 
 	Walking from Jayanagar swimming pool towards Cool Joint on the uphill road lined with large branded stores, and a red bricked column behind a large white building is seen. This is Genesis: The art space. Inside, you’ll find wooden idols, painted bottles and ceramics, gold plated coloured jewellery and tribal junk jewellery, among other articles. The variety is what makes Genesis interesting – from bags to stringed instruments, you’ll find a host of artefacts to pretty up yourself and your home. 
 	  	Prior to 2010, Genesis was an art gallery run by Nethra Shylendra. They sold works of upcoming artists. In 2010 Priyanka, Nethra’s daughter took over and Genesis became an art space. The store itself sports an interesting décor – a small clearing under the stairs is lined with pebbles, there’s a stone-carved bird bath, garden gnomes and figurines; art work lines all the walls. 
 	  	“This isn’t just retail,” Priyanka shares, “we have a cause.” “All of our stuff is sourced from NGOs and non-profits supporting women and we believe in promoting ethical shopping.” They stock items with a conscience, such as non-leather and non-fur bags, recycled newspaper baskets and coir and coconut fibre decorative items. In June 2015, they displayed an animal-themed series of paintings and invited a wildlife conversationalist to give a talk. 
 	  	“We then gave the proceeds to a charity,” she says. 
 	  	The store also stocks dream catchers, jewellery made of paper, coconut shells, terracotta, ceramic and fabric, German silver and gold jhumkis, necklaces, bracelets, and more. A Portuguese artist’s wooden spoon-ceramic series, idols from Indonesia and Bali, potpourri from Rosemore UK, newspaper baskets from Chettinad, ceramic ice cases, “calming stone necklaces” and wooden kalimbas – stringed instruments made of coconut shells —also feature in the eclectic wares.
 	  	“We have a lot of art lovers and women in search of exclusive décor for their homes coming in. There isn’t a better place for that, says Priyanka, “because we stock articles that people can access from the world over, something rare in South Bangalore.”    
 	
 	
 	GENESIS: THE ART SPACE
 	
 	 		#12/25, 11th main, 3rd block Jayanagar, Below MAX showroom, Bangalore- 560011 	 		USP: Home décor-Paintings-handbags-jewellery crafted by non-profits 	 		Price: Rs 250 – Rs 5,000 	 		*paintings priced separately