Boasting the rarest of the rare flora and fauna diversity along the Western Ghats, Karnataka is home to one of 25 biodiversity hotspots in the world. It is this diversity, across its pristine forests, which has made Karnataka vulnerable to one of the worst ecological threats—Biopiracy!
 
 Waking up to the potential threat that could wipe out several of its precious species, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has rolled out stringent guidelines for the collection of biological material (specimens) from its forests for research and experiments.
 
 The latest guidelines, published by the KFD impose stringent restrictions on collection of specimens like plants, insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, etc for research and experiments. Following the sudden spurt in the number of applications for research and experiment in state forests, the KFD, in consultation with experts, has rolled out fresh rules “to ward off chances of trespass into forest areas causing biopiracy”. The guideline says: “No permission shall be granted to foreigners or institutions owned by foreigners.” However, the department has inserted a clause that if the Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF) issues permission to such foreign researchers, then they will be allowed to conduct research but under the watchful eyes of department officials.
 
 A top forest official told Bangalore Mirror that over the last couple of years, the department has received a large number of applications requesting permission to conduct scientific studies in forest areas.
 
 “Earlier, it was only wildlife areas that formed the subject of interest for researchers. But now even the reserved and protected forest area, which hitherto did not come under the purview of sanctuaries and national parks, has also evinced interest among researchers. We suspect it could be because of the expansion in the species habitat and discovery of several rare species used for many industrial purposes. Irrespective of the objective, we are committed to safeguard our diversity and hence have come out with stringent rules so that nobody could damage our biodiversity or hijack our species to claim patent in foreign courts.”
 
 The latest guidelines notified through an official gazette dated May 21, 2015 empowers both Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Head of the Forest Force and Wildlife, as authorities to sanction permissions for conducting scientific study and research. A copy of the guidelines, which is with Bangalore Mirror says, “Permission shall be granted only to research institutions and universities of Indian Union that are recognised by the respective state governments.”
 
 This apart, as per the guidelines only a minimum number of researchers and assistants will be permitted to enter into forest areas for research and they shall collect only specimens of permitted species from forest areas at such location, date, time agreed by the researcher and divisional forest officer with control over the area. Further, no researcher, professor or team member is allowed to share the database or findings to any person or organisation without permission of the KFD.
 
 Protected areas beyond reach
 
 Acknowledging the value and importance of protected areas which house high density of carnivores and herbivores besides a verdant floral diversity, the guidelines make it more difficult for researchers to enter protected areas like sanctuaries and national parks for study.
 
 “No permission is ordinarily granted for research in protected areas unless PCCF (Wildlife) is satisfied that such permission is absolutely necessary and in the interest of KFD,” says the fresh guidelines. If the research involves photography, then, copies of the photographs taken along with the identity of plants, animals shall be submitted to divisional forest officer who will maintain a register for this purpose, as per the latest orders. The researchers or scientists have to present three copies of published reports and one copy of the final report has to be mandatorily submitted free of cost to the KFD on expiry of the period of research. In case of damage or loss to forest produce, plant, animal or environment due to negligence or any other way by the researchers’ team, the loss will be assessed by the PCCF and their decision will be final. The researchers shall pay a security deposit of Rs5,000 in bank or treasury in favour of PCCF, forest department which will be returned after the completion of the project or study.
 
 The researchers are allowed into forests only with proper accompaniment of forest staff with the department given ID between 6am and 6pm Commenting on the latest guidelines, Vinay Luthra, PCCF (Wildlife) told Bangalore Mirror that these measures would not only safeguard our precious biodiversity but also ensure greater transparency in conducting research and experiments.
 
 “Till today we were only regulating experiments in wildlife areas and henceforth with the latest set of guidelines even the general and reserved forest areas have also been covered under the rules as they also house considerable treasure of species. The rules have already come into effect since the date of notification,” Luthra clarified.