With no assistance from radio collar technology, the forest officials have roped in tribals from neighbouring Chamarajanagara to help locate the big cat
 	
 	
 The odds are heavily stacked against not only the tiger that killed a pregnant woman near Belagavi, but also against any big cat that may come in the way of a team that has fanned out in the 15-sq km section of the 1,365-sq km Anshi-Dandeli Tiger Reserve spreading across Uttara Kannada (Karwar) and Belagavi districts.
 Around 300 forest officials, commandos – armed with AK-47s, no less – and tribals are on the prowl, most of them on foot along with rangers on two elephants, since 6 pm on Saturday to smoke out a man-eating tiger. 
 		 	 		The flipside is though they have been given camera-trapped (set up across the reserve) photos of the man-eating tiger the instinct would be to go with the Wild West flicks’ dictum ‘When you have to shoot, shoot. Don’t talk’: The first tiger that crosses their path could well be shot, especially since they will be on the lookout in the thick of night in a heavily-wooded forest. Then they will cross-check it with the giveaways the man-eater tiger left at the village near Belagavi. If it turns out to be a case of mistaken identity, the entire hunting exercise will begin all over, and it will again be ‘first come, first shot’. That is called standard operating procedure, in old concrete jungle saying.
 		 	 		The operation itself is becoming as grassroots as possible; the radio collar that the tiger they suspect to sport is not emitting any signal, so the authorities have had to fall back – a first, just like the shoot-at-sight order – on primitive methods in search of the tiger.
 In all, four tribals form part of the 300-member team and their job is to put their inherited input to direct their team members towards any tiger. Aged about 35 to 45 years, all of them were born and brought up in dense forests of the adjoining Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) tiger reserve of Chamrajanagara. Knowledge of locating tigers is passed onto them by their forefathers through several techniques, according to forest officials.
 		 	 		Though the department has been using them to track a tiger for the first time, department personnel were known about their habitual instinct of locating tigers based on smell and signs including of its prey. 
 		 	 		According to them, all tigers are dirty enough to leave several marks all through their journey as they roam within their territory.
 		
 Based on the smell of their body fluids, droppings, pugmarks and paw marks on tree barks and plants that they trail behind tigers.
 The four tribals – Aalambadi, Keta, Bheda and Alumalai -- are native to different haadis in BRT reserve and belong to from the Soliga community of Mysuru-Chamarajanagar.
 		 	 		They come in because after three days of its effort to capture the man-eater the state forest department has realised that relying on technology is of no use, having failed to track the tiger through radio collaring technology.
 		 	 		“These Soligas take note of various signs left by tigers and they could even smell its presence. They look for tiger pugmarks, droppings.
 		
 		Subsequently they observe paw marks on tree barks along the route and smell of its body fluids in the air before identifying its exact location. Being born and brought up in forest areas of Chamarajanagar and Mysuru where there is healthy population of tigers, Soligas are experts in tracking tigers’ presence and location. Hopefully, tonight (Saturday) we will be able to capture the tiger with their help,” said a senior forest official from Belagavi circle. 	

 	 		Different stripes of babudom
 While noted tiger scientists have reiterated that the man-eating tiger should not have been let into the forest again, the guidelines by the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) call for different action. According to the NTCA guidelines, any tranquillised tiger found to be healthy in young age without incapacitation may be released after radio collaring in a suitable habitat with adequate prey base.
 		 	 		Similarly, the officials who captured the four-year-old tiger near Chikkamagalur released the tiger in Khanapura range in Belagavi district after it was radio collared by Sanjay Gubbi of Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF) in presence of certified veterinarians, NTCA members and forest officials. Even though nobody had an issue then, everybody has begun to cry foul now raising several doubts. 	 		Speaking to mediapersons, Belagavi DFO Ambadi Madhav said that the team of conservation scientist Sanjay Gubbi did not do well and has let them down. But, according to experts, what the officials have failed to understand is the pitfalls of technology that all of them have relied upon till date to study the behaviour of captured animals.
 		 	 		Admitting that the radio collaring has failed in the Belagavi ‘man-eater’ episode, Sanjay Gubbi told Bangalore Mirror that the device is as good as any other electronic device that can experience malfunction any time owing to misuse. “More than anything the device is fitted around a wild animal. It can go into water, roll in muddy waters, scratch against any hard surface or hide beneath a huge boulder.
 		
 		During these sojourns, the device may experience technical glitch and fail to emit signals. This could have happened in the case of tiger in Belagavi as well. Ever since we let the tiger into the wild, at least one member of our team has been tracking the tiger and constantly updating the department. But a few days ago we stopped getting any signals, and even that was also communicated to the department. There is nothing to hide in any stage of the operation and everything was done transparently,” Gubbi clarified.
 		 	 		Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), said, “Anybody is free to comment at their will. But being government officials we have some rules to follow and we have gone by the rules. From capturing to re-release of tiger, we have followed every guideline laid down by the NTCA, and everything was done and documented in the presence of experts.”
 		 	

 	 		How do collars work?
 		 	 		Even though several issues and doubts have been raised about the functioning of radio collars across the world, still they are the reliable source for studying the behaviour and movement of wild animals. Currently, all the collars used in India by experts are made in the US. The collars weigh roughly about 1.5 per cent of the total body weight of the animal (300 to 450 gms). Collars are programmed to function for six months and fall of automatically after the expiry of battery. Till then, the transponder hidden inside the collar around animal’s neck emit signals that will be reflected by satellites. These signals are received through VHF antenna and based on the signals longitude and latitude the location of the animal is plotted. Scouting for the GPS signals, volunteers move around the forest with VHF antenna. Everyday volunteers collect nine locations of the collared animals. The cost of each collar ranges from Rs 2 to Rs 2.5 lakh, and a measly monthly rental of US$30 is given for using satellite services.
 		
 		
 		 			Tiger scare in shivamogga
 			 		 			Triggering panic in Shivamogga, a tiger attacked a cow pen and killed a cow at Hiduvani village in Gamate Ghatta forest area of Sagar taluk on Friday night. Following the incident the villagers demanded the forest officials to capture the tiger before it could prey on humans 		 			
 			
 			THE HUNTERS
 			
 			 				Total number of officials engaged in operation  			 				>300
 				
 				 					Forest officials 				 					175
 					
 					 						Police officials (all ranks included) 					 						210
 						
 						 							Soligas (tribals) 						 							4
 							 						 							Anti Naxal Force commandos 						 							10
 							 						 							Sharpshooters 						 							5
 							 						 							STPF commandos 						 							36
 							 						 							‘Garuda’ commandos 						 							5
 							 						 							Veterinarians 						 							6