In line with the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission (UGC), many higher education institutes in the city have devised community service programs for their undergraduate and postgraduate students. The idea is to foster a sense of social responsibility in the young generation and encourage community engagement.
 
These programs require students to engage with organisations working at the grassroots level and complete a minimum number of volunteer hours.
 
However, many city-based organisations providing such opportunities to students say there is a growing trend of students from reputed institutes looking to buy their way out of the time commitment.
 
“We get students from various reputable colleges and universities in the city for internships in the field of ecology and environment conservation. Most of them come with the requirement of 60 volunteer hours or 45 days. After completion, the students are expected to submit a report based on activities taken up during the program, following which, we provide a certificate. However, recently, we are flooded with calls by students who want to buy internship certificates without putting in the required volunteering time,” said the founder of an organisation working towards environment and wildlife conservation.
 
The organisations say most of the students are not interested in spending hours conducting field-based research or volunteering work. Even if they join a team, they do it half-heartedly. 
“They are only concerned about the certification which is mandatory for them to obtain a degree. While the requirement of certain hours as field work is on paper, all the students do not complete that requirement,” said a representative of another conservation-based non-governmental organisation that receives students from various city-based institutes and universities.
 
Organisations say while the programs have a lot of potential, vigilance by the institutes is lacking. Educational institutions must monitor the students and seek daily reports of such internships. Such scrutiny is missing barring in the case of students with social work backgrounds.
 
Some also suggest having ethic-building programs in higher education institutions.
 
“Currently, students approach us with a letter from their college or university stating the time duration of the internship program. While the initiative is good, colleges and universities must be more vigilant toward students’ activity. As of now, only students with MSW backgrounds undergo that level of scrutiny by their institutions. For the rest of them, no one reaches out to us to cross-check the progress they are making or the number of hours they are putting in,” said another city-based NGO.