It is time to reconstitute State Board of Wildlife and past instances make experts worry members won’t be chosen without fear or favour

As the reconstitution process of the State Board of Wildlife gains momentum, conservationists and wildlife activists have raised concerns about alleged controversial appointments of Board members in the recent past. They claim that on multiple occasions in the past, the members appointed did not have the right field expertise and background in wildlife conservation, laws, and policies. This has resulted in the dilution of the Board’s objectives and has hampered its functioning.

“Over the years, the members appointed to the Board have had a conflict of interest. The best example is a mining company owner who was nominated to the Board in January 2020 along with two other members having purely political backgrounds with no expertise in the field of wildlife. In the past, a mining baron’s company was implicated by the Karnataka Lokayukta for illegal export. Despite bringing these issues to the notice of the state government, the mining baron not only continued as a member of the previous Board from January 2020 but more shockingly, was reappointed to the Board in October 2020. Such appointments should not be allowed,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

Wildlife activists claim that most of the time, the appointments of State Board of Wildlife members are purely on political recommendation and clout rather than actual merit.

“A good example is that of a tribal leader who was appointed as a Board member a few years ago. However, in 2014, when his house in Kodagu was raided, the forest department booked a forest offence case against him for illegal possession of teakwood. He not only continued as a member of the Board but was caught in another offense in 2016 for brewing liquor illegally in Anechoukur Wildlife Range of Nagarahole Tiger Reserve. Despite all this, he not only continued as a member of the Board but was reappointed again in 2017,” recalled Ram, a wildlife activist.

‘Mockery of law’
They allege that the appointments are now being made with justifications for such nominees calling themselves ‘wildlife photographers,’ ‘wildlife is my hobby,’ or ‘social worker’ etc. This, they say, is a mockery of the appointment process mandated under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

As per WLPA, the State Board for Wildlife consists of the Chief Minister as chairperson, Environment and Forest Minister as vice chairperson, three members of the state legislature, three persons representing non-government organisations dealing with wildlife, and 10 eminent conservationists, ecologists, and environmentalists to be nominated by the state government, apart from others.

The duty of the Board is to advise the government in the selection and management of areas to be declared as protected areas, formulate policies for the protection and conservation of wildlife, and tackle matters relating to the amendment of acts.

Conservationists allege that such appointments are well-planned strategies to bring down the Board and make it function as a paper tiger.

“It is important to note that the State Board for Wildlife is a statutory body and has a very important role to play in wildlife clearances like railways, highways, mining, etc., which requires field expertise, knowledge of wildlife laws/acts/guidelines/policies apart from grass root level experience, utmost commitment and dedication to arrive at scientific and appropriate decisions. In the given situation of rising human-animal conflict cases and loss of biodiversity, it is disheartening to see the Board getting diluted,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust. 

Allegations denied
However, SK Malkhede, PCCF Wildlife, and Chief Wildlife Warden, Karnataka Forest Department, denied the allegations and said the members of the Board are appointed by the government under the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and guidelines prescribed by the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife Rules, 2006.

 The Wildlife Board has a vital role in clearances and requires field knowledge of guidelines, expertise, grass-root experience and dedication–Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member
“The term of the State Wildlife Board is over and the new board will be constituted by the government any time. The members are appointed by the government under the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and guidelines prescribed by the Karnataka State Board for Wildlife Rules, 2006. These rules define how members are to be appointed and how the board functions. The background and expertise of these members are verified and there have been no major complaints regarding any wildlife board member in the past. The members are mandated to contribute positively to wildlife conservation,” said Malkhede.