Meenakshi&rsquo;s work could become a field guide for conservationists                 
But the lives of these creatures can be fascinating. Are you aware that some insects have life cycles restricted to a few hours? Even as most of us are swat-happy, city-based ecologist Meenakshi Venkataraman has enthusiastically taken up the arduous task of documenting the lives of these creatures.

Meenakshi’s work A Concise Field Guide to Insects and Arachnids, released recently, is a glimpse into the city’s new-found love. After bird watching, techies, youngsters and conservationists are talking about the insect world through online communities. The work featuring over 300 species of insects could become a field guide for beginners and conservationists.

The book is said to be the first attempt by an Indian recently to give a boost to the conservation of insects. It was in 1910 that a tome on the fauna of British India edited by W T Blanford was published. There were no documentations thereafter about agricultural pests, or for that matter, no detailed documentation of insects, explains Meenakshi. 

Meenakshi took close to three years to pool in details about various species of insects. Her hard work focusing on the taxonomical details of insects is embellished by the splendid photographs of minute insects by renowned wildlife photographer T N A Perumal.

Meenakshi said, “Everybody knows and loves butterflies. But only a few understand that they are nothing but an extension of the insect world. While we talk about conservation of tigers and pandas, insects have been forgotten by all. Most of us do not know the importance of insects in the eco system and that without them there would be no pollination of either flowers or fruits.”

Indian context

Meenakshi said, “In Bangalore, most people are familiar with the Butterfly Park at Bannerghatta and the greener pastures surrounding Hesaraghatta. For those who go insect scouting, most of the field guides come from either the US or UK. So they do not prove very useful. But this book is immediate to the Indian context.”

Photographer Perumal was introduced to the world of insects by the bird man of India Salim Ali. “Scientists and photographers should come together to bring out field guides which will help in creating an awareness among common people. In the days of yore, wildlife photographers faced ethical limitations that tested their skills. But today, thanks to modern equipment, our job is much easier and we can photograph insects without causing damage to them and their habitat,” 
Perumal explains.

The book has interesting details on the secret life of insects. “Cockroaches have a strong maternal instinct, always protecting their offspring. Also, a few insects and butterflies unique to the north-eastern forests which have been newly discovered are recorded in the book,” said Meenakshi, who adds that though there are more than 15 million species, only two million have been identified.