So close, yet so far
 The diarist spotted golfer Sharmila Nicollet and Sidhartha Mallya together on two consecutive evenings, at two different occasions, this weekend in Bangalore. On Friday night, the couple entered ITC Hotel Windsor Manor maintaining a low profile. They came here for the TCS pre-party event. They entered together, stayed at the party for less than three minutes and left together. No, they didn’t even pose for the paparazzi. On the next night, through the thunder and lightening that hit Bangalore, Nicollet stood by Mallya Jr till the very last ball of the match that started close to midnight. She occasionally went away from the stand, but that was only a move to hide from the shutterbugs. It was lady luck around Jr. Mallya that made RCB win. Keep at it, Junior.
 
 
 Her work on words is evident
 F rom being in the spotlight during Master Chef India Season 1 as one of the runners up, she has come a long way. Master Chef Shazia Khan’s culinary skills have always been appreciated but her presentation skills needed more polishing. Her last workshop in Bangalore during August-September last year wasn’t really a ‘master class’ and participants were left exasperated with the never-ending giggles. But on Saturday afternoon, a new avatar... Simply Shazia emerged on stage. Simple recipes were complemented with smooth presentation skills. Despite some technical hiccups in the beginning (the live camera arriving late) that left audiences a bit annoyed, Khan managed to hold their attention with much ease. The diarist can tell you that the lady is just getting better at it (like the Sanjeev Kapoor style), owing to all the travelling for shows from our backyard Mysore to New York (she presented a show at the Varli Culinary Awards in November last year). Shazia was glad her ninth big show on Saturday went on smoothly and believes experience is the best teacher. Luru boys flying high
 Two Bangalore boys have been chosen by the National Geographic this year along with 17 other ‘movers and shakers’ called the 2013 Class of Emerging Explorers. Artist Raghava KK and wildlife photographer and filmmaker Sandesh Kadur have featured in this list. To get on to this list, by the way, is very hard for the committee (of experts) does not accept applications or unsolicited nominations. In fact, the list is kept confidential and the nominees are not even notified that they have been nominated.  Well, Raghava has been on a roll this year, and the previous one too, for that matter. The diarist understands Raghava’s excitement at having been invited to speak in front of 2000 plus guests at Nat Geo’s 125th birthday bash in Washington DC. He told the diarist that he was honoured that the award which is normally given to scientists, conservation biologists and their ilk has been given to an artist. He said that he learned to colour outside the lines and use technology in his art, and now, he has to, from science as well.  He is looking forward to a new adventure with Nat Geo, along with his brainwave art and bio-art. Sandesh Kadur, who the diarist has learned is on a book tour launching Himalayas: Mountains of Life across cities of the world, has been listed by Nat Geo as someone who raises awareness about the world’s threatened species and habitats. These two have done Bangalore proud. Wishing you both a great innings.  One for you, Senorita  
 Shankar Mahadevan discovered an ardent fan in Sudha Murthy on the weekend. The function organised by the Mahadevans to announce their association with an NGO that provides mid-day meals to over a million children would have wrapped up after the song Maa from Taare Zameen Par — which seemed just right for the sober occassion. But Mahadevan couldn’t refuse Sudha’s special request — the peppy Senorita number from Zindagi Milegi Na Dobara.
 
 Who’s the Bose?
 Onscreen or off screen... waxing eloquent through his intellectual speeches or while running like Bolt, Rahul Bose is always the ladies man. Even at the TCS 10K run, many a PYT seemed to have skipped a heart beat when they saw the 40-plus run past them smoothly matching the velocity of the wind. “He looks killer... but when he smiles, it’s that perfect 32 that’s visible...” is what many of the ladies were discussing as they saw the marathoner run back. Their hearts may have skipped a hundred beats but their running speed got 100 times faster.