‘Forest officials sent on deputation to irrelevant posts/external departments as critical positions lay vacant’

Although reeling under an acute shortage of staff in critical positions in its divisions, the Karnataka Forest Department has not shied away from putting officials on deputations - at times to irrelevant posts and external departments. According to information provided by KFD, in 2022-23, as many as 58 officials were sent. Last year, 60 officials were on deputation.

These officials, of mostly IFS and SFS, hold the charge of deputation posts in various departments and government agencies such as Forests, Environment & Ecology Department, KFDC, KSFIC, KCDC, Watershed, Tourism, Lake Development, Karnataka Biodiversity Board, Karnataka Medicinal Plant Authority, Jungle Lodges and EMPRI, MGIRED, CADA, Karnataka Pollution Board, KSHDC, MPM, BDA, BBMP and KBJNL.

Conservationists said IFS and SFS officers should be posted on wildlife/forest protection and conservation posts, especially when many critical posts are lying vacant.

“While some of the departments of deputation such as Forest, Environment and Ecology, Karnataka Forest Development Corporation Limited, and Karnataka Biodiversity Board, etc, are relevant, forest officers are sent to irrelevant departments such as Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Rural Energy and Development, Mysore Paper Mills, Bangalore Develo­pment Authority, Bengaluru Metro­pol­i­tan Transport Corporation and so on. Deputation to these departments can be justified only when all critical posts in KFD are occupied. However, this is not the case,” said a city based conservationist.

Experts pointed to vacancies in critical divisions of KFD such as wildlife and Forest Mobile Squad. As per the KFD data, out of 13 posts under Forest Mobile Squad, only seven are occupied by State Forest Service officers, while six posts are lying vacant. Keeping the sanctioned posts vacant while deputing IFS and SFS officers to external departments will hamper the goal of forest and wildlife conservation, according to conservationists.

“The Forest Mobile Squad is the department’s right eye. It deals with forest and wildlife offences; it is a critical wing. KFD must ensure it does not fall short of resources. Similarly, there are vacancies in research and working plan divisions.

 .
 
Every forest division sketches a 10-year working plan, including activities such as wildlife conservation, forest conservation, and management of wildlife crime. Likewise, the research division looks at exploring and analysing new initiatives and wildlife research work. These are critical wings of KFD and vacancies should be immediately filled to ensure proper functioning of the department.
 
IFS officers should be posted for protection and conservation of forest and wildlife,” said a wildlife activist.