A mother and her two newborns – a family of slender lorises – are battling for life even as members of the city wildlife team are relentlessly working over the last 21 days to ensure that they survive.
 
 The team’s senior member Saleem Hameed has already been bitten five times over these days by the protective mother – signs of improving health – but neither him nor the other members plan to give up on them. Saleem, a President’s award winner in wildlife rescue and rehabilitation and Sharath R Babu, honorary city wildlife warden, have been putting up all efforts to save the three in critical condition that includes round-the-clock care.
 
 On May 11, the mother and babies were rescued from the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) campus – the only existing natural habitat of slender lorises in the city – after IISc registrar called them to inform that a mother slender loris and her two babies were in a bad condition.
 
 Rajesh Kumar M, city wildlife volunteer, said “He (the registrar) said a loris had fallen down from a tree and narrated how he spotted the slender loris being attacked by crows after suffering the fall. His timely intervention helped save their lives. After rescuing the mother and its two newborns, he had put them in his car boot as we rushed to the spot. He asked us to check the status of the three. We found the babies to be just 2-3 days old. The mother was also very weak. Usually when somebody tries to touch the younger ones, the mother shows a bit of aggressiveness. That was not the case here. The mother was not responding. There seemed something seriously wrong with her. So, we decided to rush it to our paramedic centre and rushed the three, where they are recovering.”
 
 The team members feel it had something to do with the mother giving birth to two babies – a very rare thing among slender lorises.
 
 Caring for the three lorises has not been an easy task. The situation of the mother battling for life and the two newborns completely dependent on her was compounded by the fact that the mother was not lactating due to poor health.
 
 “Every two hours, I’m feeding the babies and it takes one hour to feed. Seven to eight times they are fed every day. The babies are being fed Lactogen and milk. The mother is eating insects and fruits. Both were weak, but now they are doing much better,” Saleem says. “Gain of each half a gram in weight is an achievement as it is very difficult. It is the first time that we are working with such small babies. There is a lot of dependency on the mother. And also the danger is if she bites. The bite is dangerous. It bit me. While attempting to remove the babies to feed them, she may bite. That’s another problem. It’s a deep bite as they can bite really badly.”
 
 But the fact that she responds by biting shows that she has improved in health, the team members say. After three weeks, hope of survival is returning in a trickle for the three.
 
 “They (the babies) are okay and the mother is doing much better now. We are really struggling to keep them alive and going.
 
 Gram by gram, I am trying help the babies gain weight. It is critical as when they came they were just 2-3 days old. The mother was hurt and we still do not know what the problem was. But she has responded to medical care. She is eating now. But it will take a long time,” Saleem told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 The three will be released back to their habitat after their condition improves considerably, Sharath Babu said. “Areas in and around IISc are the last living patches, which are a conducive habitat for these beautiful slender lorises – the state animal of Karnataka. These two little babies are living examples that our city has still prospects of retaining its image as a wildlife habitat.
 
 These three will be released once they recover in their habitat as they are colonial creatures,” he said.