Adding variety to the growing eco-tourism across the state, and in an effort to beckon more tourists both from India and abroad, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has come up with a concept of ‘Canopy Walks’ in order to make visitors understand avian life and to appreciate the unique flora of the Western Ghats. 
 
 	The walks are close on the lines of similar walks offered to tourists in rainforests of South East Asia and South American countries. Tourism minister RV Deshpande told Bangalore Mirror that the walks will be commissioned soon. “The walks would be a treat to nature lovers and adventure buffs as it would provide a new dimension to the flourishing eco-tourism across the state,” the minister explained.
 	
 	  	The Canopy Walks will be a joint venture by the Karnataka Forest Department and the Tourism Department. Vinay Luthra, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, said, “The tourism department will provide us with the funds, and infrastructure will be built by the forest department. The walks would be a part of trekking trails through the Western Ghats and the length will not be more than half-a-kilometer. A rope bridge will be built close to the canopy of tall trees 10 to 15 feet above the ground. Trekkers or visitors can climb on to the bridge and take a walk amidst dense canopy.”
 	
 	  	The visitors will be assisted by trained wildlife guides and naturalists. “The services will be supervised either by Jungle Lodges and Resorts or Wildlife Wing of the KFD.
 	
 	
 	People will be briefed about canopy wildlife like birds, their nesting pattern, butterflies, reptiles, amphibians and unique plant life like orchids,” Luthra revealed. The department is hopeful of launching the new attraction after this year’s monsoon.
 	
 	  	Both the KFD and Tourism Department have planned canopy walks as part of the recently commissioned Great Canara Trails. Officials revealed that in India, canopy walks facility is available at Thenmala Eco-tourism circuit in Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary in Kollam, Kerala.