Not mentioning wildlife in an Africa travelogue is a way to invite some ire but hey, this isn’t a brochure anyway. Point is, if you’ve had your share of animal sanctuary outings in India, spotting some more value-additions such as zebras or giraffes shouldn’t be the ‘only’ agenda of your Africa trip.
 
 Yes, the ‘big five’ - lion, leopard, elephant, rhino, buffalo - appear intriguing if gaped at from a jeep (though the spotted cat almost never lets you see itself) but there is much more that we first-world-loving Indian travellers can explore in more civilised parts of southern Africa. Did you, for instance, know…
 
 1 That there is a European hangover here
 
 Having been colonised by the Dutch and British in the past, South Africa today bears a quiet hangover of it. Nearly half its cities have Dutch names (Johannesburg, Bloemfontein et al) while Cape Town, which has hitherto served as the interim port for European ships to Asia, flaunts distinctive Amsterdam-esque architecture.
 
                                             
 Thanks to the rainbow nation’s fine weather and a historic location on the ‘wine route’, it’s a proud producer of wines too. Also, its cities’ palates are unmissably European, so finding an Irish bar or a French-styled café won’t take too much of your time. In fact, the locals themselves head to Montecasino of Jo’burg for an authentic Italian experience.
 
 2 That Cape Town leaves you sleepless
 
                           Arguably the most vibrant harbour city in the world, Cape Town is sure to catch your day time attention with its history (Robben island, where Nelson Mandela was imprisoned), its picturesque vineyard drives and of course the Table mountain, SA’s contender for the New Seven Wonders. However, stay up and you’ll find that its nightlife appetite is enormous.
 
 Dozens of pubs and lounges on Long Street throb with revelers from across the world and the alcohol, coffee and an uber-friendly vibe keep flowing till sunrise. For best results, begin on a Friday night and pub-hop your way to glory till Sunday morning!
 
 3 That you can be a gold-digger for a day
 
 A city formed thanks to a gold-rush in the 1880s, Johannesburg still considers mining as serious business and it is at one of its significant mines — the Gold Reef City that visitors can get a feel of being a miner.
 
                          
 The theme park’s gold mine tour takes you several metres down a shaft into a dark, humid gold mine, and gives you a crash course on the risky business of extracting yellow life out of an ore. In between adjusting the torch on your head-gear and gasping for breath, you will surely realise how fascinating the world beneath us is.
 
 4 Though it’s easy to find dal fry, biryani or even Jain food…
 
 South Africa claims to be home to the largest Indian community outside the sub-continent and hence is also home to some good, bad and ugly Indian eateries at unexpected corners.
 
                          Such as the expansive ‘Raj’ (which serves rubbish gulab-jamuns) right over a flashy casino in a Sun City hotel, or the impressive ‘Bhandaris’ (run by a South African!) en route a wine drive in Cape Town
 
 That said, we’re yet to recover from the elaborate Jain food spread we encountered at a picturesque beach restaurant in Simon’s Town. Though we proceeded to gorge on the king clip (fish), this is good news for Gujjus and Marvaris, who reportedly love coming here.
 
 5 …You can always eat an ostrich/crocodile/zebra…
 
 ..and gather some stories for your grandchildren while doing so. ‘Game meat’, specifically hunted and delicately prepared, is a unique local treat you must try if your heart (and credit limit) allows.
 
 The common ones are ‘biltong’ (cured beef/ostrich meat, spiced and dried) and the spring buck (antelope).
 
                          However, if you want adrenaline rushes at the dining table, try the smoked crocodile meat, charcoal-grilled zebra or the kudu (cute in the bushes but apparently delicious on your plate). While stuff such as ostrich membrane/knuckles is sold at malls, the wilder varieties are to be tried at restaurants such as ‘Carnivore’ in Jo’burg.
 
 6 …But won’t have the heart to touch the penguins here.
 
 It may be called the jackass penguin owing to its bray but the African penguin at Boulders beach near Cape Town will still get the ‘aww’s going among your group.
 
 This colony of two-three feet long black-and-white beauties is on a spectacular beach, and for those who thought such screen saver-like situations were experienced only in New Zealand, this is a sasta, sundar option.
 
 7 That they love their beer… and cricket
 
                          As apparent from the stands in any cricket match in Centurion or Newlands, the South Africans love their golden brew as much as they love cricket. While many ‘shebeens’ (traditional taverns with smiling fat ‘mamas’ getting everyone drunk) have given away to plush bars, the locals continue to down ‘Castle’ and argue on their Smiths and Steyns.
 
 In fact, beer aficionados might consider it criminal to miss the exquisite audio-visual tour of the history of the drink and sample the world’s dishiest brews at SA Breweries’ ‘World of Beer’, the coolest museum of Jo’burg.
 
 8 That safety and friendliness are under-rated
 
                          All this said, your father/in-law might still clamp down upon your South Africa itinerary for ‘safety’ reasons.
 
 But having been there twice and done things such as hailing a mini-van filled with African-Americans from an empty street post 11pm; asked a hundred strangers for directions and partied till dawn, this writer can vouch for the land’s safety and amiability.
 
 Yes, there are security concerns (GP can be Gauteng Province or Gangster Paradise!) but then being cautious was in every trip’s instruction list, right? Unless you insist on being stupid, you will be ‘sho-sho’ (all well).
 
 Clockwise from top:'ˆRevelry at Long St, Penguins at Boulders beach, Locals partying into the night, easy to find vegetarian food,  Table Mountain behind the oldest bakeries in Cape Town, Old biscuit mill in town