Even as the countdown has begun for the Dasara festival with the elephants starting their journey, there is a not-so-grand side to it: the condition of mahouts, who have not been paid their salaries for months.

The sad tale of mahouts and their assistants who are called kawadis came the fore during the start of the ‘Gajapayana’.
Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Kawadis said, “Many of us are working on a daily wage basis. The department gives us Rs 100 per day. However, we have not been given even that for the last six months. Now with the festival fast approaching, the forest officials are following a divide-and-rule policy. They have cleared the dues of mahouts and kawadis who have to accompany the elephants in the first batch. We strongly protest this discrimination.”

Mahouts complained that forest officials were taking advantage of their illiteracy by paying less and taking a receipt for a 
higher amount.

Deputy Conservator of Forest, Hunsur Wildlife Division A K Singh dismissed such charges and said, “We have a fund of around Rs 3.5 lakh and we will pay their salary in another two or three days.”

Not satisfied with the assurance, the mahouts said they did not have any confidence in officials of the forest department.
Only an intervention by C H Vijayashankar, MP, and Deputy Commissioner P Manivannan who took the responsibility of distributing their salaries soothed the mahouts’ tempers.

An old problem

According to a senior official from the forest department, “There are around 200 trained elephants in different camps. There should be one mahout and one kawadi for each elephant. But since many years, recruitment to the posts of mahouts have been stopped and the existing ones were hired on a contract basis.”

The skills of taming the elephants and controlling them are not easy to learn. Many of the mahouts hail from either the tribal groups or the Muslim community who live on the fringes of forest areas. “Because of their acquaintance with the animals since childhood, they can handle them easily. While many tribals are working in the camps at Nagarahole and Bandipur, Muslim mahouts are working at Sakrebailu and Dubare elephant camps,” explained a senior wildlife conservationist.

Action at last

The state government has now decided to recruit 37 mahouts on a permanent basis and the recruitment is likely to happen in a month. Out of the 37 recruited, 20 will be sent to Nagarahole camp where there are more than 60 elephants and the rest will be sent to Bandipur, Sakrebailu and Dubare camps, according to need. 

A senior official from the forest department said, “This time a few rules for the recruitment of mahouts like age and education criterion have been relaxed with a view to help these men.”