Efforts to link all forests from Bangalore to Kodagu district got a boost on May 7 when the state government passed an order granting protection to Kollegal forest in Chamrajnagar district and naming it Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary. The immediate effect of the order is prevention of trespass and encroachment of forest land. It will result in an increase in government aid to protect the forest and its inhabitants. The adjoining Bandipur National Park (BNP), a tiger reserve, will get a boost as animals there will get more space.
   Kollegal forest is spread across 1,224 sq km. Of this, 906 sq km has been declared a wildlife sanctuary. It connects BNP (874 sq km) with BRT (539.58 sq km). Including the adjoining Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary, spread across Mysore, Mandya and Ramanagar districts, wildlife get a large chunk of protected forest that stretches up to Kanakapura, near Bangalore. However, there is no protected area linking the four forests to Bannerghatta National Park on the outskirts of Bangalore.
   In 2010, environmentalists and forest officials had requested the government to provide wildlife a protected corridor from Bangalore to Kodagu district by linking forests in the southern districts. The aim was to reduce man-animal conflicts, especially those involving wild elephants which often travel across various forests.
   Chamarajnagar is one of the least populated and developed districts in Karnataka. It boasts of a forest cover of 52 per cent of its land area. It is an important biological hotspot in the Nilgiri biosphere. Besides three districts of Karnataka, it shares a border with Tamil Nadu and Kerala.
 
 Mahadeshwara Wildlife Sanctuary will be the fourth protected forest in the district after Bandipur National Park (BNP), Biligiriranga Swamy Temple Wildlife Sanctuary (BRT) and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. The district now has the maximum number of protected forest areas in the state.
   The new sanctuary gets its name from the hill temple of Male Mahadeshwara in Kollegal taluk. The deity was the favourite of sandalwood smuggler Veerappan. 
   It is said that he would often visit the temple in disguise.