Recently built vulture breeding centre at Bannerghatta National Park awaits arrival of 20 vultures; officials say they are yet to get permission from Central Zoo Authority

The newly constructed vulture breeding centre at Bannerghatta National Park (BNP) is still awaiting the arrival of 20 vultures from the Pinjore Vulture Conservation Breeding Centre in northern Haryana. After hitting multiple roadblocks since the plan was announced in 2020, it is now stalled due to delayed permission from the Central Zoo Authority. According to officials from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), permission from the Central Zoo Authority has yet to arrive despite multiple reminders.

“This is a project by the government of India, funded by the Center. However, we have yet to receive permission from GOI, despite sending multiple reminders to the Central Zoo Authority. There is no technical issue with the proposal, and the delay in permission is probably due to a shortage of staff. The Central Zoo Authority is a relatively small office with a large number of proposals to manage. However, since the project is related to the breeding programme of an endangered species, the delay could have been avoided,” said a senior official of KFD.

The BNP centre was proposed three years ago to revive the dwindling population of various vulture species under the Action Plan for Vulture Conservation in India 2020–2025. The plan recommended setting up vulture hubs in each state of the country, including Karnataka.

Following the standard procedure, the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest in Karnataka has already spoken to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest in Haryana, and both officials have agreed to relocation. A letter was also sent to the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to obtain final permission for the process.

“Once we receive the final go-ahead, our team will make arrangements for transporting the birds. Transportation is a huge challenge and will be taken care of by a team from KFD. Our preference will be to transport the birds in flight,” added the official. In the meantime, the breeding centre at BNP is ready with all the necessary infrastructure. The centre, with two aviaries, will house 20 vultures for breeding. Once vultures lay eggs, they will be removed from the nest and taken to a brooder unit, where the eggs will be kept at a regulated temperature.
 
The hatchlings will then be kept in the centre until they are ready to be released into the wild.

 There is no technical issue with the proposal, and the delay in permission is probably due to a shortage of staff– a senior official of KFD
The breeding centre will also facilitate interaction between captive and wild vultures while they are inside nets in the aviary. The department also plans to have a feeding arrangement for wild vultures around the aviary to help the captive-reared birds familiarise themselves with their wild counterparts. The centre is expected to ensure the successful introduction and breeding of vulture species and restore the raptor’s dwindling population in the city and state.

However, the first-of-its-kind project has hit multiple roadblocks since work on it started in September 2021. The centre was first expected to be ready by May 2022. However, the project completion deadline was pushed multiple times, and the centre was finally ready only by early 2023. Later, the change in the definition of zoos under the Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Act of 2022, which came into force on April 1, 2023, delayed the project further.