By Iffath Fathima

Guardians of the forests — anti-poaching camp staff at Bannerghatta National Park — didn’t even have proper boots. That’s just crazy!

Instances of poaching in Karnataka’s wildlife corridors saw a spike during the pandemic.
 
According to reports, confrontations between forest guards and poachers were rife during the lockdowns throughout India’s wildlife sanctuaries and national parks. So was the case in Bannerghatta National Park in the periphery of the city.
 
BM has in the past reported several instances of poachers targeting wild animals in the park, especially the shooting of a Sambar, in 2019. In some cases, snares were used in the Ragihalli forest to trap deer.

Now, the question arises: are the forest department personnel equipped to confront hunters and poachers active in these rich wildlife corridors? Though there are anti-poaching camps set up, how ready are the APC crew for a full-fledged anti-poaching operation?

Coming December first week, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) will provide safety kits to the anti-poaching camp (APC) staff deployed at the Bannerghatta National Park (BNP).
Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF), Bannerghatta National Park, Dr Ramesh Kumar, pointed out that the department has decided to look into the protection of the camp staff, and safeguard the forest watchers who are often neglected.


 .

Currently the BNP has 17 anti-poaching camps with four personnel in each camp. Since most of the personnel stay in camp, basic facilities such as drinking water, infrastructure inside the camp, bedding, ration and safety equipment are necessary: and these have been lacking.
 
The idea of establishing an anti-poaching camp was to prevent the entry of poachers into the core area of the forest and protect the wildlife. Usually foot-patrolling is considered one of the most efficient strategies for protection from poachers and other wildlife offenders.

“We are strengthening the APCs and are going to provide the staff with safety kits comprising shoes, uniforms, knives, ropes, jackets, torches, backpacks, medical kits and water bottles. Often, the forest guards do not even have boots, which makes it difficult for them to traverse the tough terrain. Inside the camps, they do not have proper beds to sleep on or even proper utensils to prepare food. We will be providing the staff with all such necessary equipment,” Dr Ramesh told BM.


 .
Ramesh informed Bangalore Mirror that in the past, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) would come forward and provide the APC staff with food kits or safety equipment: however, now, the KFD itself has decided to provide the guardians of the forests with the much needed protective gear, using the department’s own funds, at the BNP.

“Usually, the majority of the funds are spent on forest development and other activities, which is important, but often the needs of the forest staff are neglected. They are the frontline workers in conservation, risking their lives and protecting the forest. Hence, we will provide them with all the facilities. Starting from December, we will distribute the kits to all the APC staff.”

 We are strengthening the APCs by providing staff with safety kits comprising shoes, uniforms, knives, ropes, jackets, torches, backpacks, medical kits and water bottles–Dr Ramesh Kumar, DCF, BNP

Moreover, Ramesh revealed that there were instances where sloth bears entered the camps: the officers are looking into installing nets at the poaching camps as a result, he added.
 
According to official data from the National Tiger Conservation Authority, a statutory body under the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, an audit was carried out of the wildlife parks in Karnataka in the year 2017: the report from 119 temporary APC staff, highlighted the non-availability of drinking water facilities, electricity, delay in salary payments, rations, jackets, safety measures and lack of proper toilets, to mention a few.