In a first, a day-long bee and butterfly festival is set to be organised in the city. This will also be the first formal festival to spread awareness about bees after bees were declared as the state insect recently in Karnataka. In July this year, the Karnataka Eco Tourism Development Board (KEDB) had organised a moth festival to educate people on the importance and different species of moths. However as moths can be seen in the night, the festival was held at night and as butterflies are more active during the day, the festival is being held during the day time.

BR Ramesh, General Manager (Forests), KEDB says, “Since bees have been identified as our state insect, we have also added a session on their importance. Both bees and butterflies are pollinators and play an important role in our ecosystem. We usually think that wildlife means big animals like lions or tigers but such small insects are a vital part.”

Rohit Girotra, a member of Bangalore Butterfly Club, says, “Butterflies are active in the post monsoon period. This year, due to delayed monsoons, they were highly active in October and are active now as well. We will observe around 160 butterfly species.” A forest department official said that Doresanipalya has more than 200 butterfly species and during this time of the year, butterflies are active and can be seen in good numbers.

Avanish V, one of the organisers, said, “It will be an hour-long walk in the Doresanipalya campus during which experts leading the walk will explain about the different species of butterflies and how to identify a butterfly species. Whenever they encounter a butterfly species, experts will explain about it in detail. There will also be a talk on bees. We must just walk past the beehives or bees instead of trying to chase them away. We must maintain a safe distance from them and not be scared.”

The Butterfly Festival is being organised annually at the Doresanipalya Forest Research Station for three years now and this is the first time that the KEDB, Karnataka Forest Department, The Bengaluru Butterfly Club, National Centre for Biological Sciences and Indian Foundation for Butterflies are coming together for the festival. The festival is being held on November 23 from 8 am to 3 pm at Doresanipalya Forest Research Station, Arekere, Mico Layout.

Butterflies in Doresanipalya
Red Helen, Monkey Puzzle, Common Grass Yellow, Common Emigrant, Baronet, Large Oakblue, Spotted Angle, White Tipped Lineblue, Spot Swordtail, Karwar Swift, Joker, Bamboo Treebrown, A Crimson Rose, Indian Jezebel, Tiny Grass Blue, Grass Jewel, Blue Tiger, Dark Blue Tiger, Common Crow

Karnataka Bird Festival to be held in second week of January
The annual bird festival is set to be held in the second week of January in 2020. BR Ramesh from KEDB says that currently two locations are being considered for the festival – Ramanagara and Nandi Hills - and that the department will finalise on one soon. The annual bird festival draws huge crowds of wildlife enthusiasts and photographers. This year, the festival was held in Bidar.