More and more snakes getting killed or suffering injuries during construction activities in and around Bengaluru, say NGOs and wildlife activists

Strong and sudden spells of rain along with a surge in construction activities across the city have kept snake rescuers and organisations busier than ever. The volunteers with the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) as well as various NGOs working in the space say the number of injured reptiles has only been going up over the past few months.
 
“We have rescued nearly 500 snakes over the past six months. Earlier, the number of snake rescue calls used to be higher during the monsoon season. However, that line is blurred now.
 
We mostly get cases of the reptiles sustaining severe spinal cord injuries after getting entangled in JCBs or being run over by the vehicles,” said Colonel (Dr) Nawaz Shariff, chief veterinarian, PFA wildlife hospital.
 
As per the data shared by the hospital, over 700 snakes have been rescued by the NGO this year alone.
 
According to Mohan K, wildlife rescuer, BBMP, cases of reptiles sustaining spinal cord injuries are mostly being reported from the city outskirts. Cobras and Russell’s Vipers are the two species that are at greater risk of sustaining these injuries.
 
“While cobras are known to hide inside their burrows at the slightest disturbance, Russell’s Viper is nocturnal and thus has limited mobility during the daytime. Most of the cases are from sites that are being cleared for construction purposes in the city’s outskirts,” said Mohan.
 
Experts say such incidents can be avoided if we resort to the practice of clearing the sites before deploying a JCB.
 
“This will give the snakes a chance to run away. One should clear the land and leave it for a day or two. Adding water to the site will force the snakes further to vacate their burrows.
 
Otherwise, spinal cord injuries become fatal in snakes and most of them succumb to the injuries despite the treatment,” added Mohan.
 
According to the experts from the Avian and Reptile Rehabilitation Centre (ARRC), yet another animal rescue centre in the city, dug up by JCBs, run over by the vehicles and incorrect rescue techniques are some of the factors that have led to the increase in the number of snake rescue cases recently.
 
“There is a slight uptick in snake rescue cases. While land-clearing activity for construction projects and snakes being run over by vehicles are important factors, the use of incorrect rescue techniques by amateur rescuers is yet another reason behind this uptick. When people see snakes, they panic and reach out to people who might not be well-equipped to handle snakes, leading to serious injuries,” said Subiksha Venkatesh, rescue manager, ARRC. 

PFA’s reptile rehabilitation centre 
Given this surge in snake rescue cases, PFA in association with Ashraya Hastha Trust is coming up with a reptile enclosure for the rescue and rehabilitation of snakes with grave spinal cord injuries.
 
“Currently we are rescuing 50-60 snakes with a history of being displaces, trapped or injured. Among these, almost 30-40 per cent of snakes need veterinary and rehab support, at present, we can hold 10 snakes. However, the upcoming centre will be able to hold 30 snakes for treatment, recovery, and release along with artificial incubation of reptile eggs,” added Colonel Nawaz.