By: Ananth Aravamudan
 
 
 When I heard the clamour of crows, I knew that something noteworthy was happening with the wildlife in my neighbourhood. I rushed to my balcony, only to spot a big mob of crows attacking some poor creature. Amidst the mass of black wings, I could see flashes of green. Time to intervene, I decided. Waving and screaming, I rushed towards the melee, dispersing the crows in the process. Their victim, a parakeet, lay flat on its back, alive but clearly hurt. “Oh, you poor thing”, I said, as I instinctively reached to pick it up.
 
 
 	Big mistake! My gesture had been interpreted as a threat by one of the most powerful biters in the bird world. The startled bird chomped down on my thumb and simply refused to let go. It must have been a comical sight, with me dancing around in pain, trying to shake off an agitated green bird which held on for dear life. When it finally did unclamp its beak out of sheer exhaustion, it left me with a deep cut and a prescription for an anti-tetanus shot. As for the parakeet, it survived the mob attack as well as my bumbling efforts to help it. In a few minutes it mustered enough strength to right itself and fly off.
 	
 	  	Parakeets are a familiar sight in Bengaluru. You would have surely spotted them streaking across the city’s skyline, or balancing delicately on a twig while feeding on a ripe mango. If you are lucky enough to be close to a parakeet roost – large trees with plenty of foliage – you can actually count these birds by the hundreds as they settle down for the night. Bengaluru still has a few densely populated roosting spots–like the old trees on the fringes of Orion Mall, or a large Peepal tree at Vidyapeetha circle.
 	
 	  	The name “parakeet” refers to members of the parrot family that have long tails. The most commonly sighted parakeet in Bengaluru is the rose-ringed parakeet, which derives its name from the red (or sometimes black) ring on the male bird’s neck. With its long tail feathers and distinctive curved red beak, it cuts a familiar figure on fruit and seed bearing trees when they are in season.Its very pretty but not so common cousin is the plum-headed parakeet. In this species, the males have a plum coloured head, while females have a greyish head. These birds have distinctive yellow upper beaks. Both species have a loud, screeching call.
 	
 	  	Parakeets and humans go back a long way. Their attractive appearance, endearing antics, and ability to imitate human sounds have always made them much sought after as pets. When Greek emperor Alexander invaded India, he was so fascinated by the parakeets here that he started sending them back to his homeland. There is a species of parakeet named the Alexandrine parakeet, after this great conqueror. Sadly, this bird now leads a life of persecution, much in demand as part of the illegal pet trade. You will not spot it in the wild in Bengaluru, but from time to time you will read about seizures of large numbers of these birds, both chicks and adults, which were smuggled illegally into the city.
 	
 	  	There is some fascinating science behind the parakeet’s green colour. If you pick up one of its feathers, you will not find any green pigment on it. If anything, it would have a yellowish hue. The parrot family serves as a brilliant example of structural colouration, where delicately arranged nanostructures on the bird’s feathers reflect only blue light out of the full spectrum falling on its body. A layer of yellow pigment, laid over the reflective layer, mingles with the blue light to produce the characteristic green colour that you or I can see. This technique, if understood and replicated by human scientists, could one day change the way that manmade objects are coloured.