By:Aliyeh Rizvi
 
 On a wind-torn evening, a group of worried men huddled around an imposing column in the middle of a crossroad near Lalbagh. They had been given the task of constructing it only ten days ago. The column was to mark the inauguration of a new suburb in South Bangalore and C Rajagopalachari, the last Governor-General of India was to unveil the historic stone name plate at its base the next day.
 
 	Though time was short, they responded to the challenge. The honour of the company and the city administration was at stake. But now, just a few hours before the event, news had arrived that the sculptor working on the final flourishes had run away!
 Unperturbed, PS Ranganatha Char of Messrs Ranganatha Char & Co, Engineers,ordered for tarpaulin to shield the men from Bangalore's temperamental weather. Work commenced by moonlight with a handy Petromax. Arunachalam, the mason,stepped in for the missing sculptor. By early morning, the inaugural Ashoka Pillar with four fierce lions was completed in time to commemorate the birth of Jayanagar on 20th August, 1948.
 	  	Jayanagar went on to unfurl itself over nine blocks and many villages. PS Ranganatha Char was commissioned to build the now forgotten pillar with dressed granite stones (and another tight deadline of two weeks) in north Bangalore for the inauguration of Rajajinagar in 1949.The stone dressing, he says, could not be carried out on site. It was worked on in VV Puram and transported across town.He was a man who knew how to get the job done.
 	  	PS Ranganatha Char, Civil Engineer, was born in Chitradurga in 1913 to P Shamiengar, District and Sessions Judge in the late 30's. Life then whisked him through engineering college in Lucknow, an internship with his famous uncle PS Char in Bombay and a job in Goa as surveyor on the Panjim-Bombay road before propelling him towards Bangalore where he married the daughter of M Sheshadri,Revenue Minister to the Nizam, elder brother of M Chinnaswamy, a famous name in Indian cricket.
 	
 	He was mentored here by Sajjan Rao and in partnership with his son-in-law, Manaji Rao, built bunkers during WW II for the airstrip constructed by Tarapore & Co. in Kolar. Major civil works for the VijayaCollege, residences across Bangalore, Kengeri, HMT and hangar floors in HAL were undertaken. In Yelahanka, he built a mission and an airforce runway that his son, P Ramaswamy (Hon. Joint Secretary, KSLTA) says was tested by the Sub-Area Commander who insisted on driving the length of it at over 60 mph!
 But this master of the built environment was also a champion of the outdoors. He was an ace shooter, the Founder-Secretary of the Mysore State Rifle Association, a keen tennis player, a drama enthusiast who built the AV Varadachar Memorial Theatre behind Natraj Theatre, a versatile photographer- film maker who left behind several 16 mm films and a shikari who hunted his way through Shimoga and Ramanagaram, only to sell all his weapons in the late 60's and turn into a wildlife conservationist. He was a multi-dimensional man whose memoirs contribute significantly towardsthe spatial narratives of this city.
 	  	The trust placed in him by C Narasinga Rao, Chairman, City Improvement Trust Board, Bangalore, and R Madhavan, Chief Engineer that rainy August night was justified. The Ashoka Pillar still stands at the crossroads of Kanakanapalya, near what was once the south end corner of Bangalore. Stop and take a closer look at it.
 	
 	
 	
 	 		The writer is a cultural documentarian and blogs at aturquoisecloud.wordpress.com