An eight-year-old female bonnet macaque got a fresh lease of life on Sunday, thanks to the doctors and prompt action taken by the rescuer.

The surgical team of the People for Animals Wildlife Hospital carried out a marathon surgery on the skull of the macaque and removed two bullet pellets deeply embedded in the cranium of the macaque’s brain. While the primate has shown signs of recovery, the bullets shot in her head have left the left side of her body paralysed.

The primate was rescued by Sameer SM, a resident of Nagarbhavi, on Wednesday morning while he was on his way to work.

“I was heading for work, and the monkey, out of nowhere, rammed into my vehicle and fell unconscious. I was about to leave when I saw she was not moving. I took her to a local veterinary hospital, and the doctors attended to her wounds. The incident took place around noon, and when I came back to visit her in the evening the same day, I realised she was not doing well. I reached out to PFA and admitted her there. Three days later, I got a call back from the hospital informing me that the doctors had found bullet pellets inside her head,” recalled Sameer, a sales executive.

Upon further inquiry, locals informed Sameer and alleged that primate mothers are often found injured in the area in an attempt to take away the infants.

“Locals claimed that they have witnessed mother macaques sustaining injuries in the past as well. When the macaque rammed into my vehicle on Wednesday, she was also carrying an infant that moved on with the troop after the mother fell unconscious. Locals claimed that it was mainly to take away the baby,” explained Sameer.

After initial stabilisation, a series of x-rays of the brain of the bonnet macaque were carried out at PFA, and two pellets of the bullet were embedded in the frontal lobe and cerebrum of the brain. According to Dr Nawas Shariff of PfA, the nature and marks of the injury indicate that the primate was shot by a double-barreled gun.


A radio diagnosis showed two pellets in the monkey’s brain, with one embedded deep inside–Dr Nawaz Shariff, PfA
 “When the monkey was brought in, she was bleeding profusely. A radio diagnosis showed two pellets in her brain, with one embedded deep inside. Two pallets in the same spot indicate the animal was shot by a cartridge with multiple pallets. The airgun uses a single pellet, and this is not an airgun injury. The second pallet found very close to the first palate inside her brain indicates she was shot by a double-barreled gun. I have written to the PCCF of the Karnataka Forest Department and the commissioner of police with details of the case and have requested that they take action,” said Dr Shariff. All through the surgery, the macaque was put on oxygen support, and vital parameters were monitored.