The images are great, but the stories of the birds in his frame are even better

It once took MN Jayakumar and his team, three weeks to get a shot of a barn owl bringing feed to its nest. “They are active only at night, and once it starts, the feeding process lasts only about three weeks. 

Since we were not sure about the output of flash and shutter speed required, the first week was lost in just standardising the various parameters. Then we would get the film roll processed, see the shortcomings and defects, and try to improve. 

It was seven consecutive nights of trial and error, just to stabilise the parameters. From day 7 to 14, some reasonably good images could be obtained. But the best one came only in the 3rd week,” says the nature photographers, who retired as the Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Member Secretary, Zoo Authority of Karnataka. 

Another time, he had to photograph the “brave” river tern catching fish and feeding its chicks – in all of two seconds. “And if you miss that moment, nothing will happen for the next 20-30 minutes, once it has finished feeding,” he explains. At 67, however, these are not challenges that faze Jayakumar.
   dfhuih   
“Bird photography is back breaking,” he says matter-of-factly, seated at Sublime Galleria, where 42 images from his latest show – Birds as Art – are being exhibited. It was to create awareness “among the urban crowd” about 2018 being declared as the Year of The Bird, in celebration of the centennial of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, which is one of the most important and powerful bird protection laws ever passed. Of these 42, 12 have been given digital treatment to enhance colour and texture such that they can even replace a painting on a wall – hence the name of the exhibition.

The explosion of colour and vibrancy in these pictures makes amply clear that Jayakumar is a nature lover. And yet, he was someone who was responsible for all the zoos in Karnataka – zoos that get people’s goat for holding animals and birds in captivity. Jayakumar, however, believes that this is the only way to create education and awareness among people about the natural bounty around them – bounty that they will otherwise not be able to see and experience. “A mere group of environmentalists/ conservationists/ forest officers cannot save a species. You need the support of the common man, all stakeholders. And for that, they need to see the bird or animal in question,” he explains. Of course, proper conditions that “minimise the stress levels for the bird”, need to be maintained. And in this, he believes the zoos in Karnataka are doing a good job, by following the guidelines issues by the Central Zoo Authority on ways in which design should have a salutary effect on the bird. Jayakumar cites the Mysore zoo aviary as an example – where there is “ample space for them to fly, for interaction, for feeding”.

Photos: See these breathtaking pics of birds by MN Jayakumar19Flamingos go in herdGreater Flamingos are known to be always in groups when they go to hunt fish in the lakes. These long-legged birds are a beauty as they get captured by the lens. Photo by MN JayakumarVibrant colours enhance the pictureThe parrot sits on a tree branch whose leaves' colour is dazzling and fiery. Such species should be protected in an environment where everyday due to the increasing rate of population, the number of birds and animals both alike decrease. Photo by MN JayakumarBlue dominates this pictureThe eastern Bluebird is a beauty as its vibrant blue colour is a sight to the mere eyes. The bird here is captured beautifully along with its crystal clear shadow. Photo by MN JayakumarFood is their concernThe birds peacefully share their food as they sit quietly on tree branch. The serene nature of the birds are captured beautifully and is quite peaceful to look at. Photo by MN JayakumarThe majestic peacock spreads its feathersThe majestic bird looks on as he spreads the feathers while he rejoices. The male peacock ususally spread their feathers when they feel elated or are dancing under the rain. Photo by MN JayakumarFood's a crisis for these BulbulsThree Bulbuls are seen picking at their berries in all their glory. Birds find it difficult to look for food because of the amount of trees being deforested and the wildlife being depleted at an increasing rate. Photo by MN JayakumarPeacock takes flightA peacock is captured jumping from the surface to gracefully spread its wings. The peacock is known for its beautiful wings and how it rejoices by showcasing its feathers to the world. Photo by MN JayakumarPelican's play under nature's lapThe Pelicans display a playful nature as they bicker along side a beautiful lake. Such birds prefer to stay near lakes and swamps to catch fish as their food.The swan flaps its wingsDue to the growing human population, the amount of water has been depleting in the natural habitats of many species. They do not get enough water. amidst these, a Tundra Swan enjoys the essence of water around it by majestically flapping its wings. Photo by MN Jayakumar 
Which is heartening, given the sheer variety of bird life in Karnataka. The state, Jayakumar says, “hosts around 530 species of the 1,300 in the country”. The variety of forest habitats – from the Western Ghats to tropical evergreen forests, semi-evergreen forest, moist, dry and deciduous forests – each supports a different variety of birds. “Hornbills, for example, are endemic to the Western Ghats, because feed on particular shoots that are found in the area,” he explains. The abundance of grasslands – with the easy availability of grasshoppers – in the state is also responsible for the prolificity of the Great Indian Bustard – of which there are 200 in India and five-six in Karnataka. It’s with a sense of sadness then that he discusses how the conversion of these grasslands, the habitat of the Bustard, into agricultural land, is making life difficult for the bird. “The use of insecticides and pesticides is destroying its habitat and prey base. And since they’re very large birds which need a large area to run and take off, the shrinkage of their habitat is not helping,” he explains.
It is his first-hand experience with forests and wildlife that has contributed to Jayakumar’s understanding of animals and birds today. He shares how it has helped him anticipate what an animal is likely to do: “Years ago in Nagarhole National Park, we saw a leopard sitting on a tree. As we approached it, he saw us and stood up on the branch. I knew immediately that she will run down, and changed my hold on the camera from landscape mode to vertical. So I got that shot of the animal running down.” There are other nuggets too – such as the fact that just before they take flight, birds secrete a little excreta “to lighten the load”. “So if you’re watching that, you will know that within five seconds it will take off, and it will help you capture the right photo.” He adds: “River terns make a particular call just before they arrive at the nest for feeding. Knowing that helps you be in readiness, so you can focus on the chick and get the shot of it being fed,” he adds. Approaching birds too – especially birds of prey – is an art. Jayakumar suggests clicking, moving closer slowly, and waiting, before repeating the process again to “gain their confidence, and not scare them away”.

Of course, the ultimate goal is conservation, achieved only through education and awareness. “For me, taking the photo is the last priority. You have to enjoy being in nature, and value the privacy of the bird/ animal first,” he says, citing past examples of so-called wildlife photographers who would take pictures of birds and then destroy the nest so that no one else could get the same photo. For Jayakumar, conservation also translates into a concern for the frontline staff – what he calls “the real guardians of the forest”, the ones who interact with animals every day. “Their welfare needs to be looked after to motivate them properly. And of course, as citizens, we need to be responsible and not pollute the atmosphere where the animals and birds are found,” he says.

‘Birds of Art’, 11am–8pm at Sublime Art Galleria, UB City