Click with the wild 
Check out the original photographs that were submitted to and selected by Adventure & Wildlife, a bi-monthly magazine based out of the city, for a photography contest and exhibition on the occasion of Photography Day (August 19). The theme is ‘Wildlife of India’. Selected photographs will be displayed at this 
two-day exhibition 

WHERE: Rangoli - The Metro Art Center, Mg Road
WHEN: 10 am to 7 pm, August 19 & 20

Uncovering the past
Manu S Pillai and Prem Panicker will be in conversation about Pillai’s book The Courtesan, the Mahatma and the Italian Brahmin. They will discuss tales from India’s countless yesterdays. This is part of Public Texts, a series of conversations with authors about their work, using their books as starting points for discussion. Pillai is the author of the critically acclaimed The Ivory Throne: Chronicles of the House of Travancore (2015) and Rebel Sultans: The Deccan from Khilji to Shivaji (2018). Formerly chief of staff to Shashi Tharoor MP, he is also a winner of the Sahitya Akademi Yuva Puraskar (2017). Panicker is a city-based journalist, one of the founding members of rediff.com and co-founder of the multimedia website peepli.org. 

 WHERE: Indian Institute for Human Settlements, 16th Cross Road, Sadashiv Nagar WHEN: 6pm, August 19
 ENTRY: Free

Intricate designs
Warli wall paintings from Maharashtra are famous for their simplicity. They are an attractive depiction of the routine life of Warli tribes. This workshop 
will guide participants to create a Warli painting with a step-by-step introduction to handling brush and paints, creating Warli designs, and conceptualising and making bookmarks and greeting cards with Warli art using handmade paper.

 WHERE: The Circular Square, Uttarahalli Hobli, Kanakapura Road
 WHEN: 10am, August 19 
 TICKETS: `1,350, eventshigh.com

Learn to garden 
At the end of this session you will be able to list nutrients required for plants and their role in plant growth, appreciate the fact that different plants require different nutrients, of different quantity at different growth phases, and know how to harness nutrients available in nature. You will understand that each plant requires different potting mixes, containers and a unique micro-environment, and be able to identify the nutrients in an urban environment. You will also discover how to compost using different methods and appreciate the benefits of integrated gardens.
 
 WHERE: Anurag Garden Consulting Services Inc, 1st block, Prakruthi township, Horamavu 
 WHEN:10.30am, August 19
 TICKETS: `1,000, eventshigh.com

Funny people
Some of the city’s most well-known faces in standup comedy, from Shankar Chugani to Kjeld Sreshth, Shamik Chakrabarti, Joteen Patro, Somnath Padhy, Gautham Govindan and Anand Rathnam perform here to try some of their new material for the very first time. Make your boring Monday evening into one filled with fun and be part of the journey of some new material being developed.

 WHERE: Zostel, 1st Cross Road, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar
 WHEN: 8pm, August 19 
 TICKETS: `150, bookmyshow.com

 Make and bake
If you’re going to lick the icing off a cake, it might as well be yours. In this one day workshop, you will learn how to bake an egg-sponge cake (Vanilla and Chocolate), and learn the basics of icing and pastries that you will later work on to practice and perfect your icing skills. You will learn to make and use cream icing, and learn how to flavour your cake with maximum moistness. The class will include decoration with cream, levelling your cake as well as sorting your cake to get sharp edges and achieve neatness. 

WHERE: Flourish, School Of Baking, Brigade Road, Ashok Nagar
WHEN: 3pm, August 19 
 TICKETS: `2,000, eventshigh.com

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’