Temperature plummets to 15 degrees in some parts of the city; weather experts predict more spells of rainfall to hit the city in the next few days

Bengaluru’s weather on Thursday resembled that of a hill station as the mercury plummeted to 15.8 degree Celsius at Yelahanka (according to Varuna Mitra portal) while in other BBMP zones, the temperature hovered around 20 degree Celsius accompanied by a drizzle.
 
Weather experts predict a light to moderate rainfall for the next few days as the depression over southwest Bay of Bengal is moving north-west wards with a speed of four kilometres per hour. According to the Met Department’s forecast, the temperature in the city will be between 18 degree Celsius to 20 degree Celsius on Friday and 18 to 24 degree Celsius on Saturday with few spells of rainfall likely.
 
Scientist Sadananda Adiga said: “While a depression was crossing Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh coast, another low-pressure area was forming near south Andaman Sea. The low-pressure area may intensify in the next 48 hours.” The maximum rainfall was reported from Kolar district.
 
Meanwhile, due to the incessant rain since the past one week, a total of 363 lakes in 13 divisions of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Chamarajanagar district of Karnataka have filled up, mitigating the fears of water shortage for wildlife during the summer season.

  . 
It has also become a reason for celebration by nature lovers as it minimises man-animal conflict in the villages and residential settlements located close to the forest area.
The Bandipur Reserve is adjacent to Madhumalai forest ranges of Tamil Nadu and Wayanad in Kerala. It is said that all regions have received a good amount of rainfall.
 
The Bandipur Tiger Reserve is spread across 1,02,700 hectares (1,027 sq kms). Almost all the lakes in this area are full to the brim. 

This time, the wild animals will not have to move to the Kabini, Mudumalai and Nagarhole forests in search of water, as there is sufficient amount due to the torrential downpours.
  While a depression was crossing Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh coast, another low-pressure area was forming near south Andaman Sea. The low-pressure area may intensify in the next 48 hoursSadananda Adiga, scientist 
The water sources which will have full capacity during the rainy season will serve the animals during summers. If they do not fill up, the Forest Department usually keeps these water sources intact by filling water through solar-powered pumps. But, this year it won’t be required, say forest officials.
 
The Neelakantharao, Sollikatte, Tavaragatte lakes in the Bandipur division, Malagatte, Kaduburukatte, Devaramadu lakes of Kundukere division, and the Hirikere, Kolachikatte, Haggadahallada Katte of Gopalaswamy hill divisions are considered as major sources of water which are currently full.
 
Meanwhile, the number of tourists has also increased. Bandipur is among the nine tiger reserves in the country. It has been at the forefront of ecotourism for the last three decades.
 
(with inputs from agencies)