It was the first interview that I had done over the internet from the sole internet cafe on Brigade Road. It was 1998. What Eric Meola and I had talked about then holds good even today. Excerpts from the interview.   Mahesh Bhat:   Let us start with your early years – in school and college – and how you became interested in photography?    Eric Meola:   My father was a doctor, and one of his patients was an engineer whose hobby was photography – he got me interested in B&W printing. I began saving money and reading and looking at all the photo books I could get my hands on. As photography was not yet established in terms of college curriculum, I majored in English literature, but continued shooting and took a few college courses in colour and design. In my junior (third) year of college I went to New York as I was drawn to Pete Turner's work. I interviewed with him, and he told me to come back in a year – fortunately when I came back he was in need of a new assistant, and I got the job.    MB:   There has been a change in your style of photography over the last few years, from ultra rich colour graphic images to warm, intense story telling images. A planned progression or an unconscious move?   EM:   I was fortunate to have a long run with my commercial work, which continues to this day, but I have now forced myself to re-examine my own work – to throw away concepts and precepts. When I first went to Burma two years ago, my entire life changed – it is, for me, the most incredible place to photograph, and I went wild, literally running after people shooting, not caring if I was in focus or the exposure was right, but still filled with incredible energy. It was as if I had landed on another planet - it was that unusual. And many of these images are the best I have ever taken.   MB: Was there an instance that made you look at your work differently?   EM :  Mahesh, you are right! The most significant moment in my life was when I was at the sacred Shwedegon pagoda in Rangoon. I had stumbled upon a “coming of age” ceremony for a young boy – he was seven years old and was about to become a monk. He was dressed in all material beauty of his “worldly clothing” - bright colours, sparkling in the sun, carried aloft in the hands of his family and relatives. It was indeed a very moving ceremony, and as he was carried in a circle, I began to cry. Suddenly I found myself caught up in the rituals and I began running in the circle, taking pictures. And then I learned that he would go to his family's house for his last feast, and then be brought before a monk to have his head shaved, and dressed in robes- he would become Budha. I realised in an instant that I had to photograph this, but did not know the protocol. When I found out that it was perfectly alright to photograph the ceremony, I was astounded – and our car followed the procession through the winding streets. When the time came, my hands were trembling; %I made one last photograph of the boy – side lit by the final rays of sunlight. Then as he knelt before the monk, I made the most important single image of my life – the moment where the monk begins to shave his head. It was shot at 1/10th of a second with a 200mm f2.8 lens wide open. Somehow, it came out incredibly sharp. Until that moment, I had been thinking about a book project that shows the diverse beauty of this planet's cultures – especially its rituals and mysticism – but that moment it became real, and I realised that I had to pursue the making of the book with all my spare time. 
   The idea first came when I was at the peak of doing my advertising work – I was up night and day, absorbed completely in the intensity and demands of my work. There were always so many details – details of production that sometimes were in my control, and other times, when the client would change his or her mind at the last second, not in my control.
   I realised that this could not go on forever, and that there was a reason I had become a photographer, and it was simply, that I was in love with light, with the forms and shapes and colours of photography. I began looking at my personal work, and realised that I had begun to photograph a lot of wildlife, and also that there was a thematic thread to some of my work. I began thinking about the end of the 20th century, and started planning more personal trips. And little by little, I realised that what I wanted to record was the beauty of those parts of humanity that are slowly disappearing – culture, ceremony, mysticism. 
   And one day, I thought of the title  The Last Places on Earth  . I sat down and simply started making a list of all the places I wanted to visit, and realised that what I wanted to document was the incredible diversity of this planet, and the fact that we are all the same, in many ways. But it was that moment in Burma, the image of the young boy becoming a monk, that changed my life forever.    For more of Eric Meola’s work check www.ericmeola.com