With a record of having rescued thousands of snakes in the last seven years, Shivappa is no ordinary snake catcher. “When the construction work on Namma Metro began by digging up of roads, workers spotted many snakes. I usually go to the spot and rescue the snakes before they are killed or crushed under road rollers,” he said.
 
 According to Devraj, most of the snakes spotted in the city are rat snakes, but an occasional cobra or a Russel’s Viper is also not uncommon. “I have caught four cobras, three rat snakes and two Russel’s vipers in the eighth-mile stretch on Tumkur road. In about five months, I have caught over 60 snakes from various Namma Metro construction sites,” he said.
 
 But it was a six-foot cobra in Malleswaram that really tested his skills. “Last August, a six-foot long cobra was found in a small drain in Malleswaram. Since the snake was not very long compared to the usual size of the species, I was confident that it would be an easy catch. I was not aware that the people around the snake had irritated it by poking it with sticks. So when I tried to catch it with a hook, the snake sprang at me and almost bit my thigh. It was a near-death situation. I took almost half-an-hour to rescue the snake.”
 
 His latest catch is a nine-foot rat snake which he rescued from the front of Vidhana Soudha on Ambedkar Veedhi on Friday. The snake was spotted in an abandoned cable box and was rescued after a two-hour-long rescue mission.
 
 Speaking about the incident, Ravish, assistant sub inspector of police, Cubbon Park Police station, said, “I saw the snake cross from the High Court premises and going towards the Vidhana Soudha gate. It was really huge. We later found it in an abandoned cable box. We tried to get it out and struggled for over an hour and a half before Shivappa came to our aid.”
 
 Shivappa says the snake must have wandered in search of food. “Since the Cubbon Park is close by there are lots of rodents on this road looking for food left over by tourists. Snakes wander into these streets hunting for rats.”
 
 After he makes a catch, Devraj usually takes the snake to nearby forests like Savana Durga or Nandi Hills and releases them.
 “It is actually not a very healthy thing to do. But we cannot leave snakes in city areas. So I take them to a nearby forest and leave them there,” he added.
 
 Environmentalists, meanwhile, feel that huge construction projects will spell doom for city’s biodiversity. Suresh Heblikar said, “Bangalore’s urban biodiversity has been slowly receding due to infrastructure development. Namma Metro is no exception. In fact, the speed at which the work is going on has had a huge impact. Snakes are found in areas where there are rodents and frogs. It is not surprising that Shivappa has rescued so many snakes from Namma Metro construction sites.”
 
 He also called for a massive rescue operation to save urban wildlife. “We should not cut off shrubs and small plants near our houses. These are the places where urban biodiversity is found. Pigeons, small birds and butterflies are found here. Frogs and rodents are also found. We have to make sure that our urban wildlife is saved,” he added.
 
  The speed of the Metro work has had a huge impact on biodiversity; we need to make sure urban wildlife is saved
 Suresh Heblikar
 Environmentalist