The Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) has been having a tough time with activists and conservationists after losing out major tracts of forest land for developmental projects in the recent times. Spurred by the dissent, the KFD has cracked a whip to retain a major chunk of the Western Ghats, which otherwise would have been diverted for a major railway line project.
 
 Safeguarding 595 hectares of thick forest area between Dharwad and Ankola, the KFD has suggested that pursuing the ambitious Hubballi-Ankola Railway line may disturb the fragile Western Ghat landscape and if the state government is keen on executing the project, it must opt for tunnelling rather than axing more than 2 lakh trees.
 
 Acknowledging the damage caused by the railway line and inspection by the KFD officials, the Regional Empowered Committee (REC) of Regional Office of MoEF has sent the Hubballi-Ankola Railway project proposal back to the state government for reconsideration and to conduct fresh enumeration of the trees that would be cut for the project. KFD’s tough stand, rare in recent times, on the ambitious railway line project that has been pending since decades may just have saved about 2,02,450 rare trees and several endangered species of wildlife along the 168-km stretch.
 
 Project controversial
 
 The Hubballi-Ankola Railway line has been under controversy ever since it was envisaged in 1998 to transport mineral ores from the mining districts of South-Interior Karnataka to various ports along the coast. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) in February 2016 had directed the Railways—the user agency -- to approach the State Government for diversion of land and convert it for non-forest activities.
 
 Initially, the Supreme Court-appointed Central Empowered Committee (CEC) had recommended scrapping of the project.
 
 Soon after the NGT’s directions, the state government in October 2016, submitted a proposal to divert 595.64 hectares of forests in Karwar, Yellapura and Dharawad divisions in favour of the Railways and furnished RoFR compliance certificates from the revenue departments. Taking up the proposal, the REC constituted a committee comprising both retired and serving IFS officers to carry out site inspection and submit a report over the feasibility.
 
 The committee that visited the project site in the last week of April 2017 submitted its report and raised pertinent concern over execution of the project.
 
 Based on the report that strongly disapproved of the project, REC has now sent it back to the Karnataka government, asking it to reconsider the entire project keeping in mind the present conditions and sensitivity of the geographical terrain. Based on the report, the REC has directed the state government and Railways to submit current objectives of the project, cost benefit analysis, exact count of trees, compensatory afforestation and other aspects.
 
 The KFD through the REC has suggested to the state government that it should consider tunnelling. “If the user agency is particular about the project, they should go for tunnelling from Kalaghatagi in Dharawad range to Navalagadde village in Ankola range,” the experts’ report suggested. The forest officials also told the government it should direct the user agency to bear the salary and cost of operating three sets of patrolling staff equipped with weapons and vehicles (with eight personnel in each team).
 
 Do we need to cut over 2 lakh trees for the project?
 
 Upon carrying out the site inspection, the officials have raised the question whether the project requires cutting of over 2 lakh trees in the Western Ghats region. “As per the proposal, the trees that need to be axed is 2,02,450. The count was based on sample enumeration done in 2016 at Yellapur and Karwar division. Similarly, the tree count at Dharwad was done in 2005. Hence there is a need for complete enumeration to know the exact tree count and its composition. As the number of trees to be felled is huge, an Environmental Impact Assessment for the project has to be conducted,” the committee said in its report to the REC, a copy of which was accessed by Bangalore Mirror.
 
 Severe damage
 
 The Railways have proposed 34 tunnels and nine stations, most of which will come up in the forest area. This would further require forest land to build approach roads. Though the length of the track is just 1.68 m, land at list a minimum of 10 m wide is required. The forest in Yellapur and Karwar division are dense and part of the Western Ghats. “The project, if approved, would completely disturb the area due to movement of heavy machinery and transportation materials,” the REC said. The committee also felt that execution of the project would result in fragmentation of land, posing threat to wildlife from vehicles and poachers.
 
 
 Mining for nothing
 
 The railway line that was initially proposed for transportation of iron and manganese ore seems to have lost its importance in the present day scenario with the mining industry being in its lowest ebb. “The initial purpose of the project cannot be justified now. As of now, not many trucks were seen plying on the NH-63, which runs almost parallel to the proposed railway track suggesting that the actual capacity of the existing road is not fully utilised,” the report said.