On a cold December day this year, a tigress was killed in Kaziranga. She was riddled with bullets from an AK-47. The autopsy reported 10. There was confusion about who fired the weapon, a forest guard or an Assam policeman. An enquiry has been ordered. The tigress’s crime was to wander too far from the man-made limits of the national park, too close to human habitation.  
 A senior official said she was feeding, probably looking for her cub. Other reports indicate that, aggravated by boisterous local youth and alarmed by a journalist trying to film her up close, she panicked and charged, knocking down the cameraman before running away.  
 There were the usual assertions of her being a man-eater, but there is no evidence of this. We still do not know why no attempt was made to tranquilise and capture her. That this was her home, a place reserved for wildlife, does not seem to have factored in anyone’s thinking. 
 Driving in from Guwahati on the Assam Trunk Road, now NH37, Kaziranga appears without warning. The four-lane highway narrows and fields 
 give way to grassland and forest on either side. The national park is to the left, the north, but the forests on the other side of the road are dense too, occasionally giving way to tea estates. Just after 5 pm in December it’s already pitch dark, but buses and trucks still scream along the road, an ugly black gash through dense green. Every few hundred feet there are road signs warning of animal crossings; the text is too small to read. This is a wildlife corridor, but the signs seem tired, without hope. Frequent roadkills are inevitable. Anywhere else, they’d divert traffic away from here, shut this road at night. Here, as in our cities, wheels have right of way over feet. 
 “Commerce and development are also important,” says a senior forest officer in Guwahati when I call him. His tone is guarded. “It’s a difficult balancing act, but we have to manage.” He will not admit the outrage he must feel about the tigress; wildlife conservation is not immune to politics either. 
 Over the next few days, visiting the park, we traverse NH37 several times. In daylight, it’s hard to tell that we’re anywhere near a national park. There are shops, tea estates, bungalows, fields; and the incessant traffic.  
 We enter the park, a few minutes off the main road, ride over a culvert, and it’s another world: a world of grass 10 feet high, wide shimmering lakes, enormous expanses of sky, dense old growth forest. There is wildlife everywhere, big and small. Elephants of course, and rhinos, lots of them. One heaves itself up the embankment and stops between our vehicles. It turns and moves towards the second car. For a minute, no one knows what might happen. For one magnificent minute, you believe your life now hovers between a fabulous extinction and a mundane continued existence. The rhino decides we aren’t worth the effort of a goring and, to general relief, lumbers off. We bounce on into forests of tall trees through which the light breaks in unpredictable patterns. The underbrush is so dense it’s unnerving. You could spend days here and never tire of it. 
 This is a bounty beyond measure; but it is very clearly under threat. Twice our driver stops and Manoj, our hawk-eyed guide who seems to know every blade of grass, hops off to pick up discarded plastic and foil packets. We pass other vehicles; there are men smoking in each despite the no-smoking signs. On another route, two heroes swagger down the path to relieve themselves. That they might be a few feet from a rhino or a tiger seems not to matter. Manoj tells their driver to get them back aboard, but there is weariness in his voice and sadness in his eyes. 
 Kaziranga is one of conservation’s great success stories. Its holds 70 per cent of the world’s population of the Indian one-horned rhino, over 2,000 of them. It has one of the highest tiger densities anywhere. In one form or the other, it has enjoyed protection since the early 1900s; been a national park since 1974; a UNESCO world heritage site since 1985; a tiger reserve since 2006. It has a zero-tolerance approach to poaching, with shoot-on-sight orders. Yet, it is still a fragile land.  
 Rimmed by the Brahmaputra to the north, east and west and the serpent of NH37 to the south, it sits in an uneasy relationship with surrounding human settlements.  
 Locals have opposed new initiatives, including its status as a tiger reserve.  
 The park staff, said to be uncommonly dedicated, are underpaid, overworked and badly equipped. Inside the park, at a rest stop, faded markings show the steady decline of flood levels from 1996. Kaziranga’s many gains are slow, hard-won, calculable. The losses are not, and they are incremental, irreversible. 
   On a ride back out, I ask Manoj about the tigress who was killed. Has the officer been suspended, dismissed? He shakes his head. “No sir,” he says, his voice flat. “They’re saying he is to be given an award. For saving human lives.”