By Iffath Fathima

Wildlife rescuer releases a parakeet from fortune teller

On Monday morning, a rose ringed parakeet was seized from a fortune teller near Kengeri Signal. On Saturday morning, two parakeets were confiscated, one of them, from a fortune teller located at Peenya 2nd Stage, near NTTF Circle, and the other from a resident who had kept the parakeet as a pet, at his home in Chimney Hills, Hessarghatta Road. 

Parakeets are listed under Schedule IV Entry 50 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. They are protected and cannot be trapped, kept in captivity or sold. The punishment for such offences is imprisonment for a term up to three years or a fine of Rs 25,000, or both.

Guru Dath, wildlife rescuer, who rescued the parakeet from a fortune teller, said, when he told the fortune teller it was illegal to have the bird, he refused to accept it and did not give him the parakeet, but it was confiscated. "The tail and both the wings had been cut off,” Dath said.

On Saturday, Vasanth Kumar AR, People for Animal rescuer, rescued a parakeet after he repeatedly warned the fortune teller, but to no avail. Kumar took matter in his own hands and rescued them. “I had been warning him for three months now. He said he did not know it was illegal and told me he would hand it over to a wildlife centre. When I freed the parakeet from captivity, the fortune teller kept pleading with me not to take away the bird,” said Kumar.

The same day, Kumar rescued the parakeet from a resident in Hessarghatta, who had the parakeet for 20 days. “He told me his children had found it on some one’s terrace and brought it home. But when he came to know it is illegal to keep parakeets at home, he happily gave it back. It was a female parakeet,” said Kumar.

About the condition of the parakeet, Dr Karthik, Veterinarian, Bengaluru, said, “The male rose-ringed parakeet doesn’t have feathers in both the wings. The female doesn’t have primary feathers in the left wing. The money minting business of fortune telling has cost the parakeets precious lives and made them unable to fly back to their natural habitat,” said Dr Karthik.