Around 30 children from Shree Ramana Maharishi Academy for the Blind had a field day at Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) recently. They learned how to distinguish an antelope from a deer, listened intently to various bird callings, and mastered the art of identifying hippos through scent marking. They also spent the day examining leopards’ pug marks, feathers of flying and non-flying birds, and humps of different camel species while stumbling upon the wooden model of Asian elephants.
 
The visually impaired children were part of BBP’s special program for the differently abled to educate and inspire kids with special needs and make the park accessible to all.
 
According to BBP officials, the program was started two years ago.
 
“The programme is tailored as per their needs as these children, whether visually impaired or with autism spectrum disorder, face various learning challenges. We have reached out to around 10 schools for the specially abled in the city through this program,” said a BBP official.
 
The kids who visit the park under this program are eased into nature through tactile learning methods as they get to see through touch, smell, and information by zoo officials.
 
“We provide the children with wooden or POP cast of animals and explain to them anatomical differences. For instance, they get to feel the double-domed head of Asian elephants, count the number of nails on leopard paws, visualise pug marks of a lion, and understand distinguishing features of a crocodile egg from birds,” said the BBP official.
 
Children, while on the ground, are also taught to identify animals using their sense of smell. For instance, Hippos mark their territory and communicate through poop spray. Children are introduced to the smell while they feel the 3D model of the animal, making it a unique hands-on wildlife education experience.
 
“We teach them to identify animals based on scent marking. While children visit animal enclosures, we tell them about their natural behavior and explain the reasons behind it. For instance, carnivores can mostly be seen inside their enclosures clawing on some enrichment to sharpen their nail,” informed the staff.
 
“They stopped near every enclosure and children created the animals based on the tactile models and information shared by the officials. This was our first visit and we now plan to take the younger children every year to the park,” said a representative of a school for visually impaired children in the city.