By Iffath Fathima

Rescuers call for complete ban on manja in Bengaluru upon seeing state of birds after Sankranti

Makara Sankranti, is a day of happiness and festivities for people. Flying kites is part of the ritual and thousands of Bengalureans flock to terraces to fly kites. The sport gets pretty competitive, with people trying their best with sharp manjas (flying strings) to cut the strings of other kites around. As usual, the deadly Chinese manja is the weapon of choice.

However, collateral damage came in the form of injury to birds. On Tuesday, the day of Sankranti, about ten birds suffered injuries due to Chinese manja. These birds were later rescued by wildlife rescuers. “Getting a call on Sankranti to rescue birds in different localities is nothing new. Every year on the day of the festival, we rescue at least five birds which are entangled in the manja on trees. They are not able to figure out if there is a string. When they go and land on a tree they get entangled in the manja. The manjas are not safe and should be banned”, said Rashmi Mavilkurve, wildlife rescuer.

Similar sentiments were echoed by Somu HN, who got a call in the early hours of Tuesday from a resident of Bannerghata. A barn owl was entangled in manja string on a 30 ft high tree. The manja had wrapped around the owls wings and it couldn’t move. “I went to the location and spotted the owl. The owl was trying to free itself and was getting more entangled. I had to rescue it immediately. At times a cut by manja can be real bad. I got a ladder and rescued the owl. It had a small cut and little bleeding on the wing. I took it home and cleared the wound with antiseptic. The owl was totally dehydrated. Liquids were given and after a while it regained its energy and tried to fly. I released it near Bannerghata forest,” said Somu, a wildlife rescuer.


  BBMP wildlife wardens are talking to the DCF and Commissioner to get kite manja banned. We also plan to raise awareness through a marathon–Prasanna Kumar, BBMP rescuer 

The same story was repeated across neighbourhoods like Shantinagar, Wilson Garden, Jayanagar, Nyndahalli, Hanumanthanagar, Cunningham Road, Vidyaranyapura. Kites, mynahs, coucals, barn owls and even injured flying foxes were rescued.

“The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) wildlife wardens have been talking to the DCF and BBMP commissioner to get the kite manja banned permanently. We are also planning out raise awareness against manja through a marathon in February,” said Prasanna Kumar, a BBMP wildlife rescuer.

Kumar added that manja poses a danger to birds throughout the year. “It is not just a menace during Sankranti. Every day, the BBMP wildlife rescue team gets at least 10-15 calls from different parts of the city to rescue birds stuck in because of kite manja. Not many people who bring the creatures to our notice can find out why the birds are stuck. But when we reach the spot, we see the culprit in most cases is kite manja,” he said Kumar.

Prasanna is also of the firm opinion that manja should be banned.