Wider culverts on tough terrain to facilitate jumbo crossovers
 
 
 	Can a herd of elephants squeeze through a passage 25 meters wide? This was the question that left officials at the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) scratching their heads as they cleared a proposal to make the NH-75 four lanes between Mangaluru and Hassan, connecting Bengaluru with coastal Karnataka.
 	
 	  	While officials from the Karnataka Forest Department argued that 25 metres was more than enough for a herd, MoEF officials demanded that it must be 75 metres.
 	
 	
 	However, in the end, the MoEF officials got their way.
 	
 	  	The PWD department’s proposal to widen the existing NH-75, which included a diversion requiring about 33 hectares of forest land, was placed before the Regional Empowered Committee constituted by the MoEF. The proposed site was inspected by the Deputy Conservator of Forests, Mangaluru, and his report stated that the route would cut through an elephant corridor and measures had to be taken to facilitate a safe crossing for elephants across the NH.
 	
 	  	According to the report, a copy of which was made available to Bangalore Mirror, the DCF from Mangaluru identified three locations that were used by elephants to move from East to West and vice versa. The DCF suggested that if the user agency (NHAI) builds 25-metre culverts, it would be easier for elephants to cross. However, going through the DCF report, the MoEF officials decided the space was inadequate for a herd to cross.
 	
 	  	“Twenty-five metres is too small an opening for elephant herds to feel secure while crossing. A minimum space of 75 metres is required in such dense forests and the height of the pass shall not be less than six metres,” officials stated.
 	
 	  	MoEF officials directed NHAI officials to build an elephant underpass 75 metres wide between Valthaje Bridge and Dharmasthala cross road in Kanajalu and Kodyakallu of Shiradi village.
 	
 	  	“We estimated that 25 metres would be sufficient as the space provided for elephants on the Mysuru-Manandawadi road is 12 to 15 metres. 
 	
 	
 	 		Sometimes, views can differ from person to person. Probably they would have kept future requirements in mind as it would be difficult to widen the culverts later,” explained a senior IFS official of KFD. 	 		
 		
 		 	 		More than 6,000 trees will be uprooted!
 		
 		 	 		The diversion will require about 33.18 hectares of evergreen forestland along the Western Ghats and would spell doom for over 6,000 trees belonging to as many as 82 different species. The REC, set up by the MoEF, gave its approval to uproot a total of 6,378 trees to facilitate the road-widening. The committee, in its report, stated:
 		
 		
 		“Forests within the Bantwal range are only deemed forests and will not have significant ecological impact if they are uprooted. Real Western Ghats forests are located in Uppinangadi Range, Puttur Range and Subramanya Ranges of Mangaluru Forest Division. The user agency must ensure the continuity of the habitat on either side of the road and facilitate the easy and free movement of the land animals across the proposed four-lane road,” the report said.
 		
 		 	 		An environmentalist from Hassan said, “The decision to allow the four-laning would result in an ecological disaster, as it cuts through bio-diversity-rich Western Ghats. Several areas will be left fragmented, affecting the movement of animals. The area should have been left intact considering its importance for the state and its climate.”
 		
 		 	 		Acknowledging that the project would affect the ecological balance in the long run, Anur Reddy, APCCF, (Forest Conservation) said, “The project is also equally important considering the economics of the state. I agree that forests, particularly the Western Ghats, must remain intact. But in this case there was no alternative.
 		
 		
 		However, minimising the damage, the user agency will implement mitigation plans to minimise wildlife conflicts. Besides, tunnels and road supported by stilts will be set up causing minimal damage to the ecosystem.”
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 			TRUCK BAYS, NO; SIGNAGE, YES!
 			
 			

 			 				Considering that the NH passes through dense evergreen forests, it is natural for people to park their vehicles by the side of the road to enjoy nature in its pristine form. But the REC has put a blanket ban on such activities while clearing the proposal.
 				
 				 			 				“There shall be no parking facility for truck, bus or bus laybyes inside the forest area. At all elephant crossing locations, signage shall be displayed over a distance of 500 metres on either side of the road and speed limits of 40 kmph are also fixed at these points, particularly at night. Only those trees actually required to be felled for building the road need be felled. All trees beyond the berm are retained and fragmented land must be fenced and protected by the project,” the report directed.