Alvas Group planning a luxury health resort in the eco-sensitive zone
 
 The proposed health resort within the limits of Kudremukh National Park has run afoul of the green lobby with members of the Coastal Karnataka Bird Watchers’ Network, comprising more than 1,000 naturalists, urging the government to drop the project.
 	  	The group, which conducts nature conservation, has been instrumental in uniting bird watchers across the coastal belt of Karnataka. Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, one of the members said Wildlife First that had won a major legal battle in the Supreme Court, resulting in the closure of mining in Kudremukh, has written to the Forest Department objecting to the luxury health resort within the limits of Kudremukh National Park.
 	  	The activists say some buildings of KIOCL (Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd) in the demised mining lease area, designated as an eco-sensitive zone (ESZ) within the national park, have been acquired for the resort —Kudremukh Nisargadhama — of the Alvas Group. They protest this is completely impermissible under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, the ESZ guidelines formulated by the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change and the State’s Wilderness Tourism Policy. The entire 1,401-hectare enclosure, including the 281 acres acquired by KIOCL through KIADB located within the park area, has been declared an eco-sensitive zone as per directions of the Supreme Court. They claim the said area is also within the Western Ghats Eco-Sensitive Area as notified by the Ministry of Environment on March 10, 2014.
 	  	The members stated the Supreme Court in its judgment did not entertain the plea of KIOCL to use existing buildings and infrastructure for promoting eco-tourism. On the contrary, the court observed that, “the heartbeat of that solution is the stability of the slopes involving no or minimal disturbance to the unbroken area. It is noted that at various times, petitions have been filed practically with a view to undo what had been definitely held to be imperative by this court.”
 	  	In light of these facts, Wildlife First has written to the government and met the Chief Wildlife Warden who immediately instructed the deputy conservator of forests, Kudremukh, to issue notices and initiate appropriate action. Wildlife First has also appealed to Forest Minister B Ramanatha Rai who is also from the same area, not to yield to any pressure since mushrooming of luxury resorts in many of the 100-odd enclosures within the park pose huge potential threat. The precedent of acquisition of 70 acres in Tolali enclosure to stop a resort from coming up must be strictly followed in this case as well, say activists.
 	  	
 	
 	 		Kudremukh facts
 		 	 		*  The Kudremukh National Park is the second largest Wildlife Protected Area (600.32 km²) belonging to a tropical wet evergreen type of forest in the Western Ghats. 
 		 	 		*  It is located in Dakshina Kannada, Udupi District and Chikkamagaluru districts
 		 	 		*  Three important rivers, the Tunga, the Bhadra and the Nethravathi are said to have their origin here.
 		 	 		*  A diverse assemblage of endangered large mammals is found in the park supporting three large mammal predator species such as the Tiger, Leopard and Wild Dog. The important Tiger prey base found within the Park is Gaur, Sambar, Wild Pig, Muntjac, Chevrotain, Bonnet Macaque, Common Langur and the Lion-tailed Macaque.
 		 	 		*  The Kudremukh township developed primarily as an iron ore mining town where the government run public sector company Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Ltd. (KIOCL) operated for 30 years and closed its mining activities in 2006 due to environmental issues, as per court orders 
 
 	‘We won’t cut a single tree’
 	  	Reacting to the letter, Dr Mohan Alva, chairman of Alva’s Education Foundation, slammed reports of a luxury health resort as baseless. “A resort is not being set up. We have only taken up maintenance of the Sahyadri Guest House as well as 30 houses for three years through an open bid. We are not building anything new. Only basic repairs are being undertaken. We will not cut a single tree. We respect nature. There is a township that has about 2,000 houses. Our dream, if possible, is to start an ayurveda and naturopathy centre and not a resort for enjoyment or entertainment,” he said.