After a long wait of four years, Bengalureans will get to see a zebra. The Bannerghatta Biological Park (BBP) is all set to present the striped animals to visitors from October 19. A zebra brought from the Mysuru zoo had died a few years ago and since then, there were no striped animals despite the zoo authorities’ repeated attempts to source zebras from South Africa and Europe. Four zebras (two males and two females) were finally brought from Ramat Gan Safari Park, Israel. Though the animals arrived at the zoo in November last year, they could not be put out for public viewing since authorities first quarantined, and then allowed the zebras to get acclimatised to the local weather. There was also a requirement for creating a separate enclosure with a relatively huge space. The enclosure has been constructed at the cost of Rs 50 lakh, with Infosys Foundation’s support. The zebras will be housed near the safari waiting area. As Bannerghatta is gearing up for more guests, the biological park has been extended from the current 24 acres to 50 acres.
 
 
 
 White lion for the BBP
 
 
 BBP will also get a white lion and elands as donations from the Israel zoo, and there will be no exchange processes for these animals. As BM earlier reported, a giraffe will be donated to the BBP from the Cyprus zoo. White lions, with white fur and pale blue-green eyes, are regarded as rare and endangered species. White lions were first spotted in 1970s in Timbavati wildlife reserve in South Africa. They acquire their unique colour from a recessive white gene through a phenomenon known as Leucism, a rare form of colour mutation. They are born to normal parents. In 1975, lion researcher and conservationist Chris McBride had first encountered a lioness with three cubs: one a tawny male, and the others snow-white; these were later transported to the Pretoria zoo for breeding purposes. According to an estimate, there are less than 300 white lions, and those in the wild are practically extinct. Currently, all white lions are born in captivity in various zoos across the globe.