Karnataka, which is known for the most number of tigers in the country, is seeing a number of tiger deaths recently. In just40 days of 2017, seven tigers from various forest ranges have died. The latest is a tigress from Bandipur. The eight-year-old cat was found dead in Kudahalla near Balluru Hundi Forest Beat in Yadiyala Range of Bandipur Tiger Reserve. The dead body was spotted after three days. Giving the post mortem report, forest officials said the tigress was well grown and healthy.
 
 The death is probably due to in-fighting with a male tiger, which has left its neck bone punctured with wounds in both hands, damages in the shoulder region and ribs bone broken, leading to internal bleeding. The officials also said the tigress had major injuries on its face with the right eye appearing ruptured.
 
 Speaking about the recent deaths, sources from the National Tiger Conservative Authority said, “The mortality of tigers in December and January is usually more. In 5-6 years, there will be more deaths due to various reasons, and this year it will peak. Three of the dead tigers from our state died of natural causes, but we do agree there are a few human errors which might have caused some deaths. Since Karnataka has more tigers, the death rate is also high in our five tiger reserves. But there is no need to worry, they told BM.
 
 Six tigers dead in just 41 days
 
 An 18-month-old tiger which was rescued from Ponnampet in Virajpet taluk within the Nagarahole forest reserve and kept in the Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre in Kurghali died on Friday afternoon.
 
 Apart from the recent death of a tiger in Kurghali on Friday, three tigers from Nagarahole National Park and Muliyuru ranges have also died.
 
 Decomposed carcass of a tigress was found on near Kamalethodu village, under DB Kuppe range in Nagarahole National Park on Tuesday.
 
 Veterinarians stated that the tigress was around 11 with one of its teeth broken. However, the nails of the tigress were intact.
 
 In an another incident, on the same day, a nine-year-old tigress and the mother of two cubs, is alleged to have died due to an overdose of tranquilizers at a village in HD Kote taluk on the outskirts of Nagarahole forest.
 
 In an another incident reported week back, a seven-year-old tiger which was rescued from Bandipur had died while shifting to Bannerughatta National Park. According to information available, the tiger sustained a fracture on its front right limb, besides bearing external injuries. 
 
 Recently, another six-year-old tiger died in Mysore district. 
 
 Leopard dies in Mandya
 
 A five year old leopard was found dead in Kotebetta village of Nagamangala Taluk of Mandya district on Saturday. The leopard is said to have been killing domestic animals from the past many days in the village. The dead body of the leopard was found along with the dead body of a goat. The post mortem report is yet to come.
 
 Of eight dead tigers, two tigers died due to over dose, 2 due to injuries by snare, one dead due to poisoning, 2 died due to infighting and one cub died to natural causes.
 
 The deaths were reported from DG Kuppa, Muliyaru, Kabini, Ponnampet, Kalllu, Srimangala and Bandipur.