A pugmark found at the orange orchard at Raanmangli village in Maharashtra          
It’s located a mere 4 km from the famous Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR), and people in the area seldom talk about anything other than the aged, blind tigress who had strayed into the village a fortnight ago. The first attack was in Satara. “The animal was old and could barely walk. Even though the forest department workers lit crackers, she wouldn’t run. She would falteringly walk a few paces and then sit down snarling,” recounts the village sarpanch, Ratiram Damaji Kodape (52), who went to the dilapidated, abandoned house where she had taken refuge in the afternoon on July 1, to tell villagers to disperse. 
“But nobody was moving. People kept getting closer, throwing stones and shouting when she just leapt and pawed Laxman Warluj Kodape who was nearest to her and later slunk into the thick tree cover.” 

By morning she had managed to walk 3 km to the neighbouring Masal village. This was when Kashiram was attacked. Curiosity had got the better of this farmer who was out tilling his field when the tigress came to Satara. Not wanting to miss the action, he went to Masal to see her.

“People were standing around her hooting and making growling sounds. I turned around to ask someone for tobacco and was caught unawares when the tigress pawed me from the left and jumped on me. 

Despite my screams everybody fled. I remember trying to hold my right hand up to prevent her bringing her paw down on my face,” he says pointing to his injuries. 

April 16, 2010
Raanmangli village, Nagpur
Forty-year-old Baijabai Bhoge and her husband Bakaram left with four others to gather the musk-scented mahua flowers that are fermented into liquor. They’d walked nearly 6 km into the thick forest and had begun gathering flowers when they heard the growls of a tiger. “All of us froze since we were so far from the village. We decided to wait and eat lunch hoping that the tiger would go away,” says Bakaram, “My wife scoffed at all of us for being scared and went ahead. She was gone for 10 minutes when we heard her scream. We rushed only to find the tigress slinking away with her cubs. She had dug her claws into my wife’s  neck and shoulders and bit into her skull. We picked my wife up and walked till we got within cell phone range. We then called for a motorcycle and rushed her to hospital where she died two days later.”

With a faraway look into the forest he says, “I have never stepped into the forest again.” 
 
Battle zone 
These aren’t isolated instances. The entire 27 sq km forest in Chandrapur adjoining Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve (TATR)—home to nine tigers—is considered the biggest man-tiger conflict zone in the country. 

With 60 deaths being reported from 2006. This does not include the six deaths due to man-leopard conflicts. 

The three attacks on July 3 shocked the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) into action. NTCA Member-Secretary Rajesh Gopal dashed a message to Maharashtra’s chief wildlife warden for a report on the incident and the progress of a Centrally-funded project to mitigate the man-tiger conflict raging in the TATR landscape (contiguous forest area outside the tiger reserve) for the past four years. 

If you have just put your hands together for Gopal’s prompt response, hold them right there. His concern for landscape tigers still isn’t officially a part of the tiger conservation regimen in the country.  Referring to the previous census figure of 1,411 tigers, he says in a recent interview, “Whatever tigers we have are only inside tiger reserves. We have not succeeded in saving tigers outside reserves. There are hardly any tigers outside protected areas.” 

While that paints Project Tiger in bright colours, pugmarks on the ground tell another story. In fact a senior official who works with the wildlife section of the Forest Department says, “Tiger conservation experts know that a good number of tigers live outside the buffer and core tiger reserve areas. It is sad that for all our chest-beating on saving the tiger, nobody wants to invest in them or bring them under the umbrella of Project Tiger that is restricted to tigers in the reserves. Knowing how spectacularly some of these reserves have failed to protect the cats is perhaps the reason but the tigers deserve better.”  

                                 The tigress that killed Baijabai returned to the village a day after. This is the only incident when, caught in a conflict situation, this mother of two cubs attacked a human being           No consensus 
Look at what happened in Satara. This was an ailing tigress who had lost her vision inside the protected area. Wildlife rules say that within a protected area the animals must be left alone to cope with their circumstances without human intervention. Yet in her case the authorities intervened and began feeding her. “While this speaks well of their compassion and monitoring efforts, it seems a bit strange that they failed to notice when she gained enough strength to take steps to stray into the village,” points out a local activist. 

No surprises then that the officials we spoke to refused to even acknowledge there was a problem. “Where are the statistics to suggest there is an increase in man-tiger conflict?” asks Maharashtra Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) A K Joshi. But he admits, “Monitoring of tigers is not done outside protected areas as the priority there is different.” This is exactly what conservationists have been saying all along! Rohit Kaaru from Wildlife Conservation and Development points out how state-run entities like Forest Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited have played havoc. “Since their goal is to optimise commercial exploitation of forests, tiger monitoring does not fit into their scheme of things,” he points out.

In fact the insistence of carrying on with the tendu contracts—though it is well-known that problems increase due to human beings going deeper into the tiger habitat—suggests that there may be some truth to the allegations of corruption. “The government, year after year, has ended up giving out more money in compensation than it earns from tendu contracts,” points out a local forest official, “Unless there is actually more money that is going into somebody’s else’s pocket this is illogical and makes for poor business sense.” Weak resources 
This apart, the forest department simply does not have the resources needed for monitoring. For example at the Brahmpuri division there are only eight guards as opposed to the 14 stipulated and even they only have lathis to take on poachers who come armed with the  latest night surveillance equipment and guns. Till the current crisis began making waves, the RFO had no option but to sit pillion with one of his guards on a motorcycle to take rounds. “Now we have been sent an old Commander jeep but it hasn’t started even once from the day it arrived,” says a guard. 

The conflict zone is also located on what should ideally be a corridor for the tigers to go to and from other habitats. The Forest Department runs a Corridor Conservation Programme in these areas to mitigate the conflict. The programme, however, has been shrinking in its area of operation for want of funds. Earlier, it covered three ranges. Now, it is being done only in two rounds in one range. 

Harshavardhan Dhanawatey and his wife Poonam, who run the Tiger Research and Conservation Trust, say forests are getting fragmented, thereby depleting the prey base for the big cats. Also, repeated regularisation of encroachments are making the corridors smaller.

“Yet most attacks have been inside that shrunken forest area,” points out Harshavardhan. “What does that tell us about the adaptability of tigers and the greed of human beings?” 

Poonam explains how the local custom of investing in cattle heads has also been harmful for the tiger. “The cattle overgraze in the forests, leaving nothing for herbivores there. When they move towards the fields in search of food it is only natural that the carnivores follow them and come closer to human settlements and occasionally livestock gets attacked,” she explains. “Will we keep huge kerosene stocks near an open fire? No we won’t. But that logic escapes us in case of our forests and wildlife.” Poor politics 
But now that there are already over 12 villages in the conflict zone it will be difficult to shift them. It is perhaps some indication of their strength as a vote bank that made a local politician Suresh Borade recently ask for all tigers to be shot dead. “We will think of your needs. After all tigers don’t vote for us, you do,” he said at a public meeting.

As Poonam Dhanawatey says, “In the current situation, conflict cannot be mitigated, at best it can be managed,” but wonders whether there is political will for even that despite there being laws in place since 1973. 

Others like Dr Keshav Walke of the Matru Sewa Sangh Institute of Social Work, Nagpur agree. A first generation literate in his family, Walke grew up in Fuljhari village located in the middle of Pench tiger reserve. His PhD, not surprisingly, is on tribal displacement in tiger reserves. “Current government policies are not doing either the tribals or tigers any good. The government chooses to throw out tribals and then bring bus loads of tourists go around on elephant back scaring the other animals ,” he says. “Also, a change in lifestyle has meant that tribals are not looking at the forest in a need-based way any more.”