Himalayan Forest Thrush, common in eastern Himalayas, had been overlooked till now
 
 
 	 A bird species, common in the eastern Himalayas and overlooked till now, has been identified as a new species.
 	
 	  	A team of scientists from India, Sweden, China, US and Russia have described this species from north eastern India and adjacent parts of China as Himalayan Forest Thrush.
 	
 	  	It is also the first Indian bird (Zoothera salimalii) which has been named after the late ornithologist Dr Sálim Ali, in recognition of his huge contributions to the development of modern Indian ornithology and wildlife conservation.
 	
 	  	Shashank Dalvi, based in Mumbai/Bengaluru said he Dr Per Alström from Sweden discovered the bird in May-June of 2009 while studying birds at high elevation in Western Arunachal Pradesh. 
 	
 	  	They realised that what was considered a single species, the Plain-backed Thrush (Zoothera mollissima), was in fact two different species in north eastern India.
 	
 	  	What first caught their attention was the fact that the “Plain-backed Thrush” in coniferous and mixed forests had a rather musical voice, whereas individuals found in the same region, but on bare rocky habitats above the tree-line had a much harsher, scratchier, unmusical song.
 	
 	  	Studies of museum specimens in 15 museums in seven countries revealed consistent differences in plumage and structure between birds from of these two species.
 	
 	  	After it was confirmed that the species breeding in the forests of eastern Himalayas had no scientific name, it was named Himalayan Forest Thrush (Zoothera salimalii).
 	
 	  	The high-elevation “Plain-backed Thrush” is now renamed as Alpine Thrush while it retains the scientific name of Zoothera mollissima.
 	
 	  	Further analyses of plumage, structure, song, DNA and ecology from throughout the range of the “Plain-backed Thrush” revealed that a third species was present in central China. While this population was already known, it was treated as a subspecies of “Plain-backed Thrush”. The scientists have instead called it Sichuan Forest Thrush.
 	
 	
 	The Himalayan Forest Thrush
 	
 	
 	The Himalayan Forest Thrush is common in the Eastern Himalayas. It has been overlooked until now because of its close similarity in appearance to the Alpine Thrush. New bird species are rarely discovered nowadays. Since 2000, an average of five new species per year have been discovered globally, most of which are from South America. The Himalayan Forest Thrush is only the fourth new bird species described from India since our independence in 1947.
 	
 	
 	
 	The scientists
 	
 	
 	 		Shashank Dalvi is an alumnus of the post graduate programme Wildlife Biology and Conservation WCS-India Program NCBS, Bengaluru and recently became India’s first birder to complete one ‘Big year’ and record 1,128 species of birds from across India, Prof. Per Alström is from the Department of Animal Ecology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Sweden and Swedish Species Information Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden