Parag Kulkarni, who is passionate about nature and wildlife, described the trip is his own words in a conversation with Mirror. 

Don’t be surprised to see colourful Himalayan birds enjoying in the serene mountains of Nainital or Sarus Cranes at their romantic best on a misty morning at Bharatpur sanctuary, while flipping through his album.

I am an eternal traveller, visiting and exploring new places always enthuses me. I recently made a short trip to the world famous ‘Keoladeo National Park” at Bharatpur, Rajasthan and had some great experiences with the “Sarus Cranes”. Bharatpur is a great place for nature and bird lovers. The early morning mist of winter adds to the allure and photographing the birds as well as mammals such as the deer, nilgai etc in misty background and marshy land is a fabulous experience. The sanctuary is one of the richest bird areas in the world and is known for nesting of resident birds and visiting migratory birds including water birds and is a preferred choice for photographers.

I also recently concluded a visit to Sattal, Nainital, Pangot in the Himalayas and came back awestruck at the beauty of the colourful Himalayan birds. Sattal or Sat Tal (Hindi for "seven lakes") is an interconnected group of seven freshwater lakes situated in the Lower Himalayan Range near Bhimtal, a town of the Nainital district in Uttarakhand, India. Set amongst dense forests of oak and pine trees, Sattal is one of the few unspoilt and unpolluted freshwater biomes in India. These lakes are a paradise for migratory birds. The variety that I saw in my short visit was fascinating. I was most impressed to see “Common Green Magpie an absolutely beautiful bird, Blue magpie, great barbette, blue whistling thrush, white crested & white throated laughing thrush, Khalij Pheasant, greater yellow naped woodpecker, grey headed woodpecker, rufosbellied niltava, lemon rumped warbler, spotted forktail, dipper, plumb is redstart, cold tit, upland pipit, Himalayan woodpecker and rofus bellied woodpecker etc.

 	  Blue Whistling Thrush shot in Sattal – near Nainital  
We love Africa and have travelled there a few times. I made a trip to Kenya and visited the national parks of Amboseli, Nakuru, Lake Naivashe in Kenya and also the iconic Masai Mara National Reserve which provided me ample opportunities to photograph the rich wildlife in action. Encouraged by this Kenyan Safari trip, we also travelled to Tanzania on a safari to Ngorongoro, Ndutu and Serengeti National Parks. The safaris in Tanzania are some of the best in the world. Tanzania is unparalleled for its natural beauty, unique wildlife viewing, and rich culture.

 	 
  Common green magpie shot in Sattal  
I love the mountains and had a very enriching trip to Kashmir & Leh. It was an unforgettable experience. On my bucket list are a visit to the Kumbhmela (next time) to capture the emotions of people , the Ganga arti on the Ghats of Varanasi and the sunset over Ganga and of course a visit to the Pushkar mela.

  White-Crested Laughing Thrush shot near Nainital  
My passion for nature goes beyond just photography and this belief about a “green world”, has led us planting trees regularly at our campus. We have over 1600 trees at our campus in Bangalore, and on an average, we plant a tree every second working day. It’s a delight to walk in to our factory in the morning and hear the chirping of birds of multiple varieties. “We need to contribute to nature”, and do our bit to preserve habitats for the wonderful species that reside on our planet. It is this drive that drove me to photography which has become a serious hobby for me now. I am a regular traveller to National parks across India and Africa.

  Darter Birds Rain Dance – Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur, Rajasthan  
Africa is amazing as it provides great experience to photograph amazing wildlife in natural surroundings, but India too has so much to offer. My wife and I hit a national park once every 45 days. She is an avid bird photographer and we balance out our likes by visiting varied parks.

  Sarus Crane -'the tallest flying bird' – Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur, Rajasthan  
I am also a seasoned marathoner and have participated in multiple runs. Running for me is like “meditation” and it helps me detach from everything and most importantly it helps me connect with nature. I took part in the Ladakh Marathon last year with my wife, Anita, and returned with bag full of frames of the dazzling Himalayan topography as well.

  'The Dance of the Sarus Cranes' – Keoladeo National Park, Bharatpur, Rajasthan  
My message and resolution for 2020 is “Go Green & Preserve Nature” and I urge all to spread the message and put in untiring efforts towards a green future.
***

Parag Kulkarni, MD of AO Smith India is a veteran who runs his business and is passionate about nature & wildlife. Under his leadership, AO Smith has been recognized as “India’s Most Trusted Brand” in Water Heaters. Apart from his enthusiastic & energetic corporate influence, Parag is an eternal traveller and is considered as the face of wildlife & nature photography within his intimate circles. 

*****

Disclaimer: The views expressed here are the author's own. The opinions and facts expressed here do not reflect the views of Mirror and Mirror does not assume any responsibility or liability for the same.