It was one of those Sunday mornings in the life of a photojournalist – nothing much to look forward to – that had left me wondering what worthy images I could capture for my newspaper today. 
 
 	
 	But action is always waiting round the corner for a photojournalist; I have always believed in that! And I was right! 
 	
 	  	At around 10.30 am, I received an alert about a leopard being spotted inside the Vibgyor High premises in Kundalahalli on Varthur Road. 
 	
 	  	But neither I nor my photographer friend from another newspaper (who was also sharing my ‘sleepy Sunday blues’) took that alert seriously at first. A leopard? In a school? What has it come to!
 	
 	  	But we got to do what we got to do. So we reached the school by 11.15 am anyway. But no one was ready to confirm whether a leopard was actually inside the school or not.
 	
 	  	But on striking a conversation with the security guard of the school, he took me into confidence and revealed that the school’s closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras had captured images of a leopard prowling around inside the school’s passages.
 	
 	
 	 		Now that excited me. That meant there indeed was a leopard somewhere inside the school! And, fortunately, it was a Sunday!
 		
 		 	 		My priority was to get hold of the CCTV footages – which I finally did.
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 	 		The forest and police officials, who had turned up at the school much before we did, strangely started leaving the venue at around 3 pm – after confirming that there was no leopard inside the school premises. I don’t know what kind of a confirmation it was, because if it indeed was a ‘confirmation’, they would not have left behind a few men with a cage and baits to capture the cat if it did show up. Basically, it seemed they were not sure and were also suffering from the same ‘Sunday blues’ we did in the morning.
 		
 		 	 		But when they left, we too thought that the only thing to be done is to collect the CCTV footages and leave for our respective offices. And so we did so. However, just when I reached my office I received a call informing me that they had indeed spotted the leopard and that the police and forest officials were rushing back to the school. 
 		
 		 	 		I rushed back too, and I was back on the spot in almost no time, thanking my luck that it was a Sunday! The leopard was holed up inside a generator room and the officers were going about meticulously laying a trap for the leopard. 
 		
 		 	 		Tranquiliser gun-wielding forest officials were in place … but the media photographers were all over the place – which obviously would not bode well in a situation wherein a wild cat is on the loose with people desperately trying to trap it. The hapless police tried to shoo away the people – common people and media photographers alike – and kept pleading that as it was getting darker it would be increasingly difficult to trap the leopard, which was extremely urgent as tomorrow would be Monday with children coming in to school.
 		
 		 	 		We were under the impression that the meticulous manner in which the forest officials were going about was enough to trap the leopard. They had covered the generator room with a net and were sealing all openings that could provide the cat with an escape route. Everything was in place and trapping the leopard was just a matter of time, we thought as we trained our cameras on the scene of the action. But how wrong we were was proved in a few minutes! As the officials closed in on the generator room, we were horrified to see that the leopard was making its way out through a small horizontal opening behind the nets. It jumped down, got entangled in the nets only for a few moments…and then it was free with the entire posse of police and forest officials standing vulnerable to attack. 
 		
 		 	 		The panicking leopard, in its desperation to escape a trap, straight away went into an attack mode. First, it was two school staffers; then it was the wildlife expert Sanjay Gubbi who was trying to get away by climbing a side gate. The leopard leapt at him, pulled him down, almost dragged him till the school swimming pool adjoining the generator room, and began to gnaw at him as him as if he were its prey. It was sheer luck that the leopard did not find his neck, but just his right arm. He survived with injuries though – a bleeding right arm that the leopard had held in a vicelike grip, jerking it from side to side!
 		
 		 	 		After letting go of Gubbi’s arm, the scared feline, fended away by the injured wildlife expert who used his binoculars as a weapon of defence, made its way into the swimming pool toilet where it sought refuge from the regrouped and advancing forest officials.
 		
 		 	 		The leopard was finally trapped there at 8.30 pm. 
 		
 		 	 		The officials suspect that the leopard may have come from the nearby Gunjur forest. 
 		
 		 	 		I have learnt a lesson, although I was not targeted by the beast: Never ignore the power of animals; and never underestimate its powerful reactions – especially when it is panicking. 
 		
 		 	 		I felt sorry for the leopard…and also for the forest and police officials who risk their lives to keep us (in this case, the schoolchildren who would be in school tomorrow) safe.
 		
 		 	 		In a way, although sorry for man and beast alike, I must say I was quite excited to get a ringside view of the clichéd man-animal conflict!