Attend a play 
There’s a new theatre troupe in town and it’s called Anala. Its aim is to adapt stories from literary forms, so their first play is also a result of this exploration. Called Sahagamana, it’s inpsired from Madri, a character from the Mahabharata, an article by Lakshmisha Tolpadi on the Mahabharata, the book Jaya by Devdatt Patnayak and the poetry of Kadengodlu Shankarabhatta. The play delves into the Sahagamana (or Sati system) and other practices which oppressed the women in the Indian society. 

 WHERE: Ranga Shankara, JP Nagar
 WHEN: 7:30pm, August 22 
 ENTRY: `150, bookmyshow.com

Eat well
At this Clean Eating Workshop, IIN health coach Mariam Begg will walk through some of her best kept wellness secrets and personal health recipes. Begg, a certified health and nutrition coach, views good health as the coming together of food, mental and emotional spheres, interpersonal relationships, spirituality 
and career as facilitators or impediments in the achievement of optimal health. 

 WHERE: Phalada Pure & Sure Cafe, 4th Block, Jayanagar
 WHEN: 3pm- 5pm, August 22 
 ENTRY: Free

 Beauty and the beasts
Check out an exhibition of original photographs that were submitted to and selected by Adventure & Wildlife, a bi-monthly magazine based out of the city, for a photography contest and exhibition. The theme is ‘Wildlife of India’ and the displayed photographs are on sale and part of the sales proceeds shall go to the aid of flood affected regions. 

 WHERE: Rangoli - The Metro Art Center, MG Road
 WHEN: 10 am-7 pm, August 22

 The startup story 
A startup founder’s life can be a roller coaster ride – the highs are high and lows are low. What can’t be seen from the outside is the exhaustion and numbness, caused by the daily grind of running a startup. If this sounds like your life, talk your heart out and listen to similar stories at this Listening Session. 

 WHERE: Tribe Theory Startup Hostels, 6th Block, Koramangala
 WHEN: 7pm-9pm, August 22
 ENTRY: townscript.com 

 Some Bollywood fun
Wind down at a Ladies Night Party today. It will have DJ Kamra behind the console, who will spin commercial and Bollywood songs and everything in between. But before he takes to his deck duties, Music Monk will perform open the evening for you. 

 WHERE: Drava, 5th Block, 3rd Floor, Jatti Building, Koramangala
 WHEN: 8pm, August 22 
 CALL: 9901632777

Watch a biopic
Keiichi Hara’s Miss Hokusai, an adaptation of the Hinako Sugiura manga series, is a unique biopic. Rather than telling a traditional tale of the legendary Japanese painter Katsushika Hokusai, it allows us to see him through his daughter’s eyes. Narrated by O-Ei Hokusai, the painter’s daughter, we see Hokusai painting a giant rendering of an old man, followed by him painting two sparrows on a grain of rice. 

 WHERE: The Courtyard, 105, KHRoad (Double Road), Shanthi Nagar
 WHEN: 6pm-7.30pm, August 22 
 ENTRY: Free CALL: 7338677996

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’