By: Sonia Nazareth
 
 
 You’ll need the forest department’s permission to climb Kerala’s Chembra peak. But the red tape is worth it
 
 
 Wayanad, 72 kilometres from Kozhikode, is a pilgrimage spot. It has been the hajj of a select few who are in pursuit of an encounter with prehistoric rock paintings in the Edakkal caves, and rich biodiversity in its wildlife sanctuaries.
 
 But even places less traversed, have their own roads that are less travelled. Chembra, in fact, has no road at all. At 2,100 meters above sea level, getting to the Chembra peak is via a path so rugged, that even locals on the weekend tend to bypass the challenge, opting instead for the butterflies of Kuruva island, or a leisurely stroll by the picturesque Banasura Dam — the largest earthen dam in India.
 
 But Chembra, far from displaying an inferiority complex, is remarkably self-assured. This may stem from the fact that it belongs to the Western Ghats, which have been included as a UN World Heritage site, for their abundant bio-diversity. To visit this pretty peak, permission from the forest department (en route Chembra, ask a local) must be sought. If you’re hiking alone, you’re required to take along a guide. As essential to the experience, is to carry a picnic basket of unniappams. These confections — made from raw rice, jaggery, ghee, coconut bits, sesame seeds and cinnamon powder — are best bought at the ostensibly nondescript shop that sits on the Thettu road junction, between the Thirunelli Temple and the road to Coorg. Food of the Gods in hand, pop in to the back of the shop — where you can see the cogs-and-wheels of unniappam-making in motion. These pre-requisites out of the way, we begin the climb to Chembra. To truly get under the skin of things, you have to develop a kind of bi-focal vision. Switch your eye from the detail – like an elephant footprint along the path, to the epic views of tea and coffee plantations, skinny betel-nut trees and rice paddy of emerald green, which you’re leaving behind. But this is also a test of tenacity. The hill grows taller, while the feet get heavier. The path goes from being strewn with leaves, to rocks that are hard to negotiate. The grander the landscape, the more our ego melts into striving socks.
 
 A heart-shaped lake halfway to the top is the mecca of the dominant species of wildlife that cluster around it — the lovers. The lake has entered the collective unconscious as a symbol that reveals a key motive of travel — to get away from it all. A local, haloed by butterflies that dance around us, turns his eyes with gratitude towards the lake that supposedly never runs dry, “Here, I feel relieved of the challenges that the onslaught of the modern life has brought with it.”
 
 When the sun is still a high ball in the sky, it’s time to leave Chembra. The evening brings out more animal life — deer and wild elephant, and the guide cautions — that while it’s all very well to croon to the monkeys and try to photograph the birds, the wild elephant especially, is best confronted not in the open, but from the safety of our vehicle in the nearby Tholpetty wildlife sanctuary.
 
 Chembra conquered, we turn to other sides of Wayanad. What’s distinctive is that most experiences are wholly intertwined with the act of being local. Taking a raft to Kuruva Island for instance, brims over with schoolchildren frolicking amid the rock pools and butterflies.
 To learn about the tribal communities — of which this area is a hotbed — one must pause at the Wayanad Heritage Museum and glean insights through headgear, weapons and pottery. An easier approach than real-time interactions with tribals, who tend to regard strangers with an air of suspicion. This for me is part of the beauty of pockets that live slightly removed from mass-scale tourism. People are not polite because they have to be. And people will be friends only if you make the effort to get to know them better.
 
 There are many experiences that I take away from my time in Wayanad. But the one I remember most is a woman from the back end of the earth’s queue offering me an unniappam freshly-made, and balking at the idea that I should pay for it. Visit Wayanad now, while honesty and warmth are rife, and wild elephants still cross paths with you on the street.
 
 
 BEFORE YOU PACK
 
 Getting there: There are many direct flights between Mumbai and Kozhikode. Kalpetta, the entry point to this adventure, is a 72-kilometre drive from Kozhikode.
 
 Best Time to visit: Ideal between September and January, The waterfalls are in full swing and the landscape, verdant
 
 Stay At: If you want where you stay at to be an extension of the trip itself, Vythiri Village works well. Avail of the hotel’s early morning walks through villages, zip-line facility through green surrounds and ayurvedic spa. Double-room rates from Rs 10,500/- per night (includes all three meals). For more information, vythirivillage.com
 
 A five-day trip will cost you (including transport, and sightseeing, but not stay and food) Rs 12,000