Pulkit shares how he had his meals with Unni – the elephant and learned how intelligent animals are

March 3 is celebrated as World Wildlife Day every year in an effort by the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) to raise awareness about global wildlife and plants. Prime Minister Narendra Modi shared that the population of lions, tigers and leopards are increasing in India.

To mark the occasion, Bollywood actor Pulkit Samrat, who will next be seen sharing screen space with Rana Daggubati in Haathi Mere Saathi, shared how he bonded with an elephant named Unni for life. 

Pulkit shared pictures with Unni and wrote, “For me, this ain’t just a title of my movie anymore. It stands true to the time I shared with this gentle beast. Meet Unni the elephant; playful, gentle, understanding and more human than any human I know. I feel blessed to spend a year and a half in the forest with this beautiful soul.”

   Kriti Kharbanda: Pulkit Samrat and I have been dating for a year-and-a-half, but haven’t discussed marriageKriti Kharbanda on her relationship with Pulkit Samrat, work, battling malaria, and an unforgettable interview with Thor, Chris Hemsworth
Pulkit shared that he had shared meals with Unni and learned how intelligent the beast is. “I used to have red rice with sambhar while I fed him huge red rice balls mixed with jaggery. I remember once I was having an apple and I offered him one. He smelled it and to my shock threw it away! I offered him another apple. He did the same. Then my director @prabusolomonofficial sir came to me and explained to me that the fruits that we eat are usually adulterated with chemicals and wax is applied on them to give them the expensive shine. Animals are very smart at noticing when nature’s products have been tampered with. He took another apple, cleaned it up, wiped off all the wax and offered it to Unni. This time the mighty elephant took the apple and enjoyed it. Made me realise how much we humans tamper with nature and it’s beauty.”

   Photo: Instagram/@pulkitsamrat
Pulkit urged his fans to spread awareness on treating nature with love and care.

Meanwhile, the makers have released the trailer of the film on Wednesday morning. Haathi Mere Saathi is based on the backdrop of human and animal conflict. Rana Daggubati, Pulkit Samrat plays the character of helping the mighty beasts living peacefully in the ecosystem. The film will set to release on March 26, 2021.

   Rana Daggubati's Haathi Mere Saathi pushed due to COVID-19Rana Daggubati-starrer Haathi Mere Saathi, which was scheduled to release on April 2, now stands postponed amid the ongoing coronavirus outbreak in the country as well as the world.