Feathers attached to injured birds in overnight surgery can get them right as rain

Veterinary doctors and surgeons at the People for Animals (PfA) Hospital, near Kengeri have perfected a technique called imping where they attach feathers to injured birds and make them fit to fly in an overnight operation.
 
At the hospital on Uttarahalli Main Road, vets offer a new lease of life to injured birds who would otherwise gradually lose their wildlife instincts staying at enclosures for long months until their feathers re-grow at a slow pace.
 
“We have a feather bank and we do the process on all birds, but the majority are black kites,” says Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff, a veterinary surgeon. 
Usually birds such as black kites, parakeets and barbets get entangled on Chinese manja threads and in the process, lose many of their feathers and become handicapped.
 
Sometimes they get entangled with threads lying in water bodies, and some of them suffer from dehydration and fall and lose their feathers. Some get entangled in electric wires, get electrocuted, and lose feathers in the process, the doctors at PfA told Bangalore Mirror.
 
“A black kite that was rescued less than two weeks ago had almost lost 50 per cent of its feathers. Most of the tail feathers and many of the secondary wings had also gone. It could not fly at all, so we had to get the feathers arranged for performing the procedure on this kite,” said Dr Shariff.

 Birds often get entangled in Chinese manja threads or electric wires, causing their feathers to fall off ­A Doctor, People for Animals (PFA) Hospital 
“A few other wildlife conservation centres were informed about sending us kite feathers. We collected feathers from the ground and from bird enclosures every morning. We have told students to collect and other conservation centres were informed. For this kite, it took about eight to 10 days to gather all the tail and wing feathers,” he said.
 
Dr Shariff said holes are made in the follicles and with high-density surgical glue, the feathers are stuck. When the feathers grow back naturally, the implanted feathers slowly wither and fall away.
 
We have long enclosures here where we keep the birds, and we even put them on higher branches and check if they can fly down, opening its wings to land on the ground, Dr Madhav from PfA told BM.
 
Flight training and testing is not only done for black kites, but for parakeets and barbets. “It is not required to keep the injured birds inside enclosures for three - five months until their feathers re-grow. Now, birds are released overnight soon after the flight testing,” said Rahul, a wildlife rehabilitator.