Echoes of Earth, Bengaluru’s very own music festival which celebrates music and culture is scheduled on the 7th and 8th of December, 2019.

Echoes of Earth is a convergence of music, arts and culture to spread the message of preservation and conservation of the environment.

The fourth edition the festival will have four stages, each featuring world fusion, live electronica, techno and acoustic-unplugged, with pop-up performances for children as well.

To prove that large scale events can be executed sustainably and responsibly, the entire festival is using upcycled and recycled materials. Along with a solar-powered stage, Echoes will be powering many areas of the festival with renewable energy.

This year’s Echoes theme is ‘The Sanctuary’, which will highlight the splendid yet endangered species of flora and fauna in India and the world. Some of the animals to look out for through art are the Mandrill, the One Horned Rhino, the Hangul, the Great Indian Bustard, the Indian Vulture, and many more.

 Festival highlights - what to look out for The Mahseer Installation by the Wildlife Association of South India:

The Humpback Mahseer, which is on the brink of extinction, will be presented as a 30 x 12-foot interactive art installation, built from scrap items. It’s large enough for participants to enter through its mouth. Once inside, people can interact with a range of content regarding its ecology and habitat. 

Flea market: Shop for a wide range of organic and sustainable products at the flea market, and sign up for an alternative way of living. Some of the stalls here will be Bare Necessities, No Borders and Verve Tattoo.
 
The Animal in you - dress your wildest: Echoes encourages people to dress like their favourite animal, and to bring out the #AnimalinYou. Tag Echoes in your social media stories and get recognized as the best dressed!s 

Highball lounge: Chill out at the Johnnie Walker Highball Lounge with refreshing cocktails. 

Pet zone: Don’t forget to bring your furry friends along because there are lots of activities for them at the Pet Zone. 

National Geographic Wild Zone: In collaboration with National Geographic Wild, the Nat Geo Wild Zone will have lots of activities for kids like face painting of your favourite animal and tours. 

Artist Brunch: 50 lucky people can win a brunch with their favourite artists at the Renaissance Bengaluru Hotel. Book your tickets today on BookMyShow.

 Food Court: The large food court has vegan and vegetarian options to choose from. Some of the stall are Social, Sarah’s cafe, Earth Mama, Apsara ice cream and The Renaissance Bengaluru, Race Course Hotel. 

Artists to look out for: 

1 Squarepusher: It’s a time for Squarepusher at Echoes. Tom Jenkinson is a self-taught technical wizard with enviable talent and cinematic vision.

2Acid Pauli: This is Acid Pauli’s first time in India as he brings German ethno-centric electronic music.

3 Fakear: Fakear tells intricately woven stories about love and cultures through his upbeat music.

4 Shigeto live ensemble: Known for genre-blending sets, the Michigan-based artist mixes instrumental hip-hop and electronic music. 

5 Natasha Diggs: The New York-based DJ, producer and vinyl expert, takes an old-school approach to electronic music. 

6 (((O))): The American-born Filipina singer, June Marieezy’s laid-back music reflects stories of culture, divinity, love and spiritualism.

7 Lifafa: It’s Suryakant Sawhney’s first time at Echoes. Let him take you back to 80s Bollywood music with a twist of modern sounds. 

8 Prabh Deep: Representing Indian hip-hop, listen to Prabhdeep’s hard hitting lyrics and catchy basslines.

9 La Petit Fumee: The French band makes energetic and powerful tribal music.
 
Garden City Movement: This Tel Aviv trio brings a fusion of Ethiopian pop, mellow electronic beats, and intertwining vocals.

Important festival information 

* Gates open at 1pm.
* It’s a zero-plastic festival so please bring reusable water bottles which you can refill at the hydration stations.
* Carry hats and sunscreen for the day, and jackets for the evening.
* This year, Echoes will go cashless and is introducing RFID systems for a hassle-free festival experience.
* Brings cycles and prams to explore the festival spread over a large area.

Echoes of Earth, December 7 and 8th, 2019. Embassy International Riding SchoolTickets on www.bookmyshow.com

To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs to mybangaloremirror@timesgroup.com with the subject line ‘Unwind’