Star techie 
 
 Before Nirup Bhandari assumed the role of hero in RangiTaranga, he was a techie at SAP Labs India. Scheduled to return to work in July after a three-week break post the release of his film, he has now requested for time off till September 21, to complete the promotional activities and such around the release. Luckily, it was granted. But the diarist can tell you the buzz among his colleagues is whether he’ll return after tasting success on the big screen. And Bhandari didn’t deny it. “Lots of offers coming in. I’m yet to take a call,” he told the diarist, in true up-and-coming actor style.
 	  	
 	Wild times
 	
 	
 	
 	 		Saad Bin Jung shared some interesting anecdotes about his encounters in the wild with a select gathering at veggie restaurant Green Theory over the weekend. Passionate about wildlife and conservation, he told them how he once took a “very high-society group from Delhi” camping along the Mara river in the northern Serengeti. In bed in little more than a kurta, he found himself rushing with a flashlight and a spear “that I always sleep with” to the lady’s tent at 10 pm, after her screams alerted him. Dodging buffaloes and hippopotamuses on the way, he got there only to realise that a huge rhino had been grazing five yards away from her bed and snorted, and she had “panicked, thinking something was inside.” Another time, a terrified honeymooning couple from Bengaluru asked to sleep in his tent after a lion, wounded by hunters, came up to five yards near their tent, roaring loud enough to make the fabric “reverberate”. “He disappeared, but they wanted to share my tent after that. I refused because they were on their honeymoon!” he chuckles. 
 		
 		
 		Beauty is the beholder
 		
 		
 		
 Actors Kareena Kapoor and Saif Ali Khan have multiple art works at their swishy Mumbai home. But the lady says her favourite is one by the celebrated Delhi-based modernist Manu Parekh that decorates their living room. The reason Ms Kapoor Khan gives for this particular affiliation is that it is a rural figurative, and she loves “ethnic things”. But mostly because the eye-catcher art work garners her maximum compliments, almost every guest visiting them appreciates this painting. Incidentally, the actor has also been roped in to judge a talent show for an apparel brand that awards women for their skills in classical dance and singing.
 		
 		
 		Sought-after job
 		
 		
 		
 The post of the India coach is vacant and if you thought it is the most sought-after cricket job in the world, you may not be all that wrong. But there is an equally lucrative job available in India and, we can tell you, coaches world over are lining up for it. Since Trevor Bayliss moved to London to take over the reins of the England team a couple of months back, there has been a vacancy in the Kolkata Knight Riders team. Officials are flooded with job applications. Given the profile of the team owners and perks associated with it, the job is thought of as a very alluring one. With close to US $250,000 for just about two months, the best in the business are eyeing the seat. But we hear the KKR management is in no hurry to take a call. They are looking for someone who can easily gel with two other coaches in the team – batting coach Jacques Kallis and bowling coach Wasim Akram. Now that should be a big task.