It is mating season for snakes and with less human activity, the reptiles are cropping up all around; experts advise people to keep a safe distance

With several videos on how to catch snakes going viral and many people stuck in their homes, newbies are turning ‘snake catchers’, causing much havoc in their own and the reptiles’ lives.

On Thursday, a resident of KR Puram called a wildlife rescuer to inform him that he had caught a python and even clicked a few pictures with it. The man sent the pictures to the rescuer. As soon as he saw the pictures, the rescuer rushed to the spot to tell the young man that what he had not caught was not a python, but the highly venomous Russell’s viper.

Rajesh Kumar, a wildlife rescuer, told Bangalore Mirror that this is the mating season for snakes and many baby snakes are found during this time. “People are trying to catch them and pose for photographs, which can prove even fatal. In the last few days, I have heard of at least four snake bite cases in Bengaluru. According to the protocol, a snake bite patient has to be admitted in an ICU ward and kept in observation for 24 hours. But, as of now most ICUs are occupied by covid patients, so how can snake bite cases find hospital beds? I request everyone not to get into such misadventures,” he said.

The recent rain is also a reason for the spike in calls to snake rescuers. While the most spotted ones are rat snakes, rescuers said that they are finding a number of cobras also of late. Two to three cobras are being rescued from the city’s residential areas every week.

      .
‘Snake’ Mohan, a snake rescuer, said in the last few days, many rat snakes had gotten into vehicles and car engines and had to be rescued. As it is a lockdown, many people are not using their vehicles. So, the snakes are finding it easy to cosy up inside the vehicles. Someone needs to exert extreme caution before starting a vehicle and must thoroughly check the vehicle. He said there have been instances of snakes being rescued from toilets in Hennur Bande as well as Jeevan Bima Nagar.

Mohan also said that with many drains in the city being concretised, the snakes have nowhere to escape to and so are coming on to the streets. “Earlier, the rats would make pathways or burrows inside the drains. However, now with most of the drains being concretised, the rats are unable to drill a hole. So, the snakes are shelterless without burrows and come on to the streets,” he said.

A few snake catchers said that people were finding more snakes as people have locked up their houses and generally there is less human activity, so the repltiles are coming to residential areas. Some snake catchers said with very few people on the road, snakes are moving freely on the roads too. As February to mid-April is the mating season for snakes, snake catchers say this may help increase the population of snakes.

      .
Rajesh Kumar said that there were 26 species of snakes of which the three most common ones found in Bengaluru were cobra, rat snakes and checkered Keelback. Based on the habitat, the snakes have been categorised as terrestrial, arboreal and aquatic.

“We need to understand that as long as humans are there, there will be human waste and with waste come rodents and where there are rodents, snakes will be around. While these three species have adapted to Bengaluru’s changing environment, the Russell’s viper are not found much in the core city due to loss of habitat as they prefer open land and rocky terrain. We have been rescuing a number of snakes from TV stands, shoes, kitchens and air conditioners,” he said.


     People are catching them to pose for photos, which can prove fatal. I have heard of 4 snake bite cases in the last few days–Rajesh Kumar, rescuer

Tips for you
Snake catchers shared a few tips for readers: Keep your surroundings clean and clutter-free. If you spot any snake inside your compound wall, the first thing to do is to call a rescuer. Cobras, rat snakes, checkered keelback (Fowlea piscator) and Russell’s viper (Daboia russelii) are quite common in Bengaluru.

Call these numbers, if you spot a snake
 
Forest department’s helpline number : 1926
BBMP helpline number : 08022221188
Wildlife rescuer forest cell : 9036111007