Using a puppy as live bait to lure an animal is cruel and against animal welfare laws, say wildlife activists

Activists and wildlife conservationists have expressed displeasure over the use of a puppy as live bait to lure the big cats that were sighted on the city’s fringes lately.
 
Researchers and animal law practitioners say the practice of using live bait is against the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act and the Karnataka Forest Department should resort to less vicious ways to catch the wild cats.
 
“I was surprised when I got to know that a small puppy has been forced into a trap cage and is being used as live bait to lure the leopard. Section 11 of the PCA act prohibits this or any other form of cruelty to animals. The forest department officials were not supposed to put life there,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.
 
However, Forest Department officials have clarified that the bait has been kept in a separate cage as per the norms and no physical harm will be inflicted upon the animal.
 
“The dog is kept inside a small enclosure and even though the leopard might get attracted to it, the big cat cannot reach the animal. The animal is safe and will be released soon,” said a senior official from Karnataka Forest Department.
 
However, activists and animal law practitioners have expressed their dissatisfaction. They say the PCA act is criminal legislation. Ideally, a case should be registered, an investigation must be held, the prosecution must follow;
 
“This is an incredibly cruel option. Whatever the facts and circumstances might be, the use of live animals is prohibited under the law. There are many other options that the department could have resorted to. All this while, the animal knows that it is trapped and must be overwhelmed with the feeling of fear and dread. Ideally, a case should be registered, an investigation must be held, the prosecution must follow; unless the department officials enjoy immunity from the law,” said Shreya Paropkari, an advocate who practices animal law.
 
Nevertheless, some experts said that while using live bait is against the provisions of the Act, a sensitive situation like this calls for extreme steps.
 
“The entire ecosystem is sensitive, given that there has been an attack and a person lost their life in Mysuru. In its truer sense, it is against the provisions to use a dog as bait. But given the situation, it could be more detrimental to more animals if the cats are not caught and relocated. There is a chance that people might poison the leopards by lacing meat with poison or by poisoning the waterbody,” said a wildlife expert on the condition of anonymity.

  There are many other options that the Forest Department could have resorted to instead of this– Shreya Paropkari, an advocate

According to sources, the Forest Department is also running out of ways in managing such situations rapidly. Which probably is why they have resorted to using live bait.
 
“Leopards or any other carnivorous get attracted when a live animal is calling out. In the past, the department has tried using various perfumes to attract the big cats. While multiple measures have been tried, this is the one with a relatively high percentage of success,” said the source.