Two conservationists are busy documenting the river to make it as pristine as possible
 
 Worried about the increasing pollution level in Tungabhadra, a team of researchers and conservationists, led by Samad Kottur and Shreyas Sudhindra, has launched a project to document the river.
 
 Wildlife activist and researcher Samad Kottur told BM, “The team is in Chikkamagaluru, collecting information. We have just begun the documentation process from the origin of the river known as Tungamoola [also known as Gangamoola], the birth place of three rivers- Tunga, Bhadra and Netravati. We are also collecting water samples. Since it’s rainy season, there is difficulty in documenting flora and fauna, which will be taken up again post monsoon.”
 
 On how it all began, Samad said, “We are conducting research on Otters through the Otter Conservation Reserve that stretches from Mudlapura village in Koppal till the bridge in Kampli, Hosapet taluk in Ballari district.”
 
 During data collection, they realised that the river was destroyed due to excessive growth of alien invasive species, water hyacinth and Ipomoea.
 
 “The weeds have grown extensively and cover the surface of the water. If the water surface is covered with Ipomoea then no sunlight reaches at the bottom of the river where aquatic submerged plants are there. They produce oxygen utilising sunlight. If no oxygen is produced, all algae will perish. The dissolved oxygen is important. These weeds have resulted in the diminishing rates of fish and microorganisms that are important for aquatic life,” Samad said.
 
 The team said water hyacinth had been growing extensively because of the excessive use of chemical fertilisers. “For areca and coffee cultivation, farmers use fertilizers and chemicals that are washed away from the fields because of rain water and reach the river and reservoir. These help the excessive growth of alien weed.
 
 There are lot of industries and distilleries along the river that release the untreated chemical effluents into the river that results in pollution. There have been cases
 where human sewage too has been released to the river,” said Samod.
 
 “The river is crystal clear from its origin till it reaches the human habitation, however, later during its journey the colour changes and the river turn muddy and dirty. Another major cause of concern is the over-silting in the dam and river. The river has its own cycle and during monsoon the rivers must flood so that it clears the garbage and weeds. Since the government has not released the water in the recent years, excessive weeds are growing and over siltation is taking place,” said Samad.
 He added, “If we have to urge the government to act to protect the river, then there needs to be a study. This is a long journey and a small trailer on the works would be released soon. The team will meet scientists who have conducted research on the river.”
 
 
 STATE’S PRIDE
 
 Tungabhadra flows through Karnataka before flowing along the border between Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. It then joins Krishna river in Andhra Pradesh. Tungabhadra is formed at the confluence of Tunga and Bhadra at Koodli. The two rivers originate in Chikkamgaluru district along with river Netravathi at Gangamoola in Varaha Parvatha at the Western Ghats