With no agency taking up the onus, animal activists plan to conduct raids on stores that sell the lethal threads

With no officials looking into the Chinese manja menace, animal activists who are regularly witnessing birds and animals being injured due to manja, have decided to carry out raids themselves to get to the roots of the issue. They are seeking police help to take action against stores selling manja.

Though the National Green Tribunal (NGT) has imposed a total ban on the non-biodegradable thread for flying kites in 2017, manufacturers are still making them and the thread is easily available in many stores in the city. Activists have been opposing the use of manja as they are dangerous to birds and animals which often get caught in it and some even end up dying. Recently, a techie was also severely injured in Adugodi.

Harish KB, an animal welfare officer, said that activists have written petitions to implement the ban but so far it has not been done. “We get information on stores selling manja in the city and whenever we contact the Forest Department, the officials ask us to reach out to BBMP and they would direct us to health department who would again ask us to speak to BBMP,” he said. He said nobody wants to take the issue up and make the ban stick. “Every day we witness birds being injured due to manja and we feel helpless about it. So we decided to take it upon ourselves and carry out a probe and take police help at the time of raids,” he said.


.
He said they had received information about two stores in Shivajinagar selling the manja for Rs. 1,400 per roll. “On Friday, we met the shopkeeper as a buyer and asked him to show us the pieces. We took photos of the manja and gave him an advance of Rs. 500 and placed an order of 10 rolls to which he easily agreed. Both shopkeepers were supposed to deliver it to us the next day,” he said. By then they informed the police to help them carry out the raid and seize the manja. “The police agreed to help us but, the information was leaked to the shopkeepers and on the next day when we raided the shop, they had got rid of all the manja rolls. We had photos and videos of the manja rolls from the same stores a day before but still, we could not do anything about it,” he said.

Vikash Bafna, an animal activist, said that on a daily basis the wildlife rescue helplines receive 50-plus calls related to manja. “We want to know which department is responsible to implement the manja ban. We are not going to give up. We still have information on other shops which we will be raiding. The shopkeepers get the manja for Rs. 800 and sell it at Rs. 1,400 which is a good profitable price for them. The lives of birds and animals lost due to this does not matter to them and even officials don’t seem to care to implement the ban,” he said. The two along with other volunteers are taking the help from local police and are trying to impose the ban.