A month-long event, the Great Elephant Migration, organised by the Coexistence Collective (a collective of various organisations promoting human-wildlife coexistence) in collaboration with the Forest, Ecology and Environment, and the Horticulture department has been inaugurated. The main attraction of the event will be 100 elephants made of lantana, signifying coexistence, displayed across locations in the city such as lakes, colleges, metro stations and other public spaces that witness heavy footfall with a spotlight on Lalbagh and Cubbon Park.

The event will also comprise a range of activities including photo exhibitions, talks, workshops, nature walks and round table discussions in relation to the exhibition happening across the city. The objective behind these events is to create awareness regarding the understanding of shared spaces between humans and wildlife.
 
Each of the elephants displayed across the city is a replica of a real wild elephant from the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, narrating a story of coexistence. The models of the ‘Lantana Elephants’ have been made by The Real Elephant Collective in India, in partnership with the UK Charity Elephant Family. Close to 150 indigenous people in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka are involved in making Lantana elephants and other crafts. The model elephants have helped in removal of invasive weed forest with the involvement of indigenous communities. They have also been displayed across the world to raise funds to support human-wildlife harmony in India.

Walkers request
“While we welcome your move, we request you to confine the activity to two days, that is Saturday and Sunday,” Umesh Kumar, President of Cubbon Park Walkers Association said in a statement. He added that the organisers must try to reduce the usage of vehicles while setting up the exhibition. “Also, permitting one organisation to have a long term activity will lead to setting a precedent with others too making similar demands. This will not be in the interest of Cubbon Park,” he said.

On the other hand, other regular goers to Cubbon Park said that the park must be utilised for such events, that promote harmony regarding human-wildlife coexistence. “This event must indeed set a precedent for public spaces such as the Cubbon Park to be utilised for promoting events that are in the good light of society. The disruptions caused by such events to regular walkers is not an inconvenience. It is informative, and would encourage many to visit the public park and make use of its amenities,” Fareed Razaq, a park visitor said.