Spotted deer cornered after joint effort by volunteers from 3 different bodies
 
 	In a dramatic rescue in Whitefield, a chital (spotted deer or the Axis axis) that strayed into a residential area was rescued thanks to a joint operation by BBMP forest volunteers, PFA (People for Animals) volunteers and the Forest department staff on Sunday.
 	  	The spotted deer, aged about four years, was first sighted in an eucalyptus grove in a private land opposite a petrol bunk near Kanmangala gate in Kadugodi. It took about three hours for the team to locate and capture the deer. Rescuers said that the chital may have escaped from the nearby Hoskote forest, situated about six kilometers from the place where it was spotted. “It was not an ordinary rescue. The chital may have strayed as food and water goes scarce inside the forest in summer,” C S Nagabhushan, BBMP wildlife volunteer, told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	The BBMP team received a call at around 7.30 in the morning that a chital had been spotted. Nagabhushan immediately rushed to the spot. Chital are agile creatures with strong hind legs and can run up to 40 kmph. Capturing a wild chital single-handedly would have been almost impossible, and so Nagabhushan called in a team of local forest officials and wildlife volunteers for support. A desperate rescue operation was planned in order to beat the eventual onset of Sunday commuters on the busy road that would pose a threat to the creature’s life. It took about two hours for the entire team to gather.
 	  	“It was a vast area and a rescue effort by one or two volunteers was absolutely impossible. So we called in many volunteers and some locals joined our efforts too. We first deployed our volunteers at two exit points of the compound. That was not sufficient as the chital was capable of jumping over the eight-foot compound wall. Preventing its escape from that area was our first challenge as this would not only hamper rescue efforts, but also pose a threat to its life,” said Nagabhushan. Despite the team’s best efforts, the chital escaped.
 	  	Not only did the creature traverse the wall, it jumped over two cars. Luckily for the team, nothing untoward occurred. As the chital entered the basement of an apartment on the other side of the road, the rescue team was quick to move in. “It was a small closed space and the chital ran into the net laid out and was rescued. It was then shifted to PFA shelter,” Nagabhushan said. The chital is currently under observation and PFA has not confirmed the date of its release yet.
 	  	Chital are protected under Schedule III of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972. 
 	  	
 	
 	ANATOMY OF RESCUE
 	
 	 		Spotted Deer also known as Chital
 		 	 		Age: 4year
 		 	 		Origin: Hoskote Forest
 		
 		 			»First spotted in an eucalyptus grove opposite Kanmangala gate at 7 am 
 			
 			 				»Escapes the grove by jumping over the eight-foot compound wall plus two cars parked outside
 				
 				 					»Enters the basement of an apartment on the other side of the road
 					
 					 						»Rescued from the close space of the basement and moved to a PFA shelter