Twenty-two-month-old Rana, a German Sheph-erd who heads the state’s first forest sniffer squad, proved his mettle as he sniffed out teakwood smugglers in Bandipur Tiger Reserve. With wildlife crime – particularly pilfering of wood – on the rise, Karnataka Forest Department had strengthened its investigation wing with the addition of sniffer dogs.
 
 	Investigating personnel came across a log felled by smugglers and left at the site of cutting, either to come back and collect later or because their act was interrupted by the arrival of some forest guard. Rana, who was pressed into service, took one sniff at the log and led the team straight to the house of the alleged smugglers in a nearby hamlet.
 	  	Rana’s tipoff has triggered a probe by the forest department. They are trying to find out how big the gang is and how far their reach is. The department is also hoping to pin down all persons involved in the nefarious activity.
 	  	For Rana, who has been specially trained to detect wildlife crimes at Bhopal’s 23rd Battalion of Special Armed Reserve Forces, the first call came on Friday. It was a case to try and unravel a mystery gang said to be into wood smuggling, which is said to have been often spotted before disappearing after sensing forest department patrols inside the deep forests of Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 	  	The piece of wooden log 1.3 metre long and 0.98 metre in girth, which the cutters left behind, would have gone unreported and undetected like many are unless a strong clue or evidence from CCTV camera emerged. But the
 	sniffer squad changed that.
 	  	At 8 am on Saturday the department’s sniffer squad, which was introduced only last June, was summoned to figure out the mystery of the discovered teakwood log. Rana, who is trained to detect wildlife crimes involving poaching and smuggling of various wildlife products like skin, teeth, claws and meat of the tiger, leopard, deer and the like, apart from smuggling of wood, reached the spot where the log was found and got into the act right away.
 	  	Rana took off from the spot, N Begur range, inside the forest reserve, with the entire team of forest sleuths and sniffer squad following him. As it was Rana’s first case, the sceptical officials did not know what was in store for them.
 	  	“However, after leading them on for two-and-a-half kilometres, Rana stopped at Maladahaadi, a small hamlet with about thirty households. As the surprised villagers looked on, and the forest team hid no curiosity, Rana walked straight into one of the houses in the cluster. The inmates of the house were taken aback,” a source at Bandipur told Bangalore Mirror.
 	  	Rana’s handler, Prakash S Honnakore, took pride in saying, “It was a test for Rana, who is rigorously trained for such jobs, in which he proved his worth. We were surprised as after sniffing the clue, he had to walk for a long distance but still went straight into the house of the suspects.”
 	  	With the department’s suspicion powered by Rana’s detection, and leads pointing to three suspects, whose relatives are said to have exposed the suspects’ involvement in the crime, forest officials have registered a case against them. The forest department is hopeful of apprehending the absconding suspects soon.
 	  	The three accused – Ravi Kumar alias Biliya, 34, Nagaraju alias Naga, 30, and Kutta, 32 – have been booked under various sections of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, which include entering a prohibited sanctuary and destroying wildlife habitat (section 29), and entering a sanctuary with weapons (section 31), which can land the accused behind bars for up to three years if the charges are proved. The accused are also booked under various sections of the Karnataka Forest Act and Karnataka Forest Rules.
 	  	
 	
 	 		A SUPERLATIVE NOSE
 		 	 		It is said that hundreds of millions of sensory neurons in canine nasal cavity make them unique when it comes to sniffing and recognition capabilities. They are capable of identifying every human being by the unique scent s/he bears. A unique nasal airflow pattern developed during sniffing, optimized for odorant transport to highly developed and unique olfactory nerves of nose that gives distinct capability to recognise the faintest scent.