By Melvin Mathew

After the spectacular transformation of the Richmond Circle Flyover, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) plans to take up Karnataka-themed upgrade work on four more flyovers. The project will make use of corporate social responsibility (CSR) funds.

As per the plan, Domlur, Nayandahalli (Mysore Road), KR Puram and Rajajinagar flyovers are next in line.

“We are executing these works by securing CSR funds and the work has been tasked to The Ugly Indian,” said a senior BBMP official.

The Domlur Flyover (the section on Old Airport Road) will be based on the theme of Space and Prof UR Rao, India’s Satellite Man, KR Puram flyover will be based on the theme of Krishna Raja Wodeyar and his contributions, Mysore Road/Nayandahalli Flyover will be based on the theme of Sir M Visvesvaraya, and the Rajajinagar flyover theme has not been finalised yet.

Richmond Circle Flyover (the sections on KH Road, Mission Road and Lalbagh Road) have been completed and are based on the theme of sports heroes of Karnataka.

Between 2019 and 2023, the NGO has done transformation works for three flyovers and nine underpasses.

Work has been carried out at Veeranapalya (ORR) flyover (Karnataka Wildlife), Bhadrappa Layout (ORR) flyover (Bengaluru History), Carmelaram (Sarjapur Road) flyover (Chess), Mehkri Circle (Ambaari), Windsor Underpass (Ganda Bhairunda), Palace Underpass (Royal Mysuru), Kundalahalli Underpass (Birds & Lakes), and HAL Underpass (Aerospace).

Stops misuse
Apart from visual transformation, the design is aimed at acting as a deterrent for misuse of public space. The task the NGO claims is not just about illustrations, but also about design elements and regular maintenance.

“As you go around Bengaluru, you hardly see any symbols of the city’s or state’s pride or identity in public spaces. We felt this absence is a void that needs to be addressed - and we always try to use themes or motifs that create a sense of pride in the citizens. When it comes to underpasses, we have added motifs like Gandabhairunda, Ambaari and the Karnataka state logo (at Mehkri Circle, Windsor, Palace and Dairy Circle Underpasses), a science motif at CNR Underpass, a cricket motif at the Puttenahalli underpass, Aerospace at HAL Underpass, Birds at Kundalahalli and Okalipuram Interchange, and peacocks at Kadugodi. These themes evoke a sense of pride among locals, and create awareness among immigrants about what the city cares about and stands for,” said Arun Pai of India Rising Trust (coordinating organisation of The Ugly Indian).

  .
Public friendly-design
But the chief design officer, India Rising Trust, Aniruddha Abhyankar, also has implemented design changes to allow for a more long-lasting impact of the deterrence. Aspects like 24x7 public access (without grills and bars), well-designed seating and resting places, provision of small footpaths, attractive installations/murals that make them into selfie points, easy-to-maintain public spaces, stealth-proofing, well-lit and regularly maintained, offers public facilities and/or amenities otherwise not available in the area (seating, toilets, rain-sun cover, relaxation places) are included as part of the design.


  .

“ The theme is just one part of the work but for the public to maintain it, we need to create public value for the space. We noticed that when the spaces under the flyover are covered with grills, people are walking on the roads. We decided to keep them accessible for people and provide small footpaths. Irrespective of the utility of the place, there is always some miscreant making a mess. For this, we conduct maintenance three times a day as per requirement. To clear the dust off the flyover, we are using vacuum cleaners instead of brooms. While greenery is laudable, muddy surfaces are harder to maintain, so we cover them with cobblestones,” added Pai.

  We noticed that when the spaces under the flyover are covered with grills, people are walking on the roads. We decided to keep them accessible for people and provide small footpaths— Arun Pai of India Rising Trust

Additionally, keeping the circular economy in mind, most of the material used in transformation is reused. “When BBMP removes paver blocks on footpaths to replace them with new ones, we take the old ones to conduct transformation work,” he added.