Hunting in tiger reserves continues with impunity and sleuths arrested two persons on Tuesday for daring to go after wildlife at Anamalai Tiger Reserve (ATR).   A joint decoy operation by city wildlife sleuths, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) and Anamalai forest officials led them to Sultan (42), a resident of Udumalai, on the outskirts of the reserve.
   The catch He was caught red-handed with two bison heads and deer skin, besides three rifles and live cartridges.    While the bison is protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, deer is protected under Schedule IV. The sleuths also recovered a set of rifle servicing equipment and several live rounds, which they said was evidence that hunting was being carried out inside the reserve.   The accused, who confessed to the crime, said that a forest guard was helping him. Both were arrested in Tamil Nadu and have been booked on several charges under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act since carrying weapons into a tiger reserve is a serious crime.   “The decoy operation was based on a tip-off,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, told Bangalore Mirror. “Forest and wildlife sleuths went in the guise of tribals to zero in on the poacher. The operation went on for over five days till we reached the suspect. WCCB and Anamalai forest officials have taken over the case.”   Always a step ahead Despite the measures by the state and Centre to protect tiger reserves, poachers always seem to be one step ahead.    Less than a year back, some interstate poachers were nabbed before they could strike at BRT Tiger Reserve. And now comes the ATR incident. In fact, Sultan is suspected to have been involved in several other crimes pertaining to poaching in the vicinity.   “He seems to be a professional poacher. Forest officials have recovered some important things. Future investigation will throw light on other crimes too. It has been decided to increase the vigil in the area where the suspect and his gang operated,” a forest official who was part of the operation told Bangalore Mirror.