By Rachana Ramesh

Citizens, experts say other than security and law and order problems, fauna at lakes also face threat due to broken fences

Lake activists have warned that the lack of adequate fencing at Avalahalli may drive out the wildlife which gathers in the vicinity.

Raghvendra Pachhapur, a lake activist, told Bangalore Mirror that while the lake has basic fencing in place, there are many areas that have been left unfenced and sections that have been broken open by miscreants. “There is a guard at the lake to ensure security, but the purpose is defeated when the basic fencing itself has holes, allowing unregulated entry,” Pachhapur said, stressing that the fencing acts as a basic line of defence and must be prioritised by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). He noted that illegal activities such as hunting will likely see a rise if the fencing is not immediately fixed.

On the other hand, the birds which gather in the lake may begin to feel threatened by entry of stray animals such as dogs and cattle. “The stray dogs may not end up killing the birds but the birds will feel threatened enough to not visit the lake again. If the problem is not fixed soon, all the birds will be driven out of the lake. The number of birds in the city has already witnessed a significant fall,” he explained.


 .
Recently, some citizens had also pointed out the design flaw in the inner fencing at the Doddakallasandra lake, allowing the entry of stray dogs into the premises. In this scenario, the fence did not begin from ground up but from a few feet above. Residents and lake activists had then also pointed to the entry of dogs into the lake, which had begun to see various birds, including the oriental darter, painted storks, and black-headed ibis, which have been deemed Near Threatened (NT) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).

Bangalore Mirror in May had also written regarding members and residents of Green Circle living near the lake finding numerous illegal activities taking place in the premises of the lake during night time. Some had alleged that during their night visits, they had found people drinking, and individuals using the pedestrian pathway to learn how to ride. They had also found children fishing and fishermen excessively fishing during day time.

There is a guard at the lake to ensure security, but the purpose is defeated when the fence has holes–Raghvendra Pachhapur, lake activist

Executive Engineer at the lakes department of BBMP, Indrani, told Bangalore Mirror that they have prepared estimates for putting up fencing on the damaged portions as well as the water body. She noted that estimates have been made for other developmental works too. “The work will begin in a month or two,” she said.