We have 200 more tigers than we did 4 years ago — a result of better tech used for counting or a figure that undermines habitat loss?

Wildlife conservationists and experts are divided over the tiger census number released by Prime Minister Narendra Modi at an event in Mysuru as Project Tiger completed 50 years. As per the latest report, the country is now home to 3,167 tigers -- 200 more than we had four years ago.

Some say that the numbers are inflated when seen through the lens of issues related to habitat fragmentation, lack of corridors, rampant mining and other such activities in eco-sensitive zones, and inclusion of one-year-old cubs in the census, others say that the estimation is fairly accurate and can be attributed to latest technologies being used to count the elusive wild cats.

“This number does not make sense considering forest loss and corridor encroachments. Moreover, the census also includes cubs as young as one-year-old. Cubs are vulnerable and their survival rate is very low. Conservationists contested this aspect during the last census and had hoped that it would be rectified. But if you are interested in inflating the numbers, why would you remove it?” said Joseph Hoover, president of United Conservation Movement and former member of the State Wildlife Board.

However, according to other wildlife conservationists, technological advancements have made it possible to track more tigers with better accuracy, which is reflected in the census outcome.

Up until 2012, the big cat population was estimated using the pug mark methodology. However, with the advent of camera traps and smaller gridlines with higher camera density, more and more tigers, which were not seen before, are being tracked now, causing a surge in the number.

Experts claim the census outcome has been improving year after year as the state forest departments have upgraded themselves with the latest technologies.

“With camera traps, the accuracy of tiger census has gone up to nearly 90%. This is even though we have still not explored the pockets of forests outside forest reserves, national parks, and buffer zones. This increase could be because we are now able to spot tigers better. The gridlines now are also much smaller with higher camera trap density, leading to the increase,” said a wildlife conservationist.

While the outcome of the recent tiger census is exciting, experts say the state forest department and the MOEF&CC should work towards maintaining habitat integrity. They sound a word of caution on the required prey base to sustain a healthy tiger population.

According to a tiger prey base study conducted a few years ago, a prey base is vital to sustaining the tiger population and there should be at least around 60 prey bases for every tiger. To uphold such a prey base with tiger numbers going up, grassland conservation comes into the picture.

Habitat loss
However, they point to the issue of grasslands rampantly being converted to monoculture plantations of Acacia and eucalyptus.

“Assuming that the census has estimated the right number, where is the habitat to sustain this growing population? Considering that habitat fragmentation is happening in every forest, mining and other activities are being allowed in critical areas in the name of development, the government should also show the conservation measures that have been taken up to conserve habitat that can sustain a prey base for increasing number of the top predator,” said Dr TV Ramachandra, Centre for Ecological Sciences (CES), Indian Institute of Science (IISc).


 Assuming that the census has estimated the right number, where is the habitat to sustain this growing population?– TV Ramachandra, CES, IISc
Safeguarding corridors connecting forest areas and protecting unguarded forest patches are other ways to ensure a healthy and growing tiger population while bringing down human-tiger conflict cases, say conservationists.

“Currently, we are focusing on elephant corridors which can be fixed since elephants use the same paths to navigate for generations. But for other mammals including herbivores, corridors are missing. We must also start looking at protecting other forested areas too. For instance, there are a lot of hillocks with temples in the Bandipur area that are not accorded the same level of protection due to pushback from temple trusts and the public. We have been trying to get MM Hills declared as a tiger reserve but the file is sitting on CM’s table for over two years owing to such reasons. It is time we take such bold decisions to ensure that the growing tiger number has sufficient habitat,” added the conservationist.