By Shreyashi Mukherjee

Recently rejuvenated water body sees sewage entry once more

The Residents staying near Doddakallasandra Lake are witnessing sewage enter the water body once again. The lake had been rejuvenated not too long ago. Locals say that sewage entry has been a regular occurrence and they want to find a permanent solution to this problem.

They told Bangalore Mirror that despite several complaints, no action had been taken by authorities concerned to resolve the same.

Raghavendra B Pachhapur, working with ActionAid India, said, “Doddakallasandra Lake is home to 354 trees belonging to 42 species, 43 species of plants and shrubs, 37 butterfly species, and 71 bird species (including 11 migratory ones and two near threatened species), according to the ActionAid Association report, 2019. Since lake rejuvenation by the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) in October 2021, the local community has been continuously monitoring the lake for pollution.”

He said they have regularly raised issues that concern water quality in this lake. During the last 12 months, the lake has consistently performed under class D, which is suitable for wildlife and fisheries (Karnataka State Pollution Control Board/KSPCB report), he added.

He also informed that despite the several written complaints to the KSPCB and BBMP, the polluting stream from the adjoining property has not been checked for the last three years. In the last 23 months, six complaints were reportedly made.

Soundararajan, a resident of the area, told BM, “This issue is happening very often. The sewage stagnates and then gets diverted to the lake. The water is most likely coming from the colony nearby. A lot of complaints have been made to the authorities, but no permanent solution has been proposed yet. Yesterday I spotted sewage entering the water body myself, and the water entering the lake was black in colour.”

If a permanent solution is not put forth and sewage entry is not arrested, the entire ecosystem of the lake will be destroyed– Resident
Another resident spoke about how sewage entering the lake is hampering the water quality. If a permanent solution is not put forth and sewage entering the lake is not arrested, the entire ecosystem will be destroyed, they said. “Marine life will also not be able to survive.
 
The authorities should take immediate action given the fact that the lake was rejuvenated very recently,” they added.

Meanwhile, a BBMP official said that the water entering the lake was not sewage. They said that it was water that was used for washing.