Primate trouble: Relocation of around 40 macaques has raised the heat

It is man versus wildlife in Basavanagudi, South Bengaluru. Thanks to the menace caused by the monkeys who has made the neighbourhood their home, some residents of Srinivasa Nagar have complained to their local MLA Ravi Subramanya who in turn, wrote a letter to Forest Department officials to relocate around 40 Macaques in and around Basavanagudi and Banashankari to the wild Kaggalipura forests.
 
When officials did so, this decision did not go down well with wildlife activists who are now up-in-arms against the relocation and have even approached the chief conservator of forests at the Forest Department’s headquartered office in Malleswaram.
 
“Monkeys tamper with or turn on and off the taps on the terraces of apartment buildings which is connected to individual flats from the overhead tanks,” said a resident of Srinivasa Nagar who wished to remain anonymous. “They get into our living space and cause a nuisance. They snatch bags thinking that they are eatables and threaten children with their unusual sounds. They also take away clothes that are put up for drying after washing and tamper with the dish television antennas on the terrace for which we have to call the customer care who charge us, but again, the monkeys come and disrupt the dish antennas,” the resident added.
 
Wildlife activist Arun Prasad says that Macaques have evolved themselves to be a part of urban habitat as many people feed food to them for religious purposes. “It’s a battle between two groups of people in Srinivasa Nagar in Basavanagudi: one who feed the monkeys and the others who think they are a nuisance,” Prasad told Bangalore Mirror.
 
“They have built their territory in Srinivasa Nagar and cannot be dislocated to any other place such as Kaggalipura forest as easily as they would have territorial issues with the wildlife already present there.

 Monkey see monkey doThe high court recently directed the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike and forest department to chart a plan to protect both the residents and monkeys, and ensure the macaques return to their natural habitat.
 
“These macaques are dependent on urban habitat solely for their food, and the other so-called nuisances that the residents complain of are because of their own behaviour, Prasad reiterates.
 
“When one intimidates a monkey, it would get scared, annoyed, and act in their defence and that cannot be termed as nuisance. They are just in search of food and once they get their food, they mind their own business,” Prasad added.
 
Colonel Nawaz, a chief veterinarian working with the People For Animals (PFA) Hospital in Uttarahalli near Kengeri says there is not much awareness created on co-existence of such wildlife in urban habitat. “It’s just a difference of opinion between two groups of people in the society which leads to decisions such as this - relocation of a wildlife herd - macaques,” Nawaz told Mirror.


 It’s a battle between two groups of people in Srinivasa Nagar: one who feed the monkeys and others who think they are a nuisance­–Arun Prasad, wildlife activist 
A group of wildlife activists headed by Arun Prasad and Nawaz approached the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest Vijay Kumar Gogi, IFS about the order of relocation from the local forest department office. “He said that he would take necessary steps to look into the complaints by the residents and suitably modify the order,” Kumar said.
 
Senior forest officials also hinted that this is not the problem of monkeys, but the conflict of interest between two groups of humans.
 
The grievances reached the local MLA Ravi Subramanya’s office who wrote to the forest department.