Necropsy delay leaves questions on cause of death

Now and then, we hear about urban wildlife and human conflict resulting in endangering scheduled species. In yet another incident, two monkeys were discovered in the city – one was found dead and another in a critical state -- and they are suspected to have been poisoned.

The sick monkey later died. Arun Prasad, an animal activist, said he learnt about the incident on Monday night and started to follow up with the officials to know the status of the second monkey and if they had shifted it for postmortem.

Though the SOP says the postmortem should be conducted at the earliest, the confusion in identifying jurisdictions resulted in a delay of over 60 hours. He said, “On Sunday, one monkey was found dead on the ledge of a window of an apartment in Basaveshwarnagar and another monkey was found ill. Volunteers of People for Animals (PfA) arrived and rescued the monkey, but it succumbed later. It was clear that both the monkeys were poisoned.” He said the dead monkey’s postmortem was carried out immediately but the rescued monkey’s postmortem was delayed. 

“The monkey was rescued from North Bengaluru but it died in the South, which led to the confusion. On Wednesday, the forest department of Kaggalipura Range took the monkey into its custody and shifted it for postmortem. The delay in carrying out postmortem could result in affecting the results as the poison content will get dissolved. We need to follow a clear SOP to avoid such delays,” he said.


   Postmortem of the monkeys is completed. We are waiting for the results to ascertain the cause of the death. Preliminary investigation reveals that the older monkey is the mother which had died two days ago when we found her while the younger one displayed fatigue and weakness before death. Once we receive the PM report confirming poisoning, we will approach the police for further investigation. Till date there have been no instances of poisoning in the city as they are worshipped by most people. There has been no much delay in PM and we can still trace the poison,—Ravishankar SS, DCF Bengaluru Urban

A volunteer said earlier too in poisoning cases, the postmortem was delayed and they could not prove that the monkey was poisoned as the stomach contents had decomposed. “The forest department must act quickly and not delay wildlife cases. The police must act quickly and probe to trace the people behind it,” he said.
Navaz Shariff, General Manager of PfA, said they got a call for rescue on Sunday and their team brought the monkey for treatment and rehabilitation but it died on Sunday night. “The monkey had symptoms of poisoning and we immediately alerted the forest department to handle the case,” he said.

Manjunath, Range Forest Officer, said recently a dead monkey was found and its body had decomposed before they shifted it for the postmortem. “The monkey had died two to three days ago. The cause of death is yet to be ascertained,” he said.

Dr Prayag HS, assistant professor and chief wildlife vet, said that in any poisoning case, postmortem has to be done as soon as possible and the delay would affect the detection of poison. He said, “Fresher the carcass, better the results. Maximum they can extend is between 36 hours to 72 hours depending on the method used for detection. Forensic samples of the stomach content, liver and kidney should be immediately sent to the toxicology lab.”