By Melvin Mathew

Residents of a gated community in Mahadevapura are in a tussle with the residents’ welfare association (RWA) members over feeding of strays. Animal activists have said the RWA is acting in an unconstitutional manner and its members must be suspended.

It is said that the RWA members are discouraging the feeding of strays citing an increase in their population. Animal lovers also alleged that some people have been throwing the food kept for stray animals in the drain.

Rajesh (name changed), a long-time resident of the apartment complex, spoke to BM. “We have several community cats and some people feed them. But some others have started a campaign to make the neighbourhood cleaner and are trying to stop feeding of strays. They say that BBMP rules don’t apply here and are forcing us to starve them. We approached the RWA and they said that BBMP rules don’t apply within gated communities.”

Residents say that the feeders are being harassed online and that is causing them mental distress. “Animal lovers have been feeding stray animals but those against them have been harassing them over mail and WhatsApp groups. Sometimes, the language used by the opposers also gets derogatory. We have been completely forbidden from feeding the strays. The bowls kept for strays have been turned over,” said another resident.

One person told BM that they had been asked to not feed cats. “The RWA says that cats must not be fed as they are multiplying in numbers and defecating in the gardens. Feeders are being shamed and told that the cat litter will be dumped in their houses,” said another resident.

Animal activists say that feeding stray animals is a constitutional responsibility and it does apply to gated communities.

“There is no rule and in fact, it’s our duty to feed stray animals. There is a Delhi court order placing the onus of feeding the strays on the premises of the RWAs. Why are individuals struggling when it’s the responsibility of RWAs? There is no rule about removing domestic animals from the area. As per the animal birth control, it envisages sterilisation of cats and dogs. The residents can write to the Registrar of Societies to derecognise the RWA. The office-bearers should be suspended and new members should be reelected,” said animal activist, Nevina Kamath.

Arun Prasad, a Bengaluru Urban District SPCA member, told BM that as per SWM rules, due to door-to-door collection, strays are struggling to find food. “As per Article 51 A(g) of the constitution, citizens must take care of the environment, and wildlife. Under SWM rules, wet and dry waste is being collected house-to-house and now stray animals and birds are struggling to get food. No RWA can impose rules against feeding strays and bylaws can be cancelled by writing to the Register of Societies. As per ABC rules 2023, clearly places the responsibility of taking care of stray animals on RWAs, apartment owners association or local authorities.”