Long after the gruesome incident in Chikmagalur, man ends up in police net while trying to sell the big cat’s skin
 	
 The city police, with the help of forest officials, have cracked an eight-year-old tiger poaching case while investigating a recent tiger skin seizure. The case has also helped the forest officials gather more information on poaching in and around Masakali near the Bhadra tiger sanctuary in Chikmagalur. 

 	 		Chennammanakere Achchukattu police led by inspector B K Shekhar arrested Hidayatullah, 28, a resident of Ramanagaram on June 9. He was trying to sell tiger skin near Kathriguppe bus stand. 	

 	 		“He has revealed how a snare put to capture wild boar, which is a practice in estates abutting forests near Bhadra sanctuary, ended up trapping a tiger. However, instead of either informing forest staff or trying to rescue the trapped tiger, the man, who worked in the estate, left it like that. 	

 	 		“He has revealed how the tiger suffered for more than two days in the trap. Later, he called another friend and shot it dead. The duo managed to skin it. The injury the tiger suffered due to the snare was so bad that its skin and muscles were damaged,” the source added. 	

 	 		“When the accused was taken into police custody for further questioning, the whole sequence came out and we could reach the scene of crime,” a police official told Bangalore Mirror. “While the one involved in the hunting is arrested, the other, who was part of it and had shot the tiger, is absconding.” 	

 The accused, who left his village in Chikmagalur district with the skin, had tanned it well for preservation, and hid it all these years. “Police officials had come and the accused revealed details of the incident that had occurred at the estate, which is about 3 kilometres away from the tiger reserve. It is a place frequented by animals inside the wildlife sanctuary. We will take out our records to trace the tiger’s details,” Ramprasad, ACF (assistant conservator of forest), Chikmagalur told Bangalore Mirror. 

 “The early progress made in the case is welcome, as the police put an extra effort, reached the scene of crime and closed the loop,” Sharath R Babu, former honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban, said.