On the occasion of World Environment Day, Bengalureans pitched in to raise global awareness and take positive environmental action to protect nature and the planet
 
 
 
 	GO WILD FOR LIFE
 	  	This year’s theme for WED – Go Wild for Life – encourages you to celebrate all those species under threat and take action of your own to help safeguard them for future generations. This can be about animals or plants that are threatened within your local area as well as at the national or global level - many local extinctions will eventually add up to a global extinction! Whoever you are, and wherever you live, show zero-tolerance for the illegal trade in wildlife in word and deed, and make a difference.
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	100 km ride for the environment
 	
 	 		About 40 members of Mangalore Bicycle Club celebrated World Environment Day by pedaling 100 kms from Mangalore to Udyavara and return. Out of 40 members, 20 were doing their first 100 kms and contributed their bit to the environment. Despite humid weather, all riders enjoyed their ride to the fullest for the cause they were cycling for.
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		
 		 	 		The message was loud and clear to all members, and the members pledged to continue their support to environment-friendly causes in every step they take. Members of Mangalore Bicycle Club have been observing car-free day every second Saturday of the month since October 2015. At Katpadi, members of MBC met Udupi Cycling Club members during their morning ride.
 		 	 		
 		Once in Udupi, MBC members were invited by the management of St Francis Xavier’s church to visit their newly-built church. The church was recently built adopting environment-friendly methods like rainwater harvesting and efficient usage of electricity. The beautiful statue of Jesus on the dome of the church is sculpted by one of the club’s member Ashwath Rasquinha. This was a unique, educative and environment-friendly ride for Mangalore Bicycle Club members and all of us loved it, said Ganesh Nayak of the Mangalore Bicycle Club.