By Prakash VL

If you are travelling to Coimbatore, Sathyamangalam and Kerala via Dhimbam Ghat, then you may not be able to travel at night. Following a directive from Madras High Court, the night ban on Dhimbam Ghat kicks off from Thursday.

The night ban has evoked mixed reactions. While the green activists welcome this, the locals are opposing this as this is a key road that connects Bengaluru and Mysuru to nearby areas. For those travelling from Bengaluru via Kollegal and Chamarajanagar towards Coimbatore, this is the key road connecting to the neighbour State. As many long-distance travellers use this road, many of them prefer to travel at night.
 
G Chandan, a Bengaluru-based techie said, “As this is a contiguous forest, wildlife crossing is quite common and frequent vehicular crossing on this road is certain to create disturbances to the wildlife. Hence, I welcome this ban order.”

In January last week, the Madras High Court had directed the NHAI to consider prohibiting vehicular movement between 9 pm to 6 am on NH-958, which passes via Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve (STR). This was done to prevent wildlife deaths caused by road accidents in STR. Statistics show that during the last 10 years (2012-2021), around 152 wild animals including three leopards were killed on this stretch. It was also brought to the notice of the court that many drivers were not adhering to speed limits. The road between Thengumarahada and Bannari Main Road runs into the core area, which falls within STR and 30 per cent of tigers move in and around the area. The area is also considered as a breeding place for tigers and other wildlife animals. The judges said that as the area was vulnerable where the wild animals were supposed to move freely. In 2019, the Erode Collector had issued an order banning night traffic which was then challenged in the court. Chinnanajaswamy, a businessman said, “This road is used to supply vegetables frequently. Most of the transport happens during the night times and night travel will affect our business.”

V Prabhakar, president, Chamarajanagar District Commerce and Industries’ Association said, “The night ban could lead to many issues. As Bannari Ghat is one of the dangerous roads, the vehicles travel at a slow speed and hence they will be very cautious of any animal movement.” Currently, there is a night travel ban on the Bandipur stretch and some of them would take the Sathyamangalam route as a detour in the night. Now, with this road being out of bounds, many locals feel cut off from the inter-state travel at night