By Hemanth C S

Airport operator is looking for a consultant to take up this project near T2

Passengers at Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) will have much to look forward to once the new terminal (T2) comes to be – and we don’t just mean metal birds, but the actual ones too. Authorities are planning to set up an aviary near T2 that will be home to a variety of bird species. Once established, it would be the first such facility in any Indian airport. 

Aviaries are large enclosures where birds are displayed. Unlike cages, in an aviary, birds can fly around in a setup that resembles their natural habitat, usually consisting of plenty of plants, trees and small water bodies. 

Bangalore International Airport Ltd (BIAL), which operates KIA, has issued a Request For Proposal (RFP) seeking to appoint a consultant who can give “Design Consultancy Services” for the aviary in the proposed new terminal at the airport.

“BIAL is in the process of finalising the design for T2. One of the features proposed in this design is an aviary,” a BIAL spokesperson told Bangalore Mirror.

“The RFP has been put out seeking the services of a consultant who can guide us in crystallising the idea and support BIAL through the development of the [aviary] – taking into consideration various aspects related to its setting up and maintenance,” the official added.

The proposed aviary will meet environment norms and specifications set by the government while also abiding by the local and global aviation regulatory requirements.

Outlining the scope of work to the consultant, the RFP states: “Designing of Bird Aviary Enclosures/ environment as per Central/ State government norms and specifications. All the enclosures design to specify proper viewing area of visitor or visitors’ gallery wherever applicable. Ensure the overall proposed design meets the local and aviation regulatory requirements, (like ADRM norms, IATA etc.) And codes, as applicable.”

The official said that RFP is not part of the Wildlife Management System of the airport. Besides, the species of birds that would be part of the aviary too have not been decided. As per the RFP, the consultant will have to suggest suitable vendor for BIAL to procure the birds, local or exotic.

The new terminal

Design approvals for T2 began in 2017 and it is expected to be operational by 2021.

US architectural firm Skidmore, Owings & Merrill (SOM) has designed the terminal, while Turner International will be the Project Management Consultant for this project. 

T2 will be constructed in two phases; in the first phase, it will cater to 25 million passengers annually, while the second phase of the project will add another 20 million passengers to its capacity. 

It is estimated that on the completion of both phases of T2, the airport’s overall capacity would reach 65 million.


IRONICALLY…

Bird movement in the vicinity of any airport is a nightmare as bird strikes can cause damage to aircraft and endanger lives. The proposed aviary, as per the RFP, would be an enclosure, which will ensure that the birds cannot fly out and come in the flight path.

BIAL has a wildlife controller who is designated to keep a constant vigil on stray animals (if any) or birds entering the airside. A trained team of birdwatchers and bird chasers are deployed with bird hazing kit at the identified critical bird-crossing locations in the airfield on a routine basis.