A day after the partly eaten body of a 50-year-old man was found inside the Bandipur Tiger Reserve, the forest officials are starting an awareness campaign in villages abutting the reserve. The campaign will entail week-long street plays by a skit team from Mysore.
 
Bandipur Tiger Reserve director Ramesh Kumar informed that the team will work along with village panchayat members and will perform awareness skits across nearly 200 villages in the area.

“The street play team is being brought from Mysore and it will perform 4-5 skits every day for a week in 20 villages in and around the area. In the past, we have conducted these skits in the Hediyala Wildlife Range but it is the first time such an awareness campaign is being organised in the Kundakere Range as no such incident was reported in the past. We will be involving panchayat members for better outcomes. The campaign will communicate to the villagers that they should not enter the forest area and when they have to, they must do so in a group. Big cats are shy and generally do not like to encounter human beings. So if a group of humans is passing by, they would never attack,” said Kumar.

Bandipur forest officials also informed that ten camera traps have been installed to confirm whether the attack was by a tiger or a leopard.

“We put up ten camera traps on Wednesday to understand if it was a tiger or a leopard. We have also collected hair samples from the spot and sent them for analysis,” added Kumar.

The body of the shepherd was discovered on Tuesday evening after a two-day-long search. Basavaiah, a tribal from the area, was untraceable after he entered the forest on Sunday morning to collect firewood. After he did not return home by the evening, his family members along with some villagers launched a search, which was also joined by officials from Karnataka Forest Department.
 
His half-devoured body was found on a hillock on Tuesday evening. This was the third death recorded in the Bandipur area in the last month. On November 24, Rathnamma, a 50-year-old woman, was killed by a tiger in Nanjangud taluk under Hediyala Wildlife Range in Bandipur Tiger Reserve. The second incident was that of Balaji Nayaka, a resident of Kadabeguru village, who was killed by another tiger in the Moleyur Wildlife Range on November 6.

According to wildlife activists, while the Karnataka Forest Department has conducted such awareness programs in the past, it should be a continuous process given the recent surge in human-wildlife conflict cases.
 
“The forest department should educate the villagers by creating awareness. Not that awareness programs have not been conducted by the department in the past, but it has to be a continuous process. Moreover, villagers and farmers living around forest patches and tiger reserves must also act responsibly. Entering the forest and covering a distance of almost two kilometres inside the forest is inviting trouble,” said Joseph Hoover, former State Board for Wildlife member and founder of the United Conservation Movement and Charitable Trust.