The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) forest cell volunteers, who usually get rescue calls for snakes and trapped birds, have now begun getting calls from people, complaining about bats on fruit trees. This comes after reports that bats might be carriers of the coronavirus and responsible for animal to human transmission. Fuelled by fear and rumour, people have been calling to request the BBMP to remove bats or even cut the fruit trees where they reside.

According to an article published in the Economic Times on April 15, a first-if-its kind study by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has found the presence of a different kind of coronavirus -- bat coronavirus (BtCoV) -- in two bat species from Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Puducherry and Tamil Nadu.

 However, according to the study, there is no evidence or research to claim that these bat coronaviruses can cause disease in humans, said Dr Pragya D Yadav, Scientist at the National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune and also the first author of study. “These bat coronaviruses have no relation with SARS-CoV2 responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic,” Yadav said, adding that Pteropus bat species were earlier found positive for Nipah virus in 2018 and 2019 in Kerala.

R Sharath Babu, wildlife advisor to BBMP, says it seems people have a lot of time on their hands and are now taking the time to observe nature, which includes bats. “People call up the BBMP control room to report their findings and expect wildlife volunteers to act like pest control workers,” said Babu.

Complaints about bats have increased, especially after the flying mammal’s link to Coronavirus being reported in the media.

An email complaint from a netizen to the BBMP head office stated that his neighbour’s Sapota (Chickoo) tree was frequently visited by bats. “The bat’s excreta falls on our house and clothes in addition to the half-eaten fruits by these bats are dropped into our premises,” the complaint states.

The complainant alleges that this is a huge life risk for him and his family due to these Nipah virus-carrying fruit bats. He also goes on to state that his family and he have been living with this risk for the past 23 years. “Please have that tree removed,” the letter concludes.

A wildlife volunteer has been trying to counsel the complainant that if for 23 years, he had no problems, it would continue to be the same for the rest of his life as bats do not spread Coronavirus.

One of the forest cell volunteers received a call from a chief engineer working with the same civic authority. The resident of Vijayanagar wanted bats to be removed from a tree in his neighbour’s house. The volunteer had to counsel him for at least 20 minutes to make him understand that was not a Covid-19 risk.

Another man in his twenties from Vasanth Nagar called up the wildlife volunteers to complain that bats were frequenting his balcony during evenings and nights and demanded that the volunteers do something about it because the bats could spread deadly viruses. The volunteer again had to explain to the man that though Coronavirus is found in two bat species, they are incapable of affecting human beings adversely.

Advice from BBMP

When to call BBMP’s wildlife volunteers and rescue staff YES: If any reptile or a bat has accidentally entered your house or if anyone has been bitten by a reptile, animal or a bat NO: If you spot a bat in the neighbourhood, flying around your house or resting in a tree