By Ikram Khan

Shivajinagar pet shop owner lands in judicial custody after dept claims that his silver pheasants are of the Himalayan variety

Most pet shops owners in the city are up in arms after four officers from the forest wing of the Criminal Investigation Department (CID) raided a pet shop in Shivajinagar and picked up two male Silver Pheasants, pointing out that trading of Indian Pheasants is illegal as per the Wildlife Protection Act. 

The CID forest wing also slapped a case of theft on the owner, Shakil Hannan, claiming he had poached the two Silver Pheasants from the wild.

Hannan, in his bid to convince the forest wing, produced documents to show that the two birds were Chinese Pheasants and not the Himalayan Indian Pheasants and that he had bought the exotic species from a top local Pheasants breeder. The authorities, however, filed an FIR at the Shivajinagar police station and confiscated the two birds. Following the theft charge, a non-bailable offence, Hannan is now in judicial custody.

“I produced the purchase receipt of the two Pheasants I had bought from a local breeder in February and they refused to acknowledge it. I produced all the documents including a couple of letters from Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden of Karnataka and Dr RL Singh, Chief Wildlife Warden, Uttar Pradesh, certifying that the Silver Pheasant is neither Indian nor migratory bird as per the Wildlife Protection Act and there is no restriction on the trading of these species and that the wildlife office has no objection to their movement by road, rail or air to other places. They dismissed the certification copies and booked a case.”

A couple of big pet shop owners disclosed it is a clear case of wrong identification of birds. The forest wing contend that it is an Indian Pheasant but it actually is a Chinese Pheasant. A breeder of exotic Pheasants said the authorities may have identified it as Khalij Indian Pheasant and slapped a case. But he made it clear that the forest wing has got it wrong. The legs of the Khalij Indian Pheasants are grey or brown and only the Chinese Silver Pheasants have red legs, and as the two confiscated Pheasants have red legs, it is clear they are Chinese Silver Pheasants and do not come under the Wildlife Protection Act. It is a case of wrong or false identification and it should have been withdrawn after the owner had produced valid documents and certificates proving that the Silver Pheasants in his shop were not the Indian Pheasants.




  bird 2 



“It is surprising that not one forest wing officer could differentiate the Chinese Silver Pheasant from the Indian Pheasant,” said a leading pet shop owner. 

A couple of years ago, the CID forest wing had raided poultry shops selling Japanese Quails, claiming that the Indian Quail comes under the Wildlife Protection Act. But when the quail breeders pointed out that the birds bred are Japanese quails and the Animal Husbandry Department supports breeding of Japanese Quails for bird meat, the cases were withdrawn.

Hannan, now in judicial custody, said: “It is unfair. We are trading only in exotic species and don’t touch the Indian birds. As for the Pheasants, all across India only Rheeves Pheasant, Silver Pheasant, Golden Pheasant, and Lady Amherst Pheasant are bought and sold. No one dares to buy or sell any Himalayan Indian Pheasant. About the theft case against me, I can tell you that I’m only a pet shop owner, not a bird poacher.” He hopes to get a bail and clear all charges on Monday.