Concealed under hay was the perennial grass worth several crores
 
 
 	Is use of cane banned in Karnataka? This was the question that haunted many when the vigilant staffers of Kali Tiger Reserve came across a truckload of raw cane being transported to neighbouring Goa. While patrolling the reserve, the forest department officials seized the truck full of cane bundles perhaps for the first time in the history of the reserve. Loaded with paddy grass from outside, the truck had several crore rupees worth cane hidden inside that was being smuggled into the Goan border to meet the demands of the furniture industry both from in India and abroad.
 	
 	  	While it was common for KFD staffers to arrest poachers and timber smugglers, it came as a big surprise to them when they got to know that even cane grass was being targeted by smugglers. “It was uncommon in and around Dandeli to see anybody smuggling or illegally transporting cane sticks. However, now and then there were reports that a few are resorting to illegal extraction and transport of cane. Since then we stepped up our vigilance and were constantly on the lookout for such culprits. Till date no case has been registered or no incident of seizure of cane reported in the department in and around Dandeli,” K Srinivasulu, chief conservator of forests and director of KTR, who lead the operation told BM.
 	 

 	Extraction of any timber is prohibited
 	
 	  	Giving details about the operation Srinivasulu said, “Extraction of any timber is not allowed from wildlife areas particularly national parks. There could have been such practises when the area was under territorial division. This is for the first time that we have caught such a huge quantity of cane being smuggled and seized the truck and the bundles of canes. Santosh Narayana Velipa, 32, who was in the truck was arrested and produced before a magistrate. A case was registered and investigation is on.” Another accused Mani Takku Lambori is still at large and hunt is on to nab the culprit.
 	
 	  	Officials comprising ACF Ashok Gonde of Kumbar-wada Wildlife Subdivision, SH Poojara, RFO of the subdivision along with other staffers recovered close to 8,500 cane sticks tied into bundles of different sizes. The accused revealed that the cane was being transported to Goa, which would later be supplied to furniture dealers.
 	 

 	Cane export is banned
 	
 	  	Sources in the KFD confirmed to BM that export of cane for any purpose is banned considering its endemic nature. Giving details of the grass, AC Lakshmana, IFS (Rtd), former secretary to Government of Karnataka said, “Export of cane is banned in India. The cane is grown in damp soil in the rich areas of biodiverse Western Ghats. Today, it is found in patches in the evergreen forests of Western Ghats in Uttara Kannada and Udupi. Considering its endemic status and wide requirement in the handicraft industry, it is allotted in quota to artisans on a yearly basis. But those smitten by greed resort to these kinds of illegal acts and such people must be meted out hefty fines and imprisonment.”
 	
 	  	According to officials, cane is one of the tall perennial grass species with flexible and woody stalks. Depending on its strength, cane sticks of different diameter are used in the furniture industry, musical instruments and other artistic purposes.