Wildlife officials crack whip on NGOs, individuals suspected of violating regulations
 
 
 Of all things, catching snakes is becoming popular in the city, to the alarm of ecologists. So much so that the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), which is probing reptile trade in different parts of country, thinks there is a connection between the two. It is closely scanning individuals, NGOs and groups involved in wildlife conservation. 

 	WCCB has sought details from city wildlife sleuths about two techies who were arrested last month for illegally keeping snakes including four cobras, two Russell’s vipers and a Kukri in their houses in HSR Layout. The duo who work in a reputed city-based IT firm were booked under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA) on charges of hunting reptiles that are protected under the act. 

 One of the two arrested had a Facebook page called ‘Amateur snakecatch’ and had posted pictures of the catch, which is illegal. 

 	While catching snakes is increasing being taken up as a hobby, especially by working professionals, reptile trade that involves sale of skins and venom is also on the rise. Officials of WCCB are procuring details of people who catch and ‘rescue’ snakes in their trail of the larger issue of reptile trade, to investigate the correlation. 

 	Easy access to grab sticks, which are used to catch reptiles, through online shopping platforms is making it easy for people to indulge in what seems an adventurous hobby. But catching rat snakes, vipers and cobras isn’t child’s play, for they are listed as protected in Schedule II of IWLPA. 

 	Catching snakes and other wild animals and reptiles and then posting those pictures on social networking sites is becoming a fad, necessitating the close monitoring, according to SRV Murthy, WCCB regional deputy director. “Only a person or agency registered with the forest department and granted such permission can rescue snakes. But many young chaps in Bengaluru have developed an enthusiasm for catching snakes, and go about catching these reptiles. They shouldn’t be doing this, as it is illegal. A person caught catching snakes illegally is liable for punishment under Section 9 of IWLPA since it amounts to poaching,” he said. 

 	“We have been doing it (monitoring) as a number of so-called NGOs are working on wildlife issues and Bengaluru city is witnessing a rise in illegal wildlife activities,” he added. 

 	“The very fact that WCCB has sought information on wildlife activities in the city points to an alarming trend. So far, those into it were warned. Two techies were recently arrested by the police. A software engineer died last year while trying to catch a snake. We have provided information of over 50 people who are into such activities. Based on WCCB directives, complaints will be lodged and cases booked against these people,” Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore urban told Bangalore Mirror.