Instead of releasing a monitor lizard deliberately rendered immobile by poachers who broke its limbs into the wild, the BBMP’s wildlife team is taking steps to heal it first, so that the animal survives.    The monitor lizard, a species protected under schedule I of Indian Wildlife Protection Act, was rescued last month from Subramanyanagar after residents spotted it in a bag. It was over three and a half feet long and weighed more than a kilogram. Its hind limbs had been broken to make it immobile.   After two weeks of treatment, a team of orthopedic experts on Sunday carried out surgery on the reptile’s left hind limb, using an external splint fixator. The process, similar to that conducted on humans, went on for six hours and it took two four-inch pins and four bolts to fix the broken bone. The rare procedure will be repeated on the right hind limb of the lizard next week.   “The procedure was conducted by a team of three wildlife experts and was similar to that done on humans. It will take at least two months for each limb to recover. Once the broken bones join, the animal will become as fit as it was in the past,” said Shreeram N, a wildlife expert.   “Usually, rescued animals are released into forests after giving first aid as they found in a dehydrated and stressed state. But in this case, the reptile was badly injured,” said Sharath R Babu, honorary wildlife warden, Bangalore Urban.   Once the animal recovers, it will be made to undergo a session of physical exercises to help it move with ease. “We will release the lizard once it is fit is able to move as swift as it did before its capture,” Sharath said.    Officials suspect the lizard was a victim of wildlife trade as there is a myth that its flesh boosts sexual performance. “We urge people to not to believe in myths attached to such wildlife. Besides putting the lives of such animals in risk, it will encourage the illegal trade,” Sharath added.
 
         Once the animal recovers, it will be made to undergo a session of physical exercises to help it move with ease      SHARATH R BABU, HONORARY WILDLIFE WARDEN