After coming under fire for the death of its tigers caught in snares, the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) led a major combing operation across Kodagu’s many coffee estates bordering Nagarahole Tiger Reserve. They removed no less than 100 snares laid down, presumably by estate labourers, to capture wild boars and small mammals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Two tigers were found dead in south Kodagu last week after getting strangulated in these traps. The officials suspected that there could be many more such traps, and set out on a combing operation to remove them, led by Chief Wildlife Warden BG Hosmath.
 
 “Two days of relentless work by our men resulted in the removal of more than 100 snares. Combing operation in Anechowkur and Thithimathi found 31 snares, in Kallahalla and Ponnampet area there were 23 snares. Between Nanachhi Gate and Kallahalla, a whopping 67 snares were removed. All these places are abutting Nagarahole and Brahmagiri Wildlife Sanctuary in south Kodagu,” said Hosmath.
 
 This large-scale recovery of snares has not only left KFD officials in shock but also called for serious talks with the coffee planters and estate owners of South Kodagu.
 
 “We called all the estate owners and held a meeting about the recent tragic incidents. All of them have been directed to look for such snares and remove them immediately from the limits of their property. We have also informed them that allowing snares within their boundaries that result in the death of a wild animal would lead to imprisonment and hefty fine under various clauses of the Wildlife Act. We have also undertaken a declaration from them that they’ll remove such snares and not allow poaching in any part of their estate,” said Hosmath.
 
 Sources in KFD said usually labourers in coffee estates would lay these snares at crucial passages where there is increased movement of mammals and cats during night time, especially wild boars. “Once caught, the panicked animal tries to escape, which only tightens the noose around its neck, killing it,” a conservator said.
 
 TIGERS TO LEOPARDS
 
 After the many tiger deaths in the state in the last few weeks, the state is now losing its leopards. As many as four leopards have died in the last four to five days in different parts of the state. One died in Nanjangud taluk while trying to prey on a porcupine, the other three were found dead under mysterious circumstances. Two others died of electrocution on January 25 on the outskirts of a village bordering Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary.
 
 Yet another leopard was found dead under mysterious conditions near Vittalpura village in Ballari circle.
 
 Sources in the Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary told BM that pictures of dead leopards were doing rounds on social media with one of them partially buried at a field nearby.
 
 “Initially, it appeared to be hushing up case as the leopard was partially buried. Interestingly, the KFD too has not registered any cases.
 
 Initial analyses of the carcass revealed that the leopards died due to electrocution. Even though it is illegal to draw electricity to the fence, farmers all along the border of Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary are resorting to it. Forest officials are neither listening to their grievances nor cracking down on poachers or miscreants,” alleged a wildlife activist.
 
 Reacting to leopards’ death, BG Hosmath said: “The department, like in the case of tiger deaths, has taken the matter seriously and directed all range officials to report the deaths in their jurisdictions and register a case. We are closely monitoring the situation and will initiate action against miscreants who come in the way of
 conservation.”