By Bellie Thomas

Shriram Samruddhi Apartments’ residents’ welfare association says forest dept approved relocation of trouble-stirring monkeys at residential complex, but animal lovers, activists suspect perfidious intents

Residents of Shriram Samruddhi Apartments on Varthur Main Road addressed the monkey menace hauting their homes with the apartment complex’s residents’ welfare association, whose inquiries zeroed in on four monkeys that have been stirring trouble at the apartment complex. The association recently sent an e-mail to residents stating they have secured the approval of the forest department to relocate the monkeys. This raised eyebrows; the apartment complex is also home to animal lovers and pet parents. Wildlife activists wonder how the forest department gave such approval against the guidelines of the Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI).

Facility manager Umar told BM the monkeys usually sneak into homes through kitchen doors and steal food. They also hide in the narrow duct and utility cable passageways and frequent the terrace and meddle with water connections. He said, whenever plumbers go to the terrace, they jump on them to scare them away.

Recently, a monkey dropped an empty tender coconut on a car’s windshield, which broke. Then the monkeys kept repeating it and other vehicles got dented, Umar said, quoting a resident.
 
However, the animal lovers in the apartment complex explained the monkeys create problems only when they are hungry, annoyed or irritated. On a full stomach, the animals behave themselves and their business, they maintained.

The association’s email to the residents read: “We have secured the forest department’s approval to relocate the monkeys at our cost. We have initiated discussions with a monkey catcher. For him to be able to plan the exercise and advise us of the costs, the catcher needs us to confirm the count and provide supporting pictures. Towards this end, we need your help over the next couple of days, if you happen to see the monkey.”

The residents were requested to click pictures of the monkeys whenever they spotted one and send the photos with details of the location and the time to the facility manager on WhatsApp.

An animal lover in the residential complex forwarded this email to a group of wildlife activists who were surprised by the fact that the forest department would give approval for the relocation of monkeys when they are the guardians of urban wildlife and must ensure the animals stay in their own territory.
 
Some wildlife activists said this would be like the forest department officials are training poachers – like monkey catchers – so they become experts in capturing wild animals. Another activist said they are going to take the issue up with the forest department and find who gave the approval. However, sources from the forest department said they are unaware of any monkey menace in the city that was brought to their notice recently.