Raviprakash’s photograph of a spider web was shortlisted from over 42,000 entries and is vying for People’s Choice Award
 
 Bangalore techie SS Raviprakash’s photo of a spider web is among the 50 photographs shortlisted for the People’s Choice Award — constituted as part of the 50th anniversary of Wildlife Photographer of the Year (WPY) competition conducted by the Natural History Museum, London and BBC Worldwide.
 
 Raviprakash’s photograph was shortlisted from over 42,000 entries and is the only Indian entry in the contest. WPY competition dates back to 1964 and has several categories. This is the first time a ‘People’s Choice Award’ has been constituted as part of WPY’s 50th anniversary. Anyone can vote for their favourite among the 50 shortlisted photographs before September 5. Five winners will be announced in October.
 
 Raviprakash, who works as an associate consultant at TCS in the city, told Bangalore Mirror, “I am extremely happy that one of my photographs has been short-listed in a prestigious competition.”
 
 Raviprakash is not a professional photographer, but photography has been his love from childhood. “I am from Sringeri which is in the lap of Malnad (Western Ghats). Seeing my interest in cameras, my father got me a point and shoot Yashika camera when I was young. This developed into a passion. My specific interest is in macro photography, which means shooting small subjects. I have taken thousands of photos of water drops and dew drops. Over 20 years, my interest in photography never waned.”
 
 Raviprakash’s shortlisted photograph is that of a spider and its web. He had to wait for two years to get the perfect shot. “My hobby is usually restricted to weekends. Eighty per cent of my photographs are taken around Sringeri. The rest on Bangalore outskirts. Nearly two years ago, I noticed that a single strand of a spider web displayed rainbow-like colours when seen from one particular angle. For the next year, I spent all my effort on trying to capture a web with all its strands in colour. My experiments and wait finally paid off earlier this year. The shortlisted photograph shows what you cannot see with a naked eye. Only two strands of the spider web are in focus. The rest are out of focus. But you can see the colours they emit. You can also see the spider in one corner.”
 
 Capturing small wildlife is not easy, says Raviprakash. “Most wildlife photographers are interested in birds and mammals. In macro photography, it is difficult to spot subjects. In Bangalore, I visit TG Halli or Valley School for subjects.”