The world has suddenly turned darker for creatures living in a lake near the ruins of Hampi, the erstwhile capital of the Vijayanagar Empire. Put it down to their home being covered with a gigantic black polythene sheet laid out by Kannada University authorities. Green activists, however, say it is an ecological disaster.
 
 The 12-foot, two-decade-old lake is part of Daroji forest circle which includes a bear sanctuary and adjoining forest areas. It is the only water source for flora and fauna including sloth bears, leopards, jackals, wolves, peacocks and reptiles.
 
 Sources in the university told Bangalore Mirror, “The University has been experimenting with many methods to conserve water. This is important since the area is interspersed with granite hillocks and deciduous thorn forests. Recently, the lake was de-silted to hold more water and the entire lake including the bed was covered with a black polythene sheet to preserve water. We were told that this would not be a problem for the flora and fauna.”
 
 The university’s earlier attempt to conserve water was to use cement packing which was equally harmful for the aquatic ecosystem.
 
 In its latest experiment, the university spent Rs 11 lakh to arrange for the plastic sheet and over Rs 15 lakh to implement the project aimed to conserve water for the rest of the year.
   Disaster, say activist
 Green activists say that the university’s decision has made the water body as good as a dead, jeopardising the lives of several wildlife species and birds. “It is not only an unscientific move but also affects the lake’s ecological structure. They are doing it in haste and we are wondering how a natural lake can be packed with a polythene sheet, which drives away animals and birds,” rues Sreenivas M, a resident of Kamalapura village close to the university.
   How it erodes the natural cycle
 Harish Bhat, a city-based bio-diversity expert who calls it a “foolish idea” said, “It will damage the eco-system and foodchain dependent on the lake. A lake is home to several species of algae, water plants, insects etc which are consumed by other animals. By covering the banks and bed with polythene, you are cutting off the very interaction between a-biotic (soil, water) and biotic species (insects, organisms, plants). All these organisms are interdependent but the sheet will completely seal off the cycle. It is as good as having a dead lake.”
 
 The polythene sheet also prevents groundwater recharging, said Sanjay Gubbi, renowned conservation expert and member of the State Wildlife Board. “With a polythene sheet covering all sides, there will not be any aquatic animals like tortoise, fish, reptiles etc. Though animals in the area have been accustomed to living with limited water, this will affect the natural mortality rate,” Gubbi said.
 
 Conservation expert and ecologist, A N Yellappa Reddy, also had reservations about the idea. “Constant exposure to sunlight will make the polythene brittle and it could pollute the water which animals will drink. This would lead to a catastrophe by affecting percolation and evaporation.”
 
 However, Reddy thinks that creating a life-supporting layer over the polythene inside the lake will help. “The layer should be made using cowdung, soil and other natural material and should have at least two feet of organic silt to ensure the polythene is not seen. They should also ensure that the water percolates as it’s the main source for underground water,” he said.
   University’s defence
 Dr A Murigeppa, vice-chancellor of Kannada University, defended the move, saying: “The only goal is to stock water collected during the rainy season for the rest of the year. We have made arrangements for the water to percolate to a certain extent. I don’t think it will affect the ecosystem. We will check if aquatic life and plants can survive in the plastic-covered lake. We hope they will get adjusted to the change. I firmly think the ecosystem in the water will flourish at a later stage as we have planned to create a soil layer on the polythene sheet inside after a few months.”
 
 
  We would have won the game, but top order did not do well orderdid not do well