Online campaign launched to save Kolar leaf-nosed bats from granite mining 
 	 
 An online campaign has been launched to protect the endemic and endangered Kolar leaf-nosed bat Hipposideros hypophyllus by including it under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act.
 
 	The campaign launched by Bhargavi Srini from Hyderabad on change.org also requests the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests and the state’s forest department to protect the endemic and endangered Kolar leaf-nosed bat Hipposideros hypophyllus by including it under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act.
 	  	The Kolar leaf-nosed bat is endemic to India and is known only from one subterranean cave in Kolar district. It has not been sighted since 1985 and after its description in 1994, was rediscovered only in 2013 by this team of campaigners. The bats in the subterranean cave are threatened with extinction due to illegal granite mining activity that has progressed to 100m from the mouth of the cave. “If the activity is not stopped and the bats accorded protection, we would lose the only roosting site housing this glorious bat from the face of the earth,” said the petition.
 	  	Kolar leaf-nosed bat, Hipposideros hypophyllus, is a restricted range species known from only two closely located areas in a highly disturbed habitat in Kolar district. The species qualifies as high-priority conservation species. Surveys conducted in this district between November 2013 and December 2013 by a team of experts from Osmania University including Bhargavi Srinivasulu, C Srinivasulu, Harpreet Kaur, Tarig A Shah, G Devender and Aditya Srinivasulu showed the presence of this species at a subterranean cave. The cave opening is narrow and hence can’t be accessed to obtain a proper count of the bats.
 “I appreciate the efforts of the researchers at rediscovering this rare bat. It is unfortunate that we stand a chance of losing the species despite its rediscovery. When I had done a recce of the site in January 2013, we were terrified to witness the unabated granite mining which was getting closer and closer to the cave (following which I wrote an article in Sanctuary Asia in August 2013). I strongly urge everyone to do their bit in conserving this bat by signing the petition,” said Rohit Chakravarty, bat researcher with the Indian Bat Conservation Research Unit (IBCRU).
 	  	Despite being the most species-rich mammalian order in India, bats have received scant attention. There are about 125 species of bats in India. Very little research has been undertaken because they are hard to study.
 	  	“All bats (except for two species) are classified as vermin under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Insectivorous bats (like leaf-nosed bats) are economically important as they eradicate pest insects, thereby benefiting agriculture. Fruit bats pollinate the flowers and many tropical plants depend on them for the distribution of their seeds. It’s important that the government recognises the usefulness of bats and affords protection to them,” said Rohit Chakravarty.