BBMP issues notice to BWSSB over entry of sewage into lake revived by them

The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) authorities have issued a notice to the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) over the entry of sewage water into Kothnur lake in JP Nagar. This is after the residents reported shoals of fish gasping for air on the surface of the water body.

“We have served the BWSSB engineer of the division with a notice after we observed sewage water entering the lake that was revived by BBMP. Our team recently conducted an inspection of the area and we noticed some houses around the lake releasing untreated water directly into the waterbody,” said a BBMP official.

According to the notice, BBMP officials have observed two to three houses in ward number 195 discharging sewage water into the lake. The notice cites the Karnataka Tank Conservation Development Act 2014, under which anyone found polluting a waterbody directly or indirectly is liable for punishment. The civic body has asked the BWSSB officials to look for a permanent solution to the problem.

Locals say, according to the recent water quality report of the lake by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB), while the lake’s water quality fits into category D, which is suitable for wildlife and fisheries, there are issues with some of the parameters.

   Stop the fish kill, while there’s timeAs per a recent study, over the last five years, lakes in B’luru had 32 fish kill episodes and for 51% of this, sewage was the reason. This year alone, we have seen nine fish kills
“The report shows a marginal increase in total coliforms, including bacteria found in human or animal waste. The Biochemical Oxygen Demand of the waterbody was also found beyond the permissible limit and is a cause of concern,” said Raghavendra B Pachhapur, a lake activist.

Officials from BWSSB and KSPCB inspected the waterbody on Wednesday.

“There is water stagnation near one of the inlets.
 
It is being taken care of,” said a BWSSB official.