Kanchuki and Kongkona Sarma of Gypsy Feet                 Today’s itinerary: Assemble for organic breakfast by the pond; proceed to a tribal welfare office; lunch in the hut of a Buddhist woman with a toothy grin, followed by a sail boat ride and ending the day with blogging under the stars. Never seen an itinerary like this? Of course, for that leading travel company will never risk taking you there. But then, there are some others, which do. This is their story.

If you’ve been a discerning reader/surfer, chances are that you’ve come across ‘offbeat’ travel outfits sprung up of late. And truly, some of these, at least the ones we mention here, are off the trampled track, focusing on experience rather than packaging, self-change than tourism. Not surprisingly, most are initiatives of 20-somethings who were running about the mill not too long ago.  
GOING NORTH-EAST
With one partner, Kanchuki Sarma, an ISB passout and former Microsoft employee and the other, sister Kongkona pursuing a Master’s degree abroad, you wonder whether their travel venture is just a whim. But Gypsy Feet is far from being so. Off track idea: In June last year, the Sarma sisters, with photographer Kausiki and researcher Mirza Rahman, launched Gypsy Feet, a travel outfit specialising in travels to the North Eastern states. They’re already 20 trips down. Behind the idea: “We grew up in Guwahati. While studying first in Delhi and then in America’s Pacific North West area, I did a lot of trekking,” says Kanchuki. 

“But both of us hadn’t seen our own backyard. Then, we went on this long trip to Arunachal and discovered a new dimension to travel. I think I understood more about the life of a tribe in our two-night stay at their home than I would have if we’d spent a month in a hotel,” Kongkona adds. 

Soon, they thought of promoting the stunning locales of the northeast, though in a more ‘let’s get our friends here’ way. “More trips — to Meghalaya, Sikkim, Bhutan — introduced us to many guesthouses and the unique local ways. We had to show off our region!” quips Kongkona.  The next trip: The Sarmas and their partners have attracted diverse travellers across India, mostly through word-of-mouth and Facebook. “There are many curious adventurers who want to come,” Kanchuki tells us, adding, “Our trips are all about wildlife (in Kaziranga), tea tours (upper Assam) and lots of local flavour (such as staying in a bamboo hut in Mawlynnong, Meghalaya).” The gypsies, as they call themselves on their website, plan to get over challenges of the terrain and further market the untapped tourism potential of the region.  
TAKE IT AS A GIFT 
Many urban Indians who’ve gone on one of social entrepreneur Vinod Sreedhar’s trips divide their lives as that before the trip that after.  Off track idea: Journeys With Meaning, Sreedhar’s two-year-old outfit, takes a bunch of his friends (and later, their friends) twice a year to meet the rural community in Kashmir/Ladakh and live their eco-friendly life. More so, all his expertise and tour design comes at a cost - rupees zero. Behind the idea: A musician by profession (at least while starting off), Sreedhar holds youth workshops in Hyderabad and Mumbai and often awakes his attendees from ignorance about their ecology, mental blocks and life in general.  “My travels are extensions of my workshops!” he explains. “I want people to visit a challenging terrain, discover new ways of living, have conversations with me - and themselves - and return with a slightly changed heart.” Thus, Sreedhar’s travails in Ladakh are about home stays, visits to eco-institutes, organic farms, clean-up drives and oodles of philosophy. 

There are Kargil and the rest of Kashmir on the map too. “How many of us are aware of an average Kashmiri’s life or the experience of living in a militarised zone?” he asks.  The next trip: Sreedhar is already planning a similar eco-concious trip to the northeast next month. And some more trips to organic farms - perhaps shorter ones - are on the cards too. That said, Journeys With Meaning will never change its essence - gift economy. “We split travel and accommodation costs and at the end of a trip, I ask them to pay me anything they feel like, voluntarily. I’ll never change this way of functioning. After all, I’ve been sustaining myself this way for years now!” he quips. 
RIDING THE QUARTER-LIFE 
Your parents would laugh at the above term, but that dodgy period in your mid-20s gets many questioning themselves. But then, with initiatives like ‘Away on Leave’, a turnaround might just be a trip away. Off track idea: Coming from the guys behind the Batti Bandh campaign, AWOL invites those aged 21-28 who think they require a turnaround in life, filters them and funds them to a three-month trip, but not without handing them some regulations and responsibilities. Behind the idea: Keith Menon, Somesh Kamra and Shiladitya Chakraborty, already having lived the life of juggling a day job with a social initiative, felt earlier this year that there are too many youngsters ranting about their jobs. “How many of your friends are always cribbing about being stuck in life?” Kamra asks, “…and don’t each one of them love to travel?” We get it. The team’s programme is rather ambitious - expecting the depressed soul to embark on a sole journey and return with a tale of self-discovery. But in the first two weeks on Facebook, AWOL has already received 80 applications, 50 from women!
“It’s not a wasted vacation though! They must survive only with Rs 1000 a week and must blog/picture/record their adventures,” Kamra explains. And like a reality show, AWOL offers perks to every month that you complete without using your own money you get an additional Rs 3,000 bonus! The trio is confident of the idea as Menon and Chakraborty themselves have gone on the above ordeal and have returned as changed men. “It was damn difficult! But they discovered their writing and photography skills!” Kamra says. The next trip: AWOL is still premature; the first three travellers embark in two weeks’ time. And wary as they are of sponsors’ restrictions, the boys are self-funding this venture. “But we’re planning to send off 30 candidates in a year. And if all goes well, we might just style this as a TV show, Nat Geo style!” Kamra boasts.   
SAILS AND MARKETING
“That segment is very crowded…we want to remain low-key” is a boring line if it comes from a senior sales guy. But from a 20-year-old BA student, it’s plain amusing. Off track idea: Making sailing more accessible, and giving unique experiences such as waterfall rappelling and rural meals. Rushikesh Kulkarni’s Breakfree Journeys launched on I-day last year. Behind the idea:  Always an avid trekker, Kulkarni saved up some funds from a part-time job and kickstarted his outdoor outfit. Last monsoon, he hit upon a sailing company on Facebook and associated with them for sailing trips off Appollo Bundar. “We charge Rs 1800 for four people for an hour-long ride, which is not too much,” he explains. The idea was a hit as people began surprising their partners.  The next trip: Breakfree also does trips of kayaking, river rafting and experiences such as rural meals and home stays. But its founder isn’t too interested in profits. “Though I’m looking at designing foreign trips and have tied up with sources in Orissa and MP, numbers aren’t important,” he admits.