A Delhi-based company has submitted a proposal to the State government to develop adventure sports in various destinations in the State. The land for the proposed activities has been identified at Ramnagara near Bengaluru, Mysuru, Kalaburgi Lake site, Hampi, Sharavathi (Near Jog Falls), Nandi Hills, Belagavi and Phalguni River Lodge, Pilikula in Mangaluru.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Sudhir Gowda, consultant, district tourism department, said, “This is an attempt to develop adventure sports. In Mangaluru, the area near the Phalguni river lodge has been identified. Wanderlust Adventures from Delhi has proposed setting up a bungee station with jumps over the river. They have also proposed ziplines across the river. The project cost is about Rs 4.25 crore and will be developed on a 70:30 with 30 per cent by Wanderlust. The ticket revenues will also be on 70:30 ratio. Multiple activities will be offered from this bungee site which also includes commando slithering, cage ride and so on. The proposal is pending before the tourism minister and secretary tourism,” he said.
 
 At Ramnagar, they have proposed an adventure zone with a mix of extreme adventure and family adventure generally seen only on television channels. The total project cost is about Rs 5.90 crore and this will be developed on PPP on 50:50 basis for investment and ticket revenue. They have also proposed setting up of a soft adventure park with extreme sports in Mysuru at the cost of Rs 1.70 crores. At the Kalaburagi lake site, they have proposed an intricate network of six zip stations over the lake and the bird sanctuary to view and enjoy the landscape and birding opportunities as well as a fun adventure zone for the visitors at the cost of Rs 2.60 crores. At the most popular tourist destination Hampi, the company has proposed a Zipline cum sky walk close to the monuments.
 
 At Sharavati near Jog falls, they hope to set up a bungee station with jumps over the river and with views of the famous Jog Falls. Due to the wildlife sanctuary in Sharavati valley, they plan to set up criss cross zip stations over or close to the sanctuary for wildlife viewing or birding opportunities at an approximate cost of Rs 4.25 crores. A bungee station is also proposed at Nandi Hills which is about 60 kilometers from Bengaluru.
 
 Since Belagavi is known for the army commando training, the agency has proposed setting up of extreme adventure zone with bungee jumping, sling shot and obstacle courses. They have suggested this at the Bhimgad adventure camp and, being close to Goa, it could attract many tourists