Karnataka Forest Department paid over Rs 5.38 crore for human-wildlife conflict cases in 2023 alone

The compensation paid for wildlife-related losses in Bengaluru is turning out to be a significant amount this year. According to data from the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), from April to December 2023, the region recorded five human deaths, 4,625 cases of crop damage, and 685 cattle deaths in human-wildlife conflict cases. These incidents have resulted in the department paying over Rs 5.38 crore as compensation, the second-highest ex-gratia amount released in the state, following only Kodagu.

Overall, in just nine months this year, Karnataka has already paid over Rs 29.69 crore for 26,658 human-wildlife conflict cases. These cases include crop damages, cattle killed, human deaths, permanent and partial disabilities, injuries, and property losses. In 2022-23, KFD had released Rs 34.13 crore under ex-gratia.

According to official data, while 19,120 conflict cases were recorded in 2018-19, this number surged to over 40,000 in 2022-23. In 2019-20, 23,480 cases were registered, followed by 28,559 cases in 2020-21 and 36,982 human-wildlife conflict cases in 2021-22.

Notably, Karnataka recently doubled the ex-gratia amount both for crop damage and life loss.

Experts say this increase in compensation would be beneficial only when coupled with other measures such as a crackdown on forest encroachment and wildlife habitat consolidation.

“The reason behind high cattle and human death cases in Bengaluru is encroachment and illegal diversion of forest land. A lot of encroachments have happened in Ramanagara, Kolar, Chikkaballapura, and Bengaluru Urban divisions, leading to high conflict and thus higher ex-gratia. Unless forests are protected from encroachments, such cases will keep increasing. While human-animal conflict cannot be mitigated completely, it can be reduced to a large extent through these measures,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

Experts also underline the priority given to plantation activities instead of wildlife habitat restoration and conservation. They say instead of spending crores of Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) funds on plantation activities in the Western Ghats and other areas, the department should focus on restoring wildlife corridors and habitats.

“The need of the hour is to purchase land from people who are willing to sell. The department should make use of the CAMPA fund to safeguard their habitat. Until then, the cases will only have an upward trajectory as more and more wild animals will keep venturing out. In the majority of the reserves, the CAMPA fund is being utilised for afforestation activities. The department should take up habitat consolidation work instead,” said a wildlife activist.