With so many running around city, wildlife help say they are flooded with calls for rescue
 
 Wildlife volunteers are surprised by the increasing calls for rescuing cats. In the last 15 days, they have handled around 45 such cases. The sudden spurt in cat rescues has created another problem. They have no idea where to put these rescued cats.
 
 With shortage of space in animal shelters, one of the wildlife volunteers is now planning to launch an adoption programme.
 There are a variety of birds, mammals and reptiles being rescued by wildlife volunteers. But in recent days, it is mostly about cats that they hear about. The volunteers say these rescue operations are a testament to the fact that these domestic animals are reposing faith in the city as a habitat.
 
 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Kiran Kumar D S, a wildlife volunteer, said, “Between June and December, cats give birth every 62 days. This is one of the reasons why there are so many calls about cats in trouble. We get calls from Compassion Unlimited Plus Action (CUPA), veterinary hospitals and the control room to rescue them. Most of the complaints we have received are to save them from getting attacked by stray dogs or when they have given birth. A few complain about cats making lots of noise due to which they are disturbed. But most shelters are full of domestic animals. Due to lack of space, I had to inform a few friends and people on social platforms to adopt the cats. Recently, there were 10 kittens rescued and they were all adopted after we posted a request on Facebook.”
 
 Kiran is also planning adoption programmes. He said, “We are also planning to conduct an adoption programme every weekend near Sankey Tank Park and other major places where anyone can come forward to adopt these animals. In most of our rescues, we get many kittens and we go out asking people to adopt them.”
 
 “We had some very interesting rescues in the past week. They were a reminder to the fact that lung spaces still remain in Bangalore. It also sends out a message on conserving wildlife. Many of them call and ask us to take these cats as they are pooping around their premises. However, these cats are adopted and taken care of by a few people. We need people to come forward and adopt these cats,” said a volunteer. People who are interested in adopting the kittens can contact Kiran Kumar on 9916963710.