While Dasara is synonymous with all that’s pomp and splendour for us humans, for the ‘chosen’ elephants (if only they could speak) it brings along only trial and tribulation. For these captive pachyderms, the run-up to D-day is long hours of rigorous exercise and painstaking sessions of ‘learning to adapt’ to situations that are anything but natural to them.

Conditioned learning is the key word here and the two primary factors that drive this process, according to Surendra Varma, Research Officer, Asian Nature Conservation Foundation (ANCF), are ‘fear’ and ‘reward’. “The elephant is manipulated to behave in a manner that suits certain requirements. This is not built into their natural system of development and leads to severe stress, both physical and psychological,” said Varma, who has to his credit over 20 years of research on elephants, both wild and recently captive, across India.

Adding to the already dismal conditions, he said, are processions that involve long hours amidst noise and heat (excessive temperature variations not only cause them severe discomfort but also affect their eyes) along with treading on hard surfaces. “Trying to habituate them to firecrackers, noise, layers of cloth, weight, among other factors, adds immense pressure on them to accustom to an incomprehensible situation. Prior exposure does not imply acclimatisation,” said Varma, who added that it is the non-visible cruelties that are more destructive as there is no easy way to bring them to light.

An effort to incorporate more humane measures in such processions is an ongoing process for both the forest department and conservationists. Concerns with regard to Balarama, the 47-year-old tusker chosen to carry the howdah, have been raised. “We have suggested that Balarama be sent ahead, instead of at the end, of the other elephants in the procession. Also, to reduce his waiting time (which is one and a half hours with the tonne of weight on his back) before the grand procession,” said I B Srivastava, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests-Wildlife (PCCF), who added that 
a decision from the Mysore Dasara Committee (MDC) is awaited.

After Balarama, the chosen successor will take on the human-bestowed ‘honour’ of leading the brigade of ‘celebrated’ elephants. As always, this year there will be a large audience watching the procession in awe, and write-ups aplenty about its grandeur and special moments. All this while being completely unaware of the unfathomable distress caused to these mighty, enslaved beasts.

Maybe it is this very attitude that was referred to when Albert Schweitzer, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, said, “We must fight against the spirit of unconscious cruelty with which we treat the animals.” Captivity most cruel In the wild, an elephant’s foraging method involves application of various techniques that provide the necessary exercise that the large animal needs. Social interaction among adults, and between adults and calves, is vital for development in every respect.

“In captivity (India has 3,500 elephants in captivity, including travelling elephants and those in temples, forest camps and palaces), barring maybe forest camps, there is no room for elephants to forage the natural way and social interaction is non-existent. When their survival deviates from these two primary factors — exercise-based food and social life — it causes their well-being to be sacrificed at every step,” said Varma. Driven to suicide? Could incidents such as elephants starving to death or those chained running in circles as though to strangulate themselves be considered attempts at suicide or provide a basis for delving deeper into the issue? It didn’t seem at first for Bangalore-based wildlife researcher Pablo Tachil. But during his course of work with captive elephants in India (Kerala and Tamil Nadu) and outside, he began to witness a disturbing pattern of possible suicides that pushed him to take up the research. Also, the fact that elephants possess emotions that span love and agony, akin to human beings, led him to begin work on an aspect of the lives of elephants that is, so far, unknown.

“Though initially, what the mahouts narrated amounted to circumstantial evidence, I opened up to the possibility. Through my travel, I documented several similar occurrences that could validate the possibility of suicide among elephants. What I found common in all the incidents was a history of trauma prior to the elephants dying or what might be suicide. Work on the research is continuing and its result, when out, can throw more light on the same,” said Pablo.