India is the second largest shark fishing country in the world, but over-fishing is resulting in rapid decline of the numbers
 
 
 The Ministry of Environ­ment and Forests (MoEF) has asked the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI) to prepare a Non Detrimental Findings (NDF) for sharks in India. NDF assessment will reveal the vulnerability of particular shark species to fishing. Some shark species are rapidly declining in India and the study will provide for additional protection to threatened species.
 
 
 India is the second largest shark fishing nation in the world next to Indonesia but the threat to the shark species in Indian waters has not been studied. The Ministry’s direction comes after the The Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) revised its own NDF list.
 Speaking to Mirror, Dr Sujitha Thomas Principal Scientist, CMFRI Mangaluru said, CITES has banned about 11 species of sharks worldwide from trading but not from the domestic market.
 
 
 “At the CITES workshops in Chennai (August 2014) and Cochin ( 2015), it was decided that India being a signatory party to CITES Appendix II, trade regulations would be observed on the shark and manta ray species listed therein. The MOEF&CC raised a query on the status of these species in Indian waters and whether they required to be included under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. The task of assessing their status and preparing a Non-Detriment Findings document for these species was entrusted to CMFRI. It was decided that until the NDFs were ready, trade regulations as governed by CITES Appendix II ruling would continue, subject to other sanctions imposed by the Government of India,” she said.
 
 
 CMFRI agreed to prepare the NDF by October 2015. Dr Shobha Kizhakudan is the principal investigator and Dr P U Zachriah Head of the Demersal Fisheries division. Sharks are characterised by slow growth, large size and longevity, slow turnover of generations, late maturation and production of few off-springs. Low biological productivity makes them vulnerable to fishing.
 
 
 Protection of sharks started in India after large-scale fishing of Whale-sharks in Gujarat coast in the 1990s almost wiped out the species. Some shark species are rapidly declining in India.
 
 
 “The hammer head shark landings was about 1000 tonnes in 2007 and reduced to 500 tonnes in 2015. At the same time, the white tipped shark saw a drastic rise in landings between 2014-15”, said Dr Sujitha.