Excise minister Satish Jarkiholi’s relative’s liquor licence revoked for violating wildlife norms
 
 

 The Karnataka Excise department has cancelled the licence of the Excise minister’s relative to sell liquor in Nagarahole Tiger Reserve. This action comes close on the heels of pressure from wild life activists and locals to protect the eco-sensitive zone. The Excise minister’s relative had allegedly obtained the licence through back-channel operations. 

 	The said relative was granted two licences; one CL-7 (bar with boarding and lodging, a facility with up to 20 rooms) to run a bar and restaurant, and another CL-2 (retail wine shop) to run a wine shop in Kade Gaddhe village of Bavali in the Karnataka-Kerala border of the tiger reserve. The CL-7 was cancelled with immediate effect, while the CL-2 is kept under suspension and the relative of the minister has been told to get it transferred to some other permissible place in Mysuru district. 

 	The licensee, Y Annappa, is the brother of Dr Y Manjunath, who is a joint commissioner of Excise. Manjunath is the brother-in-law of Excise minister Satish Jarkiholi. He was issued the licence in 2012. Prior to this, Dr Y Manjunath, the then Excise DC, had the licences of liquor baron Balaji Potharaju cancelled. Balaji had a CL-9 licence and was running a bar and restaurant in the area. 

 	Balaji operated the bar and restaurant for a long time in partnership with the landowner KP Babu. His renewal application for the licence was disapproved. Balaji moved the High Court with the matter. 

 	The court ordered that the licence be renewed, but it was not. The department cited violation of wildlife rules as the reason for rejecting the application. 

 	What is shocking now, is that a bar and restaurant has been allotted permission to function in the very same place, and with the same landowner. Only, this time partnering him in the venture is Y Annappa and a few others who have managed to procure a CL-7 licence. The nexus between Annappa and Manjunath has been brought about in violation of all rules and regulations, according to complaints. 

 	Sreejith PR, an advocate from Kerala and some wildlife activists have taken up the matter with the concerned authorities through these complaints. Annappa has been running the so-called resort along with a few partners, and is alleged to be doing so illegally. 

 	The complaints state that the resort is illegally situated within 50 metres of a school and temple. Wildlife and Environment Acts prohibit construction of any structure in the entire eco-zone and particularly on riverbeds. 

 	The resort sits on the Kabini riverbed. The resort has also violated provisions of the consent and clearance certificate of water and air pollution boards. As per eco-sensitive zone directives, permission to house resorts within 10 kilometres of tiger reserves is not granted, and this law has also been violated. 

 	Based on the complaints, the Excise department has cracked down on the minister's kin. The CL-7 bar licence of Annappa has since been cancelled. Annappa has been asked to shift CL-2 to another part of the district away from the forest area. Violation of wildlife rules has been offered as the reason for doing so. 

 	Excise DC Mysuru has stated that one licence has been cancelled and the other shifted because Kay Yess resort, which belongs to Y Annappa, is situated in the crucial eco-sensitive zone of Nagarahole Tiger Reserve (a critical tiger habitat), Rajiv Gandhi National Park, Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary and Nagarahole Core Critical Tiger Reserve. 

 	“Situated as it was in a tiger reserve and eco-sensitive zone, the bar violated rules of Excise. Also, it was only 40 metres away from a state highway, while rules state that it should be beyond 220 metres. There also have been reports of Naxal activities on the premises. Based on this inputs and after an enquiry, the CL-7 has been cancelled and CL-2 licence asked to be shifted immediately from the place to any other part of the district. The CL-2 licence, which also was in the name of Y Annappa, was allotted to T Narasipura, but was illegally shifted to Kade Gaddhe near Bavali forest area, and as such, the resort has been closed down,” Jagadish Naik, Excise DC Mysuru said.
 	
 	
 	
 	FAMILY AFFAIRS
 	
 	 		Licensee Y Annapa  is the brother of joint commissioner of Excise Dr Y Manjunath, who in turn is the brotherin-law of Excise minister Satish Jarkhiholi. Annapa’s CL-7 license was cancelled while the CL-2 licence was suspended. He was running a 	 		bar and restuarant, and a retail wine shop in Kade Gaddhe village in Nagarahole tiger reserve