The frontline staff of Karnataka Forest Department have been left high and dry yet again. This time, though, they are kept waiting for the Chief Minister’s medal.
 
Introduced by the department more than five years ago, the award honours and recognises frontline staff engaged in various activities for the conservation and protection of forests.

The foresters BM spoke to said while the award is to be distributed on March 21 - World Forest Day - every year, it has not happened for the last two years.

“The forest department officials, especially the frontline staff, are not given due recognition. We encounter wildlife and sometimes put our lives in danger. Our line of duty involves spreading awareness about wildlife and wildlife conservation in nearby schools and villages. The award is a good platform to recognise all the hard work.
 
However, it is demoralising that the government is not interested in recognising our efforts,” said a forest watcher.

The Karnataka Forest Department introduced the forest medal in 2017 along the lines of police medals. The idea was to recognise the work done by foresters for handling human-wildlife conflicts, wildlife conservation, removal of encroachments, and keeping anti-poaching activities in check. However, the schedule has never been maintained. The CM’s medal was conferred to 75 staff for three years combined (2017, 2018 and 2019) in 2020. Thereafter, shortlisted foresters for the award in 2020 and 2021 are still waiting eagerly to receive the medal.


 .
According to officials, some of their diligent colleagues who were selected two years ago for the award have already retired.

“Some of my colleagues have been asked to apply for the CM’s award for this year despite the fact that previous years’ medals are yet to be awarded. Many of our colleagues shortlisted for the award for 2020 have already retired. They will not get a chance to wear the medal on duty,” an official lamented.

To shortlist the awardees, the circle-level committee of the forest department sends the recommendation list to the state-level committee. The final list of 25 officials for the award is then sent to the government by the state-level committee.

 Many of our colleagues shortlisted for awards for 2020 have retired. They will not get a chance to wear the medal on duty– KFD official
Wildlife activists told BM that while this was a good initiative by the department, such long delays in felicitating the foresters defeat the purpose of the award.

“As per a government order, the award has to be given to the frontline staff and officers who have done a commendable job on duty. As per the order, the ceremony has to coincide with World Forest Day (March 21) every year. However, it has never happened. It is a good initiative, but it has to be done on time,” said Giridhar Kulkarni, a wildlife conservationist.