As a show of love on Valentine’s Day, greens are expected to turn up in large numbers to show their love for nature. Environmental volunteers are scheduled to conduct a walkathon around Turahalli on Sunday, against the proposed tree park in the Turahalli forest area. The walkathon will begin from the current Turahalli tree park, with the group walking around the periphery of the Turahalli forest. The walkathon has been divided into three phases; two kilometres, five kilometres and 10 kilometres.

Abdul Aleem, President, Changemakers of Kanakapura Road, told Bangalore Mirror, “A tree park by modifying an already existing forest is not needed. Instead, we need transparency about any activity happening inside the forest and want the government or the forest department to take citizens into confidence before implementing any new programme. We are for the conservation of this last standing forest in Bengaluru and opposed to all kinds of non-forest activities inside the forest.”

Arun, a member of the Brigade Omega Apartment, said that this is the last existing forest in the urban limits and protecting this was very important as natural forests are not as common as parks in the city.

Vasuki, from Cleanup Turahalli Group, said that the 40-acre tree park has already been carved out of Turahalli forest area, while the existing tree park remains undeveloped. “As per Government orders, only 15 hectares of a forest can be converted into a tree park. Bengaluru is quickly becoming an urban jungle and we need to protect the only forest space there is”

 It won’t be TourahalliTurahalli forest is one among the four forests identified for creating tree parks by Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa in his pet project ‘Bengaluru Mission 2022’. 
“A tree park can be built anywhere. But a natural forest requires hundreds of years to evolve. The mandate of the forest department is to protect forests and wildlife and not to create tree parks in forests. Human entry into Turahalli forest under the guise/pretext of tree park will destroy the forest,” Aleem added.

Aleem said that the fencing was not complete and at many places, it was broken. Public presence has also been reported, even in the night times.

Apart from the walkathon, a massive human chain is being planned as part of the walkathon on Sunday.

Demand list from Environmentalists

1. Drop the tree park project at Turahalli immediately
2. Fencing of the entire periphery of Turahalli forest, which is an eco-sensitive zone
3. Increase number of forest guards to at least 10 and install CCTV Cameras
4. Develop existing tree park to its dense best to accommodate people experiencing nature by being in the middle of it.
5. Ensure the forest department constitutes a Joint Forest Management Committee to oversee democratic utilisation of Tree Park, while developing the support for forest management activities like fire lines in the restricted site.
6. Develop already existing tree park in 35 acres