Activists indicate Palike could have decided to junk chip plan to monitor strays

The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) has periodically expressed its plan to track strays using microchips for more than five years now. Each of these times, animal activists too expressed their protest against the plan. But now there seems to be a breakthrough. If the outcome of the meeting held on Friday with animal activists is any indication, it seems the BBMP has finally decided to cancel its plan of using microchips to trace or monitor stray dogs in the city.

Bangalore Mirror published a story – A chip over its shoulder – on October 7 narrating how the plan of using microchips needs Rs 6 crore as there are around three lakh stray dogs in the city. Many animal and social activists termed the BBMP’s plan as nothing but a waste of tax-payers’ money. They also expressed concern over the health of stray dogs after microchips are inserted under their skin.

According to reliable sources, some of the animal activists lodged a complaint with the BBMP officials and Urban Development Department and have referred to the article published in the Bangalore Mirror.

Sujaya Jagadish, a member of SPCA, said that she wants to thank the media, animal welfare activists and others for creating timely awareness among the BBMP officials, who called off their plan to use microchips to monitor strays.

“Using microchip or geo-tag is unnecessary without the right reason. It is understandable for endangered wildlife but not for strays in the city. Communities need to either care for strays or just let them be,’’ said Sujaya Jagadish.

Vinod Jacob of Namma Bengaluru Foundation said that there is so much work pending in the animal welfare department infrastructure, and that this unnecessary expenditure was being planned when the veterinary hospitals in the city don’t have good facilities to treat strays. “A simple tag or a collar is sufficient to monitor these animals. The government veterinary hospitals need immediate attention and hope they use these budgets wisely to build proper infrastructure there,’’ said Vinod Jacob.

  Microchips are unnecessary for strays. Communities need to either care for them or just let them be–Sujaya J, SPCA

Satish Rao, a social worker and animal lover from Indiranagar, said that the plan of using microchips is not viable as the BBMP has no manpower or infrastructure to trace or monitor the stray dogs in the city. “Using microchips for pet dogs may work because they have responsible owners or pet parents to look after them. Using microchips for stray dogs may cause health problems to the stray dogs. I support genuine animal activists and media who highlighted the disadvantages of using microchips,’’ said Satish Rao.

  A chip over its shoulderIf the BBMP goes ahead with microchipping the around three lakh stray dogs in the city, it needs Rs 6 crore and it has to spend Rs 3 crore if it chooses geotagging. Each microchip costs Rs 200 and geotag costs Rs 100.
Meanwhile, an animal activist on the condition of anonymity has said that the BBMP officials have been busy announcing microchip or geotag plans for street dogs all these years without focusing on the much-needed facilities to conduct animal birth control (ABC) programmes in Mahadevapura Zone. “The BBMP claims ownership of stray dogs but spends no money to feed them,’’ the animal activist said.