Citizens want 100 Conocarpus trees planted around lake to be removed as studies have shown these to be harmful to health

Nearly 100 trees planted by the Forest Department of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) around Subramanyapura Kere in Jayanagar last year have caught local attention. Residents say they would like the civic agency to remove these plants from the lake’s premises.
 
This is after a city-based NGO surveyed saplings planted around Subramanyapura Kere. As per the survey results, 350 out of nearly 400 trees in the lake premise are exotic. Out of the 350 exotic species, 92 are Conocarpus trees, a species that has been banned in Gujarat.
 
Used as an ornamental and avenue tree, Conocarpus was banned in forest and non-forest areas such as nurseries and plantations by the Gujarat Forest Department in September last year. The Department had cited harm to the environment and human health as the primary cause for banning this exotic species.

However, nearly a 100 trees of the same species growing in their backyard have made residents of the area anxious.

“There are many research papers and scientific evidence on the harmful impact of this tree on human health. After receiving the results of the tree survey conducted by ActionAid Association, we did our research and found out that pollen from this tree species causes respiratory problems and lung disorders. Residents want these trees removed,” said Bhuvan Raj K, a resident of the area.

Notably, the circular issued by the Gujarat Forest Department highlights that pollen of Conocarpus leads to cold, cough, asthma, and allergies among individuals, particularly during winter.

When BM reached out to officials from the Forest Department, they said, “We planted a few saplings of Conocarpus around parks and as avenue trees last year. This was before the Gujarat Forest Department imposed the ban. We are not planting Conocarpus anymore.”

Botanists and tree experts say BBMP should not only stop planting tree species with established harmful impacts but must explore biological methods to eliminate these species.

“We faced a similar situation with Parthenium when the weed had started taking over vacant space and its pollen caused adverse health impacts such as asthma and respiratory disorder. Scientists from GKVK then suggested other shrub species that could eliminate Parthenium when grown alongside. This technique is called allelopathy, whereby a native plant eliminates unwanted weeds by releasing chemicals through its roots,” said Ravindra Reshme, a city-based botanist.

Locals also raised concerns about the dominance of other exotic tree species in BBMP’s plantation drives.

“Nearly 90% of the saplings planted in Subramanyapura Kere are exotic. Long stretches of the lake have the same tree species. This goes on to show that BBMP’s plantation drives are not scientific,” said another resident of the area.

City-based lake activists say there is a need to opt for native species of shrubs, plants, and trees that can provide food and habitat for wildlife. BBMP’s Forest Department, Horticulture, and Fisheries Department should try to grow native species to improve biodiversity at the local as well as city levels.

“Not just trees and shrubs, the Fisheries Department should involve local fishermen and encourage them to go for native fish. This will attract more birds and improve biodiversity. Lakes can be developed as biodiversity hotspots, provided all the departments of BBMP are working in coordination while focusing on ecological or biodiversity aspects,” said Raghavendra B Pachhapur of ActionAid Association.

“We have many exotic species, not just around lakes and along the roads, but even in parks such as Cubbon Park and Lal Bagh. We must stop planting exotic species and focus on native trees. Although native trees grow slower, they are an excellent choice for biodiversity,” added Reshme.