Police are now trying to book him under Wildlife Act; they have nothing else against him, says lawyer
 
 Bengaluru police seem to be going for broke in the Ravi Belagere case. They are now exploring options of booking the tabloid owner/editor under the Wildlife Act as a tortoise shell was recovered from his house. This, after the police had publicly announced that he had hatched a conspiracy to get his colleague Sunil Heggaravalli bumped off. Have they bitten off more than they can chew? What gives?
 
 Belagere’s lawyer seems to know. “There is no material in the case registered against Belagere. Fantasies have been cooked up to arrest him,” said Diwaker K.
 
 It is every lawyer’s duty to defend the client; but a closer look at the case so far reveals that it may be coming apart.
 
 	 
 
 First, the shooter’s statement
 The case against Belagere hinges on the statement of Shashi Mundewadi, the shooter from Vijayapura. The police have alleged that the editor hired his services after paying him Rs 15,000 as advance and “untold wealth” upon completion of the job. In fact, Belagere had been picked up from his office last week on based on Mundewadi’s statement. Now, sources have told Bangalore Mirror, Mundewadi has changed his statement. He has apparently told the police that while he has known Belagere for a while now, the latter had not asked him for any hit.
 
 This puts the police in a piquant situation. No hit has been attempted on the alleged target; there has no recovery of the weapon that was to be used in the murder; there is no record of anyone threatening or assaulting the alleged target. So, Mundewadi’s statement was all that police had and that too seems to have fallen through.
 
 Joint commissioner of police (Crime) N Sateesh Kumar refused to comment on Mundewadi’s statement but said that the police will take the legal section’s opinion and decide the further course of action as per the advice.
 
 “The remand application states that the case has been registered against Belagere based on Mundewadi’s voluntary statement. They say that Mundewadi told them that Belagere gave him a pistol and four bullets but he returned them on August 28 saying he couldn’t kill Heggaravalli,” Diwaker said.
 
 But later, police said that Mundewadi was arrested from near Chickpet circle at around 7.20 pm on December 7 along with a pistol, four bullets and a knife which he received from Tahir Hussain alias Anand Gowda, Diwaker added.
 
 The defence lawyer tore into the police’s case on another technical point. “Police say two attempts were made by Mundewade -- on August 28 and sometime in between December 3 and 7. No attempt on Heggaravalli’s life was made on made on August 28. Mundewadi’s statement reads that he did not meet Belagere between December 3 and 7. So how can the weapons be provided by Belagere or how is he related to the second attempt,” asked Diwaker.

Read Also:
Tabloid editor had a killer plan  
 
 All hopes on Badigar now
 
 A senior officer who agreed to exchange notes with Bangalore Mirror on the express condition of anonymity said that in the absence of any concrete evidence, the police are hoping to catch Viju Badigar and make him an approver in the case. (When Belagere was arrested, the police said that Mundewadi had told them he took the killing contract from Belagere on the condition that he would take care of the planning and his brother-in-law, Viju Badigar, would carry out the execution.)
 
 Badigar is alleged to be on the run and the police have sent teams to Vijayapura to trace him.
 
 So what’s the case against the Hi Bangalore editor?
 
 Belagere had been arrested under IPC sections 120-B (criminal conspiracy), 307 (attempt to murder) and sections 3 and 25 of the Arms Act. Central Crime Branch (CCB) officials now say that the weapon recovered from Belagere’s office is licenced; and 47 bullets were also found even though as per the licence conditions, Belagere cannot keep more than 40 live rounds. Legal experts say that this will amount to violation of licence conditions and may attract an adverse remark during the licence renewal, but cannot be called illegal.
 
 Will Crime Branch probe
 
 Belagere further?
 
 Senior officers in the CCB said they will not contest Belagere’s bail petition when it comes up for hearing on Saturday (December 16) as they are done questioning the tabloid editor.
 
 However, officials want the Forest Department to take up a separate case against Belagere under the Wildlife Act as a deer pelt (with a bullet mark) and a tortoise shell (from South Africa) were recovered from his house. The police want the Forest Department to take up the case as the DG&IGP had issued an order in 2015 asking police not to register cases under the Wildlife Act.
 
 The police have registered an additional case against Mundewadi in Yelahanka police station as they claim he was in Bengaluru to attack a businessman they identified as Ramesh. Another case has been registered against him in Parappana Agrahara station and the one related to Belagere at the Subramanyapura police station. Police say they have finished questioning Mundewadi in the Parappana Agraha case and will grill him in the other two cases.
 
 When asked why he thinks Belagere is being targeted, Diwaker said that he has no clue. “I met Belagere on Sunday when he was in police custody. Even we are not aware who is behind this conspiracy and why. We will take up the issue in the next hearing,” he said.
 
 It will be interesting to see what the police have to say in opposition to the bail plea and how long they will be able to keep Belagere behind bars.

Read Also:
Sharpshooter started out as a karate teacher