According to the interim report of the recently conducted elephant census in Karnataka, the average number of elephants in the wild has gone up to 6,395. The elephant population estimation report released on Wednesday by Karnataka Forest Minister, Eshwar Khandre, indicates that the state has recorded a rise of approximately 346 individuals since the last census conducted in 2017. The elephant population estimate for 2010 was 5,740; for 2012 it was 6,072; for 2017, it was 6,049.

The top five forest divisions with the highest estimated elephant numbers include Bandipur Tiger Reserve, (mean elephant number is1116), followed by Nagarhole Tiger Reserve (831), BRT Tiger Reserve (619), MM Hills Wildlife Sanctuary (706), and Bhadra Tiger Reserve (445). The report further highlights that while nearly 82% of the elephant population was found within the protected area (PA) network indicating the importance of PAs in providing suitable habitats and conservation measures, approximately 18% of the population (nearly 953 elephants), were found outside of the PAs. Moreover, 50% of elephants sighted were adults, nearly 16% were sub-adults, 23.14% were juvenile and 10.60% were calves. The total number of elephants directly counted was 2,219 and the survey was conducted in a 6,104 square kilometre area out of the total 18,975 square kilometre. The area encompassing 32 forest divisions was studied as it is frequently used by elephants.

“The fecundity rate, which is the ratio of calves and adult females, was estimated to be 0.35 per year. It is high for any given population,” said the report.

Some conservationists caution that the results of the report cannot be used to arrive at any conclusion. Elephant census is carried out based on three methods -- direct count of elephants, transect survey or the dung count method, and waterhole count method. However, the report does not include population estimation through transect surveys. “It seems the forest department is in a hurry to present numbers. The report lacks population estimation based on transect survey. Also, the census was conducted between May 17 and May 19. Producing results within three months is not advisable and appears to be done in haste,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife researcher, Foundation of Ecology and Education Development.

Karnataka Forest Department says it is confident about its estimate, which is primarily based on block count method.

According to Avinash Krishnan, a wildlife conservationist and director, science and conservation at A Rocha India, while the numbers from transect method might sway the final figures only by a small margin, the census must be studied along with population dynamics to get a clearer picture of elephant conservation.