Family function
 
 Hema Malini with daughter Esha and son-in-law Bharat Takhtani visit the Hare Rama Hare Krishna temple in Mumbai on the occasion of Janmashtami on Tuesday
 
 Flights of fancy
 
  TEXTILE tycoon and racing aficionado Gautam Singhania might find himself at the bitter end of gossip, thanks to a family saga that has his father Vijaypat accusing him of disenfranchising him and leaving him out in the cold, but he has his little coterie close at hand. His inner circle of friends seems to stand by him — through hell and high water — for some reason. Just a few months ago, Gautam and his gang had a little boys-only trip to Maldives. In another couple of weeks, Gautam, it is believed, is taking Boman Irani, Akshay Chudasama, Asish Kapadia and, maybe, even Monty Sabharwal, to Mykonos, in Greece, for yet another boys’ trip.
 
 
  Another anniversary
 
 INDEPENDENCE Day is a special time for most of us, but a little more for designers Abu Jani and Sandeep Khosla. Of course, the Hindu-Muslim twosome is as patriotic as they come, but on a more personal note, it was on this day the two met 31 years ago, at an Independence Day brunch hosted by pioneering costume designer Xerxes Bhathena. The immediate friendship has led to an enduring relationship, upon which the legacy of their eponymous label has been built. Their first store, Mata Hari, was launched soon after. Jaya Bachchan and Dimple Kapadia were among their first clients. The actors were so much in love with their work, they have remained friends with the designers since.
 
  Batting and hopping
 
  EVER since they arrived back after a stellar performance at the Women’s Cricket World Cup, our superstar girls have not had much time for themselves. It’s been show after show and felicitation after felicitation for them. This past weekend, seven members of the team, including skipper Mithali Raj and star batter Harmanpreet Kaur, were at a studio in Mumbai for a quiz show that is being helmed by Amitabh Bachchan. On Sunday, some of the players were rushed to a studio for a chat show for a sports channel and, in between, a couple of them had to make time to attend a dance reality show, even as some others were felicitated at the Wankhede.
 
 
 Mommy is a crocodile
 
 WHILE  holiday selfies are quite the norm du jour, the term takes on a brand new meaning if you are among the best wildlife and documentary photographers in the country. Ashima Narain is on holiday in remote Maharashtra with her family — husband and Magic Bus founder Matthew Spacie, and their three tots Saira, Jahanara, and Samar. The family swims in a brown river, with Ashima stating, “Who needs a pool when the monsoon gives us a flowing river?” This picture was taken by Matthew, as the shutterbug-mum was getting trigger-happy with her kids. Just another day in the life of a mother: always at work, even when at play.
 
 Tailpiece
 
 A small-time film actor has been in a same-sex relationship with a VJ for quite some time. They claimed they are more than friends to anyone who asked them about their relationship. Their social media chats constantly had pictures of them together, either at the gym or enjoying each other’s company at cafés. But it seems over the past few weeks, the two have called off their little love-fest. They have stopped following each other on assorted sites and haven’t posted anything with them together. Also, one of them now has a boyfriend. Okay, then.