By Barkha Kumari
 
 The Deccan Conservation Foundation is leaving no stone unturned in order to save the misunderstood and elusive predator of the grasslands 
 
 Indrajit Ghorpade is a wildlife conservation photographer, and one of his favourite subjects is the elusive Indian Wolf of Koppal district in North Karnataka. In fact, not too many people know that wolves even exist in India, Ghorpade tells us, partly complaining.
 
 It’s probably because we are so focused on the tiger, he says. “In the animal kingdom, the tiger is equivalent to cricket in Indian sports. You can get a million-dollar sponsorship for a cricket match, but tell me how many will sign a cheque for a hockey game? Tiger conservation has been turned into a money-making machine (by the Indian government). Period.” Allow him to add the fact that both tigers and Indian wolves are ‘Schedule 1’ animals under The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and, thus, demand the highest level of protection.
 
 He’s not too far from the truth as far as our awareness of the animal is concerned. Blame it on pop culture or old wives’ tales, but for most of us, wolves are either werewolves of medieval Europe or ominous howlers from horror films.
 
 In other lores, they have stolen human babies, killed them and even their
 pets. The Jungle Book is a famous and rare exception. “Wolves have been misunderstood, and persecuted throughout history,” says Ghorpade, and the wolves of Koppal are no different.
 
 
 
 Fact check
 
 Let’s get our facts first. The Indian Wolf is a subspecies of the Grey Wolf, which is found across Northern Asia, Eastern Europe and North America. There are two wolf lineages in our subcontinent – the Peninsular, found across Gujarat, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh for 4,00,000 years, and the Himalayan, found in Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sikkim, with an evolution history of 8,00,000 years.
 
 The former (Canis Lupus Pallipes) is the focus of Ghorpade’s Deccan Conservation Foundation (DCF). The organisation has been working to save Indian wolves and their habitats in Koppal for close to three years now, with the larger aim of preserving the ecosystem of the Deccan plateau. They have identified two packs in Twalahalla, and one in Beleri, Ballutgi, Thalgeri and Hire Mannapur each. Plus, they are tracking the movements of three adult wolves and three pups in the scrub jungle of Mandalamari with camera traps. Ghorpade is hoping 2017 to be their breakout year, making Koppal the ‘Land of Indian wolves’.
 
 The missing numbers
 
 Why Koppal, we ask, and Ghorpade says without flinching, “I was born and brought up in the region, and I want to solve the problem in my backyard.” He comes from a royal family that settled in Gajendragarh 300-400 years ago. There was no Koppal district then. Years of geopolitical organisation split the region into several new districts, and Koppal was carved out in 1998.
 
 He comes down to “the problems”. Indian wolves here are declining fast, and are practically on the edge of extinction. However, neither he nor Iravatee Majgaonkar from the Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bengaluru, who is working with DCF to study wolves, can give you a count of how many are left. “The Indian Wolf is a neglected animal and no formal large-scale census has been conducted on it. It remains one of the least studied species because of the difficulty associated with counting its numbers; it’s an elusive animal, which can prowl close to 200sqkm of area,” says Majgaonkar. There are rumoured to be less than 2,000 wolves in India, according to a DCF report.
 
 
 
 “At one time, locals could spot a wolf every evening. Now they barely see one in three-four months,” Vinay Shankar, a project manager at DCF, shares. Add to this the shrinking litter size. This January, DCF recorded a max of four pups among the three packs that it is tracking. “When the environment is not conducive, their biological clocks tells them to produce less,” explains Ghorpade.
 
 
 Man versus the wild
 
 The reasons for the downturn are plenty: Loss of habitat as Koppal grows and urbanises, reducing the number of wolves and black bucks, their prey species, and causing the man-animal conflict, is one. Busting a myth, Ghorpade says, wolves are shy animals, and they will run away at the mere sight of a human being; they go hunting at night. Closely tied to this narrative is the story of neglect. After the extinction of the Asiatic Cheetah, the Peninsular Indian Wolf has become the apex predator of the grasslands in the Deccan. A grassland is a biome of grasses and shrub trees, which increases the water table, prevents soil erosion, and supports livestock and other biodiversity.
 
 Ghorpade highlights the problem, “In our country, grasslands are considered wastelands, and are therefore given away to set up industries. We don’t understand that grasslands, arid regions, and lakes are as important as forests (or croplands). So by protecting wolves, we are also trying to preserve the grasslands.” In present-day Koppal, there are no large, rolling grasslands, but isolated pockets, he tells us. So it’s possible for a wolf to stray into the human territory. Sadly, it has also hindered the gene pool transfer among the packs. “Earlier, one wolf would go from one territory to another to mate. This way, a progeny would get the best genes of both the alpha males and females. That’s not the case now,” he adds.
 
 
 Poaching is another issue. So is the ritual hunting by tribal people in 10 of its villages. Shankar shares, “These men go hunting at night on full moon days, and kill anything that moves. They say it’s auspicious.”
 
 According to historian Mahesh Rangarajan, 2,00,000 wolves were slaughtered in British India between 1875 and 1925. That’s because they were declared vermin – wild animals believed to be harmful to crops and livestock. Ghorpade repeats, “Wolves have been misunderstood and persecuted throughout history,” as he narrates a different version. The shepherd community in Koppal, plus the ones from Nippani village of Belgaum district, bordering Maharashtra-Karnataka, has been co-existing with wolves for generations. They consider these carnivores as their maternal uncles, or sodhara maava in Kannada (brother of Mother Nature). Amaresha Harijana of Ballutgi village lost more than 15 of his 520 sheep to a wolf attack this March, but he isn’t an angry man: “Wolves are our family. So it’s all within the family.” Or, as Ghorpade was told by a woman holding a dead sheep in her lap, “The wolves have as much right on our sheep as we have.” This is what the DCF team learnt from the shepherds: Just the smell of a wolf can give the sheep an adrenaline rush. This benefits their health, and makes the meat tastier. With no predator around them, they tend to keep their guard down, become sloppy and fat. So more the wolves around a flock of sheep, the healthier it is. “If the shepherds don’t have a problem with wolves, why does the government then want to kill them?” asks Ghorpade.
 
 The path ahead
 
 The team at DCF, comprising naturalists, retired bureaucrats, police officers, wildlife wardens, scientists, advocates, vet docs, and activists, are adamant about tackling these problems. They are now sensitising schoolchildren about the importance of wolves, their preys, and the Deccan plateau by holding discussions, and screening their film, Deccan. These conversations are replayed for residents as well – as the local community should be the custodians of their ecosystem, believes Ghorpade. Through their set-up of five cameras, and constant feedback from shepherds, they are recording the numbers of the wolves, their breeding and evolutionary behaviour, plus tracking poachers. They have recorded an astonishing biodiversity in the small scrub jungle in Mandalamari (including the rusty-spotted cat, and striped hyena). A project proposal on ‘effective conservation and management of Indian wolf, and other
 species in grasslands of Koppal district’ has been submitted to the local forest department, with September 2017-March 2019 set as the period of implementation. Hoardings of “Welcome to the land of Indian wolves” at the entrance of the district will likely go up by year-end.
 
 “The tiger is the umbrella species of forests, and the government saved the Western Ghats by saving the tiger. The same way, the wolf is the umbrella species of grasslands, and if I can save the wolf, I will save all its associated species (striped hyena, golden jackal, Indian fox, Great Indian bustard, Lesser florican), and their habitat. The wolf is my tiger, and I am batting for it,” concludes Ghorpade, a former wildlife warden of Koppal district.