By Shreyashi Mukherjee

Experts warn that if immediate action is not taken to stop sewage from entering lakes, there will be fishkill 

A recent dismal report by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board points to there being imminent danger of fishkill in at least 16 lakes in the city. These lakes have been put in the E category for the last two months, which means water from these lakes can only be used for irrigation, industrial cooling, and controlled waste disposal.

Raghavendra B Pacchapur, ActionAid India, explained that fish kills can happen in two circumstances. One of the circumstances is the regular urban runoff passing on to the lakes along with sewage silt. Another circumstance was the discharge of chemicals which are found mainly in the extended Bengaluru areas like Anekal Industrial area or Mahadevapura industrial area. In case of chemical fish kill, it happens faster while the fish kills happening due to sewage happen over a period of time. “It is worrying that water quality in the lakes of Bengaluru is not healthy and not found fit for the wildlife and aquatic life,” he said.

According to him eight lakes being classified as E category for the last three months is a serious matter and calls for immediate action, barring which fishkill would be the result. “These eight lakes turned to E category in April. And 16 lakes turned into E category in April and June. BBMP should on priority visit the 32 lakes where the water quality has been classified under class “E” and investigate if there are any live polluting streams running into the lake and arrest it immediately,” he said.

According to the report, the lakes that fall under E category since April, May and June are Kaikondrahalli Lake, Singasandra Lake, Kalkere Lake, Varthur Lake, Gangondanahalli Lake, Doddabidirukallu Lake, Bandematta Tank, Shivapura Tank.

BBMP teams should visit the 32 lakes where water quality is classified under class “E”–Raghavendra Pacchapur, ActionAid
The lakes that are under E category since May and June are Parappana Agrahara Lake, Haraluru Lake, Kasavanahalli Lake, Kempambudhi Lake, Chikkabanavara Lake, Malathahalli Lake, Subramanyapura Lake and Ullal Lake.

The lakes that have been under E category since June are Somasundarapalya Lake, Vengaiahanakere Lake, Yelemallappa Lake, Kammasandra Lake, Rayasandra Lake, Chandapura Lake, Lalbagh Lake, Yediyur Lake, Sarakki Lake, Ulsoor Training Centre, Herohalli Lake, Andhrahalli Lake, Kachohalli Lake, Vishwaneedam Lake, Machohalli Lake, Kengeri Lake.

A city-based environmentalist stressed on the need for urgency. “It is of extreme importance that the authorities take immediate action to stop sewage from entering the lakes. Till now there have been at least eight fish kills this year.”

Shivalingappa, a BBMP official, said, “We have not yet received the KSPCB report. Once we examine it, we will take the necessary precautions.” He insisted that the lakes are clean. “There is not much sewage flow, but we have to study the report in detail,” he maintained.