Canada's Lake District 
The journey begins at Calgary, the gateway for international arrivals in West Canada's Alberta district. I was glad to be there at the start of the Canadian summer which let me escape the clamour of tourist buses that pack Calgary later every year. Early next morning, we started the spectacular drive through this mountain chain that's even much older than the Himalayas. As we left the buildings of Calgary behind, we came upon small houses in the country that eventually disappeared and the green of the hills took over the cityscape as the first stretch of pure alpine came into view. 

The first overnight halt was at the sleepy town of Lake Louise, named after the 'Jewel of the Rockies', the azure Lake Louise that is its most famous attraction. Canada has the largest number of lakes in the world, and the Rockies are where you see why it's so. The heavy mist blocked most of the view, and I found it strange that despite that so many visitors were posing for a picture by Lake Louise. I kept wondering about the speciality of a lake that could barely be seen at the moment. It was only when I stood in front of the colossal Fairmont Hotel on the lake's banks that I read on a board that the legendary place was a favourite of none other than Marilyn Monroe. Before leaving, I had my picture taken by Lake Louise. 
 
Don't poke a sleeping bear 
The next day's drive was again dotted with several semi-frozen lakes, slowly melting in the wake of the approaching summer. More memorable was spotting the black bear I had been longing to see, which was still sleepy after its long winter hibernation. I wanted to step out of the car as the bear looked sleepy and harmless, but one yawn and I could see it had both a mouth and appetite big enough to easily swallow me. Seeing it up close I realised how odd it was that teddy bears are modelled after such ferocious animals! 

The climate and vegetation of the region is conducive to a unique ecology that harbours a lot of wildlife, grizzly bears being the most famous. I didn't see any grizzlies, but the cougar, the black bear, elk, wild sheep and Canadian white-tailed deer more than made up for it. The towns of Jasper and Banff are in fact part of the large Jasper and Banff National 
parks and the drive is, quite literally, into the wild. Jasper 
By late afternoon I was in Jasper, an ideal mix of mountains, cyclists, eateries and pubs. Jasper strikes the right balance between solitude and the break you need from it and instantly became my favourite town in the Rockies. If you take the tram, you can get an aerial view of the J-shaped town along with the surrounding mountains.

In the day's traipsing, I met an interesting adventure activity co-ordinator, Brent, and later regretted not having exchanged any contact with him as he would have been the best person to ask about other activities for the rest of my trip. We returned 'downtown' in the evening and hit the most popular local pub, also one with the strangest name, 'The Dead Dog'. I almost gave up when I realised I would have to walk all the way back to the hotel for an ID proof. When I reached again, it was amusing how the hotel manager's words actually came true - 'everybody goes to The Dead Dog'. From Todd, whom we had met at the tram, to Brent, who was playing pool, I met 'everybody' and my last evening in Jasper became the best. 
 
Banff
After being floored by Jasper, we headed to Banff. On our way, we stopped at the Columbian Icefield and walked up to the Athabasca glacier where a lone Inuksuk (pronounced 'Inuk-shook', it is an Inuit or Native Canadian stone structure that is a messenger of safe travel, hunting and natural shelter) stood in the midst of all the snow and mist. The starkness of Athabasca was later replaced by the diametrically opposite Lake Peyto which is a giant turquoise spill. I reached Banff expecting another quiet hill town, but was taken by surprise by its loud ways. Banff wears an unofficial 'tourist hub' badge, and the crowd there confirmed its popularity. It's the kind of place that works wonders both for the trek-weary soul and the fun-loving spirit. The horse-drawn carriages, the voluble crowds and amiable pub culture made it a memorable stopover. 
 
Memento
Close to Banff is Canmore, an amiable little town where I had stopped on my way up. I went back for two things that I had on my mind all along- a chopper ride above the Rockies and a memento I had spotted in a shop the last time. The overwhelming helicopter ride takes you high above glaciers and lakes, and soaring above this fascinating mountain chain gives a near-perfect idea of the massive scale. 

It was the ideal way to bid goodbye to the Rockies before driving back through them, one last time. Even better was taking a piece of them with me - my memento, a tiny Inuksuk made of the rock of these mountains that I cradled in the crescent of my palm.