It was hiding near a bush when Kanti, a Dasara elephant, sensed its presence and became agitated, thus alerting forest officials
 
 After three human deaths and a full-blown panic, the forest authorities have finally caught an adult healthy tiger, which, they think, is the man-eater. They tranquilised the tiger near Chikkabaragi village in H D Kote taluk on Thursday afternoon, and took it to the Mysore zoo for clinical examination. After treatment, the beast will be transported to the Bannerghatta rescue centre. 

 	Forest officials said that around 12.15 pm on Thursday, Kanti, a Dasara elephant, smelled a tiger in a nearby bush. Dr Sanath, a wildlife veterinary expert mounted on Kanti, sensed the elephant’s agitation and alerted forest officials, who fired tranquilisers in the bush. One hit the tiger near the mouth. 

 	Some Chikkabaragi villagers, however, were not certain that the forest department had caught the correct tiger. Bandipur tiger reserve director H C Kantharaju said they had captured an adult male tiger. The villagers contended that forest officials had initially said the tiger on the prowl was an old and frail one. “So how can it be the same one?” asked one among them. 

 	The man-eater claimed three lives and injured two villagers. On November 27, the tiger attacked and killed Chaluva, 40. Chikka, 32, who was with Chaluva, escaped with minor injuries. On November 29, it killed another tribal, Basavaraju, 42. 

 	Forest officials said that both Chaluva and Basavaraju were fatally injured by the tiger — the big cat crushed their skulls. A massive operation was launched on Sunday (December 1), with five elephants and 50 forest personnel teaming up with 40 members of a special tiger protection force. After two futile days, the forest department called off the operation and decided to track the tiger through photo trapping method. 

 The tiger killed Basappa on Tuesday and ate 80 per cent of his body. This angered the villagers who did not allow forest officials to do an inquest on Basappa's body for two days. They also laid siege to the forest department guest house at Chikkabaragi on Tuesday night, ransacked the office and set the furniture on fire, apart from torching a motorbike, lorry and jeep. 

 	Forest officials launched a fresh operation on Wednesday morning with a ‘shoot at sight’ mandate, and caught a tiger on Thursday afternoon. 

 

 	WHY ARE THE VICTIMS HALF-EATEN? As tigers age, they lose their teeth. Older tigers can consume some parts of the animals they manage to kill. Experts say that tigers, unlike lions, know instinctively how to kill humans. This is because monkeys, which too are bipedal on land sometimes, are part of its diet. The tiger's tongue is rough enough to scrape away meat from a prey's bones. But tigers without functioning teeth will leave the bony parts aside and consume only the fleshy portions. This is the likely reason for the man-eater leaving behind half-eaten corpses of its victims, say the experts.
 	
 	
 	 		THEY GOT THE RIGHT TIGER: EXPERT
 		 			Conservationist zoologist and tiger expert Dr Ullas Karanth said, “There is proof that the tiger caught by the forest department is indeed 		 			the man-eater as it was caught at the spot where the first killing took place. However, its identity could be further confirmed with DNA 		 			test — like matching its hair with the hair found at the site and checking its stomach for remnants of human flesh.”