Now, a pro-conservation initiative there has unwittingly led to concerns about the tiger population here. Normally, China has a huge demand for tiger products. The demand is met by poachers. But three months ago, it declared 2010 as ‘Year of the Tiger’, which means extra efforts would be made in the next 12 months to ensure the animal isn’t harmed.

As a result, Indian authorities fear poachers will target the tigers here. How to tackle the threat will be one of the main topics at a two-day brainstorming session starting Monday at Kabini tiger reserve.

As many as 30 forest officials from various parts of the country and top tiger experts are expected to participate.

The fact that they are meeting has led to fears that the state’s tiger population is under threat. But senior officials from the forest department insisted the meet is only to evolve strategies for long-term conservation of the tiger reserves.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) B K Singh told Bangalore Mirror, “It is only a brainstorming session to create awareness about conservation efforts in view of China declaring 2010 as ‘Year of the Tiger’. It is likely poachers and smugglers would eye the healthy population in our reserves. So, we plan to sensitise officers and personnel.”

The officials will be hosted by Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR), a government-run organisation that promotes eco-tourism. Elaborating on the meet, N D Tiwari, managing director, JLR, said, “Every year, the Union ministry of environment and forests organises such events. This time, the issue is ‘Tiger Reserve and Eco Tourism’. 

It will be a workshop where officials will discuss issues relating to conservation of the tiger.” Renowned tiger conservationists like Dr Ullas Karanth, Dr John Singh and Dr Rajesh Gopal are expected to participate. ‘SOUTH DOES GOOD JOB’

A senior official from the forest department said, “Eco-tourism in north India is completely different from that in south India.
 
Several tourism measures in north Indian reserves have caused a setback to conservation efforts. For example, there is no proper control on vehicles entering the reserve. But this is not the case in southern India, which boasts of a healthy tiger population. Issues like regulation of tourist activities in tiger reserves will also be discussed and a suitable strategy evolved to protect the species.”