A rare reptile was rescued from a crowded area in Bengaluru on Tuesday evening. A Monitor lizard was spotted in Upparpet. The sub-adult was safely rescued and being treated at a wildlife hospital on Uttarahalli Main Road.

      WATCH: Monitor Lizard rescued from Upparpet01:26

People for Animals' (PfA) Chief Veterinarian, Colonel Dr Navaz Shariff said, “The Monitor Lizard had no injuries when rescued and seems to be healthy upon examination. Looking at the locality it was rescued from, it seems to have fallen prey to illegal pet trade or some form of trafficking. Monitor Lizards are not found so easily in the city and most importantly not found in the crowded streets of Majestic. Even the proximity to the Bus Terminal suggests it might have fallen prey to illegal pet trade. As a next step, this animal that belongs to Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife Act will be kept at our hospital for a minimum of 10 days for Behavioural Examination. If its instinct to survive on its own is visible during this period, we will release it back to the wild”.


Dr Shariff said that the monitor lizards were rarely spotted in Bengaluru as they are not species of Urban Wildlife as they are primarily found in Scrub Jungles. They can be found in Bannerghatta Forest Range and Turahalli Forest Range in our city. "Unfortunately, there are a lot of myths surrounding Monitor Lizards. Their meat is known to increase sex drive and Monitor Lizard oils are known to relieve pain but there is no truth to this whatsoever scientifically. These myths have created a demand for them in the illegal poaching market. These species are now highly threatened as a result", he said adding that these lizards were diurnal creatures that mostly live on land and are known to live on a carnivorous diet. They feed on Bird Eggs, Small Rodents, and Bird Nestlings. They are excellent climbers and are known for good camouflage. They live in burrows that are grown up to four feet. In the recent past, rescuers have saved Slender Loris, Palm Civet, Rock Python, Mottled Wood Owl, Jungle Cat, Indian Pitta, Star Tortoise, Monitor Lizard among others.

If the Monitor Lizard is found in the wild, which is its natural habitat, leave it be. However, if they are found in private property, captivity, or injured, then one can call this free wildlife rescue helpline: +91 99000 25370 / +91 99803 39880.