The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden issued a circular to all deputy conservators of forests in the state to educate the public against harming bats. “If anyone is found killing or harming bats or its habitat, necessary action should be taken in accordance with the applicable law,’’ said Sanjay Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden.

He added that a few people had asked him if they need to chop off trees near their homes to avoid bats. “Though nobody has taken any drastic step as yet, I wanted to send this message out through the deputy conservators of forests,” he said, mentioning that bats perform vital ecosystem services in the form of pollinators, seed dispersers and pest controllers. “Killing bats is against the law and will not solve any problem,’’ he said.

According to Dr Prayag HS, Assistant Professor and Wildlife Expert, Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College, Hebbal, “There are more than 1,390 species of bats around the globe. They play ecological roles that are important to keep the natural ecosystems and humans healthy,’’ said Dr Prayag.

He said fruit-eating bats in the tropics disperse seeds that are critical to restoring rainforests.

“Bat droppings, called guano, act as a rich fertilizer,’’ he said.

On the tree-cutting incident in Mysuru, Nagarjun Kumar SM, a research scholar at the University of Mysore, said,
“I am shocked to hear that residents chopped off two trees on Ramanuja Road at Agrahara on April 4. Bats used to love visiting these trees. The misinformation about bats spreading coronavirus led to this,’’ said Kumar.


‘Stop demonising bats’

A group of bat researchers and conservationists from South Asian countries, including a few from the city, have said that the demonising of bats should stop as there is no evidence of the mammals spreading Covid-19.

Sixty four researchers and conservationists from six South Asian countries including India have said that there is no evidence of humans contracting coronavirus or any such viruses through the excreta of bats.

“The world is currently battling a pandemic of unprecedented proportions and bats have been prematurely implicated as the source of Covid-19. Recent social media posts and unverified opinions about bats have led to widespread antipathy and fear in the general public. Incidents of the public requesting for removal of bats, destroying bat roosts, bursting crackers or smoking them out and sealing crevices where bats and their pups roost has increased in the last month both in urban and rural areas in India. In this challenging time, we, as people involved in bat conservation at different capacities, would like to clarify that bats do not pose a direct human health hazard, the researchers and conservationists said.

“The viruses found in the study are different from SARS-CoV-2 and cannot cause COVID-19. Information on the current, and past zoonotic disease outbreaks suggest that global,” they added.