Bangalore has been known world over for its software engineers and medical professionals. Now, it has a new addition: Wildlife experts.

While the city is known for its wildlife species, it also boasts of having some of the best experts on wildlife. The Bangalore Forest Cell has 13 of them, who specialise in birds, lions and DNA of all pelts.

“They have a lot of experience in their respective fields. They have been associated with animals for over 15 years,” said K S N Chikkerur, former head, CID Forest Cell and currently the chief of Karnataka Railway Police.

Experts like Ravi Chellam, Director, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment (ATREE), make the list even more prominent. Known for his expertise on lions, any matter pertaining to big cats is dealt by him.

So, what is it that’s making Chellam serve in Bangalore? “There are more functioning institutes conducting studies on wildlife. Besides, the city is near to the Western Ghats,” said Chellam, who has spent five years living with lions in Gir forest, apart from being associated with forests since 1985. The list has many such notables, Dr Renuka Prasad being one of them. “Though we specialise in our respective fields, we love serving together to help wildlife,” said Prasad, Director, Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Biologicals.

He said the  forest  cell  has  been  active  enough  to seize several wildlife animals. “No wonder, the Bannerghatta National Park has all kinds of species,” he added.

He also credited the Central Zoo Authority with providing adequate funds for wildlife conservation. With so many things happening in the world of wildlife, these experts prefer to say they have a ‘world of their own’ in Bangalore.

Other Bangalore-rooted experts include Dr Ullas Karanth of Centre for Wildlife Studies, who specialises on tigers. Dr Uma Ramakrishnan is another eminent person from National Centre for Biological studies and Department of Atomic Energy. He is known for his expertise in leopard pelts and tigers.