Picture perfect
The first edition of the Nature inFocus Film Awards 2019 is here, and entries are invited from professional and emerging wildlife filmmakers. Participants in the Emerging Talent category (open to Indian participants only) can tell a story of an animal, plant or habitat in under five minutes in the Natural History segment or can highlight a conservation issue in under five minutes in the Conservation segment. In the Professional category, the films can be of any length and can be submitted from anywhere in the world. The Mobile Moments category is also open to all – an edited or unedited video clip shot on a mobile phone that captures an incredible moment of animal behaviour.

 WHEN: Till June 30
 SUBMISSIONS: awards.natureinfocus.in
 QUERIES: contests@natureinfocus.in 

 Musical melody 
Attend a Carnatic classical vocal concert with performances by Vidwan Sampagodu S Vighnaraja (Vocal), Vidushi Charulatha Ramanujam (Violin), Vidwan BC Manjunath (Mrudanga), and Vidwan G Guruprasanna (Khanjira). This is the Sri Vishnu Sahasranama Goshti Annual Day 2019 – Sri Krishnotsava. 

 WHERE: 13th Main, 35th Cross, 4th T Block, Jayanagar
 WHEN: 6pm, June 10 

 The city, imagined
Sixteen artists from different parts of Karnataka – Anil Ijeri, Animisha, Arpitha T P, Bhimappa Pattar, Eshwar Pattar, Lingaraj C Kachapur, Ninganagouda Patil, Prasad K V, Rekha Krishnamurthy, Ramesh Chavan, Sameer Rao, Sandeep S, Sunil B V, Umashankar BE and Vandana Ijeri – showcase their works at ‘Recur’. This exhibition shows the artist’s interpretations 
of their cultural identity, engulfed within the metropolitan culture.

 WHERE: Karnataka Chitrakala Parishat, Kumarakrupa Road 
 WHEN: 11am to 6pm, till June 11 

 Fables and stories
Best known for her painting on the cover page of Rabindranath Tagore’s book Geetanjali, author and artist Tarab Khan showcases her latest series of works in ‘Dancing with the Clouds’. It is an invitation to experience life through the prism of a little girl’s curiosity and her playful imagination. It is a collection of stories set in a fabled island of Nankhatoi – a land of forgotten times, that is illustrated through imaginative artworks. Khan paints on canvas and illustrates on papers with visible ink. She uses mediums such as oil, acrylic, water, crayons, pen and sometimes, pencils.

 WHERE: Sublime Galleria, UB City, 
Vittal Mallya Road WHEN: Till July 4

 Shades of spring
Check out ‘Acrosstiched’ – the spring summer 19 collection by designer Kavita Bhartia. Bhartia is known for showcasing the richness and tradition of India in her work. This collection showcases pristine craftsmanship, reinterpreting the form of cross-stitch. The eponymous label flaunts a minimalistic approach with a prettiness that layers feminine softness. There is a medley of colours and textures with a palette comprising pale blush, sage, misty yellow, melon and hot pink.

 WHERE: Collage Shop India, Wood St, Ashok Nagar
 WHEN: 10 am to 7 pm, till June 30 
 CALL: 25566819

 Start with a party
Beat the Monday blues with DJ Kamra. Known to make people get up and dance with his selection of commercial hip hop and Hollywood music, he will make sure you get your feet tapping.

 WHERE: Nolimmits, Magrath Road
 WHEN: 8pm, June 10 ENTRY: Free