For the first time, the city gets a two-day festival on wildlife photography that will facilitate interactions between experts and amateurs
 
 Four years ago, city-based wildlife photographer Kalyan Varma bought himself a day pass to attend the Wild Photos held at London. Although the ticket was expensive (about £ 300) the festival, which is one of the world’s best wildlife photography events, was the right place for him to attend lectures and interact with the world’s best shutterbugs. “The ambiance was vibrant and informative and I met the Steve Winter, the acclaimed National Geographic Society photographer.” 

 Last year, their paths crossed once again in London, when Varma won the BBC Wildlife Photographer of the year. Winter was part of the jury and he wished to see more of Varma’s pictures. He was so appreciative, Varma says, that he said he wished he had taken Varma’s frame of a cheetah chasing deer. Winter even generously called up the Nat Geo editor, asking him to take a look at the pictures. “We interacted and spoke about his upcoming project in India on leopards,” Varma recalls. 

 	It was the experience of having such enriching face-to-face interactions with legends that led Varma to organise Nature In Focus, where photographers can exchange notes with the fraternity. “There are several online platforms where photographers hang out, but somehow, meeting people face to face is different,” says Varma. Award winning works will be seen as slideshows in lectures and workshops. And the keynote speaker is Winter himself, who will be speaking in detail about camera traps, an important element in wildlife photography. 

 	“Wildlife photography is not about just taking pictures of wild animals,” says Varma. “With experience, you realise that the thought process behind each frame is more important than technique or camera.” Narration is vital to the process of creating art, and in wildlife photography too. Bangalore, according to Varma, is one of the best locations for wildlife photographers as there are several destinations that can be reached in a couple of hours. 

 	Take the example of Kukrebellur, a village on the way to Mysore, where storks and cranes come to nest. Most enthusiasts, says Varma, go there in the right season and take pictures of the birds in flight. “But if you zoom out, you will see how the villagers pick up the chicks that have fallen from their nest and put them back. Wildlife conservation too should be documented.” 

 	To highlight the several aspects of wildlife photography, the festival will have a platform for photographers to showcase their works. Tasneem Khan will be showcasing her underwater works in the Andaman, Ganesh H Shankar will be showing his fine art photographs centred on wildlife, Ganesh Raghunathan will be focussing on his oeuvre of elephant photography and Arti Kumar-Rao shall show works made during her year -long project on water. 

 	Wildlife biologist and ecologist MD Madhusudan, herpetologist Romulus Whitaker and ornithologist Dr MB Krishna will talk on their areas of expertise. “Usually, photographers are a careful lot but there have been instances when they cross that line and disturb wildlife,” rues Varma. 

 	To get into this genre, a photographer must have a love of and healthy respect for nature, research well and enjoy the learning process, advises Varma. Also take the help of locals. He cites an example, “After talking to locals, I realised that in summer, the Kabini River starts drying and receding, leaving in its wake soft green grass. Near Nagarhole, I was on a boat and actually saw herds of elephants coming to feast on the grass.” 

 	There was a plan to invite photographers to upload their pictures on their Facebook page, which would be printed and displayed along the MG Road boulevard, but that has now been shelved due to budget and time constraints. “Maybe next year,” says Varma. The organisers are raising money through sponsors and master classes. 

 	Nature In Focus, March 29- 30,  

 	Hotel Lalit Ashok, 8.30 am onwards.  

 	1 Day Pass: 600 

 	The frame that got away 	In 2005, Kalyan Varma was driving his Maruti 800 through Bandipur in the night. His headlights caught a tiger that had just killed a sambar deer and was holding it by the neck. New to the field, Varma was shivering as the big cat approached the car, growling. The picture he took turned out to be just an orange smear, thanks to his shaking hands. “Today, I will take the picture calmly, because I know the tiger won't attack me without any provocation,” says Varma.