While he was alive, forest brigand Veerappan was a thorn in the flesh of the state government. But now, it is trying to fill its coffers by milking his story.    The state forest department is revisiting the forest in a bid to turn his former stronghold into one of the major attractions of its eco-tourism package. The department has even roped in ex-associates of the notorious smuggler for a ‘Mystery Trail Camp’ at his village, Gopinatham, in the Male Mahadeshwara hills (MM Hills) near the border of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.   The camp is located between MM Hills and Hogenekal Falls. It was built at a cost of Rs 1.3 crore to target wildlife enthusiasts, bird watchers, trekkers and photographers who flock MM Hills and Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary. This is the first time that the government has invoked the legend of Veerappan to attract tourists.   The government-owned Jungle Lodges and Resorts (JLR) had come up with a programme at Gopinatham which was wound up due to poor response. The latest attempt is being made by the forest department.   Explaining the details, B L G Swamy, Range Forest Officer of MM Hills, said, ""The earlier attempt relied solely on word-of-mouth publicity. This time, we have put up hoardings to publicise the camp. We have incorporated the best available facilities at the site. Earlier, each tourist was charged about Rs 2,000 for accommodation and a guide. We have brought the amount down to Rs 1,000. We have 10 tents that look like Igloos, the huts of Eskimos, which are not only rainproof but also capable of withstanding the harsh temperatures of this region, which is home to dense deciduous forests and shrubs.""   The forest department has made arrangements for water sports, like kayaking and coracle riding, bird watching and mountain biking. Tourists will be treated to the native cuisine. The department is planning to throw open the camp for the public by the end of February.    The major attraction will be a 17 km trek around Gopinatham village. It includes a visit to the cremation site of IFS officer and Keerti Chakra recipient P Srinivas who was beheaded by Veerappan in 1991. The memorial to Srinivas has been renovated by the department at a cost of Rs 1.5 lakh. The guides will be former poachers and associates of Veerappan, who are now serving the forest department as anti-poaching staff.    ""There are about 25 ex-poachers out of which six were in Veerappan’s gang. They will narrate stories from their time with Veerappan. They will also give insights into his modus operandi, like hiding essential items in the forest, keeping tabs on the movement of cops and animals, and demonstrate survival skills that were adopted during adverse weather conditions. We believe that this trek, covering a distance of 17 km, would be an unforgettable experience,"" said yet another forest official.