The horticulture department’s plan to convert a reserve forest in Yelahanka into city’s largest park raises red flags for green reasons

The horticulture department’s plan to convert a reserve forest into a park, bigger than Cubbon Park and Lalbagh, seems to run the risk of legal hurdles. While the department embarked upon the project with a mission to do “something big” for the city, the proposal, environmentalists say, could destroy the natural resources of North Bengaluru.
 
It’s learned that the horticulture department has engaged a bunch of surveyors to survey Jarakabande Reserve Forest in Yelahanka, which is spread over 444 acres. The proposal to convert a portion of the forest into a park was also discussed with the forest department. The department wants to take up the project by following the process mentioned in the Forest Conservation Act for ‘non-forest purpose’.

However, certain environmentalists believe that the proposal goes against the principle of protecting reserve land. In an open letter, written to Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai recently, they point out that the forest land must be left as it is for the benefit of wildlife.
 
“There are already JB Kaval Tree park and JB Kaval Butterfly Garden with walking and cycling paths, attracting many visitors from far and near,” the letter stated, urging the government to drop the plan.


The city of parks all set to get its biggest park everThe proposed park is to be developed with the coordination of the Horticulture and Forest departments. This park will enhance the green cover of the city and contribute towards reducing the pollution of the city caused by rising vehicles in the city.
UV Singh, a retired IFS officer, was of the view that the proposal violates the Supreme Court’s judgment from 1996. Karnataka, he said, had come up with a working plan for all forests including JB Kaval on the basis of SC’s direction. “If the working plan has to be altered, it needs the centre’s approval,” he said.

The state government, he said, should act as a trustee or custodian of the natural resources. “If the government wants to go ahead, it will find a way out,” Singh said.
 
“The planners should act judiciously and not in an arbitrary manner.”

He asked, “Is it advisable to convert natural forest, which acts as a carbon sink in a city like Bengaluru with high pollution? If the government goes on converting forests into parks, where is the sanctity of the rules and regulations?”

Leave the forests as forests. Let wildlife thrive in their habitat. We need the forests for oxygen, water and to enhance our mundane urban lives–Krishna Datta NC
The open letter also reminded the state government that Bengaluru has already lost 6,000 acres of forest land for different purposes such as setting up veterinary villages, residential layouts, the Jakkur Flyover school, Bengaluru University, etc.
 
“Leave the forests as forests. Let urban wildlife thrive in their habitat. Forest does not need us. We need forests for oxygen, water and to enhance our mundane urban life,” the letter written by Krishna Datta NC, read.

Meanwhile, Sanjay Mohan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) said that the proposal to convert the reserve forest into a park was just an idea suggested to ministers and there has been no formal discussion on this. “So many ideas come up for discussion at the government level and we have not been planning to convert the reserve forest into a park. It is not easy to do it either as it is a reserve forest,” he said.