Those who live and work in HAL have come to understand that they have to coexist with these reptiles. There is never a day when at least four or five of them don’t spot a snake at their homes or offices. From a harmless grass snake to a poisonous cobra, they see them when they least expect them. So it wouldn’t be wrong to assume Vincent’s name is on most of their speed dials! “I have had calls at 12 in the night about a snake in a home,” he shrugs.

At first glance, Vincent looks like your average body builder, who should be obsessed with his triceps and abs. And 33-year-old Vincent Raj has won the Mr Karnataka title twice. “When I joined HAL, I was so scrawny that they nicknamed me TB Patient. So I took it up as a challenge and within two years in the gym, my body had developed without any steroids,” he says.
Still, once he starts about the variety of snakes he has caught, their mannerisms, their distinguishing marks, you realise where his heart lies. This diploma holder is a completely self-taught wildlife enthusiast.

“I actually began life as a hunter, because in our village, we had to deal with the monkeys that destroyed our crops. I had a double-barrel gun and had to use it when needed,” he says. But a chance rescue of a cobra as a seventh standard student changed his life. “I was out with a colonel who lives close by in a wooded area on a hunt. He was aiming at a boar. What he did not realise was that a cobra had uncoiled from the tree under which he was standing and was getting ready to strike at him. I grabbed its head without thinking. When I let it go, it made me realise the value of saving a life and that is what I have been doing ever since,” he says.

When Vincent joined HAL, the company knew nothing of his special talent. But once he caught a spectacled cobra at an officer’s residence, word quickly spread. “I have caught vipers, crate snakes, stiff knuckle backs, even a baby python. The longest snake I have caught is a nine-and-half feet crate snake,” he says. Has he ever been bitten in his line of work? “Of course, yes. I have been bitten twice by cobras. But it is a myth that people bitten by cobras die immediately. Most of them die because of the terror,” he explains.

So what happens to the snakes caught by him? “I take them to Bannerghatta and release them there. I do that immediately; otherwise it is like torturing them,” he says.

WHEN YOU SEE A SNAKE
Ensure that children and other family members are kept away

A snake will not strike you unless you provoke it

Don’t surround the reptile and hustle it into a dark corner. It will be very difficult for a snake rescuer to get it out.

Don’t attempt to catch the snake by yourself. However, if the snake is in the open, carefully upturn a bucket over it and set a heavy weight on it. 

In case of a bite, calm down the patient. Half the deaths are caused by fright rather then the venom.