Study urges more approaches be included as precise estimates a must for conservation action

After testing a dung-based method of estimating herbivore population density in Nagarhole National Park, scientists have sounded a word of caution against just using this method. Scientists from the Centre for Wildlife Studies in collaboration with Foundation for Ecological Research, Advocacy and Learning [FERAL] (India) and Conservation Research Ltd (UK) found that the estimates were significantly higher than the numbers measured by sighting-based distance sampling. 

Due to the differences in results, the scientists emphasise on the need to conduct experimental study of a known population in a fenced reserve to determine the validity of using dung-based approaches in population density estimations.

This article was published in the international journal Ecology and Evolution by Farshid S Ahrestani and co-authored by N Samba Kumar, Srinivas Vaidyanathan, Lex Hiby, Devcharan Jathanna and K Ullas Karanth. The study estimated and compared large herbivore densities for chital, elephant, gaur, muntjac, sambar, and wild pig. Dung pile counts, decay rates estimated from field experiments, and defecation rates derived from literature, were utilised to construct models using programme DUNGSURV in moist and dry deciduous forests. Wild pig densities were found to be similar in both types. Sambar were found in a higher concentration in the dry deciduous terrain. The other four species (gaur, chital, muntjac, and elephant) were found to be higher in the moist deciduous forests. 

The DUNGSURV density estimates were found to be significantly higher than the line transect results in both types of forests. “Large ungulates are a highly threatened group of animals, and this study was an attempt to calibrate a widely-used, dung-count base ungulate monitoring methodology against the rigorous well-established method of line transect sampling,” said lead author Dr. Ahrestani (FERAL).

This study highlights the importance of calculating unbiased estimates of dung decay. “This study raises concerns about the reliability of elephant population monitoring using dung-based methods, which are in use in India and parts of Africa,” elaborates co-author and Director, CWS Dr Karanth.
The study concludes that despite the infeasibility of using visual methods for population estimates, the simplistic application of dung-based approaches could lead to inaccurate results.