If all goes well, Karnataka will soon have its own state butterfly! And it’s the striking Southern Birdwing (Troides minos).
 
 
 	After adopting a state bird (Neelkanth) and a state tree (Sandalwood), the government is only a few steps away from declaring this rare butterfly species its very own. 
 	
 	  	In 2015, Maharashtra had declared the Blue Mormon as its state butterfly. And now, Sanjay Mohan, additional principal chief conservator of forests (APCCF), forest research, has written to the state wildlife warden to declare Southern Birdwing as officially Karnataka’s. 
 	
 	  	Mohan has been active in creating awareness about various endangered species of plants and animals through workshops titled ‘One with Nature’ (OWN). He and his team of officials and volunteers have been on a plantation spree, hoping to create a habitat that will bring back the butterfly species lost from the state.
 	
 	  	“Considering the importance of the species and its presence across Karnataka, I personally suggested that it should be declared as state butterfly. In fact, I wrote to chief wildlife warden BG Hosmath a few weeks ago who agreed in principle and promised to take it up with the State Wildlife Board in its next meeting,” said Mohan.
 	
 	  	The Southern Birdwing can be seen all over the state, although in patches, said Mohan. “It is the largest of all the butterfly species documented in India. Coincidentally, the butterfly has yellow on its wing, along with a dominant black, while the body has a bit of red,” he said, referring to the colours on the state flag. 
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	
 	  	Noted butterfly conservationist Sammilan Shetty said, “It is a welcome move that the government has decided to declare Southern Birdwing as the state butterfly. All these days we are talking about tigers, elephants, leopards and other birds. Very little is spoken about minor fauna like the butterfly. This would help create awareness about the rich diversity of butterflies across Karnataka. A thriving population of butterflies is an indication of a healthy ecological system. I am all support for the Southern Birdwing.”
 	
 	  	According to Shetty, the female of the species is the largest butterfly in India. Its wingspan measures 140-190 mm, making it easier for people to identify. It is largely found in the Western Ghats region.