TRAFFIC India accelerates efforts on strengthening wildlife law enforcement in India

Posted on 22 December 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments


Lucknow: TRAFFIC India in association with Wildlife Institute of India and with the support of DEFRA, Govt. of UK launched a workshop on “Strengthening Wildlife Law Enforcement in India” in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh today. This training is a part of a collaborative effort between the Govt. of India, Govt. of UK and TRAFFIC, a wildlife trade monitoring network, for dissemination of knowledge and skills for combating wildlife crime across the country.

The workshop was inaugurated by Dr. DNS Suman, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Govt. of Uttar Pradesh. Also present at the occasion was Mr B.K Patnaik, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest-Wildlife, Uttar Pradesh along with 40 participants from the forest department, police, DRI and SSB. 
This two day workshop aims to sensitize the officers on the latest tools and techniques available to fight the illicit wildlife trade and also to give them an overview of the organised global wildlife crime. 
This programme is being supported by DEFRA, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs of the Govt. of U.K., under the UK-India Sustainable Development Dialogue (UK-India SDD) between the Governments of India and UK. 
Inaugurating the workshop, Dr. DNS Suman said that this multi agency training is the first of its kind in U.P. He congratulated the efforts of WII, DEFRA and TRAFFIC for providing the opportunity to key enforcement agencies in Uttar Pradesh to acquire skills for combating the illicit wildlife trade and also added that such specialized trainings will help in improving the convictions rate of wildlife crimes cases. 
Samir Sinha , Head TRAFFIC India while conducting the workshop described wildlife crime as a form of organized Transnational Crime and the need of an organized response to such crime. He talked about the regional and global reach of such crimes and the need to continuously update skills and knowledge in meeting this challenge. He also familiarized the participants with the training module. 
Resource material provided to the participants includes printed compendium, CDs on various related themes and other books, posters etc. pertaining to wildlife law and enforcement issues. A copy of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, CRPC manual and a CD containing questions from the year 2004-07 pertaining to Wildlife raised in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha have also been provided to participants for easy and ready reference. During the course of this workshop, a wildlife forensic sample collection kit developed jointly by Wildlife Institute of India and TRAFFIC has been distributed to the participants. The customized kit will enable the field staff to collect samples for forensic analysis as per the prescribed protocols. 
Ends 
About DEFRA
Defra (the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) is a Government Department in the UK. The overarching challenge for Defra is to secure a healthy environment in which we and future generations can prosper.  
About TRAFFIC-India

TRAFFIC is the world’s largest wildlife trade monitoring network and a joint programme of WWF, the conservation organization and IUCN-the International Union for Conservation of Nature. It was established in 1976 and since then it has developed a considerable international reputation for helping to identify and address conservation challenges linked to trade in wild animals and plants.   
In India, TRAFFIC carries out research and provides analysis, support and encouragement to efforts aimed at ensuring that wildlife trade is not a threat to conservation of nature in India. TRAFFIC-India works as a programme division of WWF –India, the largest conservation organization in India.  
About WII
Established in 1982, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is an internationally acclaimed Institution, which offers training program, academic courses and advisory in wildlife research and management. The Institute is actively engaged in research across the breadth of the country on biodiversity related issues. 
For more information, please visit: www.traffic.org and www.wwfindia.org/traffic  or Contact: Mr. Samir Sinha, 09868144462 and 011- 41504786/43516290.


Note

Illegal wildlife trade is widespread globally, and is amongst the largest criminal activities. The  most commonly known products in illegal wildlife trade in India are: Mongoose hair, snakeskin, Rhino horn, Tiger and Leopard claws, bones, skins, whiskers, Elephant tusks, deer antlers, turtle shells, musk pods, bear bile, medicinal plants, timber and caged birds such as parakeets, mynas and munias.