Indian Environment Minister and National award winning actor pledge support for tiger conservation

Posted on 18 October 2012
 
|
 

1 Comment








Indian Environment Minister Ms. Jayanti Natrajan and film star Rana Dagubatti show their support for forest guards at the UN Convention on Biological Diversity in Hyderabad, by signing a WWF Cards4tigers post card.



© Dipankar Ghose/WWF-India



Hyderabad - Indian Environment Minister Ms. Jayanti Natrajan was joined by award-winning Indian film star Rana Dagubatti at an event that brought out holistic and state-of-the-art conservation efforts underway to step up the conservation of tigers globally.



As a special highlight of the event, the Minister and Rana signed a Cards4tigers postcard, registering their support to the forest guards, as a part of a WWF campaign that recognizes frontline staff who work tirelessly in harsh conditions to protect the tigers. 



Emphasising the high level of commitment that India has made towards tiger conservation, the Indian Minister of Environment and Forests, Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan said “India has made significant progress in implementing plans to protect and increase its wild tiger population. The increased use of monitoring technology like camera traps, and M-STrIPES are yielding success in reducing the vulnerability of India’s flagship species.’’‘’The collective effort of all stakeholders including civil society will be vital to take us further from the success that we have already achieved.’’ she said.



These important discussions around tiger conservation and the show of support came as the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) entered the high-level portion of the negotiations in Hyderabad, India. 



Bringing out optimism and hope in eventually the turning the corner on tiger conservation, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), WWF-India, Global Tiger Forum (GTF) and Wildlife Institute of India (WII) showcased state-of-the-art technology and new initiatives that are being adopted to monitor tigers and other wildlife, the recovery of tiger populations, and efforts towards halting illegal wildlife trade and poaching.

The Global Tiger Forum, an intergovernmental body for tiger range states, announced positive developments from Russia in moving towards becoming a member, and also reported that China will become a GTF member in the very near future.



“Just like the Taj Mahal cannot be built without the efforts of those who lay the stone, tiger conservation cannot be successful without the efforts of our forest guards. They are truly the unsung heroes, often working in the most difficult conditions to save the tigers. We ought to appreciate their efforts and motivate them. I appeal to the public to recognize their efforts, and spare a thought by sending them a message of appreciation for their work so that the tiger and our forests are conserved,” said Rana Dagubatti. 



“The intelligent and continuous monitoring of tigers and their prey, enhanced protection and better infrastructure planning are immediate and crucial aspects that must be stepped up if we are serious about conserving tigers,’’ said Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO of WWF-India. ‘Frontline protection is a crucial element to safeguard against poaching – the biggest threat to tigers today - and needs to be strengthened across tiger range states.’’, he added. 



For further information:

Aarti Khosla, WWF-India, +91-98111-99288, akhosla@wwfindia.net  

Chris Chaplin, WWF-International, cchaplin@wwf.sg, Hyderabad: +91 96522 36722 or Singapore: +65-9826-3802



About NTCA

The National Tiger Conservation Authority, a statutory body under the Ministry of Environment and Forests, India, addresses the ecological as well as administrative concerns for conserving tigers, by providing a basis for protection of tiger reserves, providing strengthened institutional mechanisms for the protection of ecologically sensitive areas and endangered species. The Authority also ensures enforcing of and monitoring compliance of guidelines for tiger conservation, apart from capacity building for tiger reserves.



M-STrIPES: Monitoring System for Tigers’-Intensive Protection and Ecological Status, is the software monitoring system launched by the Indian Government. This improves patrol intensity and spatial coverage thereby leading to improved park management and better conservation.