Emerging economies boost Earth Hour participation

Posted on 26 March 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








India Gate switched off



© WWF-India



Earth Hour has now swept into Europe, bringing with it a host of significant commitments of action on the environment from across Oceania and Asia. 



The symbolic action of turning lights out for an hour in an expression of concern for the environment is in the process of being officially observed in thousands of communities across 134 countries and territories on all continents.



“We are seeing a boom in participation in many of the world’s emerging economies this year, an encouraging sign as these countries begin to take an increasingly prominent place on the world stage,” said WWF International Director General Jim Leape, present at India’s official switch off event at India Gate in New Delhi. 



“The incredible participation in Earth Hour this year, especially right here in New Delhi, is testimony to a great concern about the health of the living resources on which we all depend, and a recognition that each of us can play a part in building a sustainable future.”



“Each one of us has the power to make a difference”: Indian actress Vidya Balan

Earth Hour in India has nearly doubled over last year’s record effort, with 47 cities across 12 states confirmed to take part before the event, compared to the 27 cities participating in 2010.



“For Earth Hour 2011, I pledge to not just switch off but to go beyond the hour,” said well-known Bollywood actor Vidya Balan. "Each one of us has the power to make a difference. We just need to be conscious of it and make wise choices. When each of us takes simple steps, together these actions add up. I am supporting the fight against climate change by adopting some of these steps. It's time you do too." 



Balan joined the Honorable Chief Minister of India, Smt Sheila Dikshit, along with Vidya Balan, Jim Leape, Director General of WWF-International and Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO of WWF-India in turning off the ceremonial switch at New Dehli’s India Gate - although the monument continued to glow by candlelight even as its floodlights cooled. Palash Sen, the lead vocalist of the popular Indian band Euphoria was the star of a spectacular musical evening around the monument. 



In Mumbai, popular landmarks such as Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus, Bandra Worli Sea Link, ITC Maratha, and Taj Lands End switched off lights. So too did headquarters of several public and private sector organisations like Air India, ICICI and HSBC, to name a few. The city of Bangalore too showcased its support towards Earth Hour, turning off lights in Brigade Road, ING Vysya, Infosys and at the Crowne Plaza Hotel.



“Looking at the huge impact of this extraordinary campaign, one can assess the power of individual action for a better tomorrow,” said Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India.



Korea’s largest search engine supports Earth Hour

Korea's largest search engine - Naver - launched the day with a special logo (doodle) and featured the event on the five million user social network "Me2day". Some 156 cities participated in the event, with the President’s office being dimmed for the occasion. 



Human rights lawyer, Wonsoon Park, a recipient of the Ramon Hagsaysay Award - Asia’s closest equivalent of the Nobel Peace Prize - was the official Ambassador for Earth Hour and led 500 people gathered in front of Seoul Tower for a countdown ceremony and the observance of a minute of silence for the victims of the recent earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 



Chengdu launches citywide bicycle plan, Shenyang opts for reforestation

In mainland China, 84 cities committed to go beyond the hour, with major urban centres from the southwest to northeast taking action for the planet.



In Chengdu, the symbolic lights-out event will be followed by an initiative that will see up to 60,000 low-cost rental bicycles made available for public use at over 1000 rental points city-wide. Meanwhile, on the other end of the country, Shenyang - a former industrial powerhouse - has pledged to reforest 96,000 acres this year to combat deforestation. 



Beijing’s most famous landmarks including the Olympic sites – Bird's Nest and Water Cube have turned out their lights off for an hour. This is in addition to the China World Trade Centre Tower 3, the tallest building in Beijing.



The Shanghai World Financial Centre (the tallest building in all of China); the Jin Mao Tower; the Oriental Pearl Tower and People’s Square all switched off the lights in Shanghai. Furthermore, the city will create 1,000 hectares of new urban green space.



“WWF deeply appreciates the commitments cities are making across the country,” said Jim Gradoville, CEO of WWF-China. “These cities are keeping track of an evolving Earth Hour global movement, and rising to meet the need for real action for the environment. We welcome more cities to do the same.”



Chinese musical duo and Earth Hour China Ambassadors Yu Quan also released a Chinese-language theme song for Earth Hour 2011: “Turn off the Light”. 

Hai Quan, one-half of the musical duo Yu Quan, said of the track: “The song comes from the heart. Our lyrics mention polar bears, and your heart lighting up when you help the Earth because those are things we think about and have experienced. We care deeply about the environment, and as musicians, one of the best ways we can protect it is through our craft’s ability to reach and touch people.”



In Hong Kong, the Victoria Harbour waterfront was plunged into darkness as the world’s largest permanent light and sound show was suspended for the evening. The Culture Centre at Tsim Sha Tsui hosted the official countdown ceremony which featured performances from Earth Hour Ambassadors Andox and Box. Government House switched off for Earth Hour for the first time this year, and National Geographic Asia suspended its normal programming for the hour. 



5000 Mongolians brave minus five degrees

Mongolia celebrated its second Earth Hour with over 5,000 people ignoring temperatures of minus five degrees Celsius around a vast candle-lit Earth Hour logo in the main square of capital, Ulaan Baatar. All buildings around Sukbaatar Square coordinated a switch-off for the crowd and 10 national television stations. The hour of darkness was marked by recording commitments to Beyond the Hour actions, musical performances, and a fire show. 



Vietnam also turned out impressively for Earth Hour, with 37 provinces and cities officially participating - nearly double the number of 2010. Lights went out on the Huc Bridge, Thap Rua, Ngoc Son Temple, and The Hanoi Opera House. 



An event held by WWF in association with The People’s Committee of Hue City in Nghinh Luong Temple, saw the participation of leaders of Ministry of Industry and Trade, Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, leader of Hue city, representatives of departments, businesses, organizations, volunteers, citizens and media agencies. All held a minute’s silence to acknowledge the crisis in Japan and government representatives gave speeches. 



Hue Television broadcast a concert directed by artist Huy Tuan that featured many talented, environmentally concerned singers including Mai Khoi, Le Cat Trong Ly, Ngoc Anh, Minh Chuyen, Manh Ninh, and Nguyen Duc Cuong and Earth Hour Vietnam ambassador Van Mai Huong, runner-up of Vietnam Idol 2010. 



Glowing dancers light up darkened Malaysia

In Malaysia, WWF-Malaysia Executive Director/CEO Dato’ Dr Dionysius Sharma joined celebrities, the media and members of the public in a day-long Earth Hour throw-down featuring an eco-bazaar and live performances at Sunway Pyramid, a larger-than-life recreational theme park and shopping centre near the capital, Kuala Lumpur. 



The Petronas Towers stood in darkness as Sunway switched off at 8:30pm, and “Dance in the Dark” for Earth Hour 2011 got underway, led by dancers from WWF-Malaysia and supported by students from local colleges. Covered from head to toe in glow-in-the-dark paint, the troupe of 60 dancers entertained the crowd with a routine that had been posted on WWF-Malaysia’s Facebook page the week before.



“From now until Earth Hour 2012, WWF-Malaysia is urging everyone across the nation to take Earth Hour beyond the hour by pledging online to ‘Live Green: One switch at a time’ towards more sustainable lifestyles,” Dr Sharma said. “The more people who make this pledge, the more powerful our efforts to protect our living planet become.” 



Singapore keeps it cool with air conditioning pledge and “Walk in the Dark” event

This year in Singapore over 3,000 people including celebrity supporters Nadya Nutagalung, Utt, Felicia Chin, Tung Soo Hua, Pan ling ling and Huan Shinan took part in the first Earth Hour “Walk in the Dark”, circling the city’s historic Marina Bay. An Earth Hour event featured a live concert with popular duo Jack and Rai, Dawn Ho and Syltra Lee, and a carnival and outdoor movie screening. At the carnival, participants could exchange one litre of used cooking oil for a face towel, personalise kites with wishes for a healthy planet and patronise stalls selling eco-friendly products. The Guest of Honour was Dr Amy Khor, Minister of State for the Ministry of Environment and Water Resources. 



The impressive list of national monuments and landmarks that supported Earth Hour in Singapore include the Lion City’s national emblem, The Merlion, Marina Bay Sands, Orchard Road, Resorts World Sentosa, Changi Airport and the Singapore Flyer.



Even more impressive is the success of WWF-Singapore’s “Beyond the Hour” campaign, which calls for businesses and individuals across the island to set their air conditioning at 24ºC or higher. Enterprises meeting the energy-saving challenge include Fullerton Heritage properties, the Marina Bay Sands Complex and Resorts World Sentosa.



Brunei staged a plastic bag free day and pledged to drop taxes on hybrid cars by five per cent and small engined cars (under 1.8 litres) by 15 per cent. Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddin Mosque, Yayasan Complex and the Kampong Ayer Cultural and Tourism Gallery extinguished their lights to mark Earth Hour. The Minister of Tourism for Borneo, Sheikh Jamaluddin Sheikh Mohamed lent his support to the event.

WWF-Indonesia commits to bringing renewable light to far off places



Indonesia’s Presidential Palace may have extinguished its lights for Earth Hour but WWF-Indonesia has committed itself to lighting up some isolated areas with renewable power. 



“With the support from OSO Group, we built a Micro Hydro Power Plant (PLTMH) in Harowu village, Central Kalimantan. The operation of the 15 KW plant is expected to generate power for 60 households in the village,” said WWF-Indonesia CEO Dr. Pak Efransja.



Other landmarks to go dark in South East Asia’s most populous city (population 18.7 million) included the Jakarta City Hall, the National Monument (Monas), the Hotel Indonesia Traffic Circle, the Arjuna Wiwaha Statue and Pemuda Statue. Other Indonesian cities also came on board this year, including Bandung, Semarang, Yogyakarta and Surabaya.



In Cambodia, a host of hotels, restaurants and attractions in the main tourist area along Sisowat Quay darkened for Earth Hour. 



“As individuals, we can do our own little part to reduce the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere and take action on climate change for 365 days,” said Cambodian actor, Yuth Darachhany. Colleague Mr Tep Rindaro, a legendary figure who has been in the Cambodian film industry for 30 years, also lent his profile, encouraging Cambodians to take action for the planet.



In Bangkok, the Royal Palace led a list of landmarks observing Earth Hour, along with Arun Rachawararam Temple, one of the city’s most recognisable landmarks, and the city hall which hosted an exhibition of beyond the hour activities by Thai companies. Lights were also extinguished along Patong Beach in Phuket, and the old gates and three kings monument in Changmai. Other provinces taking part included Khonkean, Nakorn Rachasrima and Prathumthanin.



In Colombo, Sri Lanka, 4,000 people have gathered outside the cricket grounds to observe Earth Hour while watching the world cup semi final - and rejoiced in a Sri Lanka triumph. Music moguls Bathiya and Santhus exhorted their fans.



“We call all our fans to add their voice to a global call for action against Climate Change and join us in going beyond the hour and changing our lifestyles to reduce the environmental footprint, which will help us lead the way to a greener tomorrow.” 



Plastics ban, energy efficient lights and tree-planting for Lord Buddha’s birthplace

The Government of Nepal has made one of the largest ‘beyond the hour’ commitments for Earth Hour with an undertaking to put a complete stop to tree-felling in the 23,000 sq km Churiya Range. These striking hills are a key watershed for the rich Terai Arc landscape in southern Nepal - an area where WWF has long worked to improve the conditions of the people and the rich wildlife.



Earth Hour commemorations will also take place at the nearby birthplace of Lord Buddha in Lumbini, near the Indian border. Highlights of this event will include commitments to install compact fluorescent bulbs in all of the Lumbini Gardens monasteries and planting 108,000 trees in Lumbini Gardens this year (as an Earth Hour and Year of Forests pledge) with an ultimate target of one million trees within a span of ten years. The World Heritage site is also to be declared a plastic free zone.



At celebrations at Boudhanath Stupa in capital Kathmandu, an Earth Hour logo drawn with 1000 traditional butter fat candles lit the sky, while Salil Subedi and EarthBeat engaged the audience in a performance of didgeridoo and drums.



Mr. Anil Manandhar, Country Representative of WWF-Nepal said, “Earth Hour is not just about the 60 minutes of solidarity for the environment. This year, Earth Hour will go beyond the hour, marking a moment where every individual, government and business can make their commitment to environmentally sustainable actions for the forthcoming year.”



Sustain life: Pakistan Prime Minister

In Pakistan, Sindh has been declared an Earth Hour Province, with the provincial assembly building going dark and Karachi leading the list of 15 cities taking part. 



Pakistan’s main Earth Hour celebration was held at the Tomb of Qiad-e-Azam, noted as the burial place of Muhammad al-Jinnah and others of Pakistan’s founding figures. “Our world is a global village with finite resources which must be used in a manner that brings maximum good to maximum number of people,” said Pakistan president Asif Ali Zardari, while Prime Minister, Syed Yusuf raza Gilani said the event is meant to show the world our respect to the Earth, which sustains life for human as well as other living beings.” 



Pakistan cricket legend Wasim Akram has made a personal commitment to stop using plastic bags, to recycle and reuse, and to use his high profile to promote and encourage the same behaviour throughout Pakistan and the rest of the world. 



Going dark for the first time is Iran’s tallest tower, the 435 metre Milad Tower in Tehran. Iran’s first official participation in Earth Hour followed hard on the heels of celebrations marking the 40th anniversary of the signing in the country of the first global environment agreement - the Ramsar international convention for the protection of world wetlands crucial to migratory birds.



Rivalry was set aside in Kazakhstan, as capital city Astana and largest city Almaty led 86 cities and towns in 10 provinces taking part in Earth Hour in the Central Asian republic. President Nursultan Nazarbayez and Prime Minister Karim Massimov, along with the Ministries of Environment Protection, Energy and Mineral Resources, and Communication and Information joined in support for the global initiative. 



World’s tallest building going dark in Dubai, Empire Statement in support

The newly completed Burj Kalifa tower in Dubai - at 828 metres the world’s tallest building - led a list of many of the world’s tallest buildings going dark for Earth Hour when it turned off about half a million lightbulbs. Six of the world’s 10 tallest buildings had registered their participation before the event - Taipei 101 in Taiwan, at 508 metres the world’s second tallest building, the Shanghai World Financial Centre (3rd at 492 metres), the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpar, Malaysia (5th and 6th at 492 metres) and the Chicago, US, Willis Tower (8th at 442 metres). Making an Empire Statement for the environment for the third time is the world’s most famous tall building - holder of the title for 40 years (1931-1971), New York’s 381 metre tall Empire State Building now still ranks 17th.



Burj Kalifa also leads an impressive roll call of buildings going dark in the United Arab Emirates, from the Sheik Zayed Grand Mosque, Emirates Palace and bridges and beaches of Abu Dhabi to many of the landmarks of Dubai including city symbol the Burj al Arab. 



Earth Hour in the United Arab Emirates is also going well beyond the hour, in Dubai under the patronage of Crown Prince His Highness Sheikh Hamdan bin Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum. An unusual initiative is solar powered Earth Hour recycling bins on public streets. 



The record number of United Arab Emirates participants in Earth Hour are also innovating beyond the hour, sharing pictures of themselves with their commitments for continuing environmental action. 

Elsewhere in the Gulf, Kuwait celebrated its national day and Earth Hour by flicking the switch on the Twin Towers that are the country’s most noted landmark. At the Jeddah Hilton, Saudi Arabia, the Gullf Environmental Forum (GEF) has partnered with Trees for the Future to plant 50 trees in Haiti for every speaker at its event. The two tallest buildings in Riyadh, the Kingdom Tower and the Al Faisaliyah Centre also turned off their lights.



Jordan’s enthusiastic participation will be marked with the lights going out on the Jabal al-Qal'a, the citadel occupying a site in use since Neolithic times and in a host of the buildings and businesses it looks down on in capital city Amman. There will be darkness in the desert as well, when the floodlights illuminating Saladin’s huge 12th century fortress at Aljoun are turned off.



Amman’s Intercontinental Hotel will also be leading a global environmental software programme called Green Engage to guide reductions in wastage and energy use by comparing performance and highlighting best practice in similar hotels. Early trials have shown potential savings of up to 25 per cent and the system allows guests to input suggestions on greener technologies and practices.



Also taking part further north is the World Heritage listed Maiden Tower in Baku Old City on the Caspian Sea, the most noted symbol of Azerbaijan, a first time participant in Earth Hour. 



Israel marked its fourth Earth Hour early on Thursday 24 March to avoid conflict with Shabbat, with hundred of Tel Aviv students familiarising themselves with nature in an urban environment, scouts commencing an environmental education program and promotions in community gardening fields. The main event was a green energy concert featuring leading Israeli bands operating off batteries powered by stationary bicycles and a bio-diesel fuel generator.