Parambrata Chatterjee joins hand with Earth Hour 2013

Posted on 14 March 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Parambrata Chatterjee joins hand with Earth Hour 2013



© WWF-India



Kolkata: Tollywood celebrity Parambrata Chatterjee has joined hands with WWF-India to pledge his support to the Earth Hour 2013– WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action on climate change. Parambrata will be a part of Earth Hour now the largest global environmental movement that enables individuals, organizations, governments and groups to show support for policies and practice that balance development and environmental concerns.



The message of Earth Hour 2013 is to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time the Earth Hour 2013 campaign calls for:



• Individuals to adopt household products powered by renewable energy;

• Organizations to adopt renewable energy solutions to run their business operations and production processes;

• Governments to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy 



The speed and scale of climate change, fuelled by ever increasing consumption of the Earth’s resources, is impacting the whole world. Unless we make efforts to transform our energy production systems to renewables, as far as possible, we will enter into a trajectory of climate instability and energy insecurity that will affect each one of us. Every individual has the power to make this transition possible by taking small, yet significant steps. 



Reinforcing his support to this cause, Parambrata Chatterjee, speaking to the media at the ITC-Sonar in Kolkata said, “I am honoured to be part of a global environmental cause like Earth Hour which inspires individual action for the benefit of the planet. Earth Hour strives to create awareness about the harmful effects of climate change and how we as individuals can contribute to sustainable living and contribute to renewable energy.” The ITC Sonar, this year’s hospitality partner for Earth Hour in Kolkata is the first hotel in the world registered by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change for Carbon Emission Reduction It is also a LEED ( Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design ) Platinum certified building by USGBC ( United States Green Building

Council ).



Speaking on the occasion, Dr Saswati Sen, State Director, West Bengal, WWF-India said, “Over the years the Earth Hour has become a symbol of bringing together individuals to engage in acts to collectively shift towards sustainable living, by undertaking better land, water and energy management which willnot only reduce the growing environmental impact of our urban lifestyles but also contribute to renewable energy.”



Earth Hour has already successfully united hundreds of millions of people around the world as it strives to gain the support of more and more people.