WWF-India initiates programme to promote wood certification in Uttar Pradesh

Posted on 20 August 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








A series of workshops have been launched to carry across this objective whereby SME’s will be educated on the various aspects of forest certification.



© WWF-India



Najibabad: WWF-India continuing with its mission of protecting India’s natural resources while ensuring sustainable development, has partnered with European Commission to implement a programme promoting sustainable and responsible trade by wood processing small and medium enterprises (SME’S)



Najibabad identified as the first town in UP to launch this project.



This project aims towards building capacity amongst SME’s from the wood processing sectors in three Indian states, namely- Rajasthan, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh through WWF’s Global Forest & Trade Network (GFTN). With the support from this project the SME’s would be able to gain easy access to international markets while supporting conservation of forests. 



Wood based SME’s in the above states play a significant role towards economic development and providing employment opportunities. With increased demand for certified wood from international markets, these SME’s engaged in processing and exporting of wood and wood related products are facing constraints in accessing global markets. This in turn is leading to livelihood related issues. The wooden handicraft and furniture industry in Uttar Pradesh generates significant employment opportunities locally while contributing to earn foreign exchange in the country through increased exports. Fall in demand will directly affect people associated with the industry.

 

WWF-India will be facilitating the SME’s for credible forest certification and building their capacity through this project. For this purpose WWF-India will work with Nagina Craft Development Society stakeholders of wood and fiber sector including timber traders, plantation owners and relevant Government bodies.



A series of workshops have been launched to carry across this objective whereby SME’s will be educated on the various aspects of forest certification. Najibabad was chosen to host one such session today where approximately 30 SME’s and 20 stake holders have participated. The resource persons who will be at these consultative meeting and training workshops include the representatives from forest certification bodies in India -Mr.Umesh Chandrashekhar ( IMO) and Mr Pramod Gupta (Smart Wood/Rainforest Alliance). Also present were senior Forest officers of UP Area. Similar training workshops are being planned in other relevant areas across the state.

   

The event was inaugurated by the Chief Guest Mr A V Rajamoli, IAS, District Magistrate, Bijnor. Speaking on the occasion Mr Rajamoli assured the local wood handicraft industry in allevating the various challenges which include lack of electricity, and other infrastructural facilities such as transportation and the decline of availability of desired would species such as Sesham (dalbergia sisso). He went on to say that environmental degradation has a ripple effect on their industry and asked the artisans that they should inculcate an awareness regarding sustainable forestry amongst the next generation whereby they would ensure best environmental paractises are adopted while ensuring that their craft thrives. On Speaking on certification he said that the industry should adopt better management practises for being on par with the global market conditions.



The CCF of UP Shri V.K. Sinha who was also present on the occasion thanked WWF-India and Nangina crafts development society for intiating this workshop. He informed all present that UP is the first state to be chosen where the pilot study on principles and criteria for sustainable forest management was introduced. Mr S K Pande, IFS(Rtd) Former Director General of Forests, Government of India were amongst others who facilitated the technical sessions which found active participation.



About European Commission

The EU is committed to helping Asia protect its environment to finding a sustainable future for the region’s growing economies. Environmental problems are rarely contained within National borders, which is why the EU has developed an approach to deal with them at regional level. The European Commissions regional strategy Paper for EU Asia cooperation (2007-2013) has identified the environment as a sector in need of major focus.



For further queries please contact:

Dr T.R Manoharan,

Senior coordinator Forestry Program, 

WWF-India

PH- 011-41504787

Email: tmanoharan@wwfindia.net



Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications,

WWF-India

PH- 011-43516248

Email: ssam@wwfindia.net