WWF-India Statement on GMOs and Bt Cotton

Posted on 11 February 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments


This is to clarify WWF-India’s stand on GMOs(Genetically Modified Organism) in general and Bt(Bacillus thuringiensis) Cotton in particular, given the recent debate on the issue and the allegations against our organization. 



At the outset, we would like to categorically state that WWF-India does not support GMOs either in policy or practice. Our mandate is to focus on biodiversity and natural resource conservation. In this context we work on “thirsty crops” such as sugarcane, cotton and rice to promote Better Management Practices (BMPs) that lead to greater efficiency in water use and reduction in the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, thus improving the health of the ecosystem while also having positive impacts on the livelihoods and health of farmers.



Our work with cotton farmers in Andhra Pradesh has been targeted by various groups and WWF-India has been accused of “promoting” Bt Cotton. This is patently untrue and defamatory as WWF-India has never promoted Bt Cotton. It is a fact that over 90% of the farmers in Warangal were already using Bt Cotton well before WWF-India started working there. While seed selection is left to the farmers, we clearly explain the potential problems with use of Bt Cotton and lay out the GMO debate. 



Working on issues related to GMOs and the environment is not WWF-India’s mandate or area of expertise. Our work with farmers does not lead to promotion of Bt Cotton but in fact we feel that it could lead to them opting for BMPs that do not rely on Bt Cotton. The criticism leveled against WWF-India on the BT Cotton issue is therefore completely unfounded.



We would also like to state that WWF-India is not a member of the Round Table on Sustainable Soy (RTRS) and we have raised our concerns regarding this with WWF International. We understand that the WWF network is currently reviewing its position on this.



For more information, please contact:

Dr. Sejal Worah,

Programme Director, WWF-India

Tel: +91 11 41504804

e-mail: sworah@wwfindia.net