Migratory Route for Bar-headed Goose Charted through Rare Sighting at Tsokar in Ladakh

Posted on 06 September 2013
 
|
 

23 Comments








Bar-headed goose with neck collar sighted in Tsokar wetlands



© Pushpinder Singh Jamwal / WWF-India



A recent water bird census being undertaken at the Tsokar wetlands in Ladakh, Jammu & Kashmir led to the rare sighting of a Bar-headed Goose (Anser Indicus) with a red-coloured neck collar with the number H-19 on it. This bird was first spotted on 28th August, 2013 by a joint team comprising of members from WWF-India as well as the Department of Wildlife Protection, Leh. On sharing this information with various bird banding groups and institutions, it was confirmed by Mr. D S Dhadwal of Himachal Pradesh Forest Department that this particular bird had been collared at a site named Nagrota Surian at Pong Lake in Himachal Pradesh, on 9th March, 2011. 



This rare sighting has confirmed that the Bar-headed Goose, which breeds at Tsokar in Ladakh, winters at Pong Lake in Himachal Pradesh. So far, this is the shortest established migratory route for the species; earlier migration studies on the same species at Keoladeo National Park in Bharatpur (Javed et al. 2000) and at Sur Sarovar Bird Sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh (Kalra et al. 2011) revealed that this species covered very long distances from these sites to high altitude wetlands in Tibet.



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India said, “WWF-India's work extends to both the states of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh for the conservation of wetland biodiversity. We have had for almost two decades now a wetlands conservation programme in Ladakh, and with this kind of knowledge - of the Bar-headed Goose's migratory route to Himachal - we are able to understand and develop conservation strategies for sites critical to migratory birds and wildlife with the support of government agencies.”



Sh. A K Singh, PCCF & Chief Wildlife Warden, Government of Jammu and Kashmir said, “It is great news and is the result of a long-term collaboration between WWF-India and the Department of Wildlife Protection, Government of J&K". He further added that it is a matter of joy for the department that for the first time in the entire avian history of Ladakh, the migratory route of a bird species has been established and this will further boost conservation efforts for this particular species. In Ladakh, Sh. Jigmet Takpa, CCF & Regional Wildlife Warden, Ladakh also appreciated the efforts of the survey team and called for regular bird monitoring initiatives at various wetlands of Ladakh which hold enormous significance as breeding sites for the key migratory species of birds.



Mr. Pankaj Chandan, Head, High Altitude Wetlands Conservation Programme of WWF-India said that such findings have a huge significance for conservation and will help in developing wetland site networks in the Himalayas. 



For more information, please contact:

Mr. Pankaj Chandan, 

Head,

High Altitude Wetlands Conservation Programme,

WWF-India.

Tel: +91 196 2261871

E-mail: pchandan@wwfindia.net