Thane wins “National Earth Hour Capital 2015” title

Posted on 09 April 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments











© WWF-India



Recognizing the city’s focused actions on aggressive renewable energy targets, energy efficiency and multiple solar energy projects, Thane has been declared as the National Earth Hour Capital 2015. After a rigorous exercise of deliberating and assessing the sustainable activities reported by the finalist cities under the Earth Hour City Challenge (EHCC), an expert jury panel has declared Thane as the winning sustainable city from India this year. Thane succeeds Coimbatore, which was the National Earth Hour Capital for the year 2014.

This global challenge called the Earth Hour City Challenge mobilizes action and support from cities. WWF works closely with ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability, in mobilizing cities to join the challenge.  The challenge felicitates and awards initiatives by cities for their climate resilient actions to stimulate best practices for footprint reduction. The platform also aims at inspiring and supporting cities to become solution hotspots for building sustainable cities.



After an initial evaluation by WWF and global consultancy Accenture, an 11 member expert jury comprising of leaders in urban sustainability has appointed one city from each country as the National Earth Hour Capital. One among the National Capital will then be selected as the Global Earth Hour Capital. Thane, along with 16 other National Earth Hour Capitals from their respective countries, is now competing for the global title.

Thane’s impressive ambitious community commitments for renewable energy and energy efficiency have been the key motivations in winning them this title. It has also shown a strong focus on reducing emissions from buildings and curbing traffic congestion.  Some of the notable actions of Thane include the mandatory use of solar water heating system for municipal buildings and the implementation of other solutions such as wind-solar hybrid systems, solar PV for lighting & air-conditioning. Besides, solar roof top net metering based power generation and regular energy audits have also been planned. Other actions include implementation of ESCO (Energy Service Company) project for energy efficient street lighting, commissioning of 15T capacity Bio-Methanation plant to treat municipal solid waste to produce electricity and three cyclic switching units for streetlights usage optimization. An implementation target for development of solar city project in five years period has been set with an objective to meet at least five per cent energy consumption from renewable energy on completion of the solar city project in Thane.



The three finalists from India included Thane, Rajkot and Pune. Pune also received a special mention from the jury for its city mobility plan as well as its solar and waste to energy initiatives.



On the occasion, Mayor, Thane remarked, “It gives us immense pride in learning about Thane’s selection as the National Earth Hour Capital. Thane has always been at the forefront of various sustainable initiatives, be it at the solar energy front or the energy efficiency front. We are happy that WWF & ICLEI have recognized the city’s sustainable actions through the Earth Hour City Challenge and we hope to continue implementing and mainstreaming low-carbon focused actions.”



Thane will be felicitated at the EHCC award ceremony which is being held in Seoul, South Korea on 9 April 2015. The Global Earth Hour Capital will also be declared at the ceremony.



About ICLEI 

ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability, is a membership organization of local governments and their associations. ICLEI is dedicated to building and supporting a worldwide movement of local governments to achieve tangible improvements in global sustainability with special focus on environmental conditions through cumulative local actions. It is a leading network of 12 mega-cities, 100 super-cities and urban regions, 450 large cities, and 450 small and medium-sized cities and towns in 84 countries.