Business to Business meeting between the JHEA and the MCC

Posted on 22 December 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








In India, the Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) play a pivotal role in the promotion of trade and economic development of the nation. 



© WWF-India



Jodhpur:  WWF-India continuing with its initiative to promote sustainable wood trade practices in the country through its Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN) programme was instrumental in bringing together two very important stake holders - the exporters and manufacturers of wooden handicrafts /furniture in Jodhpur and the suppliers of sustainable timber from Kerala.



This two day series of business to business (B2B) meeting which commenced on Dec 21st concluded today with a clear cut agenda to explore the best options to source sustainable timber domestically. This will help to promote the conservation of forests and biodiversity and minimize unsustainable practices in timber trade. WWF-India’s workshop set in motion the dialogue between the delegation from Malabar Chamber of Commerce, Kerala and that from Jodhpur Handicrafts Exporters Association (JHEA). 



This is a part of the project supported by the European Commission under its SWITCH Asia programme in three States, (Kerala, and Rajasthan & Uttar Pradesh) with an aim to build capacity amongst the small and medium scale wood processors and traders to meet the global market standards.



WWF has established the Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN) to facilitate trade links between companies committed to achieving and supporting responsible forestry and thereby creates market conditions that help conserve the world’s forests while providing economic and social benefits for the businesses and people that depend on them. GFTN-India was launched on 3rd December 2008 with a view to facilitate Indian companies to join this global network.  



In India, the Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) play a pivotal role in the promotion of trade and economic development of the nation. By recognizing this, WWF- India has become a partner in implementing a project “Sustainable and Responsible Trade Promoted to Wood Processing SMEs through Forest and Trade Networks in China, India and Vietnam” with the support of the European Commission under its SWITCH ASIA programme.  



A major objective of this project in India is to build capacity among SMEs in wood processing sectors of Kerala, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh States to provide certified sustainable forest products to national and international markets. The increased demand for forest certification and environmental measures (e.g. The Lacey Act in US, FLEGT in Europe) are likely to affect the economic prospects of many industries, particularly wood based industries, plantations, including farm forestry/agro-forestry systems in India unless adequate preparations are taken to comply with such measures. There is a need to build capacity among wood based industries in Kerala to comply with the global standards and enhance market access.