Earth Hour 2022 theme ‘Shape Our Future’ signals an important year for people and the planet

Posted on 14 March 2022







Earth Hour 2022



© WWF India




The Earth Hour India anthem, composed by Shantanu Moitra with vocals by Mohit Chauhan appeals to people for urgent action to save the planet
Earth Hour 2022 will be observed on Saturday 26 March at 8:30 p.m.

New Delhi: Powered by people, Earth Hour is one of the largest environmental movements in the world. This year as we continue adapting our lives to the impacts of COVID-19 and the catastrophic events of the past two years, Earth Hour 2022 aims to signal to Shape Our Future. It will herald a new era that puts people and the planet first.

As India marks its 75 years of Independence, it is important to recognise the efforts and actions made by people in the past and appeal to every citizen to be a conservation hero for the future. Joining the movement, our Harmony and Hope Ambassador, Shantanu Moitra and leading Bollywood playback singer Mohit Chauhan have created the Earth Hour India anthem highlighting that now is our biggest chance to act towards a safer and better future for all. 

 

Shantanu Moitra shares his experience working on the anthem, “The Earth Hour anthem is the binding force for everyone to be part of this global movement. I want to thank Mohit Chauhan who has lent his voice to this noble cause. Lyrics written by Tanveer Ghazi share the sentiments of people to protect nature before it is too late.”

He further adds, “As the Harmony and Hope Ambassador for WWF India, I request everyone to participate, no matter where you are and make Earth Hour 2022 incredibly successful! We as individuals have the power to #ShapeOurFuture by bringing attention to the grave issues our planet is currently facing.”

 

Mohit Chauhan sharing his views said, “I’m very glad to be part of Earth Hour through the Earth Hour anthem. I look forward to millions getting together this Earth Hour, to support and act for our mother nature.”

 

Earth Hour, has transformed over the years and has taken the messaging to protect and conserve our planet beyond the hour. It is the only movement in the world that connects people worldwide with a common cause and mission.  

Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary-General and CEO, WWF India, said, “Earth Hour is an important step forward in our lives every year. Spend this hour to meditate and think on positive actions that we can take, individually and collectively, to better the environment.”

 

Notes to Editors:

Link to the Earth Hour India Anthem: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9FtWVOZhxk

 

Composed and produced by Shantanu Moitra

Written by Tanveer Ghazi 

Sung by Mohit Chauhan 

Recorded and mixed by Kittu Myakal

 

For more details on Earth Hour please go through the Earth Hour India WEBSITE

Take part in the 5R FOR EARTH HOUR Challenge

Watch the Earth Hour 2022 Official Video

Link to last year’s Earth Hour photos 

 

For more information, please contact:

Komal Chaudhary

Senior Manager, Media and PR

kchaudhary@wwfindia.net

 

About Earth Hour

Earth Hour is WWF's flagship global environmental movement. Born in Sydney in 2007, Earth Hour has grown to become the world's largest grassroots movements for the environment, inspiring individuals, communities, businesses and organizations in more than 190 countries and territories to take tangible environmental action. Historically, Earth Hour has focused on the climate crisis, but more recently, Earth Hour has strived to also bring the pressing issue of nature loss to the fore. The aim is to create an unstoppable movement for nature, as it did when the world came together to tackle climate change. The movement recognizes the role of individuals in creating solutions to the planet’s most pressing environmental challenges and harnesses the collective power of its millions of supporters to drive change. Earth Hour is kindly supported by Germany’s Federal Ministry of the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety with funding from the International Climate Initiative (IKI), as a part of the project “Scaling up Biodiversity Communication”.