Earth Hour 2012: Kanpur switches off to become the Earth Hour Champion

Posted on 31 March 2012
 
|
 

3 Comments











© 



Kanpur: Earth Hour, marking the fourth year of its journey in India this year, once again united the country for one hour, as Indians from various cities switched off lights at 8:30 PM. 



Earth Hour is WWF’s largest environmental campaign empowering individuals, organizations, institutions and governments to take simple do-able actions committing themselves to a sustainable lifestyle and asking for sound polices that combat climate change.



Earth Hour 2012 aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause.



In Kanpur, Earth Hour 2012 was bigger than ever before, as Kanpur Nagar Nigam partnered with WWF-India and appealed to the citizens of the city to switch off lights for Earth Hour. The city rose to the challenge as schools, colleges, local NGOs, clubs, NCC cadets and more, collectively switched off to make Kanpur the Earth Hour Champion. All municipal parks managed by Kanpur Nagar Nigam observed Earth Hour.



WWF-India and Kanpur Nagar Nigam organized a spectacular musical evening at Sarsarriya ghats on the banks of river Ganga. Hundreds of citizens joined the celebrations on the night, as the Guest of Honour, Shri R. Vikram Singh, Municipal Commissioner, Kanpur and Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India commenced Earth Hour by switching off lights of the ghats. The Earth Hour switch-off was livened by the candle lit performances of renowned singers Deepali Chandra and Amit Bhatia, who presented devotional music dedicated to the Ganga, the lifeline of Kanpur city.



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF India said, "It is inspiring to see Kanpur’s commitment to Earth Hour. The involvement and action in Kanpur today is proof Earth Hour is being embraced by several other cities and towns across India- in a combined effort to move towards a better city, an aware nation and a better planet. Each and every one of us play an important role in making a difference to the world we live in. Let us celebrate our commitment towards the planet and inspire those around us to take action.’’ 



He further added, “To be celebrating Earth Hour on the banks of the Ganga in Kanpur makes this an exceptional and memorable event.”



Other dignitaries present at the event, Prof. Vinod Tare (IIT Kanpur) and Mr. Rakesh Jaiswal (Shramik Bharti) also addressed the audience and reinforced the significance of Earth Hour and their support.



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar also pledged his support to Earth Hour 2012 as the National Brand Ambassador of the campaign, while many well known stars supported the campaign to encourage the citizens of their cities to switch off. Telegu film actor Rana Daggubatti rooted for Hyderabad, Bengali actor Rituparna Sengupta rooted for Kolkata, Tamil singer and actor Dhanush rooted for Chennai, cricket team Royal Challengers rooted for Bangalore.



Earth Hour events across the country took the shape of candle light marches, candle light dinners, dance and musical performances, awareness programmes, signature campaigns and more. Some of India’s most iconic monuments observed Earth Hour, India gate, Qutub Minar, Humayuns’ tomb in New Delhi; Gateway of India, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus in Mumbai; Victoria Memorial in Kolkata; Bridage road and WTC in Bangalore; The Church and Towh Hall in Shimla, University of Kerala, Public Library and VJT Hall, Trivandrum, and for the first time ever, Mysore Palace observed Earth Hour by reducing the duration of illuminating the Palace on weekends from 15 to 5 minutes.

Earth Hour 2012 is expected to be officially observed in more than 130 countries across the world.