Four leading-edge “Climate Solvers” paving the way in combating climate change

Posted on 15 December 2021
 
|
 

0 Comments








Climate Solver India Awards



© WWF India



New Delhi: Climate Change is the defining issue of our time and the recent IPCC report emphasized the urgent need for strong and sustained reductions in emissions to help address the climate crisis. Climate innovations present a clear pathway to tackle climate change and achieve the transition to a low-carbon future. The WWF Climate Solver initiative fosters such innovation-led solutions for mitigating global emissions while addressing some of the most pressing local environmental challenges pertaining to mobility, air pollution, energy efficiency, and natural resource degradation. It aims to create favorable conditions for the promotion of climate technologies with transformative potential, so as to contribute to the realization of the Paris Agreement goals.



Innovative technologies for EV battery charging, solar drying and space heating, efficient storage to reduce horticulture waste, and thermal energy storage for cold chains are among the four winning solutions recognized and felicitated at the 9th Climate Solver India awards hosted by WWF-India. The wide-scale adoption of the winning technologies have the potential to reduce 13 million tonnes of GHG emissions annually by 2030. The winners were selected by an eminent jury from more than 70 applicants across the country, which were screened for their unique technology and business model, strong potential in emission reduction and scale-up, as well as social and environmental co-benefits.



Speaking at the virtual felicitation, Dr Ajay Mathur, Director General, International Solar Alliance said, "The climate solver program is an outreach to those kinds of products which are otherwise, in a sense, out of the mainstream. Awarding such unique technologies helps to give them the recognition that they want, helps to bring in the kind of markets that are needed for them to become worldwide in their reach, and of course thereby help in reducing the carbon emissions. These award-winning innovations honored today set, mark and recognize the various interventions that can help move beyond text to actual climate action.”



Amongst the awardees this year, Log9 Materials Scientific Private Limited has developed a unique battery technology that allows rapid charging of electric 2-Wheelers and 3-Wheelers in about 15 and 30 minutes, respectively. With a life of more than 10 years, this technology eliminates the need for costly battery replacements. Also, features like faster acceleration, and top speed make these batteries ideal for fleet operators and use in the urban environment. The global adoption of this innovation has the potential to reduce 4.6 million tonnes of GHG emissions by 2030.



SaptKrishi Scientific Private Limited was awarded for its innovative solution- Sabjikothi – a microclimate-based storage and transportation solution for fruits and vegetables. The patented technology is a portable, wheel-mountable, cost-effective solution that extends the shelf-life of fruits and vegetables for 3 to 30 days, thus preventing food wastage. The innovation is more than 80% energy-efficient in comparison to the conventional cold storage solutions and has the potential to reduce 3 million tonnes of GHG emissions by 2030. 

 

PLUSS® Advanced Technologies Private Limited has developed innovative phase change materials (PCMs) for cold chain applications. Their PCMs comprise of inorganic salts that change their phase at a specific temperature. These PCMs increase the temperature retention ability of freezers/coolers by up to 16 hours during power outages and reduce energy consumption by 25%, with a potential to reduce 1.3 million tonnes of GHG emissions by 2030.

 

Neochlorus Energy Solutions Private Limited has developed an innovative decentralized solar dryer-cum-space heating system with thermal energy storage to efficiently dry agricultural products and provide space heating in the Himalayan region. The technology stores excess heat during solar hours and dissipates it during non-solar hours for continuous drying process, and can be modified to provide space heating during the harsh winter seasons. The estimated GHG reduction by global adoption of this technology is likely to be 4 million tonnes by 2030. 



Speaking on the initiative, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF India said, “The Climate Solver platform showcases innovative climate solutions emerging from the SME sector that have the potential to address issues of climate change while providing strong co-benefits in terms of local environmental improvements and enhancing livelihoods. To tackle climate change, we need to embrace such technologies, as well as build and continue to support an ecosystem in which these innovations can emerge, thrive and be rapidly adopted in India and across the world.”



Since its launch in 2012, the Climate Solver platform has awarded 30 innovative low-carbon technologies in India, amongst the 124 entrepreneurs recognized globally.



Notes to the Editor:

WWF's Climate Solver platform first began in Sweden in 2008 and launched in India in 2012 which further expanded to include countries like China and South Africa. WWF-India has been partnering with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Centre for Innovation Incubation and Entrepreneurship (IIM Ahmedabad), Indian Angel Network and National Innovation Foundation for the Climate Solver initiative.

Climate Solver: www.climatesolver.org
Climate Solver India page: http://bit.ly/WWFINDIAClimateInnovations
Climate Solver Awardee Factsheet: https://wwfin.awsassets.panda.org/downloads/ghg_reduction_climate_solver_awardees_2020.pdf

About WWF India

WWF India is committed to creating and demonstrating practical solutions that help conserve India's ecosystems and rich biodiversity. With more than 50 years of conservation journey in the country, WWF India works towards finding science-based and sustainable solutions to address challenges at the interface of development and conservation. WWF India is part of the WWF network, with offices in over 100 countries across the world. WWF India works in many states of India, through our state and field offices. The organisation works in different geographical regions and across thematic areas, including the conservation of key wildlife species and their habitats, management of rivers, wetlands and their ecosystems. On the sustainability side, the focus areas are climate change adaptation, driving sustainable solutions for business and agriculture and empowering local communities as stewards of conservation. We also work in combatting illegal wildlife trade and in bringing environment education to students through outreach and awareness campaigns. http://www.wwfindia.org 

Facebook, Twitter, Instagram

 

For further details, please contact:  

Komal Chaudhary | Senior Manager, Media and PR | kchaudhary@wwfindia.net |    011-41504797

Sakshi Gaur | Manager, Communications – Climate Change and Energy| sgaur@wwfindia.net | 011 – 41504823