The summaries fall short of the science, WWF

Posted on 12 November 2007
 
|
 

0 Comments








The fourth edition of the IPCC Assessment Report on Climate Change is being finalised this week - the world's most profound scientific peer-review process.



© IPCC



Valencia, Spain – Governments cut vital facts and important information from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s Summaries for Policymakers for its First and Second Working Group Reports, says WWF. 



Earlier this year, the IPCC released what is the world’s most credible assessment on climate change in three underlying Working Group Reports: "The physical science basis" (February 2007); "Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability" (April 2007); "Mitigation of Climate Change" (May 2007). 



In its latest report, What You Should Know – WWF summary for policymakers, the global conservation organization has extracted a selection of key findings which failed to make it into the IPCC Summaries from the first two Working Group Reports. 



“There is a contrast between the immense wealth of the IPCC’s work and the politically inspired trimming back in the Summaries for Policymakers,” says Hans Verolme, Director of WWF’s Global Climate Change Programme. “These Working Group reports clearly laid the case for deeper cuts in greenhouse gas emissions - the summaries dilute this.” 



Key findings that fell through the cracks from the Working Group I Summary for Policymakers include the increased incidence of potentially destructive hurricanes, the warming of the upper Pacific Ocean and the loss of glaciers in the European Alps. 



In the Working Group II Summary for Policymakers, the IPCC was pressured to keep out references to increases in water stress and more droughts and floods. 



Working group III, not covered by the WWF review, clearly shows that it is possible to stop global warming if the world’s emissions start to decline before 2015. To keep our climate safe, 50 to 85 per cent of CO2 emissions will have to be cut by the middle of this century. 



“The IPCC along with Al Gore, won the Nobel Peace Prize this year,” says Hans Verolme, Director of WWF’s Global Climate Change Programme. ”Governments should follow the IPCC’s scientific advice and agree to making the necessary emission cuts at the UN Climate Summit in Bali to protect life on Earth.” 



For further information: 

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager, WWF-India

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797, E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net