WWF India will co-host ‘Ricky Kej LIVE at One Page Spotlight’ -the biggest digital music concert this Earth Day. #ShineYourLight

Posted on 21 April 2020







Rickey Kej LIVE



© Rickey Kej 



44 artists, from 6 countries, including Grammy Award Winners, will come together to create symphony of music for a safe, resilient and sustainable world
New Delhi: Music creates a sense of belonging and participation. It is an antidote to the growing sense of alienation and isolation in society in general – even more so now as we are in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic. It is therefore important for us to come together to help our planet heal - to inspire and mobilize the collective consciousness of the entire world to give back to nature and people. This is the need of the hour and what we are aspiring for, for all of us to Shine Our Light.

 

Enthused by this belief, Ricky Kej (Grammy Award Winning Composer and environmentalist) with support from World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and UNICEF is organizing a one-of-its-kind ‘Online music concert – Ricky Kej LIVE on One Page Spotlight this Earth Day (22nd April 2020), to leverage the global power of unity and strength to mobilize millions in a collective call for transformative action for our planet. The event is also supported by Earth Day Network, UNCCD, UN Climate Change, UNESCO MGEIP, One Page Spotlight.

 

Sharing the thought behind the concert, Ricky Kej, said, “Today, music is the most consumed form of culture. The ability of music is to increase social cohesion and direct human attention, captivate and create a sense of community. The idea behind Shine Your Light is to spread awareness and appreciation for the Earth's environment which serves as a conscious reminder of how fragile our planet is and how important it is to protect it. The current situation has threatened the livelihood of people, species and ecosystems. We are calling everyone around the globe to rise up and come together and act to make positive and sustainable changes to protect the earth that we live on.”

 

22nd April 2020, also marks the 50th anniversary of Earth Day, an annual event celebrated around the world to demonstrate support for environmental protection.  The sixty-minute concert will feature a performance by Ricky Kej and the World Ensemble with the aim to inspire humanity to create a world where it is possible to live in harmony with each other and nature. It will also include some world renowned singers, composers and artists including Grammy award winners like Ricky Kej, Babba Maal, Laura Dickinson, Wouter Kellerman, Pt. Vishwa Mohan Bhatt and many international musicians*.

 

Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF India, said, “Music has always been a powerful tool to build and strengthen the sense of community. The Earth Day concert will bring together musicians from across India and the globe through a spectacular virtual performance, that will bring the world together in these difficult times. I would like to thank Ricky Kej and all the partner organizations for their support and continuous effort to work together towards a resilient and sustainable future.”

 





The concert will be a symphony of melodies, with hundreds of millions of people around the globe joining to be part of the #ShineYourLight movement. The sixty-minute pre-recorded digital performance will be promoted/ telecast on 22nd April 2020, 8pm IST and 8 pm EST through: https://youtu.be/1ECqrNb2O6g



Information about the cause, event, artist details, timing etc are hosted on wwfindia.org/earthday. Individuals will have an option to pre-register for the concert.  

 

The world ensemble includes 44 artists from 6 countries.





For more information, please contact

Rituparna Sengupta

Associate Director-Marketing Communication, WWF India

rsengupta@wwfindia.net

9810514487