Ajay Devgn pledges his support for Earth Hour 2013

Posted on 22 March 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Ajay Devgn pledges his support for Earth Hour 2013



© WWF-India



Mumbai: Bollywood’s superstar Ajay Devgn has joined hands with WWF-India to pledge his support to the Earth Hour 2013– WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire action on climate change. Earth Hour is now the largest global environmental movement that enables individuals, organizations, governments and groups to show support for policies and practice that balance development and environmental concerns.



The message of Earth Hour 2013 is to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time, Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM, and calls for:

Individuals to adopt household products powered by renewable energy;
Organizations to adopt renewable energy solutions to run their business operations and production processes;
Governments to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy

The speed and scale of climate change, fuelled by ever increasing consumption of the Earth’s resources, is impacting the whole world. Unless we make efforts to transform our energy production systems to renewables, as far as possible, we will enter into a trajectory of climate instability and energy insecurity that will affect each one of us. Every individual has the power to make this transition possible by taking small, yet significant steps.



At the press conference in Mumbai today, Ajay Devgn said, “Earth Hour is a peoples’ movement and a live example of what individual action can do. It is truly inspiring to see billions of people coming together for a common purpose. A movement starts with a simple action, a small change that we all commit to in our lives can have a huge impact in curbing climate change. Earth Hour gives each one of us a chance to show our individual commitment towards the cause”



Speaking on the occasion Ms. Aarti Khosla, Head – Campaigns, WWF-India, said “In its fifth year now in India, Earth Hour has moved beyond a symbolic lights out campaign. This year, Earth Hour aims to inspire individuals, organizations and governments to make the shift towards renewable energy, through simple and do-able steps. Last year, Earth Hour reached more than 150 cities. This year, we aim to break old records and reach out to more cities across the nation.”



D Kavarana, Area Manager (W) & General Manager ITC Maratha said, “Being LEED® (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Platinum certified hotel in Existing Building category, we realize that future cannot be sustained unless resources are deployed efficiently. Therefore, we now have an even bigger responsibility in spreading the message of energy conservation to our patrons. To enjoy the spirit and ambience of the evening on 23rd March 2013 candle lit dinners will be served at our restaurants. All safety equipment and emergency lights will remain functional, but all nonessential lighting will either be switched off or dimmed to mark the Earth Hour 2013.”



Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM and calls for individuals and organizations to adopt simple renewable energy solutions in their lifestyle and business operations to more towards a sustainable future. Governments are encouraged to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy. The Honorable Mayor of Mumbai is supporting Earth Hour. Several events are also being organized across the city. From candle lit marches at Don Bosco School in Matunga by WWF-India, to a solar lit vigil at Mehula the fern by the Young Environmentalist Trust, supporters are coming together to pledge their support to Earth Hour on 23rd March 2013.



Several institutes such as IIT Bombay, S P Jain Management School, St. Lowrence School in Kandivali (E), M. D. College, Kirti College, and Don Bosco High School are supporting the cause. Iconic buildings participating in Earth Hour are The Taj, The Trident, CST Admin Building, MCGM Head office, Gate Way of India, Oberoi Mall.



In 2012, more than 150 Indian cities participated in Earth Hour. Globally, Earth Hour reached more than 5200 cities from 150 countries. This year, the campaign has received the support of Telugu actor Shruti Hassan, Tamil actor, Jiiva, former cricketer Venkatesh Prasad, Bengali actor Parambrata and boxer Mary Kom.