WWF-India introduces Youth Tiger Ambassadors ahead of International Tiger Forum

Posted on 12 November 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of Environment and Forests, Government of India with the two Tiger Ambassadors



© Anil Cherukupalli/WWF-India



Ahead of the International Tiger Forum which is being hosted by Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin from 21-24 Nov in St. Petersburg, Russia, WWF-India today introduced its Youth Tiger Ambassadors who will represent India at the Youth Summit, being held in parallel to this high level government meeting on tiger conservation.



The International Tiger Forum is being held to commit to global action for the conservation and rehabilitation of tigers across their range. It promises to be the most significant meeting ever held to discuss the fate of a single non-human species. The International Youth Summit will take place from 19-24 November 2010 in Vladivostok, home to the Amur tiger, at the same time as the high level meeting. Involving the youth at this important meeting will draw further attention to importance of tiger conservation and convey the concern of the future generation on the plight of this species.



WWF-India has selected two students, Anusha Shankar and Devanshu Sood who will represent India at this Youth Summit. They will be a part of the delegation comprising representatives from all tiger range countries. The Youth Ambassadors will visit Siberian tiger trails and get a first hand account of the state of wild tiger populations in Russia and measures being taken for their conservation. They will also develop a Youth Declaration on tiger conservation, which will be presented to the Tiger Forum , via video- conference between Vladivostok and St. Petersburg.



Before the WWF Youth Ambassadors embark on their journey to Russia, both the delegates today signed a pledge of support to the cause of tiger conservation in the presence of Hon’ble Minister for Environment and Forests, Shri Jairam Ramesh.



Tiger Ambassador Anusha Shankar, a student of M.Sc Ecology and Environmental Science at Pondicherry University, said, “The natural world has always fascinated me. I decided, long ago, to pursue this passion professionally. The Youth Tiger Summit is a great opportunity for me to contribute to tiger conservation initiatives; I believe that the onus is on the youth to build a better tomorrow. It is our responsibility to develop a future that is better than the past, and I intend to use innovative and creative ways to spread awareness about this.”



Tiger Ambassador Devanshu Sood, a student of Class XI at Shriram School, Gurgaon has been a core member of his schools’ Junior Tiger Task Force since the last 8 years feels that being a part of the tiger conservation programme has been a life-changing experience for him. He said “I feel that the youth are the future of the tiger, and I will continue to spread awareness about tiger conservation to the best of my capacity.”



In his opening remarks, Mr Ravi Singh, CEO, WWF-India said, “Holding a youth summit alongside the International Tiger Forum will be conveying the voices of the younger generation to the world about the fate of these magnificent cats. The Youth Tiger Summit presents a wonderful opportunity to the participants to learn from others, share experiences and contribute towards tiger conservation efforts in their respective countries. We hope that the interaction will enable our Tiger Ambassadors to develop a broader vision that will be conveyed back in India to all audiences.”



For Further details please call-

Shaila Sam

WWF-India

011-41504797

+91-9899886682



Sonali Nandrajog 

WWF-India

011-41504783

+91-9871948044