Iceland to resume whaling

Posted on 18 October 2006
 
|
 

0 Comments


Gland, Switzerland: Iceland has recently announced that it would resume commercial whaling despite an international moratorium for over two decades. 



Iceland has stated it is to begin issuing licenses to whaling ships to hunt fin and minke whales totalling nine fin whales and 30 minke whales in the year ending 31 August 2007. WWF's understanding is that whaling ships could resume commercial whaling imminently. 



"By choosing to hunt endangered fin whales, the Icelandic government is drawing a line in the sand," said Dr Susan Lieberman, Director WWF's Global Species Programme. 



"Not only is this unacceptable but it undermines the effectiveness of the International Whaling Commission, as well as a decision made in good faith by the international community over 20 years ago." 



In 2003, Iceland resumed the killing of whales in the name of "scientific" testing. WWF disputes the need to use lethal means to study whale anatomy or behaviour. 



Fin whales were severely reduced worldwide by modern commercial whaling and their current status is poorly known in most areas outside the North Atlantic. They are rarely encountered in those areas of the Southern Hemisphere where they were taken in large numbers. Today, the fin whale is listed as "endangered" by the IUCN-the World Conservation Union. 



Whale watching has seen major increases in numbers and economic value globally. It is Iceland's fastest growing tourism sector. The boom is whale watching generated approximately US$8 million in 2002 in Iceland alone. A resumption in commercial whaling could undermine this important part of Iceland's economy, according to WWF. 



"This is the thin edge of a dangerous wedge and WWF implores the Iceland government to step back," stressed Dr Lieberman. 



"Whale stocks have not yet recovered from the days of devastation from hunting. Today, whales face newer, increased threats such as from ship strikes, being caught and killed in commercial fishing nets, and climate change." 



"Do we really want to be known as the generation that put politics before good science and good ocean management and caused needless species losses?" 



For more information, please contact: 

Anshuman Atroley 

Communications Manager 

WWF-India 

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797 

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net