The Hon’ble Forest Minister of Assam meets WWF-India’s Assam team to discuss conservation issues

Posted on 17 June 2013
 
|
 

1 Comment


Guwahati, India – Three senior representatives from WWF-India’s Assam team met the Hon’ble Forest Minister of Assam, Mr. Rockybul Hussain at his residential office in Guwahati on 16.06.2013. This meeting was organized to discuss various conservation issues of the state and how the Assam Government and WWF-India can work together to address them.



The main points discussed during the meeting were.



1. Human-Elephant Conflict (HEC): WWF-India’s representatives brought up the need for smooth fund flow to the different Forest Divisions enabling them to take up various HEC mitigation measures. The Minister asked WWF-India to submit a tentative operational plan for HEC mitigation for various Forest Divisions in Assam. He promised to then take it up with the concerned Divisional Forest Officers (DFOs) and Chief Wildlife Warden (CWLW) and ensure a better fund flow to improve the HEC management intervention.



2. Indian Rhino Vision 2020 (IRV 2020): For the next phase of IRV 2020 programme, the Hon’ble Minister expressed his interest in undertaking translocation of rhinos to the Laokhowa-Burachapori Wildlife Sanctuaries (WLS) at the earliest possible time. He pledged all possible support from his side. He also invited WWF-India representatives for a meeting with the local community leaders along the fringe of Laokhowa-Burachapori WLS to garner public support for this initiative.



3. Strengthening Coordination: Mr. Hussain also discussed the need for strengthening coordination between the state government, Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) and Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) at all levels. 



4. Lumding Road Expansion: The WWF-India team apprised the Hon’ble Minister about the threats posed by the expansion of the road and the modifications that could be implemented to mitigate the impact of the expansion work on local wildlife. The Minister stressed on the need to ensure that some visible modifications are implemented during the expansion to manage the adverse impacts.



Speaking after the meeting, Mr. Hussain said, “There is a need for innovative solutions to tackle the conservation issues facing Assam. WWF has been doing good work in this regard and I’m confident that working together we can conserve the rich biodiversity of Assam.”



Over the past decade, WWF-India has initiated major programmes for the conservation of important flagship species in the state of Assam – tigers, elephants and rhinos. These programmes are implemented in close collaboration with the state Forest Department, local NGOs, academic institutions, agencies and stakeholder communities. 



WWF-India will continue to work closely with the Assam Forest Ministry, the Forest Department and local communities to ensure that the rich wildlife of the state is conserved.



For further information:

Dr. Anupam Sarmah, Head, Assam Landscapes, WWF-India, +91 94354 85789, asarmah@wwfindia.net

Anil Cherukupalli, Communications Manager, Species & Landscapes, WWF-India, +91 4150 4783, anil.cherukupalli@wwf.panda.org