The capital city switches off for Earth Hour

Posted on 31 March 2012
 
|
 

0 Comments











© WWF-India



New Delhi: Earth Hour, marking the fourth year of its journey in India this year, once again united the country for one hour, as Indians from various cities switched off lights at 8:30 PM. 



Earth Hour is WWF’s largest environmental campaign empowering individuals, organizations, institutions and governments to fight against climate change. 



Earth Hour 2012 aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause.



New Delhi has always been the epicentre of the Earth Hour movement in India. This year too, the city rose to the challenge as schools, colleges, organizations, government buildings, residential colonies, clubs, and individuals switched off collectively to make their city the Earth Hour Champion! Like every year, India Gate remained the iconic switch off in the city, as hundreds of Earth Hour supporters gathered around Amar Jawan Jyoti holding up candles and placards in support. A large group of NCC cadets formed a human chain in the shape of 60+, the Earth Hour logo, in front of India Gate, while volunteers formed chains on the main circle to raise awareness about the campaign. 



Dr. Sejal Worah, Program Director, WWF-India said, “Earth Hour, in its fourth year now, has gained a momentum that carries the campaign to every corner of the country. Cities and towns across India are switching off lights for Earth Hour in a combined effort to move towards a better city, an aware nation and a better planet. It is heartening to see the large gathering of supporters who have joined us today at India gate to show their support towards the campaign”



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar also pledged his support to Earth Hour 2012 as the National Brand Ambassador of the campaign, while many well known stars supported the campaign to encourage the citizens of their cities to switch off. Telegu film actor Rana Daggubatti rooted for Hyderabad, Bengali actor Rituparna Sengupta rooted for Kolkata, Tamil singer and actor Dhanush rooted for Chennai, cricket team Royal Challengers rooted for Bangalore.



Earth Hour events across the country took the shape of candle light marches, candle light dinners, dance and musical performances, awareness programmes, signature campaigns and more. Some of India’s most iconic monuments observed Earth Hour, including Qutub Minar, Humayuns’ tomb in New Delhi; Gateway of India, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus in Mumbai; Victoria Memorial in Kolkata; Bridage road and WTC in Bangalore; The Church and Towh Hall in Shimla, University of Kerala, Public Library and VJT Hall, Trivandrum and for the first time ever, Mysore Palace observed Earth Hour by reducing the duration of illuminating the Palace on weekends from 15 to 5 minutes.

Earth Hour 2012 is expected to be officially observed in more than 130 countries across the world.