H. K. Kansal v. State of Uttar Pradesh

Posted on 04 September 2020

H. K. Kansal

v.

State of Uttar Pradesh

 

Original Application No. 1021 of 2018
 

Coram: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Adarsh Kumar Goel, Hon’ble Dr. Nagin Nanda, Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. P. Wangdi

Keywords: Discharge of Sewage

Date: 4th September 2020

This application was filed to address the environmental concern of discharge of untreated sewage in open drains in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh.

After going through the averments made out in the application, the Tribunal directed that the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board (UPPCB) and Municipal Corporation, Ghaziabad look into the matter and file a factual and action taken report.

 Accordingly, the report was filed. It was submitted that the Developer of the Housing Colony was directed to set up a Sewage Treatment Plant (STP). Thereafter, a further letter had been written to the Developer to deposit the amount of Rs. 8.27 crores with the Nagar Nigam for STP.

After going through the averments made out in the report, the Tribunal noted that mere issuance of notice was not an end of responsibility when damage to environment was continuing without effective preventive and punitive action. It was noted that any dispute between the Municipal Corporation and the Developer did not absolve the Municipal Corporation of its liability under the provisions of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. Therefore, the Municipal Corporation was directed to take further necessary action to prevent discharge of untreated sewage in the drains which are meeting river Hindan and thereafter river Ganga and also to clean the said drains for restoring the environment.

A further report was filed by the UPPCB. It was found that untreated sewer was being pumped out and discharged in open drains. Though sewerage network has been constructed, the same is choked due to lack of maintenance. Further, the Municipal Corporation was also been required to pay environmental compensation for its failure to take necessary steps.

Thereafter, a further report was filed by the Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam (GMM). It was submitted that the GMM had taken all necessary action to ensure that the sewer line in the concerned area was flowing uninterrupted by any kind of blockage or disruption. It was also ensured that the local waste coming from the houses were not thrown into the drains and a proper procedure is following for disposal of the same. It was further submitted that the GMM was collecting the wastage coming from home to sewer suction machine and then disposing of the same through main open drain without causing any kind of disruption or blockage in the said drain.

After going through the averments made out in the report, the Tribunal noted that sewage collected was being disposed of in the open drain, without any further treatment. It was directed that the sewage had to be treated before being discharged into the drain as no pollutant could be discharged in any water body, being a criminal offence under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and other applicable norms.

Accordingly, the Nagar Nigam was directed to take necessary steps. The State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) was directed to check up the factual position and ensure that discharge of sewage was as per norms.

Accordingly, the application was disposed of.