WWF partners with business school on unique MBA programme

Posted on 14 April 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








One Planet MBA



© Exeter University



The new One Planet MBA programme will launch in September 2011, representing a unique partnership between WWF and the University of Exeter Business School. It will be the world’s first MBA systematically devoted to embedding the need for a sustainable approach to strategic business management.



The One Planet MBA will be global in outlook, developing leaders and managers capable of running organisations in a culturally diverse, resource-constrained world, influenced by radically different values and concerns from those of the recent past. Graduates of the programme will be fully competent in the business skills upon which MBAs have traditionally been based but will also be able to demonstrate innovative approaches to the development of sustainable business strategies. 



Dr. Malcolm Kirkup, MBA Director explains “Unlike other programmes the commitment to sustainability will be pervasive throughout our One Planet MBA; not just a bolt-on module. We believe that better stewardship of social and environmental capital is entirely compatible with winning and maintaining customer value and confidence.”



Jean-Paul Jeanrenaud, Director of Corporate Relations, WWF International adds “Having worked with the private sector for the last 10 years, it is obvious that as well as being part of the problem, it can also be a major part of the solution. WWF has the ambition to change the face of business education, and the One Planet MBA will play an important role in achieving that objective.”



Professor Alan Knight OBE comments “The world needs business managers and leaders who understand the pressures on global resources and can proactively deliver innovative solutions - in product development, sourcing, the supply chain, production, marketing, financing and reporting. Equally importantly, business needs them too.”



Dr Kirkup concludes “Sustainability is rapidly moving into the mainstream for business. We have been inundated with approaches from corporates who want to be involved in the programme. Our students will graduate with strong business, analytical and leadership skills but also, uniquely, a deep understanding of how businesses can use sustainability as a source of real innovation and business transformation.” 



Celebrating 50 years



The One Planet MBA is a unique partnership between the University of Exeter Business School and WWF, the world’s leading conservation organisation. Launching in September 2011, it is a significant way of marking WWF’s 50th anniversary year. Globally, it is one of a kind and seeks to change the face of management education. The objective for both parties is to drive sustainable business transformation, confident that graduates of the One Planet MBA will be qualified to deliver better stewardship of social, financial and environmental capital to business around the world.



The One Planet MBA will be officially launched on April 14 2011 as part of Exeter's Environmental Protection and Sustainability Forum. Please see www.business-school.exeter.ac.uk/events/eps/ 



The One Planet MBA is offered as a one year full time or two year executive programme.