Celebrating the Helicopters of Nature: 3rd Edition of Dragonfly Festival 2020

Posted on 17 August 2020
 
|
 

0 Comments








Dragonfly Festival



© WWF India



WWF India, BNHS, and the Indian Dragonfly Society come together to host the Dragonfly Festival 2020

 

17th August, 2020: World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF India), in collaboration with Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) launched the 3rd edition of Dragonfly Festival 2020. The pan-India festival dedicated to dragonflies, aims to create awareness for the conservation of these insects.



The Dragonfly Festival started in 2018, is a way to educate and inform the public about the integral role that dragonflies, and their lesser known siblings damselflies, play in our environment. The aim of the festival has always been to create a connection between the common man and these beautiful creatures. Through the 2 years of this festival numerous field visits with experts have been organised and. In 2018 dragonfly count was conducted by WWF India and BNHS and total of 27 species were recorded in Delhi, 5 of which were rare sightings.



Radhika Suri, Director Environment Education, WWF India says “It gives me immense happiness to see the reach of the Dragonfly Festival 2020 in 9 different states this year and I am sure it will reach many corners of our country. I strongly believe that this festival will inspire younger generation to study odonates and help build awareness in their role as critical bioindicators. Discussions and advocacy for conservation of these insects in India is the need of the hour.”

 

Due to the current pandemic situation, WWF India, BNHS, and Indian Dragonfly Society (IDS) along with, UNEP, UNDP, NBA and IUCN decided to conduct this year’s Dragonfly Festival virtually. The Dragonfly Festival 2020 aims at building awareness about the importance of these insects and the need to conserve them. WWF India, BNHS, and IDS will be training a group of volunteers to lead awareness programmes which will sensitize people about the importance of dragonflies and damselflies. These volunteers led programmes will be conducted across the country and done through the year.



Elaborating on the benefits of dragonflies, Sohail Madan Centre Manager, BNHS said “Dragonflies are some of the best predators to keep mosquito populations low. Not only do they scavenge the skies in adulthood, but they eat a large number of mosquito larvae in their larval form. Dragonflies can be the answer to the mosquito problem in India."



The Dragonfly festival 2020 was virtually launched by Mr. Ravi Singh, SG and CEO, WWF India. Dr. Subramaniam, (Scientist-E and officer-in-charge, Southern Regional Centre, Zoological Survey of India) delivered an expert talk on the importance of dragonflies and the role of citizens in their conservation. Dr Subramaniam emphasised that societal participation for mass data generation on dragonflies is imperative to understanding their lives, habitats and protection. Free and easy accessibility of this data for the public is key, and hence must be put on common platforms.



The yearlong festival will include a number of fun wildlife activities involving sessions with dragonfly experts, interactive webinars, prize winning competitions on Photography, Art, Storytelling, Quizzes, and much more. The festival will also provide an opportunity to people to undertake citizen science projects on backyards counts, exploring the dragonflies across India and documenting their unique behaviour. 

 

The Dragonfly Festival continues to be a success in the conservation of these beautiful creatures and their habitats. Both WWF India and BNHS aim that by next year, the Dragonfly Festival will build a team of amateur conservationists in India that will document the process of understanding dragonflies and monitoring the rise of species. This also ensures a systematic process of meeting and discussing lesser known dragonfly species.

Citizens can log on to https://standwithnature.org/ to check upcoming webinars and participate in the various competitions. This website will offer educational content and online learning toolkits on dragonflies and damselflies.
 
For more information, please contact:

Sohail Madan                                                                          

Centre Manager, BNHS                    

Email: cecbnhsdelhi@bnhs.org                                                     

Phone: +91 9717838299

 

Radhika Suri

Director, Environment Education, WWF India                    

Email: rsuri@wwfindia.net

Phone: 011 41504792 

 

About BNHS:

Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS), a 137-year old membership-driven organization, has been promoting the cause of a natural India since 1883. BNHS is one of the largest non-governmental organizations in India engaged in conservation and biodiversity research.



The Society's guiding principle has always been that conservation must be based on scientific research, a tradition exemplified by its former President, late Dr Sálim Ali. BNHS has been designated as a Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (SIRO) by the Department of Science & Technology, Government of India, and also recognized as a nodal agency for bird ringing in Maharashtra. It supports many research efforts through grants, and publishes the Journal of the

 

Bombay Natural History Society. Many prominent naturalists, including the ornithologists like S. Dillon Ripley have been associated with it.



Mission Statement: Conservation of nature, primarily biological diversity, through action, based on Research, Education and Public Awareness.