WWF-India initiates programme to promote wood certification in Rajasthan

Posted on 25 May 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Forest certification workshop for SME's in progress.



© WWF-India



Jodhpur- WWF-India continuing with its mission of protecting India’s natural resources while ensuring sustainable development, has partnered with European Commission to implement a programme promoting sustainable and responsible trade by wood processing small and medium enterprises(SME’S).



This project aims towards building capacity amongst SME’s from the wood processing sectors in three Indian states, namely- Rajasthan, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh. With the support from this project the SME’s would be able to gain easy access to international markets while supporting conservation of forests.



Wood based SME’s in the above states play a significant role towards economic development and providing employment opportunities. With increased demand for certified wood from international markets, these SME’s engaged in processing and exporting of wood and wood related products are facing constraints in accessing global markets. This in turn is leading to livelihood related issues. The wooden handicraft and furniture industry in Jodhpur itself employs approximately 3 lakh people. Fall in demand will directly affect people associated with the industry.



WWF-India will be facilitating the SME’s for credible forest certification and building their capacity through this project. For this purpose WWF-India will work with Jodhpur handicrafts Exporters Association and other stakeholders of wood and fiber sector including timber traders, plantation owners and relevant Government bodies.



A series of workshops have been launched to carry across this objective whereby SME’s will be educated on the various aspects of forest certification. Jodhpur was host to one such session where approximately 100 SME’s participated. The resource persons present these consultative meeting and training workshops include International experts viz., Dr Alan Smith, Forest Stewardship Council, Bonn, Mr. Irvin Gunwan, Smart wood Programme of Rainforest Alliance, Indonesia. Senior Government officials also contributed to the deliberations.  



The event was inaugurated by the Chief Guest Mr. Navin Mahajan(District Collector), Jodhpur district. The event saw the SME’s voicing their opinion on the process of certification. The workshop concluded successfully.



About European Commission

The EU is committed to helping Asia protect its environment to finding a sustainable future for the region’s growing economies. Environmental problems are rarely contained within National borders, which is why the EU has developed an approach to deal with them at regional level. The European Commissions regional strategy Paper for EU Asia cooperation (2007-2013) has identified the environment as a sector in need of major focus.



About WWF-India

WWF is a science based organization. engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country since 1969. a part of the WWF global network, the organization has made its presence felt through a sustained effort not only towards nature and wildlife conservation but by sensitizing people by creating awareness through capacity building and environ-legal activism.



For further queries please contact:

Dr T.R Manoharan,

Senior coordinator Forestry Program,	

WWF-India

Ph: 011-41504787(O)

e-mail: tmanoharan@wwfindia.net



	Shaila Sam,

Senior Manager- Communications,

WWF-India,

Ph: 011-43516248(O)

e-mail: ssam@wwfindia.net