WWF-India and the MOEF announce the youth delegation for COP-15 at Copenhagen

Posted on 04 December 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Hon’ble Minister of State, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Shri Jairam Ramesh introduces the four representatives of the Indian Youth scheduled to travel with the Indian delegation to Copenhagen 



© WWF-India



New Delhi: The World Wide Fund for Nature- India along with the Ministry of Environment and Forests jointly announced the youth delegation for the United Nations climate change talks at Copenhagen. These  youth delegates were selected through ’Prithvi Ratna,’ a National Level Essay Writing Competition for Youth on Climate Change. The objective of the competition was to inculcate a sense of ecological citizenship amongst the youth by providing them a platform to express their views.
 
 The competition was open for the age groups from 16yrs to 21yrs and was conducted in all  states and Union Territories of India. The entries were submitted in both English and Hindi. The topic for the competition was –‘You are India’s future generation- How can you lead/influence climate change challenge to ensure a sustainable future for the country and planet.’ The central panel of judges comprised of leading personalities in the field of Journalism, English and Hindi language and external climate change experts.
 
The 4 winners  will  be a part of the Indian Contingent for COP 15 - The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Copenhagen, Denmark from December 7 – 18, 2009. The winners are Ramsha Sajid (16yrs) and Aadya Dube (17yrs) from Carmel Convent Senior Secondary School, BHEL Govindpura, Bhopal, Ruchika Pokhriyal (19 yrs) from Acharya Narendra Dev College, Kalkaji, Govindpuri, New Delhi and Deeksha Singh (20 yrs) from Patna Women's College, Avila Convent, Patna. The winners will participate in the Conference from December 6 – 12, 2009. 8 other finalists will travel to JimCorbettNational Park in Uttarakhand for an expedition.
 

Speaking on the occasion Minister of Environment and Forests,Mr Jairam Ramesh said“This is the 1st time that the youth have been included as part of an official delegation. I hope it will not be the last.”
 
Congratulating the winners, Mr. Ravi Singh, SG & CEO, WWF- India, said,” The youth are the future and it is for them to create a change towards a better planet. WWF-India is proud to be associated with the selection of this team who are probably the youngest participants at Copenhagen. We look forward to them voicing the opinion of the youth of the nation.”
 
For further information, please contact:
 
Shaila Sam
Senior Manager- Communications Incharge
WWF- India
172- B, Lodhi Estate
New Delhi
Email: ssam@wwfindia.net
Ph- +91-11-4351- 6248
4150- 4797