ITBP, Uttarakhand Forest Department and WCCB to coordinate efforts to curb trans-boundary illegal wildlife trade

Posted on 11 July 2018
 
|
 

1 Comment











© TRAFFIC



Dehradun: On 11 July 2018, TRAFFIC India organised a multi-agency coordination meeting where senior officials from Indo Tibet Border Police (ITBP), Uttarakhand Forest Department, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) and Wildlife Institute of India (WII) came together to discuss issues related to poaching and smuggling of endangered wildlife across borders and to brainstorm on the ways forward to cooperate and collaborate in the fight against wildlife crime. This important meeting was hosted by ITBP at its Northern Frontier Head Quarter, Seema Dwar, Dehradun.

 

“Inter-agency cooperation and collaboration is crucial to eradicating wildlife crime’’ was the unambiguous voice at the meeting that was attended by nearly 40 officials mainly from ITBP and Uttarakhand Forest Department posted in the border regions of Uttarakhand and HimachalPradesh.

 

Ms Aparna Kumar, IPS, Deputy Inspector General, ITBP, welcomed the participants and shared her experience of dealing with wildlife crime in the border regions. She reiterated that ITBP managing the border areas can play a huge role to curb trans-boundary wildlife smuggling.

 

Dr Saket Badola, Head of TRAFFIC India gave a presentation on illegal wildlife trade scenario in Indiathat had set the stage for the discussions. He emphasised on better and more structured coordination among various enforcement agencies to break criminal networks to curb wildlife crime in trans-boundary areas. 

 

Dr Dhananjai Mohan, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Uttarakhand,gave an insight into the current issues of wildlife crime in Uttarakhand and highlighted illegal wildlife trade at the porous borders of theState with Tibet and Nepal. He also gave an overview ofhow enforcement agencies have been working with the local communities in different landscapes to gather intelligence to prevent wildlife crime in those regions.

 

Mr Vivek Kishore, IPS, Joint Director, WCCB, highlighted cases from Kaziranga National Park and Valmiki Tiger Reserve where joint operations and collaboration among agencies had led to successful seizures and wildlife crime prevention and detection. He lauded this initiative by TRAFFICinbringing multiple agencies together so there could be better coordination and cooperation among them for curbing trans-boundary wildlife crime.

 

Dr S K Gupta, Scientist, WII, gave a brief presentation on identification of common wildlife articles and derivatives and how WII can support trade in such joint initiatives to curb illegal trade and poaching of wild animals.

 

Dr Rajiv Bhartari, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief Wildlife Warden, Uttarakhand suggested that since the forest department personnel have limited resource and training for patrolling high altitude areas of the Himalayas, especially during harsh weather, ITBP with its permanent presence in the area can support the forest department in fulfillinganti-poaching and anti-trafficking goals. He suggested that officials from both forest department and ITBP must engage on regular basis to conduct joint patrolling in trans-boundary areas”.

 

The participating officers came to a consensus that there is also a need for sensitisation and capacity building training programmes for the ITBP officials at grassroot levels who are posted in critical wildlife areas and transit points for wildlife smuggling. The participants also agreed to taking forward initiatives related to joint patrolling by ITBP and forest department. More such coordination meetings were requested by the forest department and ITBP on regular basis so that the agencies can develop a more action oriented robust strategy for curbing wildlife crime at border regions.

 

The meeting ended with a thank you note from Dr Saket Badolato all the participants from various organisations for their valuable contribution to the meeting, especially Mr H.S. Goraya, Inspector General, North Frontier, ITBP, Ms Aparna Kumar, IPS; and Mr Nilabh Kishore, IPS, Deputy Inspector General, ITBP, for leading on this and arranging this coordination meeting. TRAFFIC is hopeful that this meeting will pave ways for better coordination among all the enforcement agencies on combating illegal wildlife trade near border areas.