Dhanush pledges to ‘Switch Off’ for Earth Hour 2012

Posted on 26 March 2012
 
|
 

1 Comment











© WWF-India



Tamil star urges citizens to switch off to make Chennai the Earth Hour champion!



Chennai: Tamil film actor, playback singer, lyricist and Youtube rage, Dhanush joined hands with WWF-India to support Earth Hour 2012 at a press conference today in Chennai.



Earth Hour is WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action towards a better environment. This year, Earth Hour will be observed on 31 March 2012 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM.



Earth Hour 2012 aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. The concept is simple: Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause. While six mega cities – Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore – are participating in the race to become the Earth Hour Champion, WWF-India encourages participation from other Indian cities as well. 



Dhanush is rooting for Chennai, encouraging citizens to switch off to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. Reinforcing his support to this cause, Dhanush said, “I am happy to be a part of this extra ordinary people’s movement against Climate Change. It is within each one of our means to make a difference in this world, and Earth Hour proves just that. It is inspiring to see how a simple action of switching off lights unites billions of people from around the world to fight against a common cause. I pledge to switch off lights for Earth Hour, and encourage my fellow citizens to do their bit for our planet.”



He further added, “There is only one planet, and if we continue to exploit its finite resources, there will be no one to bail us out. Earth Hour is the first step in our efforts to save the earth. It is time we are conscious of our lifestyle, and its effects on the environment.”



Marking the fourth year of the journey of Earth Hour in India, Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, said, “Last year, Earth Hour encouraged individuals to adopt environment friendly practices in everyday life that would benefit the planet. In taking that message forward, Earth Hour 2012 aims to encourage entire cities to collectively shift towards sustainable development-by undertaking better land, water and energy management which will reduce the growing environmental impact of our urban lifestyles.”



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar has also joined hands with WWF-India and has pledged his support to the Earth Hour 2012 as the national brand ambassador. 



In 2011, a record 1.8 billion individuals across more than 5200 cities in 135 countries participated worldwide by switching off lights, and pledging to responsible actions that benefit our planet. In India, Earth Hour reached more than 130 cities, including tier II and III, small towns and even villages. Last year also marked the start of a new phase for Earth Hour, as it went Beyond the Hour, encouraging individuals to switch off and also commit to a more sustainable lifestyle and incorporate changes into their day to day lives. Since 2007, Earth Hour has set new standards and has broken its own records of mass participation. From here on, Earth Hour will not only be an annual lights out event, but an opportunity for communities to be part of the world’s environmental solutions through responsible action all year round.

 

For more information please contact:

Sonali Nandrajog

Communications Officer

WWF India

sonali.nandrajog@wwf.panda.org 

+91 9871948044