WWF-India Kanpur celebrates World Environment Day

Posted on 06 June 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments


Kanpur: WWF-India’s Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership organised a Walk for Ganga followed by a meeting for NCC cadets to celebrate World Environment Day. Cadets and dignitaries also signed a pledge for Ganga.



This year’s theme of World Environment Day is Forests, and India is the global host of this year’s celebrations.



The rally was flagged off from Company Bagh Crossing by Col. Anuj Srivastava and Shri Suresh Babu, Director – Water Policy and River Basins, and marched till Zoo conveying the messages on environment and river conservation to curious Kanpur citizens. 



The cadets were warmly received by the enthusiastic Zoo staff led by Shri. Praveen Rao, Director – Kanpur Zoo. In his welcome remarks he appreciated the positive spirit and energy of NCC cadets and looked forward to long term association with NCC. He also noted the ongoing Bio-remediation pilot project which is being carried out in the Zoo drain by WWF.



Speaking at the occasion, Shri R Vikram Singh, Municipal Commissioner, Kanpur Nagar Nigam, in his keynote address said, “It is heartening to see such response from NCC cadets and I am sure these future leaders of the society will take the message of environment conservation forward.” Urging for community participation, he reminded Kanpur citizens, “It’s our city our river, let’s take charge”. 



Mr. Suresh Babu emphasised the need to think about the impacts that our every-day activities are putting on the environment. With specific reference to the Ganga he said, “Becoming water-wise or reducing wasteful consumption will go a long way in reducing pollution in the river”. 



Col Srivastava extending full support of his unit for environmental initiatives said that NCC is committed to work towards a living Ganga.



A quiz on Ganga and prize distribution was also organised as part of the proceedings.



Also present at the occasion were Dr DV Mishra, District Health Officer, Kanpur Nagar Nigam; Dr. Anjana Pant, Associate Director, Living Ganga Programme; Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager, WWF-India; Shri Naveen Kumar, Field Officer, WWF-India and senior staff of Kanpur Zoo, Kanpur Nagar Nigam, WWF-India.

(Ends)

For more information, please contact:

Shri Naveen Kumar, Field Officer

Phone: +91-9621761373