Titan launches “The Titan - "WWF Collection"

Posted on 11 September 2008
 
|
 

1 Comment


 Watches inspired by India’s most endangered species



Mumbai, September 11, 2008: Titan today announced the launch of the Titan – WWF collection, a unique range of watches inspired by some of India’s endangered species. In June this year, Titan and World Wildlife Fund India (WWF- India) had announced a tie up to celebrate World Environment Day. The main objective of this partnership is to spread awareness about some of the highly endangered species in India through a collection of exclusively designed Titan watches



The Titan –WWF collection is inspired from six endangered species namely the Tiger, Indian Rhino, Gangetic River Dolphin, The Red Panda, Whale Shark and Oliver Ridley Turtle. Every watch in the collection captures the strength and beauty of each of these magnificent animals. Its stylish bold dials come alive taking inspirations from these animals. The collection is not only a perfect accessory for the season but also acts as a medium to spread awareness about some of the lesser-known endangered species.



This collection has been designed and crafted with great attention by Titan’s in-house Design Studio in close consultation with WWF. It is a unisex collection and is targeted at new generation Indian consumer who want to express their concern for these species by wearing one of these watches. 



Speaking at the launch, Mr. Harish Bhat, COO, Titan Watches, said – “We are very happy to announce the launch of the new Titan-WWF collection. This extraordinary new collection of watches expresses the yearning that many Indians possess today, for being one with the wild and caring for our endangered animal species in a responsible manner. At Titan, we strive to develop collections of watches, which help our consumers connect with their deep-rooted yearnings for self-expression and thus “BE MORE” in their lives. The Titan-WWF collection fits this theme perfectly. We are sure our consumers will love these handsome watches, and will enjoy wearing them with pleasure and pride.”



Speaking at the launch, Mr.Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF India said “We are proud to partner Titan Industries Limited.WWF India views this association as a unique awareness campaign for saving some of India's endangered species. Titan 's endangered species collection is not only an attempt to illustrate the plight of some of India's iconic species but also a commitment for conservation. 



It is alarming that the numbers of the species chosen for the Titan line have reduced drastically in number in recent years. What makes the issue critical is that very few individuals are coming forward to understand the issues involved in protection of these species and to join hands in the conservation of India's unique fauna that is part of our natural heritage. Through this important partnership between Titan and WWF, we wish to reach out to those who would like to be the torch bearers in our mission to save these species for their future, both by the significance of symbolism and by participative action”. 



Priced between Rs 3000 and Rs 3800, present in 13 different styles, the watches would be sold through World of Titan show rooms, multi brand outlets and various malls across the country. 



With every Titan watch you purchase, you make a meaningful contribution to WWF towards providing these beautiful animals their natural habitat.



For more information, please contact:

Namita Khurana

Asst. Manager - Communications & Partnerships

WWF - India 

Mob:- 9811181607

Telephone : 41504831