WWF-India & Uttar Pradesh Forest Department radio-collar tiger before releasing into the wild

Posted on 09 March 2018
 
|
 

0 Comments








Caption for the photo- Tiger being released in the wild



© Ashok Kashyap, RO, Belrayan



Pilibhit and Lakhimpur Kheri: On 5th March, 2018 a woman in Chandupur village was killed by an adult tiger that had reportedly strayed from the Pilibhit Tiger Reserve 10 days ago. Chandupur, located 15 km from Pilibhit Tiger Reserve is one of the many villages adjacent to the Reserve’s boundary that has reported incidents of negative human-tiger interactions. Since January 2017, 18 such cases have been reported from villages located along the fringe of Pilibhit Tiger Reserve.

 

The incident was brought to the notice of the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department the same day. The next day, a team comprising of officials of the Forest Department, WWF-India and other conservation organisations was formed by Mr. P. P. Singh, Conservator of Forest, Bareilly to carry out the rescue operation. After five hours, the big cat which had taken shelter in the sugarcane field was tranquilised. With the support of the local police, the cage with the tranquilised tiger was moved back to the Pilibhit Tiger Reserve amidst a crowd that gathered around the sugarcane field. 



On 7 th March, 2018, the big cat was shifted to Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, after a team of scientists from Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly provided their consent to release it in the wild. After receiving a request from Uttar Pradesh Forest Department, the captured adult male tiger was radio collared by WWF India on 8th March, 2018 at Dudhwa Tiger Reserve.



Under the supervision of Mr. Sunil Chaudhari, IFS, Field Director, Dudhwa TR; Mr. Mahaveer Kaojalagi IFS, Deputy Director, Dudhwa TR and Dr. Nasir, Senior Veterinarian, Kanpur Zoo along with officials of WWF India and other conservation organisations, the tiger has been released back in the forest of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve today.



In partnership with the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department, WWFIndia has also been involved in conservation efforts in Pilibhit Tiger Reserve, Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, Katerniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary and Kishanpur Wildlife Sanctuary through capacity building of forest department staff, and monitoring of tiger, co-predator and prey. Through continuous monitoring, conservation issues in these critical tiger habitats have been highlighted, and has helped in developing better understanding about importance of securing these habitats in the landscape.