Nokia and WWF cooperation successful – raising the bar for environmental sustainability continues

Posted on 19 October 2006
 
|
 

0 Comments


Nokia’s current environmental focus areas are energy issues, substance management and take back & recycling.  WWF will support Nokia in this work over the coming three years, with environmental awareness building of Nokia employees remaining a key role. Nokia will also pilot WWF’s One Planet Business concept, which aims to reduce companies’ environmental impact.
Both organisations praised the relationship as a chance to learn from each other when looking at how to help create a more sustainable future.  Activities such as the internal web-based learning platform Connect to Protect, management training workshops on business cases with an environmental focus and stakeholder seminars have helped increase environmental awareness among Nokia employees.  
“Nokia has shown a real willingness to work hand-in-hand on environmentally sound business practices. We look forward to working together to improve specific aspects of Nokia’s environmental performance with enthusiastic staff who have benefited from the Connect to Protect learning portal and workshops for the past three years,” said Paul Steele,  Chief Operating Officer of WWF International.
“Understanding and reducing the environmental impact of our activities is a top business priority. The partnership with WWF has given us invaluable support in managing issues and in building environmental awareness, helping us to ensure that environmental issues are everybody’s business”, says Veli Sundbäck, Executive Vice President, Corporate Relations and Responsibility, Nokia.
About Nokia 

Nokia is a world leader in mobile communications, driving the growth and sustainability of the broader mobility industry. Nokia connects people to each other and the information that matters to them with easy-to-use and innovative products like mobile phones, devices and solutions for imaging, games, media and businesses. Nokia provides equipment, solutions and services for network operators and corporations.
About WWF

WWF is one of the world's largest independent conservation organizations, with close to 5 million supporters and a network active in more than 100 countries on five continents. Since its creation in 1961, it has maintained a constant record of success. Today, WWF funds close to 2,000 projects and employs more than 4,000 people worldwide. WWF's mission is to stop the degradation of the planet's natural environment and to build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature, by conserving the world's biological diversity, ensuring that the use of renewable resources is sustainable and promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful consumption.
About One Planet Business

The OPB philosophy is that businesses must share responsibility for both the issues and the required change towards operating within the ecological limits of our one planet. It aims to see the leaders from policy, consumer bodies, investors, companies, academia and environmental science collaborate in order to create mutually empowering innovation around key industry sectors.


For more information, please contact:

Anshuman Atroley

Communications Manager

WWF-India

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net