22 Tigers Reported From the Valmiki Tiger Reserve

Posted on 08 February 2014
 
|
 

4 Comments








The Valimki Tiger report being released



© Kamlesh Maurya/WWF-India



New Delhi: The Valmiki Tiger Reserve in the state of Bihar has been found to have 22 tigers in an estimation study. The Honourable Chief Minister of Bihar, Mr. Nitish Kumar released a special report with the results of the study today at a special event held in the state capital Patna’s zoo in the presence of Mr. Deepak Kumar Singh, IAS and Secretary (Forests); Dr. Mangala Roy, Advisor (Agriculture) to Chief Minister; Mr. Anjani Kumar Singh, IAS and Principal Secretary to Chief Minister; Mr. Bashir Ahmed Khan, IFS, PCCF (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, Bihar.



The report presents the findings of the first attempt to estimate the tiger population by covering the whole Valmiki Tiger Reserve (VTR) using photographic capture-recapture method. As part of the Phase-IV monitoring protocol to obtain minimum tiger numbers operating in this least known of India’s tiger reserves, WWF-India conducted the camera trapping exercise in collaboration with the Field Director of VTR and the Environment & Forest Department, Government of Bihar.



22 unique individuals were photographed during the study. One adult female with two accompanying cubs was also photographed indicating that VTR has a resident tiger population. In addition to tigers and leopards, the study also captured lesser cats like fishing cat, jungle cat and leopard cat, as well as prey and other species. Three of the species — Himalayan serow, crab-eating mongoose and yellow-throated marten were reported for the first time in VTR from photographic evidence obtained during the study.



Speaking at the event, the Honourable Chief Minister Mr. Nitish Kumar said, “I’m happy that the number of tigers has increased in Valmiki. The government of Bihar will continue to support tiger conservation and habitat improvement measures so that tiger numbers improve and the green cover of the state can also increase.” 



“I thank WWF-India for their contribution in the present tiger enumeration,” said Mr. Bashir Ahmed Khan, IFS, PCCF (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, Bihar.



The only tiger reserve in the state of Bihar, the Valmiki Tiger Reserve is located in the extreme northeastern corner along the international border with Nepal. It represents one of the last patches of forests having a unique combination of the terai-bhabar vegetation, which harbour rich fauna of several endemic and globally endangered species such as tiger, rhino, gaur and fishing cat. It is contiguous with the Chitwan National Park in Nepal and intermediately connected with the Sohagi Barwa Wildlife Sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh, India.



The results encapsulated in the report provide insights into the richness and diversity of VTR, and underscore its importance within the Terai Arc Landscape. Considering the biodiversity-rich habitat of VTR, including breeding tigers, and its connectivity to other important tiger habitats in this landscape, WWF-India will continue to work with the Bihar Forest Department for enhancing the protection and habitat management in the area, which would help tigers numbers rebound in the area and enable the Tiger Reserve attain its former glory.



For further information:

Dr. Anil Kumar Singh, 09760111709, aksingh@wwfindia.net 

Dr. Jimmy Borah, +91 099 5757 0468, jimmyborah@gmail.com 

Anil Cherukupalli, +91 11 4150 4783, anil.cherukupalli@wwf.panda.org