DDA and WWF India to work together to create one of its kind ‘Learning with Nature’ experience at Sanjay Van

Posted on 02 July 2022







Sh. Manish Kumar Gupta,VC, DDA with Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary-General and CEO, WWF India with other officials of DDA and WWF India, during the signing of the MoU



© WWF India



Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has signed an MOU with World Wide Fund for Nature – India (WWF India) for “Nature based learning & experiential activities” at Sanjay Van, New Delhi



Sanjay Van, spread over an area of approx 783 acres is an integral part of South-Central Ridge and is a notified “Reserved Forest”. Located near Vasant Kunj, a part of ancient Aravalli Range with historic ruins of 12th Century, the dense forest with a rich diversity of flora and fauna is home to a number of birds, reptiles, butterflies, odonates and mammals etc. Its rich natural heritage is due to its distinct landscape with geomorphological features like rocky outcrops and water bodies, thus making it a haven for nature enthusiasts amidst the Metropolis.



WWF India, with its commitment towards addressing conservation issues for securing ecological biodiversity and spreading educational awareness about nature, will act as the ‘Knowledge & Activity partner’ and also undertake ‘Educational Research and conservation of flora & fauna’. These activities at Sanjay Van will build a sense of appreciation for the city’s natural heritage amongst the citizen of Delhi, especially children, to inculcate an understanding and bond with nature at an early and impressionable age.

 

The MOU aims to establish activities based on ‘Learning with Nature’ and facilitate experiential activities like tree tagging, nature walks, flora & fauna observation, children's educational activities etc. In addition, WWF India as Knowledge Partner will also support with readable material like educative signages, flora and fauna atlas and other publications.

 

DDA, besides regular maintenance and upkeep of the large green, has taken several initiatives like enhancement of the forest character through plantation, restoration and conservation of heritage structures with ASI, cleaning of the water bodies with DJB etc. The MOU with WWF India is another important initiative in this direction.