India pledges to #giveup to give back this Earth Hour

Posted on 23 March 2018
 
|
 

0 Comments








Switch



© WWF-India



Earth Hour 2018 will be celebrated on Saturday, 24 March from 8:30 to 9:30 pm, local time.
As skylines around the country go dark, thousands will unite across the world to celebrate WWF’s Earth Hour and take a stand against biodiversity loss. The Rashtrapati Bhavan, the India Gate, the Red Fort and other prominent landmarks in India will switch off their lights in solidarity as individuals, communities and organizations across the country will come together to Give Up on habits and practices that are environmentally detrimental and deliver on their potential to build sustainable lifestyles, reduce their footprint and inspire positive action for the planet.

 

WWF’s Living Planet Report 2016 revealed a 58% decline in global populations of fish, birds, mammals, amphibians and reptiles between 1970 and 2012.  It’s a clear sign that we are pushing our planet beyond its ability to sustain us.  We are consuming natural resources at a rate 1.6 times higher than the earth can support. 

 

It is to address this that WWF-India is launching the #GIVEUP TO GIVE BACK initiative, starting Earth Hour 2018. The campaign aims to inspire organisations, institutions and individuals to make the choice to curb some habits, practices and lifestyles, burdening both our lives and the environment and inspire them to choose alternatives to Connect to Earth. The Give Up initiative starts conversations at different levels and for different agendas  and is a lens and tool that organizations can use for shifting organizational culture and behavior change, for economizing operations and reducing costs. This is the choice to consume smart and ensure that the things we own don’t own us.

 

Speaking about the campaign, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, said

“Communicating the link between our daily lives and its impact on the natural world is an integral part of our work at WWF.  The environmental challenges we already see today – water scarcity and pollution, food security, depleting natural resources, energy shortages – and the factors that exacerbate them will only increase over the next few years. The Give Up to Give Back initiative for Earth Hour 2018 is our effort to build conversations on sustainable consumption and the need for individuals, businesses and governments to adopt innovative measures to reduce our footprint.”

 

#GIVEUP PLEDGES 2018:

Bharat Scouts and Guides: 5.6mn Bharat Scouts and Guides (BSG) have pledged to #GiveUp their plastic woggles, a signature element of the BSG uniform, as a part of the Earth Hour campaign, replacing it with more sustainable and eco-friendly options



ITC Hotels: Ten of the ITC Luxury Group of Hotels have pledged to #GiveUp plastic food packaging across their properties



Barista: The Barista chain of coffee shops have pledged to #GiveUp plastic straws across all their cafes in the three states of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Punjab as a part of Earth Hour 2018. This will then be rolled out across the country



Marks and Spencer India: Marks and Spencer India has pledged to #GiveUp paper usage and has committed to a 25% reduction in A4 and A3 paper usage in FY 18-19



PVR Cinemas: The PVR Cinemas have pledged to #GiveUp plastic bottles in their own offices. They are also asking consumers to give up on paper tickets and bills and go digital through consumer communication across 625 screens in 51 cities in the country 



Please note: These are just some of the many commitments that we have received as part of Earth Hour 2018 in India. Apart from this there are several other corporate, RWAs, colleges and schools that have pledged to be a part of the #GiveUp movement and cut down on detrimental practices impacting the environment

 

EARTH HOUR 2018-2020The India Earth Hour campaign is an extension of the global #Connect2Earth campaign as its main call to action to people across the world.  While the Earth Hour campaign has consistently focussed on climate change as a key call to action over the last decade, the 2018-2020 global Earth Hour campaign broadbases the conversation beyond climate change and calls on people across the world to take action and understand the interconnectivity of people and our environment through relevant issues such as air, water, and energy.

 

ACTIVITIES PLANNED FOR EARTH HOUR INDIA 2018: 

Delhi: Pedal/Paidal for the Planet: Cyclothon-Walkathon 2018: Powered by WWF-India and Canara HSBC Oriental Bank of Commerce Life Insurance Company and supported this year by Raahgiri Gurgaon, WRI, GACS, Nasscom Regional Council, Haryana and Nagarro, Pedal for the Planet is WWF-India’s signature Earth Hour event and gives people a chance to make planet-friendly choices in their lives, like cycling, walking and carpooling whenever possible.Event details: https://www.facebook.com/events/174142520043639/

 

Bengaluru: Wetland Clean-Up: WWF-India, in partnership with the Karnataka Forest Department and Nokia-India is organizing a clean-up at the Madiwala Lake in Bengaluru to ask citizens to #GiveUp plastic and ensure clean wetlands and healthier aquatic biodiversity. The Hon’ble Home Minister, Shri Ramalinga Reddy will grace the event as chief guest.Where: Madiwala Lake

When: Saturday, 24th March 2018

7:00a.m.-10:00a.m.Contact Person: Mr. Hari Somashekar (7411700007)

 

Kabini: Switch off at Major Luxury Resorts in Kabini side of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve: Major resorts have agreed to switch off all non-essential lights during the Earth Hour, with the agenda of encouraging their staff and guests to #Give Up plastic.

Where: Kabini

When: Saturday, 24th March 2018

Time: 8:30 p.m.-9:30p.m.

Contact Person: Mr. Hari Somashekhar (7411700007)

 

Hyderabad: Musical Event: WWF-India is organizing a rock concert in Visage, in partnership with the CII and the Municipal Corporation and other corporate partners. The event will also see corporates making their #GiveUp commitments on a public stage as part of the campaign.Where: VUDA Park

When: Saturday, 24th March 2018

7:00 p.m.-10:00p.m.Contact Person: Ms. Farida Tampal (9440751037)

 

Kolkata: WWF-India is organizing a rally from The Victoria Memorial to Elliot Park to build awareness on Earth Hour and the Give Up campaign, followed by an Earth hour debate in partnership with the Jadavpur University. The event will also see a musical performance and skits by school students.Where: Victoria Memorial Park to Elliot Park

When: Saturday, 24th March 2018

Time: 7:00 a.m.-10:30 a.m.

Contact Person: Dr. Saswati Sen (9433467147)

 

Mumbai: WWF-India is organizing a beach clean-up at the Chow patty beach to build awareness on the impact of plastic on marine biodiversity and clear the beach of plastic. This will be followed by a workshop on segregation of waste and plastic use and its impacts.Where: Giraud Chow patty, Nepean Sea Road

When: Saturday, 24th March 2018

Time: 8:30 a.m.

Contact Person: Ms. Caroline Pays (9987675556)

 

Beyond this various events are being planned in cities across the country.  List of events can be found here: http://earthhour.wwfindia.org/eh18/eh_events.php

 

BUILDINGS TO SWITCH OFF FOR EARTH HOUR 2017: 

India Gate,

Rashtrapati Bhavan

Lotus Temple

Akshardham Temple

Howrah Bridge

Victoria Memorial

Charminar

Chattrapati Shivaji Terminus



For more details please contact:

Rituparna Sengupta

Sr. Manager- Campaigns, Brand and Media

Phone: (011)41504797