WWF-India, Universities Press release new book Mammals of South Asia -2

Posted on 15 April 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mammals of South Asia -2



© 



Together with volume 1, the definitive guide documents all 590 mammals in the region 


NEW DELHI, 15 April 2015: Mammals of South Asia – Volume 2, a one-of-its-kind comprehensive wildlife encyclopedia, authored and edited by legendary wildlifer Dr. AJT. Johnsingh and biologist, Nima Manjrekar, was launched by WWF-India and Universities Press on 10 April 2015. Dr Johnsingh is a senior advisor for WWF-India.

The book, together with its predecessor Mammals of South Asia – Volume 1, forms a definitive compendium covering all 590 mammals, which have been found in the region to date. George Schaller in his foreword says, “This reflects a genuine increase in knowledge since the 1960s…when many species – were, for the first time studied in the wild…” 



Describing his work of collating the enormous research done over the past half-century as “challenging”, Dr. Johnsingh said, “Massive efforts of nearly a decade has gone into bringing out this book. It is a colossal volume of 35 chapters covering the mammalian orders from Cetacea to Rodentia. Additional chapters such as ‘Little known mammals’, ‘Diseases and parasites of wild mammals’ and ‘Checklist of mammals of South Asia’ addsvalue to the compendium.” The book also includes beautiful photographs and illustrations that make it appealing to scientist and laypersons alike.



Appreciating the coordinated efforts by publisher Orient Blackswan (Universities Press), the sustained inputs by wildlife biologist Nima Manjrekar and the support extended by organizations like WWF-India, Bombay Natural History Society, Wildlife Institute of India and Nature Conservation Foundation, Mysore, in ensuring that the book is released, he added, “The process was an eye opener: I made some new friends, I discovered some friends for life who were very steady in their support all through the endeavor.”



Dr. Johnsingh cited T.J. Roberts and George B. Schaller’s works, The Mammals of Pakistan and Mountain Monarchs: Wild Sheep and Goats of the Himalayarespectively, as his prime inspiration. The book was formally released by chief guest, Ambassador (Retd.) SudhirVyas.

 

For further information:

Nitya Kaushik

Sr. Communications Manager

WWF-India

T: 011-41504783

E: nkaushik@wwfindia.net