Smt Ambika Soni inaugurates a photo exhibition depicting Sacred Sikh shrines commemorated by names of species of trees

Posted on 10 August 2006







Tryst with Trees



© Anshuman Atroley/WWF-India



Smt. Ambika Soni, Union Tourism and Culture Minister, inaugurated an exhibition titled “Tryst with Trees – Punjab’s Sacred Heritage” at the WWF-India Auditorium in New Delhi. Mr. Surinder Singla, Finance and Health Minister, Punjab, and Mr. J S Kang, Tourism and Animal Husbandry Minister, Punjab, were also present on the occasion. Eminent dignitaries from the state and central government besides WWF officials were also present for the programme. 



“Tryst with Trees” is a pictorial documentation by Mr. D.S. Jaspal - a civil servant from Punjab - of sacred Sikh shrines named after native species of trees in Punjab and Pakistan. Mr. Jaspal has documented 48 Sikh shrines in India and Pakistan which are named after 17 species of trees such as Gurudwara Tahli Sahib, Gurudwara Ber Sahib, Gurudwara Jand Sahib, Gurudwara Imli Sahib, Gurudwara Luhura Sahib, Gurudwara Phalahi Sahib, Gurudwara Amb Sahib etc. 



Through vivid and well-composed pictures, Tryst with Trees brings out the sanctity in which trees are held by devotees and the central role they play in religious preaching and practices. The exhibition includes a series of photographs of the shrines accompanied by a brief description of the botanical features of the tree as well as the relationship between the species and the historical and religious background of the shrine. 



At a time when nature and environment in general and trees in particular are coming under increasing pressure of urbanization and economic development, an exhibition of photographs of sacred Sikh shrines which are commemorated by the names of Indian species of trees of would create awareness about this precious, albeit, depleting, heritage of mankind. 



WWF-India is proud to partner this endeavour of Mr. Jaspal. We hope that it not only highlights the mutual relationship between religion and conservation but also puts into national focus the powerful forces of Faith behind this endeavour. 



For more information, please contact: 

Mahesh Pandey 

Director – Operations 

WWF-India 

E-mail: mcpandey@wwfindia.net  

Tel: +91-11-4150 4802