‘Sariska: The Tiger Reserve Roars Again’ released in the Capital

Posted on 04 September 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments











© WWF-India



New Delhi, India: On September 4, WWF-India in partnership with Niyogi Books celebrated the launch of the book, Sariska: The Tiger Reserve Roars Again, at an event held at the WWF-India Auditorium in New Delhi. The book is written by Mr. Sunayan Sharma (IFS), the President of the Sariska Tiger Foundation, who served as the Field Director of Sariska from 1991 to 1996 and again from 2008-2010. 



Sariska, in the state of Rajasthan, is one of India's most well known tiger reserves since its inception, which has faced immense pressure after losing all its tigers to poachers in 2004. The reserve has also been in news for several interesting and one-of-a-kind conservation measures, which led to the revival of the mighty cat in this forest.



In the world's first ever aerial tiger translocation exercise in 2008, several tigers were reintroduced in Sariska. The book outlines the various challenges faced during several such unique exercises. A few intense situations involving confrontations with villagers, poachers and local politicians are shared in the book in great detail, leaving the reader with a captivating and informative experience.



The book was released by the Hon’ble Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, Shri. V P Singh. Speaking at the event, WWF-India Secretary General and CEO Mr. Ravi Singh, said, “Sariska is one of the oldest and most important tiger reserves in India which has seen both setbacks as well as innovative conservation actions. It was here that the first-ever aerial translocation of tigers took place.  This book by a former Field Director of Sariska, is a valuable compendium of such initiatives that ensured that tigers roamed these forests once again.”

 

About Niyogi Books

Niyogi books has in a short span of time established itself as a publisher of fine ilustrated books. Started in 2004, it has about 200 books on its active list and is recognized for its high quality illustrated books on a range of subjects from art and photography to heritage, culture and history of South Asia. These books have won several awards and prizes including those from the Federation of Indian Publishers.

To know more: www.niyogibooksindia.com/about-us

 

For more details, kindly contact:

Ms. NityaKaushik,

Senior Manager-Communications, Species and Landscapes,

WWF-India,

Email: nkaushik@wwfindia.net  , T: +91-98-19-902763