Earth Hour receives unprecedented support

Posted on 27 March 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Earth Hour logo



© Earth Hour



New Delhi: This Saturday, 28th March 2009, hundreds of thousands of Indians will take a stand towards calling for action on climate change by participating in Earth Hour and switching off their lights from 8.30 to 9.30 pm. From Kochi to Shimla and Guwahati to Ahmedabad citizens, corporates and governments are joining this campaign to voice their concern. 



Some of Mumbai’s best known landmarks, like the Reserve Bank of India and Air India building will be switching off. In Delhi, PVR Cinemas, and educational institutions like Delhi University, Jamia Milia are joining in. Hotels chains including ITC Welcome and Indian IT giants like WIPRO and Infosys, leading banks such as ICICI, HDFC, HSBC, Standard Chartered, ING Vyasa, industry leaders Godrej Group, Genpact, Tata Indicom, Nokia, Nestle, and many more have come forward to observe Earth Hour. 

Utilities like BEST and NDPL in Mumbai and Delhi respectively have been promoting the campaign through innovative means like showcasing Earth Hour promos in BEST Buses and reaching out through their model RWA associations.



The Government of NCT of Delhi has been proactively supporting the campaigning by urging citizens to participate in large numbers. Public service announcements have been appealing to citizens to participate in global movement. They have reached out to over 2000 RWAs and schools in the city.

The Mayor of Mumbai has also been actively promoting Earth Hour through media and other channels. 

Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, addressing the media said, “It is heartening to learn the tremendous support that the campaign is receiving from all sections of the society across the country. Earth Hour shows the power of collective action towards a vote for the planet”. 



Aamir Khan, Amitabh Bachhan, Sachin Tendulkar and several other prominent individuals have extended their support for the campaign and urged citizens to turn off their lights. Noble peace prize winner Archbishop Desmond Tutu and UN secretary General Ban Ki Moon have also supported this campaign and have appealed global citizens to sign up.



Earth Hour 2009 is reaching out to 1 billion people across the world. It was initiated in Australia on 31st March 2007 where 2 million people and two thousand corporate houses turned out their lights for one hour and became a part of the event. The campaign became wider with 35 countries and about 50 million people participating across the globe in 2008. So far over 2000 cities from 85 countries will be participating in this campaign.



EARTH HOUR IN INDIA – A SNAPSHOT



No. of cities: Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore over 25*



No. of Corporates signed up: 50*



School Outreach: Over 200,000 students in Mumbai and Delhi alone 



Major Landmarks: 



National: 

ICICI Bank, HDFC Bank and HSBC Bank - Head Office and all branches, All offices of United Nations agencies, Infosys, HP, Google, Wipro, BirlaSoft, properties managed by CB Richard Ellis



Mumbai: 

Air India Building, RBI Building, Hiranandani Gardens, IIT Powai. 



Delhi:

The Raj Niwas, The Ashok Hotel, all ITC Welcome Group Hotels, PVR Cinemas, DLF Luxury Homes, Aralia; Swastik Kunj, Rohini. 



Bangalore:

Forum Mall, Shops on Brigade Road, SJR Apartments, Sarjapur; Redwood Apartments, Hebbal 



For more information, please contact:



Shaila Sam, Senior Manager – Communications

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797