Wipro and WWF sign a Partnership Agreement for Sustainable Development

Posted on 06 August 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mr. Ravi Singh, SG & CEO of WWF-India and Mr. Azim Premji, Chairman, Wipro sign a partnership agreement for sustainable development



© WWF-India



Bangalore, August 6, 2008: Wipro Limited, a leading player in Global IT and R&D services in partnership with WWF-India, one of the largest conservation organizations in the country, today unveiled an initiative to explore the use of Information Technology to drive sustainable development. It will directly deal with issues of climate change, water and waste management and biodiversity conservation. It is an attempt to develop ideas and actions for sustainable growth based on relevant dimensions of environmental sustainability. 



The initiative intends to tap the synergy between Wipro’s IT Innovation, R&D deployment and Systems Approach and WWF’s deep expertise in areas of ecological sustainability, catalyzing relevant solutions and leadership in global advocacy. 



The two organizations will collaborate in the areas of innovative IT and R&D applications for environmental sustainability. Some of the areas of joint work would be related to IT solutions as drivers for low carbon economy such as virtual meeting enablers, environment friendly ICT products, devices and systems that drive energy efficiency of a variety of economic assets and advocacy for ecologically sustainable standard practices in the IT industry. Other areas of joint work would include optimizing the ecological footprint of Wipro’s own operations and biodiversity conservation through pilots on Wipro’s campuses and WWF priority sites.



Mr.Azim Premji, Chairman, Wipro Limited said, “Innovative IT Applications, and relevant R&D Services will be key drivers for becoming a low-carbon economy. Information Technology must play a critical role in catalyzing ecological sustainability”



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO of WWF-India said “We are now in a phase where the unsustainable trend of increased CO2 emissions and overuse of natural resources is undermining the future of the planet. Progressive institutions must move outside their comfort zone and join hands to address this challenge. IT solutions can play an important role in reducing CO2 emissions and we are looking forward to the partnership with Wipro to set an example. “



Wipro has a leading position in Global IT and R&D Services, a significant presence in ultra-pure water equipment and green lighting solutions, and is also offering eco-energy solutions to its clients. Its initiative for communities, Wipro Cares, has taken up biodiversity conservation. Wipro continues to explore how it can play a pivotal role in ecological sustainability. 



WWF-India is one of the leading conservation organizations in the country, working on key areas of environmental sustainability including biodiversity conservation and climate change. WWF believes that role of business and industry is rapidly gaining importance in the area of sustainable development and that it is important to develop partnerships between environmental organizations and Businesses and industries. 



Wipro runs a corporation wide initiative - Eco Eye, which drives ecological sustainability. It is a comprehensive program that drives increasing ecological sustainability in all its operations, as also areas of its influence. The initiative attempts to engage with increasing levels of intensity with all stakeholders – Wipro’s own employees, partners, suppliers, customers and immediate communities. It will focus on areas such as how to become carbon positive (i.e. contribute more to emission reductions than the company emits), water balance, waste management and bio-diversity. WWF will be a key partner for Wipro in the Eco Eye program.



WWF-India through its Climate and Energy Programme, aims to bring in a paradigm shift towards climate smart development. A core element of the programme is to look at resource smart solutions for ecological sustainability and low carbon economy. The programme will work in strategic partnership with Wipro to bring a transition towards low carbon development path.



For Further Information, please contact:



Wipro Limited

Media: Radha Radhakrishnan +91 – 80 – 25056159

Investors: Aravind Viswanathan +91 – 80 – 25056143



WWF

Media: Shaila Sam +91 – 11 – 43516248

Programme: Shirish Sinha +91 – 11 – 43516245