Young Climate Savers Website Launched

Posted on 10 December 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








Young Climate Saver Logo



© WWF-India



A WWF-India & Tetra Pak initiative

Hyderabad, December 10, 2008: After the successful completion of Phase 1 of the Young Climate Savers (YCS) initiative, WWF-India and Tetra Pak announced the launch of the YCS website, in Hyderabad today. This website is the first Indian website for school students on climate change and energy education.



Honorable Speaker of the Andhra Pradesh State Assembly, Shri. KR Suresh Reddy formally launched the website at a function held at the Bhaskar Auditorium, Birla Science Centre here. Shri. Jayesh Ranjan (IAS), Managing Director, AP Tourism Development Board, a personality well-known and respected for his support in the field of climate change education and awareness programme, also graced the occasion, amongst other dignitaries from WWF-India, Tetra Pak and teachers, students from various schools.



About the Young Climate Savers Programme:

Young Climate Savers is a programme launched with an aim to create awareness across the student fraternity in India on climate change, and through them to reach out to the larger community and to influence them to become ‘climate savers’. WWF-India partnered with Tetra Pak in implementing the Young Climate Savers program. Following up on its commitment to emission reduction, and realizing the importance of educating children on climate change, Tetra Pak partnered with WWF-India in November 2007 for the Young Climate Savers program. The YCS is an education for sustainable development initiative aiming to educate 20,000 school children across India, and through them, to reach out and influence a larger audience on the impacts of climate change and the importance of mitigating it. The YCS initiative is envisioned to be implemented over the course of several years.



YCS Phase 1 reaches to over 20000 students at over 200 schools in India.



“The rate at which climate change is taking place is extremely alarming. While we take pride in the fact that our packaging is environment friendly, we strongly believe that collective effort is what will finally make a difference. Our partnership with WWF reiterates our commitment to create awareness and motivate the young to promote and lead energy efficient and environmentally sensitive lives. Over the past year, we have achieved our target of 20,000 students and now want to reach out to a larger national and international audience with the launch of the YCS Website.” added Mr. Jaideep Gokhale, Programme Head- Food for Development Office & Environment, Tetra Pak India Pvt. Ltd.



For more information, please contact:

Mr. Satya Kumar Pamula,

Integral PR Services Pvt. Ltd.,

Mobile: +91-98480 18923

e-mail: satya@integralpr.com



Ms. Farida Tampal,

WWF-India,

e-mail: ftampal@wwfindia.net