On World Rhino Day, WWF-India calls for adoption of a National Rhino Conservation Plan

Posted on 22 September 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Indian Rhino



© Dr. Dipankar Ghose/WWF-India



New Delhi, India– The thirtieth rhino to be killed this year in India fell to poacher’s bullets in Kaziranga National Park, Assam on the evening of 17th September. As India and rest of the world celebrate rhinos and their conservation successes on World Rhino Day today, this latest killing is a grim reminder of the challenges facing protection of rhinos in India. The increasing use of lethal weapons such as the AK-47s used in Tuesday’s poaching incident point to a growing sophistication and easy access to such deadly weapons among poaching syndicates active in the recent killing.



After decades of conservation success which resulted in the population of rhinos in Assam rising to around 2,500 currently, the spike in poaching over the last couple of years seems to indicate that poaching syndicates are strengthening. To avoid loss of these hard-fought gains there is an urgent need for the adoption of a National Rhino Conservation Plan for India. WWF-India urges the Honourable Minister of Environment and Forest, Ms. Jayanti Natarajan to take the lead on this and bring together the four rhino bearing states of India viz., Assam, West Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. WWF-India is ready to facilitate this process.



“The adoption of such a plan will increase coordination between the four rhino bearing states of India and enable sharing of best practices and information on poaching syndicates enabling better protection of India’s rhinos”, said Dr. Dipankar Ghose, Director, Species and Landscapes, WWF-India.



On World Rhino Day, WWF-India is increasing awareness about rhinos among the wider public through a range of activities in the different rhino bearing states and in Delhi. In Assam, awareness programs and plays are being organized for schools and local communities around the Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary and Manas National Park. In Dudhwa National Park, Uttar Pradesh, an awareness event involving the UP Forest Department, District Magistrate of Kheri and other administrative officers, SSB officers, police officers, school teachers and students, EDC representatives, local dignitaries and media is being organized. In Delhi, along with Oxford Bookstore, a valuable partner of WWF-India, a special awareness event is being organized for children where apart from a film screening an engaging and fun workshop is being conducted by renowned artist and sculptor Anant Misra. An online social media campaign is also being run to reach out to people worldwide.



WWF-India remains committed to the conservation of India’s rhinos and will continue to engage with the government and forest departments to ensure a secure future for these magnificent animals.



For further information:

Dr. Dipankar Ghose, Director, Species & Landscapes, dghose@wwfindia.net, +91 4150 4782



Amit Sharma, Coordinator, Rhino Conservation, amitsharma@wwfindia.net, +91 943501 5657



Anil Cherukupalli, Communications Manager, anil.cherukupalli@wwf.panda.org, +91 4150 4783