World-renowned sand artist Sudarsan Pattnaik depicts the message of Earth Hour 2023 through his sand art

Posted on 24 March 2023










© WWF-India



Using 150+ bulbs to portray the message of Earth Hour, Sudarsan Pattnaik inspires everyone to join this global movement and create the Biggest Hour for Earth.

 

Sudarsan Pattnaik lends his support as Goodwill Ambassador for Earth Hour India 2023

 

Sudarsan Pattnaik sand art for EH 2023 (Videos)

 

Puri, 24th March, 2023: The world-renowned Indian sand artist and Padma Shri Awardee shares, "Earth Hour 2023 is our chance to urge people and communities across the world to take an hour to create a global moment of change.  It is a great opportunity for all of us to join the global movement this Earth Hour and work towards creating a sustainable and environmentally friendly future for generations to come. I request you all to join me on 25th March to spread the message far and beyond, compel more people to celebrate the hour and switch off all non-essential lights.”

 

He adds, "The inspiration behind today's art is to get the message of switch-off to people across the country, especially in Tier II and III cities. We all must understand the perils of climate change and take on the responsibility to contribute positively towards the planet with our actions." 

 

Earth Hour is WWF's flagship global environmental movement. Born in Sydney in 2007, Earth Hour has grown to become the world's largest grassroots movement for the environment, inspiring individuals, communities, businesses and organizations in more than 190 countries and territories to take tangible environmental action. Historically, Earth Hour has focused on the climate crisis, but more recently, Earth Hour has strived to also bring the pressing issue of nature loss to the fore. The aim is to create an unstoppable movement for nature, as it did when the world came together to tackle climate change. The movement recognizes the role of individuals in creating solutions to the planet's most pressing environmental challenges and harnesses the collective power of its millions of supporters to drive change.

 

About WWF-India

WWF India is committed to creating and demonstrating practical solutions that help conserve India's ecosystems and rich biodiversity. With more than 50 years of conservation journey in the country, WWF India works towards finding science-based and sustainable solutions to address challenges at the interface of development and conservation. WWF India is part of the WWF network, with offices in over 100 countries across the world. WWF India works in many states of India through our state and field offices. The organisation works in different geographical regions and across thematic areas, including the conservation of key wildlife species and their habitats management of rivers, wetlands and ecosystems. On the sustainability side, the focus areas are climate change adaptation, driving sustainable solutions for business and agriculture and empowering local communities as conservation stewards. We also work in combatting the illegal wildlife trade and in bringing environment education to students through outreach and awareness campaigns. http://www.wwfindia.org 

Facebook, Twitter, Instagram

 

For more information, please contact:

Komal Chaudhary

Senior Manager-Media & PR, WWF-India

kchaudhary@wwfindia.net