ICICI Prudential Life & World Wide Fund for Nature-India tie-up for a social initiative

Posted on 18 January 2017
 
|
 

0 Comments








Forest guards tracking a translocated rhino in the park, at night.



© NBL/WWWF-India



-Life Insurance and wildlife experts come together to protect those who protect our forests and wildlife~

-Ex-gratia funding for forest staff and their families

 

Mumbai: ICICI Prudential Life and WWF-India have joined hands to aid the protectors of India’s forests and wildlife. As part of the initiative, ICICI Prudential Life will provide augmented protection to front line protection staff, (Forest Guards, Foresters and Range officers as other staff) through ex-gratia funding, in the event of their death or permanent disability while on official duty.

 

Exposed to life threatening dangers such as wild animal attacks, forest fires, weapon injuries inflicted by wildlife poachers, electrocution and deadly diseases such as malaria, the programme aims to provide financial security to the forest staff and their family members who are in need, in the event of an unforeseen tragedy. Such support will go a long way in ensuring enhanced focus by the frontline protection staff in strengthening protection measures in habitats of iconic and often endangered wildlife.

 

The program will be extended to the frontline staff of 15 forests under WWF-India’s 10 priority landscapes (Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala) and provide support to the forest guards.

 

WWF-India extends support to State Forest Departments, one of its key partners, through a range of interventions, including conducting wildlife research and monitoring, managing human wildlife conflict, building capacity through training programs and providing relevant infrastructure support to improve and strengthen protection measures in important wildlife habitats.

 

Mr. Sandeep Bakhshi, Managing Director and CEO, ICICI Prudential Life Insurance, said “The forest guards and other protection staff do a commendable job in protecting India’s forests and wildlife. It is because of them that the ecosystem is safe. They face various challenges and risk their lives while carrying out their everyday duties. Protection is a must for every individual with responsibilities. Through our partnership with WWF, we aim to provide financial protection, in the form of ex-gratia payment to the frontline forest guards and their families.”

 

 

Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, “Through initiatives such as these, we strive to protect those who protect our natural world. Working in extreme conditions, frontline forest staff are in constant danger while safeguarding our country’s endangered species and wilderness areas. With this initiative, WWF-India and ICICI Prudential Life Insurance aim to motivate and aid such foot soldiers of India’s forests, whose work is beneficial to our country now and will create consequential and positive impacts for future generations. We believe that such partnerships will go a long way in helping us protect India's natural heritage.”

 

About ICICI Prudential Life Insurance

ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Company Ltd. (ICICI Prudential Life) is a joint venture between ICICI Bank Ltd. and Prudential Corporation Holdings Limited an international financial services group headquartered in United Kingdom.

To know more about the company, please visit www.iciciprulife.com



For more information please contact: 

Rituparna Sengupta

Sr. Manager- Campaigns, Brand and Media; WWF-India

Email: rsengupta@wwfindia.net

Phone: 011-41504797

 

Rajiv Adhikari

Vice President – Corporate Communications

ICICI Prudential Life Insurance Company Limited

Email: rajiv.adhikari@iciciprulife.com

Tel: 022-40391703