Ecotrail: A Green Hiker Travelogue Contest!

Posted on 30 July 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








Tell your Eco - Trail tale



© WWF-India



New Delhi: WWF-India and Lonely Planet Magazine India have come together to invite tourists who have traveled across the Himalayas to participate in a travelogue writing contest aptly named “EcoTrail”. This contest is a part of WWF-India’s Green Hiker campaign which aims towards raising awareness about the vulnerability of the Himalayan ecosystem and promoting responsible tourism in the region, targeting tourists and service providers in the industry

 

The contest kick starts today and focuses on the dual theme of (i) A journey to the Himalayas, (ii) Lessons learnt on responsible travel. The contest closes on September 30th, 2010. Entries are invited of maximum 1200 words, based on the writer’s account of a real-life journey to the Himalayas. Special focus will be on how the writer has traveled ‘green’ and adopted sustainable practices. 

 

The contest is being judged by renowned panel of judges including Vardhan Kondvikar, Editor, Lonely Planet Magazine India, Prerna Singh Bindra, an environmental and travelogue writer, and Rita Sawhney, a travel photojournalist. 

 

On the occasion of the launch, Mr. Ravi Singh, SG & CEO, WWF- India said, “Through this travelogue contest, WWF-India aims to promote responsible tourism practices in the Himalayan region. These travelogues would help to highlight the importance and efficacy of individual action towards protecting our fragile Himalayan ecosystems from further degradation. We hope that writers and travelers who have a deeper connect with the Himalayas will participate in this campaign and contribute to furthering conservation efforts.”

 

Debolin Sen, Publisher Lonely Planet Magazine India said “Conserving the health of the Himalayan eco systems is vital in our times and all efforts taken now will make a difference. Lonely Planet Magazine India believes in and supports responsible tourism. The aim is to encourage individuals to share their travelogues on www.ecotrail.in, a microsite created for this contest. We hope that every experience shared inspires fellow travellers to be responsible. The 3 best travelogues will also be featured in the November/ December issues of Lonely Planet Magazine India.”

 

WWF-India’s Green Hiker campaign which was re-launched this year on June 4, 2010 with an aim to raise awareness about the vulnerability of the Himalayan ecosystem and promoting ‘responsible tourism’ in the region, targeting tourists and service providers in the industry. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India is a partner to the campaign for 2010.