Attempting to restore the silver threads that bind us all- the rivers

Posted on 15 December 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








The speakers addressing the launch event



© WWF-India



WWF-India, The Peace Institute Charitable Trust and the Thames Rivers Restoration Trust launch the Thames and Ganges Twinning Programme 



New Delhi: WWF-India, The Peace Institute Charitable Trust and the Thames Rivers Restoration Trust today celebrated the launch of a joint programme that aims to develop new techniques for the restoration of rivers, their wildlife and sustainable livelihoods for people. The Project personnel working on the Ganges and Yamuna Rivers in India and the Thames River in the UK came together and discussed their work and the ways in which they could learn from each other to benefit rivers around the world. 



Mr. Robert Oates, Executive Director, Thames Rivers Restoration Trust, UK, spoke about the benefits of the liaison between the three organizations, the work that has happened so far, a few success stories from the Thames Rivers Restoration Project in the UK and the way forward. “This programme provides each one of us with an opportunity to learn from each other and devise better techniques to deal with the common challenges that we face when it comes to River Restoration. Plantation of trees to reduce erosion, establishment of various eco clubs to involve school children, building hatcheries to save turtle species, reintroduction of gharials, technical ways of conducting surveys in the Ganges and the Yamuna have helped us in understanding some of the best practices followed here in India. We aim to learn from each other and spread the message of learning to live more sustainably all over the world” said he, during his address to the audience.



Mr. Manoj Misra, Executive Director, PEACE Institute, spoke about their work with the local communities and how the organizations could involve themselves into various activities to eventually restore the rivers with the help of communities. Dr. Siddarth Kaul, Advisor, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Govt. of India talked about the role of the Government and the way we need to follow an integrated approach to achieve the same while Dr. Peter Spillett, President of the Institute of Fisheries Management, UK gave a keynote presentation on ‘Restoring fish populations around the world to benefit people and wildlife’. 



Dr. Parikshit Gautam, Director, Freshwater & Wetlands Programme, WWF-India, said, “We look forward to benefit from the exchange of expertise and techniques while working towards the common goal of reviving our rivers. This programme has definitely provided a platform where the strengths of each organization involved, can be put to a positive use. The sharing of experiences is a rich source we aim to gain from.” 



Project Background:

The Environment Agency Thames Region (EA) and the Thames Rivers Restoration Trust (TRRT) in recognition of their outstanding work towards the biodiversity conservation of River Thames (U.K) were awarded the Theiss International Riverprize in 2010. In the spirit of the Riverprize, the two agencies have agreed to use all of the Riverprize funds for the twinning projects in various countries including India, wherein, the project will fund work by the WWF – India and other agencies. The study will focus on work with community groups along the upper Ganges and its tributary river Yamuna. 



For further information, please contact:

Malika Gupta

Communications Officer 

WWF- India 

172- B, Lodhi Estate 

New Delhi-3 

Email: malika@wwfindia.net  

Phone: +91-11-4150-4797



Dr. Asghar Nawab

Senior Project Coordinator

Freshwater & Wetlands Programme

WWF-India

172-B, Lodi Estate

New Delhi -3 

Email: anawab@wwfindia.net  

Phone: +91-11-41504813

Fax: +91-11-41504822