Three WWF-India women volunteers released

Posted on 08 February 2011
 
|
 

1 Comment


WWF India’s six young volunteers, including three women, were abducted on Sunday 6th February while conducting field monitoring for the All India Tiger Estimation Project in Chirang Forest Division of Western Assam. We have just received the news that three of the abducted women volunteers have been released and are well. WWF- India is working closely with government authorities and the Bodoland Territorial Council for the speedy release of the three remaining volunteers. We are also in touch with their families and assuring them our full support and assistance. 



We would like to thank local communities, the media, local authorities, NGO’s and other agencies who have lent their continuous support. We hope to see our remaining volunteers also released soon. 



An Appeal by WWF India posted on 2pm 8 th Feb. is posted below.

Six WWF volunteers were abducted from an area near Ultapani in Chirang Reserve Forest on the afternoon of Sunday, February 6, 2011. These young volunteers were part of the WWF team carrying out tiger habitat occupancy surveys in the area. These young and committed individuals were working towards helping to conserve the important biodiversity of the area for the larger benefit of the local community, the state and the region. Conservation is an apolitical activity that contributes to the well being of people, society and nature.



WWF- India has been working closely with local communities, governments and institutions across India for more than 40 years and our staff and volunteers are based throughout the country in areas which are often remote, difficult and inaccessible. This kind of work would not be possible without the constant support of the local communities and local institutions. We are deeply distressed that our innocent volunteers, while carrying out field work which has no bearing on any political agenda, have been made the target of an armed group.



We, along with the families of the volunteers, strongly appeal to the group and individuals involved in this abduction for the safe and immediate release of our young brothers and sisters. We also thank the Bodoland Territorial Council, local administration, civil society groups, print and electronic media and others for their continued support in trying to resolve this crisis. We are hopeful that this appeal will be heard and responded to.



For further information - please contact:



Dr Sejal Worah

Director Programs –WWF India

sworah@wwfindia.net

Ph-9837070839



Dr Dipankar Ghose

Head Eastern Himalayas and Terai Arc Landscape

dghose@wwfindia.net

Ph-9968661133



Ms Shaila Sam

Senior Manager –Communications

ssam@wwfindia.net

Ph-9899886682