Intel and WWF support water conservation efforts as part of Earth Day celebrations

Posted on 03 May 2007

With the objective of promoting a safe environment and conserving our natural resources, Intel India today felicitated the winners of a national level essay writing contest on water conservation, held on the occasion of Earth Day. Jointly organized by Intel India and the WWF, the essay writing contest was held from April 7 to April 10, 2007 and involved school children expressing their views on the importance of preserving potable water. It was conducted across 600 schools in six cities, including Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Chennai. The contest winners were felicitated at the WWF auditorium in New Delhi. 



According to Frank Jones, President, Intel India, “Intel has always been committed to safeguarding the environment by conserving natural resources and reducing wastage. With water resources fast depleting, spreading awareness about conserving water is the need of the hour. It is wonderful to see such active participation from so many young children in this contest and we will continue to encourage such initiatives in the future.” 



Speaking on the occasion, Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “Environment education is an integral part of WWF-India’s mandate. We are in touch with almost 2000 schools across the country. Occasion like earth are platforms to further strengthen our bond with these children. Essay competitions are a unique way for children to express their views freely on issues as critical as freshwater. Some of the essays are extremely thought provoking and we hope that through our efforts we will be able to make these children better citizens of the planet”. 



With the theme of this years’ Earth Day being water conservation, WWF and Intel endeavoured to spread awareness among young children on the dire need to protect one of our most essential natural resources and the harmful consequences of water wastage. Entries were invited on two topics ‘Water is precious; how much do we need?’ and ‘Do you think that the next World War will be on water?’ The contest saw wide participation with a total of 900 entries across the six cities. The winners of the contest were selected from the 36 candidates who were short listed for the final contest in New Delhi. The eight national winners received lucrative prizes, with two receiving laptops for the top prize, two receiving iPods for the second prize and four receiving consolation prizes. 



Through this campaign, Intel India and WWF intended to sensitize the younger generation towards the judicious use of water, create awareness about the depletion and pollution of water resources, popularize innovative ideas, measures and practices to conserve water resources and bring about awareness in terms of protecting and rejuvenating lakes and water bodies in the country. The national level prize winners will implement their projects on water conservation within their respective schools or the communities in which they live. Intel intends to support and facilitate the students for this project. 



Intel India’s Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives are aimed at enhancing lives by enabling a fair opportunity to education, improved healthcare, and a clean safe environment. By actively engaging with communities at grassroots level and seeking to improve their welfare, Intel India plans to transform lives through the effective and widespread use of technology. 





About Intel 

Intel, the world leader in silicon innovation, develops technologies, products and initiatives to continually advance how people work and live. Additional information about Intel is available at www.intel.com/pressroom. 





About WWF-India 

A challenging, constructive, science-based organization, WWF is engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country since 1969. Part of WWF global network, the organisation has made its presence felt through a sustained effort not only towards nature and wildlife conservation, but sensitizing people by creating awareness through capacity building and enviro-legal activism. 



Contacts:

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager, WWF

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797, +91-98101 69262

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net 
Hemlata K. Varlani, Intel  

080-25075034 

hemlata.k.varlani@intel.com