TRAFFIC India and WWF organise a workshop for Judiciary on Wildlife Conservation 

Posted on 10 June 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








The workshop was held at the Karnataka Judicial Academy, Bangalore.



© TRAFFIC India



Karnataka Judicial Academy, Bangalore, India: In an Indian first, TRAFFIC India and WWF, in partnership with Karnataka Judicial Academy and Karnataka Forest Department, held a two day orientation programme on wildlife conservation for the Judiciary in Karnataka.
The workshop was held at the Karnataka Judicial Academy, Bangalore from 7–8 June 2008 and was inaugurated by Chief Justice Cyriac Joseph, Karnataka. Justice SR Bannurmath, Judge-High Court of Karnataka and President -Karnataka Judicial Academy also presided over the inaugural function, which was graced by the presence of 18 other Senior Judges of the Karnataka High Court.
The workshop’s principal aim was to sensitize the Judiciary about issues related to wildlife conservation. The Judiciary plays a significant role in championing the cause of forest and biodiversity conservation, and the workshop provided a timely update on the status of Forest and Wildlife legislations, International Conventions on related issues and enforcement of wildlife laws in India.
Over 55 Senior Judges of Karnataka Judiciary and 10 Senior Officials of Karnataka Forest Department participated from across the State.
Hon. Chief Justice Cyriac Joseph in his inaugural address expressed his appreciation for TRAFFIC India and WWF, for having organized the programme on wildlife conservation. He also expressed his concern about building awareness on environment and wildlife related laws among the Judiciary members in Karnataka. Justice Joseph said “Implementation of wildlife laws will depend on the perception of the judicial officers and judges. When environment and wildlife related cases come to court, the understanding of the judges towards such issues is necessary for undertaking the right decisions. Therefore without proper orientation and training towards these laws, the Judiciary will not be able to do justice to our environment”.
Justice Joseph also felt that while the Hon. Supreme Court and the High Court are very proactive on conservation issues, the judiciary in Karnataka needs to be enlightened on the aspects. He urged the Senior Judges to play a catalytic role in wildlife conservation.
Mr. AK Verma, IFS, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Karnataka present at the workshop said ‘We want to work in co-ordination with the judiciary to protect the rich forest cover of Karnataka. Programmes like these will enable us to share concerns related to forest and wildlife in the State”.
Mr. Samir Sinha, Head of TRAFFIC India emphasized the emergence of organized trans-national wildlife crime and stressed the need for co-operation, collaboration and awareness to meet this challenge.
The second day of the workshop was conducted at the Bannerghatta National Park near Bangalore. It was followed by a field trip.
The various sessions during the programme were led by Senior Forest officers, Supreme Court Advocates, Police officers and Scientists who spoke about legal and technical issues on wildlife enforcement. The experience sharing amongst the participants and resource persons was most valuable. Sri A.V. Chandrasekhar, Director-Karnataka Judicial Academy played a pivotal role in conducting this important orientation programme.
This is the first in a series of TRAFFIC India and the Centre for Environmental Law-WWF India training programmes to be conducted for the Judiciary across the country.
Ends
About Traffic-India

TRAFFIC is the world’s largest wildlife trade monitoring network and a joint programme of WWF, the conservation organization and IUCN-the International Union for Conservation of Nature. It was established in 1976 and since then it has developed a considerable international reputation for helping to identify and address conservation challenges linked to trade in wild animals and plants. 

In India, the TRAFFIC carries out research and provides analysis, support and encouragement to efforts aimed at ensuring that the wildlife trade is not a threat to the conservation of nature in India.



For more information contact:

Mr. Samir Sinha, or Ms. Dilpreet B.Chhabra at 011- 41504786/43516290.
Notes

Illegal wildlife trade is widespread globally, and is amongst the largest criminal activities. The most commonly known products in illegal wildlife trade in India are: Mongoose hair, snakeskin, Rhino horn, Tiger and Leopard claws, bones, skins, whiskers, Elephant tusks, deer antlers, turtle shells, musk pods, bear bile, medicinal plants, timber and caged birds such as parakeets, mynas and munias.