India Inc. discloses its carbon emissions

Posted on 22 November 2007
 
|
 

0 Comments


Mumbai, November 22, 2007: Results of the first-ever voluntary disclosure of the carbon footprint of Indian corporate were released today at a gathering of select industry representatives, government officials, NGOs and the press. This exercise of voluntary disclosure of carbon emissions of 110 corporates was carried out by WWF-India in partnership with The Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) and CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development 



Seema Arora, Principal Counsellor & Head of the CII-ITC Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Development, describing the responses provided by to the CDP questionnaire said, “Given that the CDP has been introduced for the first time in India, the results were positive, with companies like Essar Oil, Infosys, JSW Steel and Tata Steel being among those who responded comprehensively. 35 percent of the companies responded to the questionnaire, of which 33 percent of the responding companies have set Green House Gases (GHG) emission reduction targets for themselves and have taken steps towards voluntarily offsetting these emissions”. 



Describing the concept of carbon disclosure and its importance, Paul Simpson, Chief Operating Officer of the CDP said: “CDP has been working for over five years to help investors and corporations better understand the risks and opportunities from climate change. As a result investors are increasingly viewing view good carbon management as a sign of good corporate management. We are delighted to have expanded CDP’s work to India this year and are pleased that some leading companies have demonstrated they are already addressing the issue and able to provide their investors with information on what climate change means for their business. Given the increasing importance of India in the global economy and climate change awareness we expect to see more Indian companies report to CDP next year.” 



The questionnaire solicited information on opportunities and risks from climate change, direct and indirect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, emission-reduction strategies and corporate-level climate change management and governance from these companies. 



A large number of the responding companies (46%) are considering emission trading opportunities and 21 percent have Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects in the pipeline. 38 percent of the responding companies have even allocated board or upper management level responsibilities for climate change issues. 



Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, speaking to the press at the release noted, “The results from this first-ever CDP India project represent a positive start and we are pleased to have worked with Indian corporations measuring, reporting and managing greenhouse gas emission”. He added, “that this is a contribution of a conservation organisation to bring to fore accounting of GHG emission and voluntary disclosure thereof by the Business and Industry”. 



He added, “However, the response of 35 % (39) companies is heartening in the first year, but it also clear that lot of work needs to be done in coordination with our existing partners and with Business & Industry and Financial sector till the level of informing and action to integrate risk and mitigating measures in business plans and investment decision are undertaken.” He added, that CDP in future will be a harbinger of new process of disclosure both internally and externally. 



(Ends) 



About CDP 

CDP is an independent not-for-profit organisation which was established in 2000 to facilitate dialogue between companies and investors, supported by quality information, from which a rational response to climate change will emerge. The Carbon Disclosure Project is a special project of Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors in New York, with 501(c) 3 charitable status. The group of investors is not a legal entity and the Carbon Disclosure Project has no authority to make any other statement on behalf of the participants. 

www.cdproject.net 

  

About CESD

This pioneering effort of CII was launched in January 2006. It creates an enabling climate for Indian businesses to pursue sustainability goals by promoting thought leadership and building capacity to achieve sustainability across a gamut of issues to implement India’s agenda for inclusive growth. The Centre enables business to transform themselves by embedding concepts of sustainable development into their strategies, decisions and processes. 

www.sustainabledevelopment.in  



About WWF 

WWF is a science-based organisation engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country since 1969. A part of the WWF global network, the organisation has made its presence felt through a sustained effort not only towards nature and wildlife conservation, but by sensitising people by creating awareness through capacity building and environ-legal activism. 

www.wwfindia.org  



For more information, please contact: 

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager, WWF-India 

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net Tel: +91-11-4150 4797