Rana Daggubati pledges to ‘Switch Off’ for Earth Hour 2012

Posted on 17 March 2012
 
|
 

2 Comments








Rana Daggubati pledges to ‘Switch Off’ for Earth Hour 2012



© 



South superstar urges citizens to switch off to make Hyderabad the Earth Hour champion!



Hyderabad: Telugu cinema actor Rana Daggubati joined hands with WWF-India to support Earth Hour 2012 and launched the campaign at a press conference in Hyderabad today. Earth Hour is WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action towards a better environment. This year, Earth Hour will be observed on 31 March 2012 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM.



This year, Earth Hour aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. The concept is simple: Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause. While six mega cities- Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore- are participating in the race the to become the Earth Hour Champion, WWF-India encourages participation from other Indian cities as well. 



In Hyderabad, the earth hour campaign has already received support from various partners such as Sukuki Exnora, Indian Youth Climate Network (IYCN), Ramky group, Harsha Toyota, State Bank of Hyderabad, KMC, Kala Mandir, SCCL, Nyros Technologies and Aliens group. Government partners such as Buddha Purnima Project Authority, GHMC and HMDA have also pledged their support. 



Rana Daggubati is rooting for Hyderabad, encouraging citizens to switch off to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. Reinforcing his support to this cause, Rana Daggubati said, “I am glad to be part of a powerful movement that inspires billions of individuals across the world to take action against climate change. This simple act of switching off lights for one hour is symbolic of one’s commitment to responsible action and sustainable practices that benefit our environment.”



He further added, “Climate change is the biggest threat facing all life forms on Earth today, and there is no doubt that it is being caused due to human activities. It is therefore our responsibility as individuals, and as a community to do everything in our power to help reverse it. Each one of us can take small steps to adopt sustainable lifestyles such that our collective actions today can safeguard the future of our planet.” 



He also urged the citizens of Hyderabad to participate in the event on 31st March to be organized opposite People’s Plaza from 8.00 to 9.30 pm 



Marking the fourth year of Earth Hour’s journey in India, Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, said, “Last year, Earth Hour encouraged individuals to adopt environment friendly practices in everyday life that would benefit the planet. In taking that message forward, Earth Hour 2012 aims to encourage entire cities to collectively shift towards sustainable development-by undertaking better land, water and energy management which will reduce the growing environmental impact of our urban lifestyles.”



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar has also joined hands with WWF-India and has pledged his support to the Earth Hour 2012 as the national brand ambassador. 



In 2011, a record 1.8 billion individuals across more than 5200 cities in 135 countries participated worldwide by switching off lights, and pledging to responsible actions that benefit our planet. In India, Earth Hour reached more than 130 cities, including tier II and III, small towns and even villages. Last year also marked the start of a new phase for Earth Hour, as it went Beyond the Hour, encouraging individuals to switch off and also commit to a more sustainable lifestyle and incorporate changes into their day to day lives. Since 2007, Earth Hour has set new standards and has broken its own records of mass participation. From here on, Earth Hour will not only be an annual lights out event, but an opportunity for communities to be part of the world’s environmental solutions through responsible action all year round.