WWF, GFTN and ITC Join Hands to Promote Sustainable Forestry

Posted on 01 July 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mr Ravi Singh SG & CEO WWF-India holding the signed agreement along with Mr Pradeep Dhobale Divisional Chief Executive, ITC Limted



© Gulshan Sachdeva



Landmark initiative towards sustainable forest management practices by the corporate sector



New Delhi, 01 July, 2009: WWF-India and ITC have come together to promote sustainable forest management practices.



The GFTN (Global Forest and Trade Network) is WWF’s initiative to eliminate illegal logging and improve the management of valuable and threatened forests, while encouraging sustainable forest management practices and minimizing the forest footprint of industries trading in or procuring forest goods. GFTN was launched in India on Dec 3rd 2008. Since then an increasing number of organizations have expressed interest in being a part of the process. ITC is the first amongst companies in India that have passed the rigorous criteria for being a part of this network which globally has over 350 companies enlisted as its members. These companies represent 15% of the Global trade in forest products.

ITC’s membership of the Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN) is an important milestone in its sustainability journey, and an indicator of ITC’s commitment towards certifying its fiber to credible standards and offering its customers products which are certified under labeling programmes of credible schemes like FSC (Forest Stewardship Council).



ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers Division (ITC PSPD), draws from the corporate commitment to the Triple Bottom Line, and continuously works towards becoming the benchmark for sustainable practices in the paper industry in all areas of its operations – right from sourcing of fiber, to the efficient use of resources including energy and water, to the disposal of waste and in improving the environmental signature of our products. Taking the lead in the Indian paper industry, ITC PSPD has signed this agreement of membership with WWF GFTN on the 1st of July 2009.



With this membership, and assistance from WWF GFTN-India, ITC will seek to progressively cover the wood sourced from its farm and social forestry programmes under a credible forest management scheme like FSC. The increasing volume of certified fiber sourced from these plantations will enable ITC to offer to discerning customers, products labeled under credible Chain of Custody certification (CoC) schemes like FSC. This will include business to business products such as packaging boards, graphic application boards and a wide range of communication papers, and its consumer range of paper products like Paperkraft copier and notebooks, and Classmate notebooks marketed by ITC’s Education and Stationery Products Business.



This will address the growing need amongst Indian customers to exercise their preference for purchasing environmentally responsible paper products.



WWF-India hopes to see this partnership grow. Speaking on this occasion Mr Ravi Singh, SG&CEO-WWF-India said that “WWF-India hopes to influence sustainable production and management practices, procurement and manufacturing processes as well as influence buyers of products to look for sustainability as a factor of choice”.



“ITC’s participation in the GFTN is in line with its commitment to sustainable forestry management and manufacture of paperboards and paper products from renewable plantations”, said Pradeep Dhobale, Divisional Chief Executive, ITC’s Paperboards and Specialty Papers Division.



“As the inaugural Participant of GFTN-India, ITC Limited joins a network of over 350 companies, in 32 countries, which are Participants of WWF’s Global Forest & Trade Network,” said Richard McLellan, Head of the GFTN.

 

“ITC’s important trading position and leadership within India’s forests products industry, and now, its participation within the GFTN, provides a unique opportunity for the company to demonstrate proactive leadership in enhancing the trade of responsibly produced and managed forest products and reducing the trade in illegal or unsustainably-produced materials,” added McLellan. “Participation in the GFTN will demonstrate their commitment to encouraging responsible forestry and trade to all of ITC’s customers and suppliers.” 



For further details please contact:

Dr T.R. Manoharan

Head GFTN-India

WWF-India

Ph: +91 11 41504787



Shaila Sam

Senior Manager- Communications

WWF-India

Ph: +91 11 4351-6248

Mobile: +91 9899886662



Nandini Basu

Manager- Corporate Communications 

ITC

Ph: +91 33 22889371



About WWF-India

WWF is a science based organization engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country since 1969. A part of the WWF global network, the organization has made its presence felt through a sustained effort not only towards nature and wildlife conservation but by sensitizing people by creating awareness through capacity building and environ-legal activism.



About GFTN

The Global Forest & Trade Network (GFTN) is WWF’s initiative to eliminate illegal logging and improve the management of valuable and threatened forests. By facilitating trade links between companies committed to responsible forestry, the GFTN creates market conditions that help conserve forests while providing economic and social benefits for the businesses and people that depend on them. More than 350 companies are members of the Global Forest & Trade Network, including manufacturers, importers, distributors, retailers, forest owners and managers.