WWF-India launches first ever Indian made FSC Certified Environment Awareness Poster

Posted on 25 September 2009
 
|
 

1 Comment








The launch of FSC certified environment awareness poster



© WWF-India



WWF-India, Industry, MOEF and FSC come together to promote sustainable forestry in India.



Delhi: WWF-India today celebrated the first International FSC Friday as part of Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN) initiatives to promote credible forest certification in the country. The event saw the presence of leading industrial houses dealing in wood, pulp, paper and handicrafts along with a high level of participation from the publishing industry.



Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) is an independent, non-governmental, not-for-profit organization established to promote the responsible management of the world’s forests. 



The FSC label provides a credible link between responsible production and consumption of forest products, enabling consumers and businesses to make purchasing decisions that benefit people and the environment. In India, the number of companies that secured FSC certificate has increased substantially during the last two years and several companies are in progress to certification.



On this occasion WWF-India launched the first ever FSC certified poster in India. Designed in-house by WWF-India with complete authorization from FSC, the poster conveys the urgent need to protect our forests and the ecosystem that the forest protects.



This was printed by Gopsons Printers, one of the few FSC Chain of Custody Certificate holders in India. FSC Certified Indian companies and GFTN-India participants have actively participated in the celebrations by exhibiting their certified products. Representatives from FSC approved certification bodies joined in hands with WWF-India and other experts, clarifying the relevance of FSC in India and the process of certification.  



WWF-India is supporting FSC in order to promote sustainable forestry by encouraging use of wood and pulp sourced from certified forests thus discouraging illegal felling of trees . Speaking on the occasion SG& CEO-WWF/India said that more companies should come forward and join this movement.



Mr Sudhir K Pande, Former Director General of Forests, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Govt. of India released the poster and inaugurated the exhibition. Dr T R Manoharan, Head of GFTN-India made a presentation of FSC activities in India.



Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)

FSC is an independent, non-governmental, not-for-profit organization established to promote the responsible management of the world’s forests.



Established in 1993 as a response to concerns over global deforestation, FSC is widely regarded as one of the most important initiatives of the last decade to promote responsible forest management worldwide. 

FSC is a certification system that provides internationally recognized standard-setting, trademark assurance and accreditation services to companies, organizations, and communities interested in responsible forestry.

The FSC label provides a credible link between responsible production and consumption of forest products, enabling consumers and businesses to make purchasing decisions that benefit people and the environment as well as providing ongoing business value. FSC is nationally represented in more than 50 countries around the world.



FSC in India

The number of FSC certificates secured by Indian companies have increased from 4 to 22 in last two years and several companies are in progress to secure forest certification. As on 1st September 2009, India has secured 21 Chain of Custody (CoC) certificates and one Forest Management Unit (FMU) certificate. The demand for FSC has increased in India and this will continue in the coming years. National initiative to develop India specific standards of FSC Principles and Criteria will be launched shortly. 



For more information, please contact: 

Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India

Email: ssam@wwfindia.net 

Ph- +91-11- 4351-6248 



Dr T R Manoharan

Senior Coordinator

Forest Policy and Economics & Head, GFTN-India

Tel: +91 -11 - 41504815-18

Direct:+ 91- 11- 41504787

Mob.+91- 9350501113 

Email: tmanoharan@wwfindia.net