Rituparna pledges to ‘Switch Off’ for Earth Hour 2012

Posted on 26 March 2012
 
|
 

1 Comment











© WWF-India



Hindi and Bengali actress urges citizens to switch off to make Kolkata the Earth Hour champion!



Kolkata: Rituparna Sengupta, the leading lady of Bengali Cinema, has joined hands with WWF-India to support Earth Hour 2012. The actress launched the campaign at a press conference in Kolkata today. Earth Hour is WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action towards a better environment. This year, Earth Hour will be observed on 31 March 2012 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM.



Bringing a new angle to the campaign in India, Earth Hour 2012 aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. The concept is simple: Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause. While six mega cities – Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore – are participating in the race to become the Earth Hour Champion, WWF-India encourages participation from other Indian cities as well. 



Rituparna urged the citizens of Kolkata, to switch off to make it the Earth Hour Champion. Reiterating her beliefs behind the cause, Rituparna said, “I am happy to associate with a powerful movement like Earth Hour, and pledge my commitment to the cause. This year, Earth Hour calls for cities to collectively participate by switching off lights and fighting against climate change. I urge the citizens of Kolkata to step up and take action for our city. Together, we can make Kolkata the Earth Hour Champion, showcasing the power of individual action behind a common cause. I will switch off for Kolkata, and encourage citizens to do so as well.”



Marking the fourth year of the journey of Earth Hour in India, Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, said, “Last year, Earth Hour encouraged individuals to adopt environment friendly practices in everyday life that would benefit the planet. In taking that message forward, Earth Hour 2012 aims to encourage entire cities to collectively shift towards sustainable development-by undertaking better land, water and energy management which will reduce the growing environmental impact of our urban lifestyles.”



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar has also joined hands with WWF-India and has pledged his support to the Earth Hour 2012 as the national brand ambassador. 



In 2011, a record 1.8 billion individuals across more than 5200 cities in 135 countries participated worldwide by switching off lights, and pledging to responsible actions that benefit our planet. In India, Earth Hour reached more than 130 cities, including tier II and III, small towns and even villages. Last year also marked the start of a new phase for Earth Hour, as it went Beyond the Hour, encouraging individuals to switch off and also commit to a more sustainable lifestyle and incorporate changes into their day to day lives. Since 2007, Earth Hour has set new standards and has broken its own records of mass participation. From here on, Earth Hour will not only be an annual lights out event, but an opportunity for communities to be part of the world’s environmental solutions through responsible action all year round. 



For more information please contact:

Sonali Nandrajog

Communications Officer

WWF India

sonali.nandrajog@wwf.panda.org 

+91 9871948044