Protecting River Ganga's Biodiversity

Posted on 17 November 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








Ganges Freshwater Dolphin



© François Xavier PELLETIER/WWF



New Delhi, November 17, 2008: WWF-India showcased results of its ongoing partnership with Indian Institute of Technology and University of Tokyo that have proven to be effective in understanding behaviour of the blind Ganges freshwater dolphin (Plantasia gangetica).



WWF-India has been actively working since 1996 for conservation of this highly endangered dolphin which are threatened due to anthropogenic pressures and human intervention. In 2006, WWF-India initiated a partnership between IIT and University of Tokyo to further develop insight into behaviour and mating patterns of the mammal.



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, addressing the media said, "This partnership is a unique example of the scientific community – both Indian and International – coming forward to help conservation. For a science-based organization like ours, such a partnership is critical as they help us understand the environment that we strive to conserve."



Dr. Parikshit Gautam, Director – Freshwater Conservation Programme of WWF-India explaining about the larger Riverwatch project of WWF-India noted, "Dolphins are one of the three priority freshwater species – Otters and Gharials being the other two - that we handle through our Riverwatch programme.” 

Explaining the innovative technique, Professor Ura from the University of Tokyo said, "Precise underwater movements and sonar-range of dolphins can be observed even in shallow water with a six - hydrophone system. An acoustic data logger system has also been demonstrated that can count the number of dolphins." 



The result findings will help sharpen and increase the scope of WWF-India's River Dolphin programme. WWF-India's work, in partnership with local community members in Narora has shown encouraging results as the pressure on the river system and the dolphin has reduced. Our work has also resulted in improved living conditions of villagers thus strengthening the link between conservation and livelihoods. 

A special screening of “Ghost of the Ganges” – a multiple award winning documentary on the Dolphin was also organized. 



For more information, please contact:

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager, WWF-India

Tel: +91-98101 69262, E-mail: aatroley@gmail.com