Green Retail is the Need of the Hour

Posted on 08 February 2013
 
|
 

1 Comment


Balancing non-financial factors, such as environmental and social issues with economic factors, should be an integral part of responsible business practices



Mumbai: Sustainability has become an important consideration for the global retail industry, influencing their strategy, operations, workforce engagement, and relationship with consumers and communities. Sustainability and the demand for green product lines is also a reflection of evolving consumer awareness and preferences. Business owners simply cannot afford to ignore consumers, as if they fail to respond to consumer demand for green, others will seize the opportunity. 



The effect on biodiversity and critical regions is not just linked to global demand, but also to where and how companies and their supply chains obtain and process these vital commodities. In today’s increasingly competitive world, consumers, employees, shareholders and stakeholders are demanding that companies demonstrate sound environmental practices and corporate responsibility.



Human consumption is at a rate 50% faster than what the Earth can sustain. Our ecological footprint has doubled in the last 40 years and is on course to double again in the next 40. 



Mr. Ravi Singh, SG and CEO, WWF-India said

The global green retailer movement covers a wide spectrum of issues from reducing energy, greenhouse gases, waste, and chemicals, employee empowerment to innovate. However, the core focus for the retail industry should be to ensure sustainable product lines and sustainable supply chains. 



Across the global retail segment, companies like Marks & Spencer, Walmart, IKEA and others have adopted proactive sustainability agendas, particularly in establishing sustainable product lines across their supply chains. Many retailers, as part of the Consumer Goods Forum (CGF) have committed to take deforestation out of their supply chain and buying sustainable products, such as sustainable palm oil, cotton, etc. 

In a panel discussion on “Sustainability In Retail: A Triple Bottom-Line Approach: as a part of Retail Leadership Summit-2013, panelists discussed the rationale for promoting Green Retail in India.



The panel was moderated by Mr. Jamshyd Godrej, Trustee & President Emeritus, WWF-India and included panelists, such as Jason Clay, Senior Vice President, Markets, WWF US; Dave Challis, Director - Global Sustainability, Reckitt Benckiser. It covered the global trends driving sustainability across the retail sector, type of initiatives being undertaken and shared best practices across the sector that have helped businesses maximize profits, mitigate risks, while reducing their social and environmental impact. The panel was organized by WWF-India in partnership with RAI, as part of the Retail Leadership Summit 2013.



Consumers too are getting behind the idea of being greener, organic and healthier. Growing consumer awareness globally and would likely follow suit in India, especially starting with food products, where health, safety, hygiene and environmental standards are likely to be important factors that drive product choices. 





Mr Jamshyd Godrej, Trustee & President Emeritus, WWF-India 

Today more than ever it is important for Indian Retail to recognize that being an efficient and profitable business and being a good steward of the environment are goals that can work together.

Innovation is key for Indian retailers to be competitive and therefore adopting a green strategy could be a strong differentiating factor for them.



Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF India also added, 

As market demand for food, fibre and fuel increases in the coming decades, so will the impact on our planet’s natural resources. WWF-India engages with companies and retailers to influence them towards sustainable supply chains.



For further queries, please contact: 

WWF-India Neha Simlai @ 9818189553

Manager Communications, Sustainable Business