WWF-India holds Second Roundtable on Promoting Sustainable Cotton

Posted on 10 January 2012
 
|
 

0 Comments








Second Roundtable on Promoting Sustainable Cotton 



© WWF-India



Ahmedabad: WWF-India organised its Second Roundtable on ‘Promoting Sustainable Cotton in India', at the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad on Tuesday. The Roundtable aimed at providing an overview of Sustainable Cotton, highlighting its relevance in India and promoting its uptake by various stakeholders in the supply chain. 



A report on 'Cotton Market & Sustainability in India', jointly prepared by WWF-India and Yes Bank was also launched during the Roundtable by Mr. Puneet Lalbhai, Executive Director, Arvind Mills. During his keynote address at the Roundtable, Mr. Lalbhai highlighted the need for a multi-disciplinary approach where different groups can work together to find environmentally sustainable solutions.



The Roundtable, emphasising the need to generate awareness on the sustainability issues related to cotton production, was moderated by Ms Bhavna Prasad, Director - Business & Industry, WWF-India. Market experiences of different intermediaries already a part of the Better Cotton Initiative (BCI) were shared with the participants during the Roundtable. 



Speakers included Mr. Murli Dhar, Associate Director, WWF-India, Mr. Selvin Loyd, Supply Chain Manager, India, BCI, Mr. Girish Aivalli, GEVP & Country Head, Yes Bank, Mr. Mahesh Ramakrishnan, Head, Agri-business Division, Arvind Mills and Mr. Vaibhav Bhamoria, Faculty, IIM, Ahmedabad, who gave their insight into the subject. 



Cotton accounts for 85% of all natural fibers and has around 59% share in the raw material consumption basket of the Indian Textile Industry. Cotton cultivation methods put tremendous stress on the environment thus resulting in excessive use of inputs, such as water, fertilizers and pesticides. Responsible brands and retailers that are part of a growing global trend towards attaining sustainability in their supply chain, find it difficult to procure cotton produced in an environmentally sustainable way. WWF-India aims to globally enhance the demand for Better Cotton through significant retailers and brands by working in conjunction with industry leaders.



For further information:

Baya Agarwal, WWF-India, bagarwal@wwfindia.net, +91 11 4150 4788