WWF-India and IGNOU collaborate to offer ‘PG Diploma in Environmental Law’

Posted on 10 December 2009
 
|
 

14 Comments








Left to right - Prof. Krishna Deva Rao-director school of law, IGNOU, Mr. Ravi Singh, Prof. V. N. Rajasekharan Pillai - VC, IGOU, 
Prof. Omprakash Mishra, Pro-VC, IGNOU, behind in frame Mr. Udai Singh Tolia, Registrar, IGNOU 



© WWF-India



New Delhi: The Centre for Environmental Law (CEL), WWF-India and the Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) today signed a Memorandum of Understanding to jointly run a programme ‘PG Diploma in Environmental Law’. The course will be formally launched in July 2010.



Established in 1993, the Centre for Environmental Law, has pioneered the first ever dissemination programme on Environmental Law and serves as a resource centre for research in national, regional and international context on matters relating to environmental law . To implement its programmes, CEL has build functional and professional linkages with the Government agencies and non-governmental organizations in India as well as at the regional and international level. 

  

In this context CEL has come together with IGNOU - a renowned name in long distance education and online programmes in diversified subjects including law- to jointly offer a PG Diploma in Environmental Law. CEL’s diploma in environmental law is much sought after by individuals from various walks of life. So far 500 students have completed this online diploma. Collaboration with IGNOU will expand the reach of this course and make it more accessible for working professionals and students pursuing environment studies as a tailor made programme is in making which would be launched as ‘Post Graduate Diploma in Environmental Law’ eventually taking shape into a Masters programme down the years. 

  

The MoU was signed by Mr. Udai Singh Tolia, Registrar, IGNOU and Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India. The event was presided by Prof. VN Rajasekharan Pillai, Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU and Prof. Omprakash Mishra, Pro Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU. Speaking on the occasion Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India said, “WWF India is proud to be a partner with IGNOU in conducting a diploma course in Environmental Law. IGNOU’s expertise on long distance education will be beneficial for many students and researchers interested in pursuing this highly specialized course. WWF-India hopes that in this way, the knowledge and awareness about enviro-legal matters spreads in a wider scope.” 



For further information, please contact:    

Moulika Arabhi 

Program Co-ordinator 

Centre for Environmental Law 

WWF-India 

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

Email: marabhi@wwfindia.net

Ph- +91-11-4150- 4772



Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

email: ssam@wwfindia.net

Ph-+91-11-4351-6248, 4150-4797