KNN committed to up scaling sustainable water and energy management recommendations in Kanpur

Posted on 15 February 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








The stakeholder advisory group meeting 



© WWF-India



The stakeholder advisory group met under the Chairmanship of Municipal Commissioner Shri. Rajeev Sharma and reviewed the various activities initiated by the WWF India’s Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership with support of Kanpur Nagar Nigam in Kanpur city. 



Shri. Sharma stated that Nagar Nigam is committed to reducing water and energy footprint of Kanpur city on the Ganga river system. He stated that the up scaling of bioremediation for on-channel treatment of wastewater on drains (nallahs) or in the trunk sewerage system holds a promising solution for pollution abatement in Ganga River and would also go a long way in improving efficiency of conventional waste water system. Further, he invited WWF India to prepare a detailed feasibility for up scaling the on-channel treatment of domestic wastewater using bioremediation on three major drains (nallahs) - Sismau, COD and Ganda Nallah.  



Dr. Suresh Rohilla, Director - Environment and Development, WWF India, presented an overview of programme activities aimed at increased and clean flow in river Ganga. He stated that the proposed on-channel wastewater of treatment through bio-remediation doesn’t require any additional land or capital assets. The total implementation of bioremediation is less than 50 % of the conventional treatment costs for treating similar quantities of wastewater. Need is to use the available funds carefully and to learn lessons from Ganga Action Plan I & II. He emphasised the need for policy level changes to mainstream and standardize novel techniques of sustainable wastewater treatment that will help achieve a pollution free – Ganga by 2020 (now also national river).  



Shri B.K. Singh, Secretary Jal Sansthan, assured the implementation of energy audit recommendations and update the savings in electricity bills. The savings from such intervention will not only improve the financial health but will also help generate resources 



WWF India’s recent study on water quality analysis of Kanpur City was also discussed. Shri B.K. Singh stated the need to introduce 24x7 pilot project. He presented details of the exposure visit of Kanpur officials to Hubli – Dharwad and Belgaum to see pilot project(s) for providing potable and safe 24X7 water supply. Shri. Rajeev Sharma mentioned KNN has identified four localities for introducing safe and 24x7 (continuous) water supply on pilot basis. Need was felt to involve NGOs and communities from early stages of implementation of safe water supply. 



The stakeholder group showed satisfaction on the various activities of WWF India’s Living Ganga Programme - a step towards helping Kanpur city emerge as a showcase of best practices and model for other major cities in the Ganga basin.  



For more information, please contact: 



Anshuman Atroley, Communications and Relationship Manager

WWF-India's Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net, Phone: 011-4150 4770