WWF-India announces awardees of the ECOTRAIL Travelogue Contest

Posted on 28 January 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mr. R.H. Khwaja, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, addressing the audience at the event



© WWF-India



New Delhi: WWF-India awarded the 11 winners of the Ecotrail Travelogue Contest launched in July last year. The contest was a part of WWF-India’s Green Hiker campaign that aims towards raising awareness about the vulnerability of the Himalayan ecosystem and promoting ‘responsible tourism’ in the region, targeting tourists and service providers in the industry. WWF- India had partnered with Lonely Planet Magazine India for the contest that concluded with the award ceremony today. 



The contest invited real life travel accounts on the dual theme of (i) A journey to the Himalayas, (ii) Lessons learnt on responsible travel, with a special focus on how the writer has traveled ‘green’ and adopted sustainable practices. The panel of judges included Prerna Singh Bindra, Environmental and Travelogue writer, Vardhan Kondvikar, Editor, Lonely Planet Magazine India and Rita Sawhney, travel photojournalist, who were all present at the award ceremony. 



Besides winning trekking and camping gear, Green Hiker merchandise and a free one-year subscription to Lonely Planet Magazine India, the first three prize-winning entries will also be published in the March issue of the magazine. 



The award ceremony was held at the WWF-India Secretariat, with Mr. R.H. Khwaja, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, as the Chief Guest. The Ministry has been a partner to the Green Hiker campaign with a close association with the Incredible India campaign and is set to play a bigger role in the coming year.



On the occasion, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF- India said, “Through this travelogue contest, WWF-India has aimed to promote responsible tourism practices in the Himalayan region. These travelogues would help to highlight the importance and efficacy of individual action towards protecting our fragile Himalayan ecosystems from further degradation. Writers and travelers who have a deeper connect with the Himalayas have participated in this campaign and contributed to furthering conservation efforts.”



The winners of the contest are: 

1st – Katherine Joanna Johnson

2nd – Indu Balachandran

3rd – Sohail Jafferi

4th – Susan Sharma



Special Mention Award:

-	Anjor Bhaskar

-	Sheela Wadalkar

-	Sudeepta Sanyal

-	Saurabh Kejriwal

-	Pooja Ohri Gandhi

-	Sriparna Ghosh

-	Sheela Jaywant



The award ceremony was visually complimented by 'Him-anjali', a photo exhibition by renowned photographer, Ashok Dilwali. The exhibition (on for a week in the WWF-India lobby) is a tribute to the Himalayas, a celebration of their natural beauty which leaves all smitten with love and admiration. The photographs depict not only the grandeur of the Himalayas but also what we stand to lose if determined efforts to conserve this sacred ecosystem are not made now.



For more information please contact:

Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India

172-B,Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

email:ssam@wwfindia.net 
Malika

Communications Officer 

WWF- India 

172- B, Lodhi Estate 

New Delhi-3 

Email: malika@wwfindia.net 

Phone: +91-11-4150-4797