Venkatesh Prasad bowls for Earth Hour 2013

Posted on 13 March 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Venkatesh Prasad bowls for Earth Hour 2013



© WWF-India



Former Indian cricketer pledges support for the people’s initiative to curb climate changeBangalore: Former Indian cricketer Venkatesh Prasad has joined hands with WWF-India to pledge his support to the Earth Hour 2013– WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire action on climate change. Earth Hour is now the largest global environmental movement that enables individuals, organizations, governments and groups to show support for policies and practice that balance development and environmental concerns.



The message of Earth Hour 2013 is to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time, Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM, and calls for:


Individuals to adopt household products powered by renewable energy;
Organizations to adopt renewable energy solutions to run their business operations and production processes;
Governments to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy

The speed and scale of climate change, fuelled by ever increasing consumption of the Earth’s resources, is impacting the whole world. Unless we make efforts to transform our energy production systems to renewables, as far as possible, we will enter into a trajectory of climate instability and energy insecurity that will affect each one of us. Every individual has the power to make this transition possible by taking small, yet significant steps. 



Reinforcing his support to the cause, Venkatesh Prasad said, “I am elated to be part of this global movement for climate change and it’s inspiring to know that my fellow citizens have been participating in this cause for 5 years. By making conscious and aware choices in our day to day activities, we can make a huge improvement in the quality of our lives and learn to consume resources efficiently. We should all try to promote environment-friendly living at home to set an example for our future generations. Earth Hour gives each one of us a chance to show that individual commitment and seek change”



In order to further extend his support to the cause, Venkatesh Prasad, will also join Earth Hour in an official event in Bangalore on 13th March 2013.



Speaking on the occasion Ms. Aarti Khosla, Head – Campaigns, WWF-India, said “In its fifth year now in India, Earth Hour has moved beyond a symbolic lights out campaign. This year, Earth Hour aims to inspire individuals, organizations and governments to make the shift towards renewable energy, through simple and do-able steps. Last year, Earth Hour reached more than 150 cities. This year, we aim to break old records and reach out to more cities across the nation.”



Mr. Vinod Valson, General Manager, Vivanta by Taj – MG road said, “At Vivanta by Taj, MG Road, we are committed towards community and environment. We strongly believe in enhancing the value of human life and supporting the cause of environment regeneration and have incorporated many efforts through our day-to-day operations including initiatives such as EARTH (Environment Awareness and Renewal at Taj Hotels) that allow us an opportunity in collectively participating in preserving our planet”



Long standing supporters of the Earth Hour campaign, ING Vysya Bank also announced their initiatives for Earth Hour 2013 at the conference. In line with the message of the campaign this year, ING Vysya Bank pledged to light up a village in Orissa using renewable energy. This will be a year-long initiative, wherein ING Vysya will cover 50 villages in Orissa by Earth Hour 2014. These villages will be identified on the basis of their energy requirements, and an understanding of the existing sources of energy.



Earth Hour has already successfully united hundreds of millions of people around the world as it strives to gain the support of more and more people.