Vote for your favourite city through We Love Cities campaign

Posted on 04 February 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments











© 



New Delhi: People across the world can now vote for their favourite city through WWF’s global campaign called We Love Cities (WLC).  A celebration of the most loveable sustainable cities, WLC aims at inspiring and raising awareness on the sustainable action in cities.

 

The campaign is a part of WWF’s global initiative Earth Hour City Challenge (EHCC) that mobilizes action and support from cities in the global transition towards a sustainable future powered by renewable energy.  Over 40 finalist cities from countries around the world have been selected in this year’s challenge. While the jury will be deliberating over the selection of national and global Earth Hour Capitals, the We Love Cities campaign invites people to vote for their own favourites among the finalist cities.

 

India has also made a proud representation in the global challenge, with three finalist cities – Pune, Rajkot and Thane – competing to become the most loved cities.  The annual initiative rewarding cities takes on special significance this year for India as there is an increasing focus on building smart cities that will further inspire actions on climate change. Some of the other global finalists include Paris, Seoul, Tampere, Seattle, Hatyai, Puebla and Córdoba.

 

People can simply visit the WLC page and vote for the city of their choice. The page also provides a platform to make suggestions and feedback to make their cities better. In doing so, citizens are empowered to engage themselves in the sustainability efforts of their favourite city. Each time people vote, tweet, instagram and/or share their suggestions, one of the cities comes a step closer to becoming the world’s most loved city.

 

Pune, Rajkot and Thane – the challenger cities from India this year - are already at the forefront of various sustainability initiatives by the government. For instance, Thane and Rajkot feature in Ministry of New & Renewable Energy’s “Development of Solar Cities” programme. Pune and Rajkot are both part of Centre’s flagship “Smart Cities” scheme and have been among the identified cities under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. These cities have also been part of the much touted Twin City Programme of the urban development ministry that calls for cities from different countries  to develop a strategic agreement, share best practices and establish public-private partnerships. Pune has partnered with San Jose, USA, the Korean government and Okayama, Japan, while the twin city agreement between Rajkot and Leicester, England was signed way back in 1996. Thane is recognized for its progressive and proactive actions on the solar front and is undertaking concerted efforts to meet its target of 6 per cent renewables by 2015. Such and many other individual accomplishments and sustainable approaches of the three cities have made them running contenders in the Earth Hour City Challenge as well as the We Love Cities campaign.

 

Speaking about their participation, Pune Municipal Corporation said, “It is an honor for Pune city to be one of the finalist cities from India in the Earth Hour City Challenge. We would like to thank the organizers for taking notice of the initiatives in the field of energy conservation, solid waste management, environment awareness, etc. and bringing these on a global platform. These initiatives have gone a long way in reducing the carbon footprint of the city and we endeavor to reduce our footprint while considering the energy needs of the growing population. We are strongly looking forward to the Earth Hour City Challenge awards, so that Pune sets a good example for other cities.”

 

“We are privileged to represent India as one of the finalist city for this global challenge”, said Thane Municipal Corporation. “Our city has constantly made efforts to focus on energy efficiency, scale up renewables and undertake traffic management programmes. We are glad that our actions have been recognized and we shall keep working towards making a sustainable difference.”

 

On being announced a finalist, Rajkot Municipal Corporation described the city as "Sensitive, Modern, Affordable, has a Robust infrastructure and is Technology driven - hence a SMART city. We are more than happy to be a part of this challenge and will continue to contribute to a green future.”

 

Khunhan, Thailand and Medellin, Columbia were named as the world’s most lovable sustainable cities for the year 2014. The We Love Cities winners will be awarded on 9 April 2015 at Seoul, South Korea along with the Global Earth Hour Capital at the EHCC award ceremony.



For further details please contact: 

Rituparna Sengupta                                                      

Sr. Manager- Brand, Media and Campaigns        

rsengupta@wwfindia.net                                          

011-41504797                                                                

 

Divya Joy

Communications Officer – Climate Change & Energy

djoy@wwfindia.net

011- 41504823