Canon and WWF announce Photo Contest 2006 Results

Posted on 21 December 2006







Canon WWF Photo Contest 2006



© WWF-India



Canon India Pvt. Limited, India’s No 1. Complete Digital Imaging Company and WWF-India, the country’s largest conservation organisation, today announced the results of the Canon WWF Photo Contest 2006 contest which was launched earlier this year as a part of the World Environment Day Celebrations on June 13. 



The contest was open to Indian nationals with entries accepted in both the amateur and professional categories. The winners in both categories have been awarded exciting and innovative prizes from Canon and WWF-India. 



In the amateur category, the first prize went to Avijit Dutta from Kolkata, who was awarded a Canon EOS 350D SLR camera and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs 3,000. The second prize went to D. Senthil Raja from Tirunelveli, who was awarded a Canon MP810 inkjet printer and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs 2,000. The third prize in the amateur category went to Anindya Majumdar from Kolkata who was awarded a Canon MP500 inkjet printer and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs1,000. 



In the professional category the first prize went to Jagdeep Rajput from New Delhi who was awarded a Canon EOS 30D and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs 3,000, the second prize in this category went to Iyer R.S from New Delhi who has been awarded a Canon i9950 printer and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs 2, 000 and the third prize went to Sanjay Ahlawat from New Delhi who has been awarded a 

Canon iP 6600 D printer and WWF-India Nature Shop products worth Rs1,000. 



Announcing the winners Alan Grant, President and CEO of Canon-India said, “The response to this contest was overwhelming, we received a number of entries from amateur and professional photographers across the country, which has been very encouraging. We are proud to have been associated with this project which works towards bringing awareness on environmental issues in the county and will continue our efforts to spread the message of protecting the environment based on our business philosophy of Kyosei - which means living and working together for the common good. We congratulate the winners and would like to thank all the participants for their enthusiasm.” 



Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, said, “Through the Canon WWF Photo Contest, we have used the impact of visual imagery to communicate and advance the message of freshwater conservation. The contest has involved people and power of visual media for better impact - using the natural element in the photographs as a propagator for itself and finding photographic excellence as a means of reaching out. WWF will continue to use photography as a medium to encourage engagement for conservation”. 



The participants of the Canon WWF Photo contest have played an important role in spreading the message of water conservation in the country. 



About Canon Inc 

Canon Inc. is a global leader in photographic and digital imaging solutions. Its global network now includes 184 companies, employing some more than 108,000 people. It is dedicated to the advancement in technology and innovation and commits 10% of its total revenue each year to R&D. Canon has consistently remained as one of the top 3 companies to have earned the most number of patents over the last decade. Since 1993, Canon continues to be ranked as one of world's largest corporations by the Fortune Global 500 Ranking. Guided by its kyosei philosophy, which focuses on "living and working together for the common good”, Canon delivers high performance and user-friendly products and solutions to improve efficiency both in the office and home environment. More information is available on www.canon.co.in 



Canon in India 

Canon India Pvt. Ltd. is a 100% subsidiary of Canon Singapore Pte. Ltd; a world leader in imaging technologies. Set up in 1997, Canon India markets a comprehensive range of sophisticated contemporary digital imaging products that include photocopiers, multi-functional peripherals, fax-machines, printers, scanners, digital cameras, camcorders and multi media projectors. Five imaging engines of Image Capturing, Electrophotography, Bubble Jet, Semiconductor and Display drive these cutting-edge technology products. The company today has offices in 7 cities across India and employs over 400 people. Canon has 250 channel partners, 218 retail stores, 32 canon care centers, over 100 authorized service centers and more than 2700 resellers across 300 towns in India it does business in. 



Creating an industry benchmark with new technologies in the latest product range the company launched 87 new products in 2006 including the launch of 51 products on a single day which is an industry landmark for the largest number of products launched in a single day. Overall, Canon grew 30% this year over 2005 and is planning a turnover of Rs. 400 cr by December 2006. 



Canon India has a Software Development Centre located in Gurgaon. Set up in the middle of 1999, the Canon Software Development Centre is one of the six such cutting edge technology centres established by Canon Inc. globally. It develops original technologies as well as supporting Canon marketing companies worldwide with application software. Canon India is ISO 9001:2000 and ISO14001:2004 certified and its Software Development Centre has achieved the CMM level 3 status. In 2006, Canon India received the CII-EXIM Business Excellence Award for Strong commitment to excel. 





About WWF-India 

WWF-India is the largest and one of the most experienced conservation organizations in the country. Since 1969, WWF has been consistently working for the protection and conservation of environment, and towards promoting harmony based on sustainability between human beings and nature. For more information please visit www.wwfindia.org  







Media Enquiries: 



Sarah Gideon 

20:20 MEDIA 

Ph no: 011 - 26933291 - 97 

Email: sarah@2020india.com  





Anshuman Atroley 

Communications Manager 

WWF-India 

Phone: +91-11-41504797 

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net