Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) meets C&I customers to map competitive RE pricing

Posted on 16 January 2020
 
|
 

0 Comments











© WWF India



WWF-India, under its Renewable Energy Demand Enhancement (REDE) initiative for Commercial & Industrial (C&I) consumers, convened a closed-door meeting along with the Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), a PSU under the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, for C&I consumers on 22 January in New Delhi. Senior representatives from companies like Siemens, Dalmia Cement Ltd, JK Tyres, Godrej & Boyce, Lafarge Holcim (ACC & Ambuja Cements Ltd.), ITC Ltd, Mahindra Group and STTelemedia Global Data Centres attended the meeting. The meeting was chaired by Mr SK Mishra, Director (PS), SECI.



C&I customers consume approximately 51% of the electricity generated in India, yet, only 3.5% of that is from renewable sources. India has committed to scaling up its renewable power capacity from 175 GW in 2022 to 450 GW in 2030. With renewable costs falling rapidly, C&I consumers have a strong financial incentive to switch to clean energy. Government stakeholders have recognised the C&I consumer segment as being critical to the uptake of renewable energy in the country, through sustained efforts under the REDE initiative. The group deliberated on SECI’s proposal of aggregating corporate RE demand, and the supply of renewable power at attractive prices, specifically for C&I consumers. As the next step, the C&I consumers will share their expression of interest for the scheme along with their power requirements with SECI, which in turn, will customise tenders for meeting the C&I demand and work on structuring procurement models in collaboration with WWF-India.


SECI is keen on exploring alternate renewable power procurement options suggested in the latest report by WWF-India, ‘Global Corporate Renewable Power Procurement Models: Lessons for India’. Currently, the avenues available to C&I consumers to procure renewable power are limited to rooftop solar installations, open access solar and wind power, and RECs. However, even these options are not freely available because of various policy and market constraints. With the growing C&I renewable power market worldwide, many new alternate procurement options have opened up. Virtual power purchase agreements (VPPAs), green tariffs, internationally tradable RECs (I-RECs) have already been successfully tried and tested in many countries. There are also proposals to set up dedicated renewable power exchanges and facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) trading.