WWF-India calls for increased investments and better policies for renewable energy with the launch of new campaign

Posted on 05 June 2013
 
|
 

2 Comments








Tata Motors



© Seize Your Power



Seize Your Power
New Delhi: On the occasion of World Environment Day, WWF-India launched its new campaign calling for a greater investment for renewable energy. The campaign under the slogan, Seize Your Power, seeks better policies, increased investments and greater public awareness towards renewable energy. This year long global initiative will look at the crucial need to reduce dependence on fossil fuel based power production, and urge governments , investors and organizations to make the right investment decisions that look at the real risks, costs and benefits of renewable energy vis-a vis fossil fuels. 



Our existing energy systems, heavily dependent on coal, oil and gas, are propelling us towards dangerous and irreversible climate change, and also severely impacting human lives, species and biodiversity all over the world. If we continue in the business-as-usual approach, and attempt to meet the growing energy demands with the existing energy production systems, we will face a future of worsening air pollution and increasingly inhospitable climate. Today, we urgently need new ways of producing energy with radically reduced climate impact for every sector, and environmental policies favorable to this transition. Investing in renewable energy solutions will not only help solve the climate crisis, but also ensure energy security for countries, making it possible for them to support growing demands with their existing resources. 



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India said, “Renewable energy is a sustainable solution to our future energy demands. The technology is now available, becoming increasingly cost competitive, and supports development while lowering carbon emissions. For emerging economies like India, there are significant co-benefits associated with scaling up renewable energy technologies. Through this new campaign, WWF-India will build awareness of the use of renewable energy technologies amongst the public.”



The launch of the Seize Your Power campaign on World Environment Day centred on the action of signing a pledge that highlights the need for a future powered by nature. It calls on governments, organizations, and financial institutions to act immediately, by making stronger commitments to increased financing for renewable technologies and implementing favorable policies, thereby shifting to cleaner options. Corporate supporters such as Woodland and Punj Lloyd joined the action and public events were organized in the Ambience Mall in Vasant Kunj.



Over the course of a year, WWF-India will expand the campaign into several cities, creating avenues for public engagement and reaching out across levels to policy makers, governments and institutions to join this global call to action. The campaign aims to highlight the real costs of fossil fuels as compared to the renewably energy sector, thereby seeking to expedite the process of transition to cleaner and sustainable energy systems. 



Media contacts:

Aarti Khosla | akhosla@wwfindia.net | 011-41504823

Campaign Policy Lead, Global Climate and Energy Initiative, WWF-International



Abhishek Nath | anath@wwfindia.net | 011-41504823

Associate Director, Climate Change and Energy