Students lock horns at inter school ‘wildlife quiz’

Posted on 01 October 2007
 
|
 

0 Comments








National Zoological Park



© National Zoological Park



New Delhi - The National Zoological Park, New Delhi, WWF-India and TRAFFIC India launched the Wildlife Week celebrations today with an inter school Wildlife Quiz competition. 



Over 20 schools from all across Delhi had sent their team of two students to participate in this event at the National Zoological Park on Monday morning. After a preliminary round, six teams were further selected to participate in the final battle of wits that put their knowledge about nature and wildlife to trial. Spring Dales School, Dhaula Kuan scored maximum points and was declared a winner. The team from Chinmaya Vidyalaya school, Vasant Vihar stood second. The winning teams will receive a certificate and a trophy from the Hon’ble Minister of State Environment and Forests, Shri S. Regupathy on the 3rd October, 2007. 



“The ‘Wildlife Quiz’ aims to cultivate interest in the young minds about wildlife conservation besides testing their awareness level about the cause,” said Mr. D. N. Singh, Director, National Zoological Park, New Delhi. “The zoo is very happy to have welcomed our young guests during this and also at other events during the Wildlife Week.” The National Zoological Park, New Delhi, India’s first and only National Zoo that has been taking a lead in spreading awareness on conservation issues to a diverse audience. 



India is rich in its biodiversity. From charismatic species such as the elephants, tigers, rhinos to smaller reptiles and a diverse avifauna, India’s forests are teeming with life force. The forests and wildlife also occupy a significant place in our religion and culture. Today Indian wildlife is facing one of its worst crisis. Skewed developmental activities have led to destruction of critical wildlife habitats, which in turn are testing the resilience of our ecosystem to its limits, causing a serious threat to our own well being. To remind our country of our rich wildlife heritage that needs to be protected and conserved, the Wildlife Week is celebrated every year across India. 



“Knowing more about the cause is the first step towards adopting one” said Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO WWF-India. ‘We are hopeful that this quiz will encourage young adults to think about the future of our natural resources and become active participants in preserving them.’ 



“The quiz was a learning experience for the young leaders of our country and also helped to raise awareness about issues related to the illegal wildlife trade that is threatening the survival of the species on our plant.” adds Mr. Samir Sinha, Head-TRAFFIC India. 



For further information, please contact:

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager

WWF-India

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797, E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net