Vidya Balan pledges support for Earth Hour 2011

Posted on 22 March 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








Vidya Balan pledges support for Earth Hour 2011



© WWF-India



Urges people across the country to act beyond the hour



Mumbai: Earth Hour, the country’s largest environmental campaign in history is once again being organised by WWF-India for the third time this year. In the lead up to 26th March, one of the Indian film industry’s leading actors Vidya Balan pledged support for Earth Hour 2011 at a press conference in Mumbai .The event was organized at ITC Maratha. ITC Welcomgroup, actively committed to environment friendly business practices will also observe Earth Hour across all their locations in the country.



To bring attention to and address the problem of Climate Change, Vidya encouraged Indians to not only switch off lights for Earth Hour but to go beyond the hour to protect the planet and added a PLUS sign to the ‘60’ logo of Earth Hour. This PLUS signifies a commitment to add a positive act in everyday life to benefit the environment that goes beyond the hour. Vidya was joined by Dr. Sejal Worah, Program Director, WWF India.



Supporting the cause, Vidya Balan expressed, “As the effects of Climate Change become more prevalent and more powerful, it is up to each one of us to take ownership of our collective future. WWF’s Earth Hour has inspired millions across the globe and has created mass awareness on the colossal issue of Climate Change. It is inspiring and encouraging to see how a step as simple as switching off lights for an hour can unite the entire world towards a single cause. I too switched off lights last year, and will do so this year as well. But now, it feels great to be a part of the bigger Earth Hour family.”



“For Earth Hour 2011, I pledge to not just switch off but to go beyond the hour. To be mindful of conserving resources, everyday, not just for an hour. From this year on, I pledge to use energy smartly. And urge you to do so as well. Each one of us has the power to make a difference. We just need to be conscious of it and make wise choices. When each of us take simple steps, together these actions add up. I am supporting the fight against Climate Change by adopting some of these steps. It's time you do too”, Vidya added.



Earth Hour 2011 is expected to be a culmination of over one billion people around the globe, in more than six thousand cities across 130 countries worldwide to commit to a more sustainable way of living, not just for an hour but everyday. 



Dr. Sejal Worah, Program Director, WWF India said, “Earth Hour 2010 got tremendous support across India as millions of citizens switched off. Earth Hour 2011 marks the beginning of a journey towards behavioral change for individuals and organizations on the path to environmental reform. We are hoping that Earth Hour 2011 will create awareness amongst one and all about the steps everyone can take beyond the hour to fight Climate Change.”



Mobilisation for Earth Hour 2011 has already begun. The site www.earthhour.in is live to provide citizens, organisations, and governments with information and suggestions on the steps they can take to reduce their carbon footprint. Last week, over a hundred cyclists mobilised support for the campaign by participating in the Earth Hour cylcothon in New Delhi. As Earth Hour continues to gather force, more and more people are taking on responsibility for demonstrating that it is feasible to confront the threats posed by increasing pressure on our resources through collective responsible actions.