Nokia India Joins Hands with WWF-India to Save the Tiger

Posted on 28 July 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








Tiger Wall of Hope



© WWF-India



New Delhi, July 27 2008: Nokia India, the leading mobile communications company, in partnership with WWF-India, one of the largest conservation organizations in the country , today unveiled the ‘Tiger Wall of Hope’ in New Delhi as part of their support initiative for the Tiger Conservation programme of WWF India. The ‘Tiger Wall of Hope’ was unveiled in the presence of Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, and Mr. D Shivakumar, VP and Managing Director, Nokia India, at an event held in New Delhi today.



As part of the association, Nokia and WWF-India will work towards providing education to the villagers for sustainable development, increasing awareness on tiger conservation, and identifying alternative livelihood programmes for the villagers around National Parks, specifically the Ranthambore National Park. 



Speaking about the ‘Tiger Wall of Hope’, that has been created out of original pugmarks embedded in Plaster of Paris encased in acrylic, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “These pugmarks are a grim reminder of the critical numbers of tigers left in our wild.” He further added, “We are proud to partner with Nokia in India. Globally, Nokia has been involved in several conservation initiatives with the WWF Network and we are happy to see this relationship extend here. This is an important step in bringing corporate institutional support for conservation, significantly tiger conservation, in India. This is an important beginning at this critical time for conservation in our country.”



“Leadership calls for responsibility and as India’s most trusted brand, we are committed to contribute to the holistic and sustainable development of the environment where we operate,” said Mr. D. Shivakumar, VP and Managing Director, Nokia India.



“It is a matter of great privilege for Nokia India to be associated with WWF for the cause of tiger conservation that needs immediate intervention. This endeavor for tiger conservation is an extension of our commitment towards creating a positive impact on the society beyond our technology, products, and services”, Mr Shivakumar added. 



During the event, a panel discussion was organized with eminent conservationists and concerned personalities like Mr. P K Sen , Ms. Leena Nandan , Dr. Rajesh Gopal , Mr. Brijendra Singh deliberated on various factors responsible for the depleting tiger population in India and the roles that various sections of the society need to play. 



The event also witnessed the presence of eminent personalities like Nafisa Ali, Roshan Seth, Shovana Narayan, Ritu Kumar and Vir Das who were present at the event to showcase their solidarity for the cause of the endangered species. 



Sharing more details about the depleting numbers of tigers in India, Mr. Ravi Singh said, “The tiger population in India has seen an alarming decrease with their habitats shrinking and several threats including poaching taking a toll on their survival. To create a healthy ecological balance we need to work towards building long term sustainable models for wildlife conservation such that our future generations can experience the joy and beauty of our varied flora and fauna.” 



As part of this relationship, Nokia will work with WWF in the following areas around Ranthambore:

• To strengthen the existing community institutions and development of further institutions of the community to facilitate community empowerment

• To provide education for sustainable development and communication outreach to the school teachers and students, villagers-including men and women, civil society communities around the Park and the forest personnel.

• To strengthen sustainable and alternative livelihood programmes, to link them with existing schemes of other line departments of the Government of Rajasthan.



Globally Nokia’s environmental strategy is to drive the use of safe substances and materials in products, improve the energy efficiency of products and create effective take-back and recycling programs. Energy efficiency and climate strategy are other important areas of continuous performance improvement by Nokia. In India, Nokia is extending this global vision to focus on local environment through its partnership with WWF. 



Nokia has a robust Community Involvement program in Sriperumbudur, Chennai around its manufacturing facility that has contributed immensely in improving the socio-economic fabric of the region and its employees.



About Nokia

Nokia is a world leader in mobile communications, driving the growth and sustainability of the broader mobility industry. Nokia connects people to each other and the information that matters to them with easy-to-use and innovative products like mobile phones, devices and solutions for imaging, games, media and businesses. Nokia provides equipment, solutions and services for network operators and corporations. 



About WWF-India

WWF-India is the largest organization engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country. Established as a Charitable Trust in 1969, it has an experience of over three decades in the field. With modest beginnings, the organization was propelled forward by the efforts of its founders and associates who volunteered their time and energy to lend momentum to this movement. A part of WWF International, the organization has promoted its mission through a sustained effort towards nature and wildlife conservation, and by sensitizing people by creating awareness through capacity building and environ-legal activism. A challenging, constructive, science-based organization WWF India addresses issues like the survival of species and habitats, climate change and environmental education.



For further information, please contact:

Shveta Nanda / Sonika Hussain

Text 100

#91 9811355277 / #91 9810900112

shvetan@text100.co.in / sonikah@text100.co.in



Namita Khurana 

WWF-India 

91-9999966971

nkhurana@wwfindia.net