Livestock vaccinations in Ranthambore to prevent spread of diseases before the monsoons

Posted on 24 July 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments








Cattle vaccination taking place in Bhuri Pahari



© 



More than 1000 cattle inoculated; community ties strengthened
Ranthambore: In most villages in India, livestock is reared under an extensive free-range system, where the cattle are allowed to roam and graze freely in open pastures. Often, the pastures are in the periphery of Protected Areas (PAs), and livestock also freely graze within the PA boundaries.



These livestock often pose a risk of transmitting bovine diseases like foot-and-mouth disease and hemorrhagic septicaemia (HS) to the wild ungulates, which could be fatal. Hence, the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, mandates immunization for all cattle in villages within 5 km of a PA.

 

In an effort to support the local communities, WWF-India's Western India Tiger Landscape (WITL) team along with the state Animal Husbandry department, conducted a vaccination programme in four villages of the Ranthambore-Kailadevicorridor – Bhuri Pahari, Donghir, Basso Kalan and Basso Khurd -- from 22 to 26 June 2015. The programme aimed at preventing outbreak of bovine diseases before the monsoon season.

 

HS is often a fatal disease that occurs among cattle and is characterized by acute fever, dullness, salivation and nasal discharge. The disease can spread swiftly and widely during the monsoon when moisture and humidity are high. This disease poses an enormous economic risk due to its high mortality rates, which would in turn deplete the milk production of these regions and have a direct consequence on livelihoods. When the livestock graze in PAs, there is a great risk of the disease spreading to prey species like deer and other ungulates.

 

In the four-day vaccination drive, about 1250 cattle across the four villages were vaccinated.  Furthermore, each household was given an orientation on the need for regular vaccinations, the immunity period of the vaccine and so on. These interactions have strengthened WWF-India’s relation with the community and helped establish new communication channels. Several community leaders have been identified who are likely to play a vital role in supporting wildlife conservation in the region.

 

For further information: 

Sunny Shah 

Landscape Coordinator 

WITL,WWF-India 

T: +919799144110 

E: sshah@wwfindia.net