School kids exhibit their “Wild Wisdom”

Posted on 12 November 2010
 
|
 

2 Comments








Mr. Mike Pandey, the quizmaster with the five teams at the Wild Wisdom Quiz, 2010



© WWF-India



New Delhi:  WWF- India and TRAFFIC India conducted the finals of the Wild Wisdom Quiz, a national wildlife quiz today. The quiz reached out to more than 5000 students from around 400 schools across 15 states of India.



Celebrating the Wildlife Week, that is observed in India from October 1 to 7th each year, WWF- India felt a need to directly apprise and engage the youth in conservation related issues. A quiz was seen as the best way to reach out to the young minds. The Wild Wisdom Quiz was born in 2007 in Delhi and was eventually up-scaled to a National-Level in 2009. 



The quiz 2010 was held in 18 cities, over three levels – school level, state level and national level. The national level quiz saw the keen participation of 30 students from 15 schools. 5 teams from 5 different schools made it to the grand finale including J&K Public School, Jammu and Kashmir; Pon Vidyashram, Chennai; Bhavan’s Newsprint Vidyalaya, Kerala; Jawaharlal Nehru School, Bhopal; and D.A.V. Public School, Orissa.



The entire quiz was divided into 6 interesting rounds testing the children on their familiarity with different aspects of the wildlife ranging from identification of bird calls to the classification of different kinds of snakes, from the long standing relationship of the wildlife with the Indian mythology and religion to its association with literature and much more! Mike Pandey, filmmaker, conservationist and recipient of three Green Oscar awards was the Chief Guest and Quizmaster. In between rounds, he entertained the audience with fascinating trivia and stories from his experiences in the field.



While the participants enthusiastically answered the questions, a keen audience was constantly on the lookout for passes as it helped them earn their green conservation bands with every correct response. Speaking on the success of the quiz, Mr. Ravi Singh, SG & CEO, WWF- India said, “. While giving an opportunity to children to expound their knowledge about wildlife, the quiz is designed to encourage increased learning and interest on the subject. We are very happy to observe the knowledge the children brought out in the quiz.”



Three teams made it through to win the final prize – a two-day trip to Bandhavgarh National Park, known for a high population of tigers. The first position was won by Kerala: Jayadeva K.J. and Jacob Kunnathoor from Bhavan’s Newsprint Vidyalaya. Following them were Effy Oommen John and A.J. Jai Sreeenivasan from Pon Vidyashram School, Tamil Nadu. In third place were Alankan Devta and Dishant Swain from DAV Public School, Orissa. Each of these teams accompanied by their teachers leave for Bandhavgarh National Park the day after.