Mysore Palace observes Earth Hour 2012

Posted on 31 March 2012
 
|
 

1 Comment











© 



Mysore: Earth Hour, marking the fourth year of its journey in India this year, once again united the country for one hour, as Indians from various cities switched off lights at 8:30 PM. 



Earth Hour is WWF’s largest environmental campaign empowering individuals, organizations, institutions and governments to fight against climate change. 



Earth Hour 2012 aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause.



For the first time ever, Mysore Palace observed Earth Hour, by reducing the duration of illumination of the Palace on weekends from 15 minutes to 5 minutes. This symbolic gesture sent out a powerful message not only to the citizens of the city and country, but to the thousands of international tourists who visit the Palace to witness this magnificent illumination. 



WWF-India and Green Connect at Infosys organized a grand event at the North Gate of the Mysore Palace grounds, where hundreds of individuals joined the celebrations. The event was attended by Smt. Pushpalata Chikkanna, Mayor of Mysore, Shri Ravi Kumar M. J., Deputy Mayor of Mysore, Mr. Prasanna Kumar, Managing Director, Karnataka Renewable Energy Development Ltd. as well as Infosys representatives Mr. Nagraj Srinivasan, Head of Development Centre, Infosys Mysore, Hitesh Sharma, Founder, Prime of Green Connect, Infosys, and Mr. R.N. Prasad, Professional Skills Development Unit Infosys, . The dignitaries commenced Earth Hour by collectively switching off lights of the Mysore palace. ExpreScions, Infosys band, mesmerized the audience with their performance of instrumental and vocal songs. 



Addressing the audience, Ms. Gitanjali Aiyer, Head, Major Donors, WWF-India said, “Today, Mysore palace will be counted amongst the world’s most Iconic monuments, Eiffel Tower in Paris, Sydney Opera House in Australia, Times Square in US, and more, as they switch off lights for Earth Hour. Being India’s most iconic monuments, attracting tourists from around the world, the participation of Mysore Palace will the citizens of the country, and reiterate India’s commitment towards environment conservation.”



Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar also pledged his support to Earth Hour 2012 as the National Brand Ambassador of the campaign, while many well known stars supported the campaign to encourage the citizens of their cities to switch off. Telegu film actor Rana Daggubatti rooted for Hyderabad, Bengali actor Rituparna Sengupta rooted for Kolkata, Tamil singer and actor Dhanush rooted for Chennai, cricket team Royal Challengers rooted for Bangalore.



Earth Hour events across the country took the shape of candle light marches, candle light dinners, dance and musical performances, awareness programmes, signature campaigns and more. Some of India’s most iconic monuments observed Earth Hour, India gate, Qutub Minar, Humayuns’ tomb in New Delhi; Gateway of India, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus in Mumbai; Victoria Memorial in Kolkata; Bridage road and WTC in Bangalore; The Church and Towh Hall in Shimla, University of Kerala, Public Library and VJT Hall, Trivandrum.

Earth Hour 2012 is expected to be officially observed in more than 130 countries across the world.