WWF-India and NLUD collaborate to offer ‘PG Diploma in Urban Environmental Management’

Posted on 27 March 2011
 
|
 

1 Comment








L-R: Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India with Prof. (Dr.) Ranbir Singh, Vice-Chancellor, NLUD



© WWF-India



New Delhi: The Centre for Environmental Law (CEL), WWF-India and the National Law University, Delhi (NLUD) today signed a Memorandum of Understanding to jointly conduct a Post-Graduate Diploma in Urban Environmental Management. The course will be formally launched in April 2011.



Established in 1993, CEL pioneered the dissemination programme on Environmental Law and serves as a resource centre for research in national, regional and international context on matters relating to environmental law. For the past eighteen years, CEL has been offering a Diploma in Environmental Law and has had in its programme over six hundred students. In June 2010, CEL in collaboration with the Indira Gandhi National Open University launched a Post-Graduate Diploma in Environmental Law through the Distance and Online mode. 



The Diploma programme with the National Law University is specially designed for professionals and practitioners contributing to and working in the field of Urban Infrastructure Management, Urban Laws and Policies, Urban Governance and Urban Development issues. 



Speaking on the occasion Prof Ranbir Singh said “With the world facing both manmade and natural disasters, it is very important to understand the urban laws and policies and how synergies need to be drawn with environmental concerns, the course will attempt to look at environmental management as core aspect of urban management”.



In the trust that the programme would contribute towards specialised knowledge on Urban Environmental issues to a wider audience, Mr. Ravi Singh said “This partnership is an important step in creating a platform of knowledge in an area much needed for India and one which WWF India attaches a high importance given the challenges of India's urban footprint. We are very happy to collaborate with the National Law University, Delhi and I hope that students enroll for this program with enthusiasm."



The course is technically supported by Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). The MoU was signed by Prof. (Dr.) Ranbir Singh, Vice-Chancellor, NLUD and Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India. The event was presided by Prof. (Dr.) Srikrishna Deva Rao, Registrar, NLUD, Mr. Sanjay Kr. Srivastava, Sr. Advisor, GIZ and Ms. Moulika Arabhi, Director, CEL, WWF-India. 



For further information, please contact: 

Moulika Arabhi 

Director 

Centre for Environmental Law 

WWF-India 

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3 

Email: marabhi@wwfindia.net 

Ph- +91-11-4150- 4772 



Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

email:ssam@wwfindia.net 

Ph-+91-11-4351-6248 

4150-4797