Release of "Environment in the Indian Parliament: an Analysis 2011-12" by ENVIS Centre, WWF-India

Posted on 20 May 2014
 
|
 

0 Comments


The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India held three days National Interaction cum Evaluation Workshop of ENVIS Centres during March 28-30, 2014 at Chintan Bhawan, Gangtok, Sikkim. The workshop was organized in collaboration with Sikkim State Council of Science & Technology. More than 130 senior representatives from various national institutions and various State Government departments participated in the interaction cum evaluation process for further strengthening of ENVIS in the Country.



On this occasion, ENVIS Centre, WWF-India released its yearly compendium "Environment in the Indian Parliament: an Analysis 2011-12" through Shri A.K.Srivastava, Chief Secretary, Govt. of Sikkim; Shri S.K.Shilal, Secretary, Department of Science & Technology; Shri B. Brahma, Senior Economic Advisor, MoEF; Shri Abhay Kumar, Deputy Economic Advisor, MoEF; Shri Arvind Kumar, Principal Secretary-cum PCCF, Forests, Environment and Wildlife Management Department; Shri. M.G.Kiran, Principal Secretary, Home Department and through experts like Dr. N. Ramaiah, Chief Scientist, National Institute of Oceanography (NIO); Dr. Avinash Chandra, Professor (Retd.), Centre for Energy Studies, IIT Delhi; Dr. Bharat H. Desai, Professor, Centre for International Legal Studies, JNU and Dr. M. N. V. Prasad, Professor, Department of Plant Sciences. 



The compilation "Environment in the Indian Parliament: an Analysis 2011-12" analyses the significant environmental information discussed amongst India's Legislators and Policy Makers in both Houses of Parliament- Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha. This voluminous publication brings together environment issues of concern to the country in the form of a single document which can be used as a source of reference by scientists, technocrats, policy makers and other concern with the cause of conservation and sustainable development.



The concluding sessions of the workshop was addressed by Ms. Vandana Aggarwal, Economic Adviser, MoEF.