First of the multi-level workshops kicks off at the District level for Ramganga’s Conservation

Posted on 14 May 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








WWF-India will coordinate the formation of Ramganga Mitra (Crusaders of Ramganga) to take lead on issues related to conservation



© WWF-India




District level workshop brings together key stakeholders to discuss and deliberate on Ramganga conservation, Circuit House, Moradabad Moradabad: The first of the series of workshops at the District level on May 13, 2013 at Circuit House successfully brought together major stakeholders to deliberate and discuss strategies for revival of Ramganga and to discuss integration of conservation into district planning as a first step to address issues of river. This workshop was a part of the multi level workshops being jointly organized by District Administration, Moradabad and World Wide Fund for Nature-India (WWF-India). The Multi-level workshops are being held at District, Block and Village level on May 13, 14 and 16, 2013 respectively. The District level workshop was inaugurated by Shri Sanjay Kumar, IAS, District Magistrate and served as a platform to discuss a coordinated framework for collaboration between different departments, deliberate on ways of mobilising stakeholder participation in Conservation of Ramganga and work out ways of aligning district plans to include Ramganga conservation



‘District Administration is taking up conservation of Ramganga as a priority. To achieve our shared vision it is vital to mobilize stakeholder participation in Conservation of Ramganga and develop a coordinated framework for collaboration between different departments. To ensure that the integration takes place at all levels, we are organizing such platforms also at the Block and Village levels to reach out to all the key stakeholders including line departments and the community members to jointly work towards in taking steps to revive the river Ramganga’, said Sanjay Kumar, IAS, District Magistrate.



The District level workshop was also attended by over 200 senior government officials including the Chief Development Officer, Municipal Commissioner, Sub Divisional Magistrates, Officials of over 20 departments, gram pradhans, and technical experts & practitioners. Mr. Faisal Aftab, Chief Development Officer (CDO) emphasized on the requirement of the participation of all the key stakeholders including line departments and the need to take steps to identify and integrate Ramganga conservation in District, Block and Village level planning processes.



Mr. Suresh Babu, Director, Rivers Basins & Water Policy, WWF-India threw light on the Ramganga river conservation challenges and the possible strategies. He said, “Restoration and conservation of Ramganga needs an integrated, coordinated effort by all stakeholders. Threats to the river need to be mapped and the solutions need to be integrated into the local plans and implemented at the district, blocks and village levels as appropriate.” He also emphasized on the importance of having both people and species as focal point as that will go a long way in restoring the river’s lost glory and ultimately aid in the conservation of Ramganga.



WWF-India will coordinate the formation of Ramganga Mitra (Crusaders of Ramganga) to take lead on issues related to conservation. Ramganga Mitra will be a voluntary initiative and people from all walks of life-urban, rural, district, city, block and village level can participate. Mr Sanjay Kumar said, “Ramganga Mitra will be recognised and honoured at different platforms at block and district level.” WWF-India also presented a plan to raise awareness and build capacity on Ramganga Conservation.



Other major points of deliberations at the meeting included a presentation by WWF-India senior officials on best practices in water, agriculture and biodiversity conservation from the Ganga basin and relevant to Ramganga such as promoting sustainable agriculture for water use efficiency and reduced pollution as well as lessons learned from People Centric Dolphin Conservation Programme in Narora. Sharing the presentation, Dr. Sandeep Behera, Associate Director, WWF-India stressed on the role of stakeholders in eliminating the threats to Ramganga and its biodiversity. 



These workshops are being organised under the aegis of Ramganga ke liye jeevan, jeevan ke liye Ramganga campaign initiated by the District Administration and WWF-India. HSBC Water Programme is supporting this campaign. All workshops will discuss ways of actively engaging the citizens of Moradabad District in planning, implementation and monitoring the Ramganga conservation activities by focusing on capacity building of the local communities, providing a platform for knowledge exchange and to get people together to unite for Ramganga’s revival.