Apollo Hospitals Foundation and WWF- India partner to provide free medical support to frontline forest staff across 16 states

Posted on 14 February 2018
 
|
 

1 Comment








Mr. Karan Bhalla, COO, WWF-India with Ms. Upasana Kamineni Konidela, Vice Chairperson, Apollo Hospitals Foundation at press conference



© WWF-India



Hyderabad: Frontline forest staff of forest departments have to brave difficult terrains, harsh weather conditions, wildlife and other adversities in their daily lives. To address this, WWF-India and Apollo Hospitals Foundation today announced the renewal of their partnership under the ‘Specialised Medical Scheme’ of Apollo Hospitals wherein free medical treatment and recovery support is provided to frontline forest staff in case of a severe medical emergency, while on duty. A part of the support will also be extended to local communities living around the forests.

 

The renewal is an extension of a larger partnership launched in 2015 to provide immediate medical support to frontline protection staff and local communities in areas where WWF-India is actively working along with the state forest departments for species and landscape conservation. Under the new partnership, effective for a year starting April 2018, medical support will be provided across 16 states, including Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala.

 

The partnership covers health screening camps for frontline forest staff and community members. Specialized medical treatment to frontline forest stafffor cases including (but not confined to) grievous injury due to attacks by wild animals; fall from elevated areas (like hills or machines); accidents while patrolling in vehicles (collision or falling off);  burns during fire-fighting operations; injuries in crowd control operations during incidents  of  human-wildlife conflict; medical emergencies during extreme climatic events, life threatening diseases like malaria, dengue, etc.; venomous bites/stings, and electrocution will be provided.

 

This unique partnership between Apollo Hospitals Foundation and WWF-India has benefitted more than 1500 frontline staff through health screening campsin Assam and Tamil Nadu over the last few years. In Assam, representatives from Apollo Hospital, the Assam Forest Department and WWF-India organised a 7-day health screening camp at the Kaziranga National Park and North KarbiAnglong Forest Division in November-December 2016 and similar camps in Tamil Nadu in June 2017. Five members of the forest departments of Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Rajasthan were also provided specialized medical care in Apollo Hospitals for injuries received while on duty.

 

Speaking about the partnership, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “The partnership builds on WWF-India’s focus on welfare and support of frontline forest staff engaged in wildlife protection. The partnership with the Apollo Hospitals Foundation enables the provision of medical advice and care to areas that are difficult to reach, at times in emergent conditions.”

 

Ms. Upasana Kamineni Konidela, Vice Chairperson, Apollo Hospitals Foundation said, “We at Apollo Hospitals groups strive to protect the frontline staff who protect our forests and wildlife through this initiative. We are always there to support them and are happy to help conserve our wildlife."



For media queries, please contact:

Rituparna Sengupta; Senior Manager, Campaigns, Brand and Media, WWF-India

rsengupta@wwfindia.net; 011-41504797



Indira Akoijam; Manager, Communications, Species and Landscapes Programme, WWF-India

iakoijam@wwfindia.net; 011-41504783