EARTH HOUR INDIA 2023 LAUNCHES 'THE BIGGEST HOUR FOR EARTH' WITH RICKY KEJ AS THE 'FACE OF THE CAMPAIGN'

Posted on 01 March 2023







Ricky Kej



© Ricky Kej




Three-time Grammy Award winner Ricky Kej will be the ‘Face of Earth Hour India 2023.'  
On 25th March 2023 at 8.30 pm, WWF's Earth Hour will mobilise people around the world to Give an Hour for Earth as part of efforts to create the ‘Biggest Hour for Earth’.  

New Delhi– Earth Hour every year seeks to inspire and remind people of the power that we each have to make a positive impact on our planet – our one shared home. This year, we are reimagining Earth Hour and creating the Biggest Hour for Earth. Therefore, Ricky Kej, whose dedication to unifying people across the globe with his music, is an apt choice to drive the campaign as the“Face of Earth Hour India 2023.” Ricky Kej (three-time Grammy Award Winning Composer and environmentalist), with support from WWF-India highlights the need for more people, more than ever, to join in with Earth Hour 2023 and provide 60 minutes of global unity in support and celebration of our planet.

 

Sharing his views and aspirations as the Face of the campaign, Ricky Kej said, “We can together revitalise the power of the hour for a nature positive world and inspire and mobilize the collective consciousness of the entire world to give back to the people and planet. As landmarks and homes across the globe take part in Earth Hour's iconic switch-off, I request everyone to 'switch off' themselves by taking a break from their routine and everyday distractions and spend 60 minutes doing something positive for our planet and nature around us.”

 

Supporters in over 190 countries and territories will create the Biggest Hour for Earth, part of WWF's efforts to turn a single Earth Hour into thousands and millions of hours of action and awareness.  In doing so, the world’s largest grassroots environmental campaign will shine an unmissable global spotlight on the twin perils of nature loss and climate change. At the same time, this year’s Earth Hour will also serve as a powerful reminder of the importance of our planet, the need to protect it, and how there is limited time we have to do so.

 

Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “WWF-India actively supports Earth Hour, a global campaign that originated in 2007. Every year, on Earth Hour, citizens worldwide take action by voluntarily switching off non-essential lights for one hour. The campaign helps bring conservation and sustainable practices into focus towards creating a better world for future generations. I want to thank Ricky Kej for his support as the ‘Face of Earth Hour India 2023’ and his continuous efforts towards a better tomorrow.”



The changing face of Earth Hour

Now in its 17th year, having been known for the “lights off” moment – a symbolic event to show our collective support for the planet - WWF is this year stepping things up by breathing new life into the Earth Hour movement and mission. Central to Earth Hour 2023’s identity is a new flip clock logo that brings focus to the hour and the fact that time is ticking.

 

Earth Hour India website

Earth Hour 2023 Socialisation video

 

About Earth Hour 

Earth Hour is WWF's flagship global environmental movement. Born in Sydney in 2007, Earth Hour has grown to become the world's largest grassroots movements for the environment, inspiring individuals, communities, businesses and organizations in more than 190 countries and territories to take tangible environmental action. Historically, Earth Hour has focused on the climate crisis, but more recently, Earth Hour has strived to also bring the pressing issue of nature loss to the fore. The aim is to create an unstoppable movement for nature, as it did when the world came together to tackle climate change. The movement recognizes the role of individuals in creating solutions to the planet’s most pressing environmental challenges and harnesses the collective power of its millions of supporters to drive change. Visit www.earthhour.org to find out about Earth Hour events around the world. Together, let’s create the Biggest Hour for Earth.

 

About WWF India

WWF India is committed to creating and demonstrating practical solutions that help conserve India's ecosystems and rich biodiversity. With more than 50 years of conservation journey in the country, WWF India works towards finding science-based and sustainable solutions to address challenges at the interface of development and conservation. WWF India is part of the WWF network, with offices in over 100 countries across the world. WWF India works in many states of India through our state and field offices. The organisation works in different geographical regions and across thematic areas, including the conservation of key wildlife species and their habitats management of rivers, wetlands and ecosystems. On the sustainability side, the focus areas are climate change adaptation, driving sustainable solutions for business and agriculture and empowering local communities as conservation stewards. We also work in combatting the illegal wildlife trade and in bringing environment education to students through outreach and awareness campaigns. http://www.wwfindia.org 

Facebook, Twitter, Instagram

 

For more information, please contact:

Komal Chaudhary

Senior Manager-Media & PR, WWF-India

kchaudhary@wwfindia.net