WWF-India observes first anniversary of Bishkek Declaration, a global agreement on snow leopards

Posted on 21 November 2014
 
|
 

0 Comments








Snow Leopards are threatened by illegal killing, chiefly for pelts.



© Klein & Hubert/WWF



The snow leopard is a rare, beautiful and mysterious species of high mountains. Known for its elusive nature, snow leopards are rarely seen in the wild. Snow leopards live in some of the most extreme high altitude and cold climates, found in the mountains of Central Asia. Unfortunately, the population of this magnificent species has been gradually declining and it is listed as endangered in the IUCN red list.

 

The ongoing expansion of human settlements into mountainous regions continues to exert a significant degree of pressure on the habitat of the snow leopard. Overgrazing by livestock, retaliatory killing by pastoralists, illegal trade in fur and bone, mining, roads and wars continue to dissect and fragment the fragile habitat in which snow leopards occur. These threats only get intensified due to the global climate change which is pushing the tree-lines further up, thereby effectively reducing the space available for snow leopards.

 

In a move to promote its conservation, the Government of India has declared the snow leopard to be a flagship species for the high altitude Himalayas. As a part of the overall conservation campaign, on 23 October 2014 the first International Snow Leopard Day was celebrated globally to mark the first anniversary of the global agreement signed for the protection of the snow leopard - the Bishkek Declaration.

 

The Bishkek Declaration was an agreement signed by 12 countries that are home to this species namely Afghanistan, Bhutan, China, India, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The declaration was initiated in order to formulate a long-term Global Snow Leopard Conservation Programme by the formation of a high-level steering committee to guide programme implementation and regularly review its progress. The key goals of the programme are to evaluate and map the current status of key snow leopard populations and habitats to set baselines and indicators against which to assess future change. These indicators will also be used to conduct an economic valuation of snow leopard habitats, and intensify scientific research and monitoring to support future policy and action and to intensify conservation efforts in the large landscapes required for snow leopard survival. Identifying and designating critical habitats of key snow leopard populations as no-go areas for destructive land uses will determine these landscapes.

 

To mark this occasion, the Snow Leopard Network a worldwide organization dedicated to facilitating networking among snow leopard experts, conservationists and supporters released an updated version of the Snow Leopard Survival Strategy (SLSS). The SLSS offers a comprehensive analysis of the issues facing snow leopard conservation and also serves as a guiding document to direct research and conservation efforts for key issues in the range countries. The SLSS is a culmination of efforts of multiple organizations and individuals, among which WWF contributed its expertise with regard to conservation issues and challenges specific to the snow leopard.

 

 

Dr George Schaller, the world renowned authority on big cats and one of the pioneering researchers of snow leopards expressed his pleasure that snow leopards conservation is receiving the much-needed attention. He added that the SLSS was a valuable contribution towards the conservation of the endangered snow leopards.

 

Additionally, the Global Snow Leopard and Ecosystem Protection Program (GSLEP) released a map of 23 landscapes covering more than 500,000 km2 of snow leopard habitat identified to be secured by 2020 declared through a multi-country collaboration for the conservation of snow leopards.

 

 

Mr Ravi Singh, SG & CEO WWF-India reiterated the commitment of WWF-India towards snow leopard conservation to contribute to the national Project Snow Leopard of the Government of India.

 

 

WWF-India, along with other many countries contributes to the survival of thismagnificent big cat and works in three key snow leopard landscapes in India in the states of Jammu and Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim. The work involves addressing human snow leopard conflicts, reducing the retaliatory killing of snow leopards, fostering community stewardship, enhancing local livelihoods in snow leopard range areas and facilitating the recovery of rangelands and prey of snow leopards. Additionally, a brochure titled “Conservation of the Snow Leopard and its Habitat in the Himalayas and Beyond”, which details the primary threats, conservation objectives and conservation initiatives planned for the snow leopard by WWF-India, was released on its website to commemorate the occasion.

 

 

Observing the anniversary of the Bishkek Declaration in the form of International Snow Leopard Day is an important step towards bringing together stakeholders who are working towards the conservation of these majestic animals. WWF-India will continue to dedicate its resources to help study, manage and support all efforts towards snow leopard conservation, in collaboration with its respective stakeholders in the regions encompassing their habitat.