To see our planet in a new light this Earth Hour, Speak Up for Nature

Posted on 26 March 2021







Speak Up for Nature_Earth Hour



© WWF India




Earth Hour 2021 will witness the first-ever Virtual Spotlight 
MoEF&CC, Department of Science and Technology, BSES, National Biodiversity Authority, The Imperial, Raymond, Sterling India, DMRC, Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation, EESL, Bharat Scouts and Guides, Mother Dairy, Namami Gange, United Colors of Benetton India, SBI, Apollo Hospitals, Woodland and others lend their support to Speak Up for Nature 


‘Speak Up for Nature with Shantanu Moitra’ will see a host of celebs like Dia Mirza, Papon, Shreya Ghoshal and others  

New Delhi: This Earth Hour (27th March 2021) aims to raise awareness of the interconnected challenges facing our planet - nature loss, climate change, health, and pandemics. We are asking everyone to “Speak Up for Nature” – to spark millions of conversations. The first-ever Earth Hour Virtual Spotlight will put the spotlight on our planet and the issues we face. With over 190 countries participating in Virtual Spotlight aims to take over social media on the night of Earth Hour, highlighting the relationship between nature loss and the rise of pandemics. It will provide a message of hope of how we can overcome our planetary crisis by applying the same lessons we've learned during the COVID-19 pandemic.  

 

Every individual and organizations that have been supporting Earth Hour in their capacity have taken certain steps in the direction of making small changes for the planet.  

 

The Imperial, New Delhi, a luxury hotel, is committed to take small steps and contribute to environment-friendly initiatives. They have recycled and reduce plastic usage, minimized water wastage, and energy consumption within the premises. 

 

 Raymond, has pledged to celebrate ‘No Print Day’ by switching off their printers to Save paper-Save trees. Raymond is committed to recycle plastic bottles and discourage single-use plastic.  

 

BSES believes that there is an urgent need to address the problem of climate change and nature loss. They have appealed to 4.5 million consumers and 18 million residents to switch off their lights from 8:30-9:30 on Earth Hour.  

 

EESL India supports Earth Hour to conserve energy and promote sustainability. This Earth Hour, they Speak Up for Nature by participating and supporting the message to protect our planet.

  

The Bangalore Rail Corporation (BMRC) has been extremely supportive of the cause of the Earth Hour. The message is promoted across 45 metro stations in both English and Kannada.   

 

Taj City Centre Gurugram, stands in solidarity with WWF India through their Dine in the Dark initiative. They bring 44 delicacies from across the globe as we switch off lights to #SpeakUpForNature this Earth Hour. 

 

State Bank of India showcases their support for the planet by switching off all non-essential lights for an hour. They are promoting the theme of 'Climate Change to Save Earth' this Earth Hour.

 

The event, ‘Speak Up for Nature with Shantanu Moitra’ would be the first of the Virtual Spotlight on Earth Hour, 27th March, between 8:30 pm-9:30 pm. Conversations around nature and conservation by guests like Shreya Ghoshal, Dia Mirza, Papon, Dhritiman Mukherjee, Saiyami Kher, Ambi Subramaniam, Bindu Subramaniam, Dr. Jayanthi Kumaresh, Kaushiki Chakraborty, Swanand Kirkire and Sangita Jindal come together to initiate conversations around Earth Hour will be pivotal to spread awareness about the message by speaking up for Nature. Shantanu Moitra, the Harmony & will host the event Hope Ambassador of WWF India and music composer.   

 

  Event will be live on WWF India SM pages:  

  Facebook 

  LinkedIn 

  Youtube  

 

Notes to Editors: 

Link to Earth Hour site:  

Hear out the Secretary-General and CEO, WWF India 

Watch the Earth Hour Video 

Link to Earth Hour photos  

 

For more information, please contact: 

Komal Chaudhary | Senior Manager- Media & PR, WWF India| +91 8010876699| kchaudhary@wwfindia.net 

 

About Earth Hour 

Earth Hour is WWF's flagship global environmental movement. Born in Sydney in 2007, Earth Hour has grown to become one of the world's largest grassroots movements for the environment, inspiring individuals, communities, businesses and organisations in more than 180 countries and territories to take tangible environmental action for over a decade. Historically, Earth Hour has focused on the climate crisis, but more recently, Earth Hour has strived to also bring the pressing issue of nature loss to the fore. The aim is to create an unstoppable movement for nature, as it did when the world came together to tackle climate change. The movement recognises individuals' role in creating solutions to the planet's most pressing environmental challenges and harnesses the collective power of its millions of supporters to drive change.