MMTC-PAMP and WWF India celebrate Himalayan birds on World Environment Day 2020

Posted on 05 June 2020
 
|
 

0 Comments








COLLECTIBLE COIN



© MMTC



New Delhi, June 5 2020: The Himalayas are a treasure trove of biodiversity and known as one of the biodiversity hotspots in the world. Referred to often as the Third Pole, they are the birthplace of some of Asia's rivers and help regulate the planet's climate. Harbouring over thousands of species of flora and fauna, the Himalayas are also home to some of the most stunning birds found in the world. It is to pay tribute to this magnificent variety of species that the Himalayas hold that MMTC-PAMP is launching its new series of coins featuring four Himalayan birds. The collection is the latest addition to the Conserve Wild India limited edition collectible series created in partnership with WWF India.



Speaking about the launch, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF India, said, "WWF India is pleased to announce the launch of a new collection of coins themed on 'Himalayan Birds' - developed by MMTC-PAMP for World Environment Day 2020. The birds highlighted in the collection are amongst some unique and beautiful species of the Himalayan region. These beautifully crafted coins will help to highlight the natural wonders of the Himalayan and of ecological conservation that is much needed. Such messages and learning help in drawing attention to conservation needs and support the on-ground conservation work of WWF India. I congratulate both the teams and look forward to the success of the launch and continued creativity for the future.” 



This exclusive, limited edition collection, struck in 999.9 Fine Silver, focuses on four endangered wildlife distinctive Himalayan range birds i.e. Scarlet Minivet, Blue-throated Barbet, Black-lored Tit and Red-billed Blue Magpie. Part of the proceeds from sales of these coins will go towards supporting the conservation effort of WWF India. The series will be available through both MMTC-PAMP and WWF India online and offline stores.



Commenting on the launch, Mr. Vikas Singh, MD & CEO, MMTC-PAMP said, “We are delighted at the opportunity to partner with WWF India and contribute to the cause of environmental sustainability. As MMTC-PAMP is India’s first, largest and only London Bullion Market Association (LBMA) accredited Good Delivery Gold refinery, we have always focused on crafting clean, green, ethical products through responsible supply chain and manufacturing practices that reduce our carbon footprint. Our latest launch of Bird series collectables is in continuation to our commitment towards supporting WWF India in its mission to stop the degradation of the planet's natural environment and build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature. On behalf of MMTC-PAMP, we wish you a very Happy Environment day.”



For Media queries please write at: info@mmtcpamp.com