Supporting conservation of tigers through the WWF-India “Tiger Series”

Posted on 18 March 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








Shri.Jairam Ramesh (Environment Minister of India) unveils 'Tiger Talk' Book



© WWF-India



New Delhi: Continuing its conservation work on the iconic species- The Tiger, WWF India unveiled the “Tiger Series”, a one of its kind endeavor. Honorable Minister of Environment, Shri Jairam Ramesh unveiled the special coffee table book 'Tiger Talk' along with CEO and Secretary General, WWF India, Mr. Ravi Singh; President WWF India, Dr Divyabhanu Chavda; CMO, Aircel Limited, Mr. Rahul Saigal; General Managaer Taj, Mr. Digvijay Singh; COO Taj Safaris, Ms.Mridula Tangirala; and Executive Creative Director South Asia, Ogilvy & Mather, Mr.Abhijeet Awasthi.



The WWF Signature Tiger Watch collection for men and women was unveiled by Feroze Gujral. The watch collection has been designed by WWF-India and manufactured by Titan Industries Limited.

Heart warming musical performances by Kunal Ganjawala, Ranjit Barot, the Nizami Qawwalis, Sridhar Parthasarthy, Sabir Khan and Hitesh Modak made the eveinng even more special.



Present there supporting this cause were designers Leena Singh, Rohit Gandhi and Nikhita Taandon, Sanjana Kapoor, Fleur Xavier, Sampada Inamdar, Iqbal Malhotra, Soni Agarwal, Executive Director Bird Group Ankur Bhatia; Managing Director, Travel N More, Ankit Bagga; Sandeep Gupta and Sanjay Sharma amongst others. 



On this occasion, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF India advised

"Such occasions allow us to continue disseminating the message on conservation, highlighting tiger conservation and its importance in India. The involvement of conservationists as manifested in this book is a testimony to their dedication. In the coming years, we look forward to many more such initiatives."



WWF-India would like to acknowledge their title partner Aircel, creative partner Ogilvy and hospitality partner Taj for extending their support and making this event a success.



Mr Gurdeep, Singh, COO Aircel said “Aircel has a long term commitment to saving our tigers. Besides the 1411 Tigers Left campaign, we have a multi pronged set of initiatives for Tiger Conservation. Aircel has worked with WWF-India for inputs and knowledge towards tiger conservation and to support WWF-India’s initiatives on the ground. We are delighted to support 





With a history of forty years of work on tiger conservation across India, WWF-India aims to further create awareness on the need for Tiger protection and its conservation work.

The ‘The Tiger Series’ includes:



'Tiger Talk' - An exclusive book that looks at tigers through the eyes of people who truly believe in their conservation values them and are passionate about protecting them in the wild. This book will capture their hopes, love and courage. The poet behind the lens is Mr. Manoj Kumar Jain and the book has been crafted by Ogilvy and Mather. 



The WWF Signature Tiger Watch Collection - A limited edition of watches which men and women can wear as a reminder to save this majestic cat.



The uniqueness of the Tiger Series is that it is an ongoing programme and does not end with an event, on creating an awareness about protecting tigers.



 WWF- India in partnership with Government of India (Indian Council For Cultural Relations) will launch ‘Tiger Talk’ Exhibition from 1st April to 10th April at the ICCR, Azad Bhawan Gallery, ITO. Dr Karan Singh will inaugurate the exclusive exhibition on Unsung Heroes.



For further details, please contact: 

Pooja Dey	

011-41504831

pdey@wwfindia.net