WWF-India and Canon come together to conserve the Himalayas

Posted on 13 October 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








The photo contest ‘Framed’ received an overwhelming response from Indians all over the country.



© Nimisha/WWF Canon Photo Contest



New Delhi: WWF-India, in partnership with Canon is exhibiting some of the finest photographs representing the great Himalayas, following ‘Framed’, the online WWF-Canon Photography Contest held on the same theme from August 20 – September 30, 2009. The unique exhibition of the winning entries was launched at the Secretariat, WWF-India premises today. The exhibition will be on till October 16, 2009. The Photo Contest is a reflection of WWF-India’s commitment to conserve high altitude wetlands.



In India high altitude wetlands in four Himalayan states have been selected for conservation action by WWF-India. WWF is striving for sustainable management of these wetlands. Addressing wetlands in all the five Himalayan states, WWF is directing its efforts towards policy-formulation for better management practices, monitoring climate impacts, reducing the impacts of tourism and other anthropogenic activities and furthering demonstrations of community-based wetland management practices. 



The photo contest ‘Framed’ received an overwhelming response from Indians all over the country. Hundreds of entries poured in everyday from across the country. Three main and seven consolation prizes were awarded courtesy Canon. The enthusiasm generated by the contest in the social networking sites truly demonstrated a passionate love for the Himalayan environment across ages and cultures. 



The photographs, shot by a varied group of nature enthusiasts have been judged and scored by an expert panel of renowned judges – Nature filmmaker, Mike Pandey; Editor of Better Photography, K. Madhavan Pillai; and Wildlife Photographer, Mahesh Nair. 



 “Environmental conservation can operate through more ways than one, and photography is a fantastic medium to capture the admiration and concern of the masses in favour of conservation. Science cannot stay averse to culture and beauty which can go a long way in spreading awareness about the environment. Canon has been closely associated with our conservation efforts for a long time and together, we are proud to present this exhibition of award-winning pictures depicting the Himalayas,” says Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and Chief Executive Officer, WWF-India.  



Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Alok Bharadwaj, Senior Vice President- Canon India said, “Canon has launched the ‘GREEN THEME’ program where they are conducting on-line photo contests with different themes which depicts eco-friendliness and how we can save the environment. Under this umbrella Canon has already launched various programs and ‘Framed’ was one of the recent photo contest held in conjunction with the WWF. This was the contest focusing on the conservation of Himalayas.



For more information, please contact: 



Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications 

WWF-India

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

Email: ssam@wwfindia.net 

Ph- +91-11- 4351-6248 

4150-4797 



Anne-Marie P. Singh

Regional Communications Manager

Himalayan Glaciers, Rivers and High Altitude Wetlands Programme

(Pakistan, India, Nepal, Bhutan and China)

WWF-India

172/B, Lodi Estate, New Delhi - 110003

Tel: +91 - 11 - 43516202

E-mail: apsingh@wwfindia.net