Sachin Tendulkar pledges to ‘Switch Off’ For Earth Hour 2012

Posted on 13 March 2012
 
|
 

2 Comments








Sachin Tendulkar pledges to ‘Switch Off’ For Earth Hour 2012



© 



New Delhi: Cricket legend Sachin Tendulkar has joined hands with WWF-India and has pledged his support to the Earth Hour – WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action towards a better environment. 



As someone who inspires billions across India, the much loved sports star will be the face of Earth Hour 2012, encouraging individuals, organizations, institutions and groups, to be a part of the largest global environmental movement in history. The big switch off will be observed on 31st March 2012.



This year, Earth Hour aims to inspire citizens to take action for cities by switching off lights to make their city the Earth Hour Champion. The concept is simple: Whichever city receives maximum participation from its citizens, organizations, institutions and government will be declared the Earth Hour Champion. That city will set an example of exemplary achievement and the power of individual action behind a common cause. While six mega cities- Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore- are participating in the race the to become the Earth Hour Champion, WWF-India encourages participation from other Indian cities as well. To mobilize people to be a part of this initiative, WWF-India will also partner with other icons and public figures across the country.



Supporting the cause, Sachin Tendulkar expressed, “It is heartening to see how a single action of switching off lights for Earth Hour can bring the world together to pledge action towards a better environment. I am happy to be a part of this movement and encourage others to participate as well. 



Marking the fourth year of this journey, Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India, said, “Last year, Earth Hour encouraged individuals to adopt environment friendly practices in everyday life that would benefit the planet. In taking that message forward, Earth Hour 2012 aims to encourage entire cities to collectively shift towards sustainable development-by undertaking better land, water and energy management which will reduce the growing environmental impact of our urban lifestyles.”



Last year marked the start of a new phase for Earth Hour, as it went Beyond the Hour, encouraging individuals to switch off plus commit to a more sustainable lifestyle. A record 1.8 billion individuals across more than 5200 cities in 135 countries participated by switching off lights, and pledging to positive actions that benefit our planet. In India, Earth Hour reached more than 130 cities, including tier II and III, small towns and even villages. 



Every year, Earth Hour wishes to set new standards and break its own records of mass participation. From here on, Earth Hour will not only be an annual lights out event, but an opportunity for communities to be part of the world’s environmental solutions through responsible action all year round. 



For more information please contact:

Sonali Nandrajog

Communications Officer

WWF India

 sonali.nandrajog@wwf.panda.org

09871948044