WWF- India brings together major stakeholders from wood and handicraft industry

Posted on 30 May 2011
 
|
 

1 Comment








Wood carving on a handicraft item



© Malika Gupta/WWF-India



Jaipur: The Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN-India), an initiative of WWF-India, in association with the United Nations Information Centre for India and Bhutan (UNIC), Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts (EPCH), Federation of Rajasthan Handicrafts Exporters (FORHEX), and the Federation of Rajasthan Home Textiles & Handicrafts (FORTHE) organized a conference on ‘Responsible wood trade, forest certification and market links’ today. 



Jaipur, being a hub of export handicraft items, was chosen as an appropriate location for organizing the conference. A major objective of this project in India, supported by the European Commission under its SWITCH ASIA programme, is to build capacity among Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in wood processing sectors of Kerala, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh to provide certified sustainable forest products to national and international markets. 



This was the first time a major awareness program was planned for the SMEs in Jaipur where they were directly involved in discussions pertaining to responsible wood trade. The conference brought together the concerned central and state government departments on the same platform to help them understand and practice responsible wood trade which would eventually help improve their overall business as well as help sustain forests. 



The conference had participation from major stakeholders including SME wood processors, forest officials, timber traders, paper and pulp companies, retailers dealing with wood and non-wood products, government, and certification bodies. The objectives of the conference were to: 


Understand the various approaches and best practices of responsible wood trade in the context of increased environmental measures and legal compliances in both domestic and international markets 
Share the experiences of Indian Industry about sourcing of wood from forests and outside forest areas 
Create awareness on “credible forest certification” and the benefits to the key stake holders and build capacity among SME wood processors and traders to supply certified forest products

The conference was a three day series of meetings with industry experts and resource persons speaking on issues ranging from responsible sourcing of wood to forest certification, legal compliance and environmental regulation in the export market of India’s wood products. Improved design techniques and methods of reusing and recycling the wood waste that would help reduce wood consumption and hence reduce the cost, were also discussed. 



The conference witnessed participation of more than 200 SME representatives and provided a platform to eight wood trade and handicraft associations from three states across India to join hands in the promotion of responsible wood trade.



The speakers included Mr. V.S. Singh, IAS, Principal Chief Secretary, Forest & Environment, Govt. of Rajasthan, Mr. A.M.Singh, Deputy Inspector General of Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India, Mr. Lekhraj Maheshwari, Vice Chairman, Export Promotion Council for Handicrafts, Ministry of Textiles, Mr Dileep Baid, Vice Chairman, Confederation of Indian Industry, Rajasthan and others.



For more information, please contact:

Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India 172-B,

Lodi Estate 

New Delhi-3

email:ssam@wwfindia.net 



Malika Gupta

Communications Officer 

WWF- India 

172- B, Lodi Estate 

New Delhi-3