Global climate deal in reach with Cancun outcome

Posted on 13 December 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








Renewable Energy from Solar Panels



© Shruti Shukla/WWF-India



Cancun, Mexico: World governments on Saturday morning laid tentative
groundwork for a global agreement to fight climate change by making a series of
commitments to progress at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) COP16 negotiations in Cancun.


Governments agreed on a set of decisions that will
support further talks over the next year with the objective of a final outcome
at COP17 in Durban, South
Africa.
In response, Gordon Shepherd, head of WWF’s Global
Climate Initiative, issued the following statement:
“After Copenhagen governments came to Cancun bruised and facing public pressure to act on climate change.  It
was hoped that Cancun could establish a platform for progress,
and now countries are leaving with a renewed sense of goodwill and some sense
of purpose.” 
After two weeks of negotiations, governments made
measurable progress in several important areas, but a lot more work and some
big political challenges remain.  
“While they
weren’t able to decide on a second phase for the Kyoto Protocol, a process has been set in motion
to do so next year in Durban.
Major difficulties remain, however, with objecting countries, namely Japan and Russia, who will now face mounting pressures to
join the global community in extending the Kyoto Protocol. Countries under Kyoto recognised
more firmly that they need to reduce emissions 25 to 40% by 2020 and
acknowledged that their pledges for emission reductions are just a start and
much more is needed to reach the shared goal of limiting temperature increase
to 2°C.  Over the next year, they need to roll up their sleeves and be
prepared to work hard and creatively to close this gap.” 
“In a
critical move, countries reached agreement on a major sticking point within the
negotiations around a set of rules for the measurement, reporting and
verification of emission reductions and finance.” 
“Negotiators
established an adaptation committee and its functions, but the issues of
defining vulnerability and an international mechanism on loss and damage remain
unresolved.” 
“Governments
backed a new global “green fund”, but now need to identify innovative sources
of finance, such as levies on the currently unregulated international aviation
and shipping sector, that would both address 8% of global emissions while simultaneously
securing billions of dollars in long-term financing.”   
“The decision
addressing emissions from deforestation, also know as REDD+, did not include
everything we hoped for, but provides a sound foundation for moving a credible
REDD process forward and an agenda for the work ahead.” 
“The Mexican
presidency deserves much credit for the handling of the negotiations which
helped bring governments together, especially on thorny issues. They created a
negotiation atmosphere that was inclusive and efficient – and which directly
helped countries regain confidence in the UNFCCC process.” 
“It was also
clear from the outset that many countries had done the critical work at home
that allowed them to more confidently position themselves within a global
framework.  Strong domestic actions, such as Mexico’s national REDD+
vision and proposals for the United Kingdom to cut emissions by 60 percent from
1990 levels by 2030, also infused momentum into the talks.” 
But negotiators still have much to do in the coming
months to secure a global deal in Durban, South
Africa.
“We need to
see additional leadership from the European Union (EU) and other countries such
as India and China on the legal form of an outcome. The EU and
other countries need to also increase their mitigation commitments to close the
gap between current emissions reduction pledges and what is required to reach
their shared goal of limiting global warming to below 2°C.” 
“The United States got off relatively easy in Cancun, failing to agree to robust reporting and review for its own actions.
To build trust in the year ahead, the US should embark on a clear process to pull
together its domestic efforts to reduce emissions into a transparent action
plan that will put it on the road to a clean energy economy. The United States should then come to Durban ready to join the world in support of a
legally binding agreement.”         
“We also need
countries to go home and continue to develop national plans to curb climate
change.  They must bring these actions into the international process if
we are to truly secure an agreement in South Africa that meaningfully addresses dangerous
climate change and helps vulnerable communities adapt.” 
For further information:
Steve Ertel, WWF, steve.ertel@wwfus.org ,
+1 202-460-4641
Ian Morrison, WWF International, imorrison@wwfint.org ,
+41 79 874 6853
About WWF
WWF is one of the world's largest and most
respected independent conservation organizations, with over 5 million
supporters and a global network active in over 100 countries.  WWF's
mission is to stop the degradation of the earth's natural environment and to
build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature, by conserving the
world's biological diversity, ensuring that the use of renewable natural
resources is sustainable, and promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful
consumption.