Wildlife Week Celebrations in Moradabad conclude on an assured bright future for Ramganga

Posted on 07 October 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments


Moradabad: The finale of the Wildlife Week saw cheering faces of the students of Moradabad, at the prize distribution ceremony spearheaded by the District Magistrate of Moradabad, Shri Sanjay Kumar (IAS) along with senior Forest Department officials who shared token of appreciation with the students for their active participation. The week long activities which included, poster, poetry, slogan writing and elocution competitions along with a quiz on Gangetic Dolphins started from October 1 till October 7, to commemorate the Wildlife Week in the city of Moradabad. These fun filled activities were organized to accelerate the awareness on the conservation of Ramganga river and wildlife conservation in the city, under WWF-India’s ‘Ramganga for Life, Life for Ramganga’ campaign.



Kumar Shaurya Rastogi of Chitragupt Inter College bagged the first prize for the elocution competition. Poster competition saw Kumari Shaili Singh of Boni Public School receiving the first prize and Kumari. Monica of Kasturba Gandhi won the first prize in the poetry competition. The girls’ team from the Kasturba Gandhi schools won the first prize in the quiz on Gangetic Dolphin. During the seven day long celebrations, the students also pledged to become ‘friends of the river’ or Ramganga Mitra and work towards its ecological wellbeing.



WWF-India’s Rivers for Life programme initiated Ramganga’s revival strategy in the city of Moradabad, in partnership with its District Administration. The revival strategy for the river envisions for communities, industries and Government to work together to bring the river back to life (improved ecological health). As part of the restoration plan, a mass awareness communication campaign has been devised with the focus on engaging diverse stakeholders to aspire for taking complete ownership, thereby becoming Ramganga Mitra.



“As we all know that today is the last day of the week long celebrations of the Wildlife Week. However, I would like to add that lets mark today as the beginning of a series of conservation activities which would involve young adults and students for Ramganga’s revival and to make our very own Eco Park (Deer Park) even more useful. If all of you would like to see Dolphins, Ghariyals, Mahaseer in our very own Ramganga river then, all of us need to work together with District Administration & WWF-India to achieve a shared vision for Ramganga. Again I would request you all to pledge today that we would reduce our consumption of polythene, would plant one sapling each year and ensure the conservation of water at our respective households!” said Shri Sanjay Kumar, IAS, District Magistrate.



Schools students witnessed WWF-India’s wildlife movies screenings, including a documentary film on Ramganga, painting competition, poster making, and elocution competition on the theme of Aquatic Wildlife Conservation in Ramganga during the week long celebrations. “Awareness generated through these fun filled activities has been hugely successful in creating interest on aquatic wildlife existing in Ramganga and to unite to work towards its conservation & revival”, added Mr. Munne Ali, Basic Shiksha Adhikari, Moradabad Administration.



*WWF-India’s Rivers for Life programme is supported by HSBC Water Programme.