PV Sindhu joins WWF-India as ‘Goodwill Ambassador for Earth Hour India’ uniting millions to ‘Give an Hour’ for the planet

Posted on 07 March 2024







PV Sindhu



© PV Sindhu




The largest global environmental movement, Earth Hour, returns for its 18th edition providing 60 minutes of global unity around the world in celebration of our planet. 
Earth Hour 2024 will be marked on 23rd March 2024, from 8:30 pm onwards 
In 2023, over 410,000 hours were given to our planet by supporters in 190 countries and territories, representing 90% of the planet, making it the Biggest Hour for Earth.  

New Delhi, 7th March 2024 – Olympian and Indian sports icon PV Sindhu joins Earth Hour India 2024 as a Goodwill Ambassador, lending her support for our one shared home. Having played against some of the world’s best players on-court, she says that climate change is the most daunting opponent she has faced off-court. It’s time we all come together to Give an Hour for Earth, spending 60 minutes doing something - anything - positive for our planet.

 

Since its creation in 2007, Earth Hour has been known for its “lights off” moment. WWF’s Earth Hour (23rd March 2024, 8:30 pm local time), the world’s largest grassroots environmental movement, serves as a beacon of positivity, hope, and inspiration and to leverage the collective power of individuals and communities.

 

PV Sindhu, Goodwill Ambassador Earth Hour India 2024, says, “I’m joining WWF-India’s Earth Hour by making strides towards a more sustainable lifestyle and spending more time in nature. I'm giving an hour for Earth by stepping out of the gym and working out in nature once a week. Join me this Earth Hour to create a more hopeful and resilient future by doing something positive for the planet. Let's make this the Biggest Hour for Earth.”

 

The "Give an hour for Earth" call-to-action makes participation even easier and fun, encouraging individuals not only to switch off lights as a symbolic collective act, but also to spend 60 minutes to do good for the planet while doing something they love.

 

Sharing his thoughts, Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary-General and CEO of WWF-India, said, “Every year, on Earth Hour, people worldwide voluntarily switch off non-essential lights for one hour. It is a movement that has continued to inspire and mobilise people globally, reminding us of our collective responsibility to create a more hopeful and resilient future for our planet. WWF-India has spearheaded Earth Hour in this country since 2007 and continues to make it bigger every year. We are honoured to have PV Sindhu as ‘Goodwill Ambassador of Earth Hour India 2024’ and applaud her commitment to take conscious actions to contribute to a better tomorrow.”

 

Note to editors

The Hour Bank, the new online interactive tool of Earth Hour, invites everyone, everywhere, to find the most enjoyable ways to give an hour for Earth. Whether it is a mindful walk through the woods, cooking a sustainable dish, learning to grow veggies, or engaging in a home scavenger hunt to identify and swap out unsustainable products with eco-friendly alternatives, there are myriad options to choose from. The Hour Bank provides a list of activities and events based on participants' lifestyle interests and preferences, from food and fitness to art and entertainment.

 

Supporting assets

Earth Hour India 2024 Website
Earth Hour 2024 Official Video
Earth Hour 2024 Give an Hour Call To Action Video
Hour Bank 2024

 

About WWF-India 

WWF-India is committed to creating and demonstrating practical solutions that help conserve India's ecosystems and rich biodiversity. With a conservation journey spanning over 50 years, WWF-India works towards finding science-based and sustainable solutions. Our holistic and integrated approach assists in addressing challenges at the interface of development and conservation. WWF-India is part of the WWF network, with offices in over 100 countries. We work in different geographical regions pan-India through state and field offices. The uniqueness lies in the interconnectedness of our work and its impact across thematic areas- including conservation of key wildlife species, management of their habitats, rivers and wetlands, climate change adaptation, driving sustainable solutions for business and agriculture, and empowering local communities as conservation stewards. WWF-India also works to combat illegal wildlife trade and bring environmental education to students through outreach and awareness campaigns.  

 

For more details, please visit our website and social media pages: 

http://www.wwfindia.org  

Facebook, X, Instagram, LinkedIn, YouTube 

 

For queries please contact: 

Komal Chaudhary

Senior Manager, Media & PR

kchaudhary@wwfindia.net