More than 700 students from Banasthali Vidyapith created the human Earth Hour logo to celebrate the Biggest Hour for Earth

Posted on 24 March 2023










© WWF-India



Rajasthan: Banasthali Vidyapith is the world's largest residential university for women's education, nurturing women for leadership roles in all walks of life since 1935. The ‘Banasthali story’ has no parallel across the globe. Today it has 16,000 girl students on its 850-acre campus, situated amidst rural settings in Tonk District of Rajasthan. It offers programmes from nursery to the doctoral level preparing enlightened citizens with a strong value base.  



700 plus students pledged for the planet by creating the number ‘60’, symbolizing the hour and spreading the message for Earth Hour 2023. The activity took place on-campus, requesting all to join the Biggest Hour for Earth and dedicate 60 minutes to doing something positive towards the environment.  



Prof. Harsh Purohit, Dean, Faculty of Management Studies and Faculty of Law, Banasthali Vidyapith said, “Banasthali Vidyapith is happy to collaborate with WWF-India for its initiative of Earth Hour. Sustainability is an integral part of ‘Bharatiya’ culture and civilization. It is true that the collective efforts of every member of society have the potential to bring desired positive outcomes for the environment. At the same time, we can all bring change, and therefore we must continue to consciously contribute towards mother nature.” 



Note to the Editor: 

Ricky Kej is the Face of Earth Hour India 2023

Earth Hour India 2023 jingle by Nakash Aziz

Goodwill Ambassadors for Earth Hour India

Earth Hour campaign film

Earth Hour India website

Earth Hour short video



About Earth Hour 

Earth Hour is WWF's flagship global environmental movement. Born in Sydney in 2007, Earth Hour has grown to become the world's largest grassroots movements for the environment, inspiring individuals, communities, businesses and organizations in more than 190 countries and territories to take tangible environmental action. Historically, Earth Hour has focused on the climate crisis, but more recently, Earth Hour has strived to also bring the pressing issue of nature loss to the fore. The aim is to create an unstoppable movement for nature, as it did when the world came together to tackle climate change. The movement recognizes the role of individuals in creating solutions to the planet’s most pressing environmental challenges and harnesses the collective power of its millions of supporters to drive change.