INDIA’S FAIR & COMPREHENSIVE INDC

Posted on 02 October 2015
 
|
 

0 Comments








Climate Savers is WWF’s global flagship programme to inspire a shift to a climate smart economy



© WWF



IMPLEMENTATION ROADMAP EQUALLY CRUCIAL

 

New Delhi:  Amidst the heightened anticipation, India announced its much awaited intended nationally determined contribution (INDC).  The INDC includes all the key elements, including that of adaptation, mitigation, technology transfer, finance, and capacity building. The key highlights from the Indian submission are the reduction of emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 per cent by 2030 from 2005 level, 40 per cent cumulative electric power installed capacity to be achieved from non-fossil fuel-based energy resources, and an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent to be created through additional forest and tree cover in the same time frame. A unique feature of the INDC is the emphasis on the changes required in lifestyles globally that would reduce dependence on energy and promote sustainable consumption choices.

 

India’s position in the global negotiations holds great significance as it is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change. Given the fact that India is the fourth largest GHG emitter in the world, it has been under constant pressure to mitigate its emissions, which is in its own longer term interest as well. However, it is at a stage wherein the sustainable development agenda is equally important in order to provide basic services such as access to energy, safe drinking water, education, health, sanitation facilities as well as overall infrastructure development. It is therefore laudable that India has chosen to emphasize on aspects such as renewable energy, energy efficiency and afforestation. Indian INDC seeks to better adapt to climate change by enhancing investments in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate change, particularly agriculture, water resources, Himalayan region and coastal regions. This is particularly important as a large section of the population is dependent on climate sensitive sectors for livelihood. India, thus, reiterates its commitment to pursue an equitable, inclusive and sustainable development strategy.



Responding to the announcement, Mr Ravi Singh, SG & CEO, WWF-India said, “The country’s ambition of increasing the share of non-fossil fuel-based power capacity to 40 per cent by 2030 reverberates with WWF-India's vision of Renewable Energy. However, the critical aspect is to formulate a concrete action plan for implementation, which would help realize these targets. Additionally, planning and implementation of climate adaptation actions to enhance resilience and reduce vulnerability have been identified as a priority area. We see this as a positive declaration, with a spectrum of actions covering mitigation, finance, technology transfer, capacity building, R&D, and knowledge creation that would involve efforts by different stakeholders at the national as well as international level.”



While the announcements are ambitious and comprehensive, it is pertinent that the international community steps forward in fulfilling their commitments related to finance, technology and capacity building efforts. At the domestic level, it is essential that all stakeholders come together to help realize the multiple initiatives rolled out towards a low-carbon sustainable development pathway. In particular, renewable energy and energy efficiency roll-out has to become a people’s movement which would go a long way in tackling not only climate change, but also pressing environmental problems such as air quality and the associated severe health impacts.



The stage is set for a climate smart future. Let’s hope we have a great show!



For further information, contact: 

Dr TS Panwar  tspanwar@wwfindia.net  Ph: 011-4351 6245

Divya Joy  djoy@wwfindia.net  Ph: 011-4150 4823