WWF Lifetime Conservation Award to Shri Fateh Singh Rathore

Posted on 16 February 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments


Honour for a true champion for wild tigers of India



WWF is privileged to present the WWF Lifetime Conservation Award to Shri Fatehsingh Rathore in recognition of his outstanding contribution to wildlife conservation and for being a true champion for wild tigers of India. 



This prestigious award is being presented by WWF India on behalf of the global WWF family, with more than 5 million supporters distributed throughout 5 continents, and projects actively running in more than 100 countries. 



It was presented today at the Sawai Man Singh Convention Centre, Jaipur.



Shri Fateh Singh Rathore, or Fathji, as he is fondly called by tiger lovers, was born in 1938 in Rajasthan in a Rajput family. After joining the Rajasthan Forest Department, Fathji worked in many field areas, including Ranthambhore and Sariska and went to the Wildlife Institute of India to do a diploma course in Wildlife Management under the legendary Saroj Raj Choudhury. He spent many years as Field Director of Ranthambhore and was one of the few handpicked by Kailash Sankhala, the then director of Project Tiger, to be part of the first Project Tiger team. Widely acknowledged for his field knowledge, passion and a no nonsense attitude towards field conservation, Fathji has been a role model to tiger lovers across India and beyond. He now lives in Sawai Madhopur near Ranthambore National Park, where he worked with distinction for several years; his single minded drive to protect the park still strong as ever. 



Fathji’s association with WWF India goes back over 35 years and we are honoured to acknowledge this living legend for his singular contribution to tigers and Ranthambore. 



On this occasion, Jim Leape, Director General of WWF International, has also complimented Shri Fateh Singh Rathore, saying “Yours has always been a strong voice for the cause of the tiger. More importantly, it has also inspired generations to take up the cause of conservation and of the tiger”.



For photographs and further details, please contact:

Dr. Parikshit Gautam

Director – Branches and Special Projects, WWF-India

Email: pgautam@wwfindia.net

Office direct: +91 11 41504820, Mobile: +91 9818928248