India’s wild tiger numbers continue to grow

Posted on 10 April 2023










© GTF/NTCA/FEWMD/WWF-India




India has more than doubled the number of wild tigers since 2010 (1411) to 3167 individuals according to the results of the All-India Tiger Estimation, 2022 released today. 
The increase is a result of significant political and civil society support for conserving India’s national animal, dedicated efforts from the central government and state governments, critical support from scientific institutions and NGOs and involvement of local communities in conservation in many areas. 

New Delhi, India - According to the results of the All-India Tiger Estimation (AITE), 2022 released today by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, the population of wild tigers in the country is estimated to be a minimum of 3,167, out of which 3,080 are unique individuals. This is an increase of 619 tigers from the 2018 AITE, where the number was 2,461. A target to double wild tigers globally, also known as Tx2, was set by governments in 2010 at the St. Petersburg International summit on tiger conservation, and India’s tiger numbers continue to contribute significantly to this.



The extensive survey involved 641,449 km2 of foot surveys, 32,588 camera counts and 641,102 person days. The survey was led by the National Tiger Conservation Authority, and the Wildlife Institute of India, in collaboration with State Forest Departments. WWF-India was an implementing partner in the survey.

 

While the future of India’s tigers across vast landscapes has always been a challenge in the face of numerous threats, the latest estimate indicates the relevance of the conservation measures that have been implemented by the Government, Global Tiger Forum, WWF and other organisations working in the sector.

 

Dr. Rajesh Gopal, Secretary General of Global Tiger Forum said, “Concerted efforts from tiger range countries are really encouraging. The wild tiger status has registered an upward trend in some countries, and others are working hard to further strengthen their efforts. We compliment all for their good work when the going is tough. As always we stand committed to work with sovereign tiger countries on the tiger agenda.”

 

Mr Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO WWF-India, “Project Tiger was conceptualised with the goal of restoring tiger populations and protecting their habitats in India. Today, after five decades, Project Tiger is recognised as one of the most successful species-specific conservation programmes globally. The current minimum estimate of 3,167 tigers in the country, as announced by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, epitomises the commitment of the government, local communities and concerned citizens towards protecting our national animal. And to keep this momentum going and see growth and stability in tiger numbers, this exceptional conservation programme will require continued dedication of combined efforts and management of human-wildlife interactions.”

 

NOTES TO EDITOR

 

About Global Tiger Forum 

The Global Tiger Forum (GTF) is an international, intergovernmental organisation of tiger range countries for conservation of wild tigers across their range. The Forum works closely with tiger range countries on advocacy, capacity building, technical support, evolving innovative partnerships across several conservation themes. The GTF, as an implementing arm of the Global Tiger Initiative Council also coordinates and reviews the Global Tiger Recovery  Program (GTRP).

 

About WWF 

WWF is an independent conservation organisation, with over 30 million supporters and a global network active in over 100 countries. WWF's mission is to stop the degradation of the Earth's natural environment and to build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature, by conserving the world's biological diversity, ensuring that the use of renewable natural resources is sustainable, and promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful consumption. Visit www.panda.org/news for the latest news and media resources and follow us on Twitter @WWF_media.

 

Why tigers matter 

As the world’s largest cat and an apex predator, tigers play a significant role in the structure and function of the ecosystem on which both humans and wildlife rely. They are a “landscape” species, needing large areas with diverse habitats, free from human disturbance and rich in prey. Success or failure means more than securing the future of a single iconic species – it sets a precedent for how we will consider and prioritise the health of nature in global development and in a changing climate going forward. For more information see: tigers.panda.org

 

For media requests, please contact:

Somreet Bhattacharya | WWF-India | sbhattacharya@wwfindia.net

Jenny Roberts | WWF-Tigers Alive | jroberts@wwf-tigers.org