WWF-India hosts the Principal’s Conference on Building Bridges to a Sustainable Future

Posted on 12 December 2016
 
|
 

0 Comments











© WWF-India



New Delhi: Recognising the role of education and educational institutions as important constituencies in influencing children and teachers to take positive action for the planet, WWF-India today organized the Building Bridges to a Sustainable Future conference for school principals and teachers.

 

Attended by participants across 56 schools of Delhi NCR, the conference aimed at building awareness in teachers, principals and school authorities about the need for environment education and recognizing their crucial role in inspiring children to spearhead this movement for change. The conference emphasized the need for collective action and shared commitment for a greener tomorrow. The conference was also attended by representatives from UNESCO, NCERT, NUEPA, , TERI, CSE, and CEE, NGOs, ministry officials, and government representatives.

 

Dr. Sabata, Sr. Scientific Officer, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, offering the keynote address at the conference said, “it’s not just about awareness but about bringing about behavioural change in students towards a sustainable lifestye.”

 

The conference also saw the preview launch of One Planet Academy, an online resource platform for teachers, schools and students, developed by WWF-India in partnership with Capgemini. The event also saw the release of WWF-India’s manual for schools, Building Bridges to a Sustainable Future: A Handbook for 21st Century Schools. The handbook brings to light the importance of nature conservation and the role of education in building a sustainable future.

 

Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said that Building Bridges to a Sustainable Future’, is a cumulation of all the years of experience, bringing together WWF-India's approach to conservation and education as two essential pillars that need to complement each other. Looking at strengthening the capacity of schools and teachers, the manual is a whole-school approach aiming to blend information, awareness and action and enabling our educational institutions to become environment friendly and sowing the seeds of conservation in young minds for positive action.

 

For more details:

Rituparna Sengupta

Senior Manager, Campaigns, Brand and Media                                                   

rsengupta@wwfindia.net                                                            

011-41504797  

 

Radhika Suri

Director,

Environment Education, WWF-India

Email: rsuri@wwfindia.net

+011- 4150 -4792