South Asia wildlife enforcement network (SAWEN) formally launched at Paro

Posted on 31 January 2011
 
|
 

0 Comments








(Left to Right): Mr S.P. Yadav, Joint-Director National Tiger Conservation Authority and Head of the India Delegation; Lyonpo (Dr) Pema Gyamtsho, Honourable Minister for Agriculture and Forests, Bhutan; Mr Samir Sinha, Head of TRAFFIC India



© TRAFFIC



Paro, Bhutan: The South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network has been formally launched at an inter-governmental meeting hosted by the Royal Government of Bhutan, thereby opening a new chapter in regional cooperation in South Asia for strengthening wildlife law enforcement. It was agreed to base the SAWEN Secretariat in Nepal.



Illegal wildlife trade is a form of trans-national organized crime that threatens many iconic species across the world. South Asia, home to a diverse network of natural ecosystems and varied biodiversity, is especially vulnerable to such threats. Apart from key species such as tigers, elephants and rhinos, there are a variety of medicinal plants, timber, marine species, birds and reptiles are threatened by illegal exploitation and trafficking. 



To counter such threats, the eight countries of South Asia have come together to establish an organized and co-ordinated body—the South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network (SAWEN). 



“SAWEN will help Bhutan to link up with authorities and officials across the region to share good practices and resources to co-operate and co-ordinate actions to apprehend poachers and traffickers,” said Lyonpo (Dr) Pema Gyamtsho, Hon. Minister for Agriculture and Forests, Bhutan, at the opening of the expert group’s meeting. 



In May, 2010, the Government of Nepal hosted the First meeting of the South Asia Experts Group on Illegal Wildlife Trade which prepared an operational roadmap for the establishment of SAWEN. Continuing with the priorities identified during the Nepal meeting, Bhutan in collaboration with the Interim SAWEN Secretariat hosted the ‘Second Meeting of the South Asia Experts Group on Illegal Wildlife Trade’ on 29-30 January, 2011 in Paro, Bhutan. 



Shri Jairam Ramesh, Hon. Minister of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India said, “The establishment of SAWEN is crucial, timely and much needed step forward to institutionalize the collaborative efforts of members nations in controlling wildlife crime in the region. India had taken the lead in flagging the need to control wildlife crime at various forums leading to the establishment of SAWEN”.



He further commented, “I solemnly take this opportunity to reiterate our support and commitment to work together to protect our previous natural resources from illegal pillage and plunder. At this occasion when SAWEN has been formally launched in Bhutan, I thank all members of SWEN for their vision and commitment to work together to help protect the natural wealth of the region.” 



Relevant focal persons and experts from the governments of member countries, inter-governmental organizations including the CITES Secretariat and INTERPOL, and non-governmental organizations including WWF and TRAFFIC participated in the two day meeting. The critical points decided by the Experts Group during the meeting were:-

-	An agreed action-oriented work plan for joint activities, some of which will begin immediately and which will continue to develop further as the network gathers strength; 

-	Establishing a SAWEN Secretariat, which will be hosted by the Government of Nepal; 

-	An agreed governance and operational structure for SAWEN; 

-	The need for strategic collaboration on communications and fundraising. 



The meeting was organized by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Royal Government of Bhutan with technical support from TRAFFIC and WWF Bhutan. TRAFFIC, the wildlife trade monitoring network has been providing technical support for the SAWEN process since its inception and acknowledges the generous funding support of the US Department of State. 



“With the formal operation of SAWEN beginning henceforth, the countries of the region have now reached a milestone in their efforts to counter the spectre of illegal wildlife trade,” said Samir Sinha, TRAFFIC’s programme head in India. “This is an essential piece of a collective effort to conserve a region of outstanding biological richness and diversity.”



For further information contact: 

Dilpreet B. Chhabra, Communications Officer- TRAFFIC India; dchhabra@wwfindia.net 

Tel: 011-41504786 ; 43516290



Vijay Moktan, Conservation Director; vmoktan@wwfbhutan.org.bt 

Tel: +975 2 323528 Fax: +975 2 323518



Samir Sinha, Head, TRAFFIC – India 

ssinha@wwfindia.net 



James Compton, Asia-Pacific Senior Programme Director, TRAFFIC

james.compton@traffic.org 



Background Notes

SAWEN has its origins in 2008, when the environment ministers of eight countries of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka met in Jaipur, India. It was here, that the member delegates announced their undying support for the formation of a SAWEN and a South Asia Experts Group on Illegal Wildlife Trade. Regional cooperation on ‘wildlife conservation and combating illegal trade in wildlife and bio-resources’ was also included as a focal component in the scope of work under the Convention on Cooperation on Environment in South Asia, proposed by India during the Environment Ministers’ meeting held in India in October 2009. This was endorsed during the 16th South Asian Association for Regional Co‐Operation (SAARC) summit held in Thimphu, Bhutan in April 2010. 



On the occasion of the 2nd Meeting of the South Asia Experts Group on Illegal Wildlife trade, the representatives of the countries of South Asia, in the spirit of regional co-operation and collaboration have officially launched the South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network (SAWEN). 



TRAFFIC, the wildlife trade monitoring network, works to ensure that trade in wild plants and animals is not a threat to the conservation of nature. TRAFFIC is a joint programme of IUCN and WWF. TRAFFIC works to support government agencies in law enforcement networking across Asia and globally to combat illegal wildlife trade. Technical assistance across the enforcement continuum, including facilitation of inter-governmental dialogues, engaging the judicial sector, and working with WWF to improve linkages from national level agencies to field-based rangers, is provided on demand to member countries of the ASEAN and South Asia Wildlife Enforcement networks, as well as to China and its immediate neighbours.

In India, TRAFFIC works as a programme division of WWF-India.