Going green with ‘Earth Hour Fair’

Posted on 16 March 2013
 
|
 

1 Comment











© WWF-India



An exhibition-cum-sale of recycled products and solar powered home appliances at Dilli Haat
New Delhi: WWF-India, in association with Canara HSBC Oriental Bank of Commerce Life Insurance and the Delhi Government has organized the Earth Hour Fair at the cultural and handicraft hub of the city ‘Dilli Haat’ on the 16th and 17th of March 2013. The ‘Earth Hour Fair’ is an exhibition-cum-sale of recycled products and solar powered home appliances which can be used every day at home. It is an effort to promote “everyday green products” that individuals can opt for and move towards a more sustainable lifestyle. The event is part of the run up to the Earth Hour 2013, the people’s initiative to curb climate change by switching off non-essential lights for one hour on 23rd March from 8:30 – 9:30 PM



The recycled products on display will range from accessories such as flex bags, wallets, mobile and laptop cases, to stationery such as diaries, greeting cards, and paper photo frames. WWF-India is also organizing live counters and workshops where organizations will demonstrate the life cycle of each recycled product, and what it was made from. Additionally, organizers will also showcase how household waste material can be used to create fashion accessories and artifacts. The solar product manufacturing companies will hold live demonstrations of how solar powered household appliances work, as well as an installation of solar panels.



Talking about the Earth Hour Fair, Ms. Aarti Khosla, Head – Campaigns, WWF-India, said, “This fair aims to demonstrate how it is practical and very much possible for individuals to change their consumption patterns, and make conscious choices towards living a sustainable lifestyle. Today, organizations working towards the common goal of providing environment friendly solutions for consumers have come together at the Earth Hour Fair to demonstrate options of recycling, up-cycling, and making the shift to renewable energy. It is in line with our efforts to mainstream renewable energy as the new normal.'' 



The companies that have set up their stalls at the Earth Hour Fair include Green the Gap, People’s Project, ACT (Action Centre for Transformation), Trash to Cash (Prabhat), Use Me Works, WWF Nature Shop and Solar products manufacturing companies like Gautam Polymers and Solar Universe. 



Ms Nonika Raj Kumar, AVP – Corporate Communications & CSR, Canara HSBC Oriental Bank of Commerce Life Insurance said, “Climate change is undoubtedly the biggest environmental challenge of our times. As responsible citizens of this planet, it is essential for us to act now by choosing a sustainable way of life. It is heartening to see the innovations for creating usable products from things that we deem useless. We are confident that such efforts will play an integral role in the transition to a low-carbon economy, critical for the conservation of our environment and survival of all species.”



The message of Earth Hour 2013 encourages individuals, organizations and governments to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time, Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM and calls for individuals and organizations to adopt simple renewable energy solutions in their lifestyle and business operations to more towards a sustainable future. Governments are encouraged to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy. In 2012, more than 150 Indian cities participated in Earth Hour. Globally, Earth Hour reached more than 5200 cities from 150 countries. This year, the campaign has received the support of Telugu actor Shruti Hassan, Tamil actor, Jiiva, former cricketer Venkatesh Prasad, Bengali actor Parambrata and boxer Mary Kom.