Acoustic survey of Dolphins yields promising results

Posted on 23 February 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments








The rare and endangered Ganges River Dolphin is facing severe threats due to habitat fragmentation and loss of prey base underwater



© Sandeep Behera/WWF-India



A multi-organization team under the aegis of the MoU of WWF-India with University of Tokyo has conducted a series of unique experiments to aid in the detection and survey of Ganges dolphins in Narora region. This is the second visit after last year’s experiments in February 2007. 



In the previous experiments, the group had checked the feasibility of conducting acoustic surveys of the river dolphins and also to understand the river environment on the basis of the technology developed earlier for the Irrawaddy dolphins in Chilika lagoon. The motivation of the experiments is to directly contribute towards the conservation of Ganges dolphins by using advanced day-night observation systems. 



The main objectives of the experiments conducted this year were explained by Prof. Bahl of Indian institute of Technology, Delhi, “This year the scope of our work was to carry out deployment of a specially designed six-hydrophone system which can observe the underwater behaviour of dolphins in a large area of the river and to send the observed data over the commercial mobile networks to a web-server, test a hand-held compact dolphin detector, and to carry out an automated survey of dolphins in a river stretch by towing compact A-Tag data loggers.” 



Prof Ura of University of Tokyo and Mr. Kojima from KDDI explained the results, “The six-hydrophone system could successfully detect dolphin activity during day and night over large distances even when visual observations would normally not be feasible. The dolphin data was also successfully transmitted to web server over the mobile phone network. Compact hand-held dolphin audio-based click detector was also tried for the first time. This device can be operated from a moving boat and is a convenient aid for the user to quickly locate the presence of dolphins. 



Dr. Akamatsu discussed the A-tag performance: The A-Tag data logger was towed behind a boat to conduct dolphin population surveys. The dolphin counts by this method matched very well with the known dolphin population using visual surveys. The use of A-tag makes dolphin census an easy task compared to visual survey requiring several trained observers. The team made a detailed presentation on the results of the several experiments conducted. 



Dr. Sandeep Behera, Freshwater Species Coordinator, WWF-India spoke about the future possibilities: This year’s work has demonstrated the enormous utility of hydrophone technology applied to the observation of river dolphins. Real-time dolphin observation is possible by establishing a network of acoustic observatories along the river and can also be presented in real-time anywhere in the world via the internet. In addition, rapid detection of dolphins and dolphin census can be carried by use of compact technologies such as A-tag data loggers. Efforts will be intensified to introduce these technologies on a regular basis. 



The team of experts who conducted the acoustic survey of Dolphins: 



Indian Experts: 

Dr. Sandeep Behera, WWF-India 

Prof. R. Bahl, IIT Delhi 

Mr. Jatin Sharma, Kritikal Solutions Pvt Ltd 



Japanese Experts: 

Prof Tamaki Ura, Mr Takashi Sakamaki, Ms. Harumi Sugimatsu and Mr. PV Unnikrishnan, University of Tokyo 

Mr. Junichi Kojima, KDDI Labs 

Dr. Tomonari Akamatsu, National Fisheries Agency Japan 

Ms. Yukiko Yamamoto, Tokyo Institute of Technology



(Ends) 



For more information please contact: 

Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager 

WWF-India 

Tel: +91-11-4150 4797, E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net