Shruti Hassan pledges her support to Earth Hour 2013

Posted on 07 March 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Shruti Hassan pledges her support to Earth Hour 2013



© WWF-India



New Delhi: Tollywood celebrity Shruti Hassan has joined hands with WWF-India to pledge her support to the Earth Hour – WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action on climate change. She will be a part of Earth Hour- now the largest global environmental movement that enables individuals, organizations, governments and groups to show support for policies and practices that balance development and environmental concerns.



The message of Earth Hour 2013 is to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time, Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM, and calls for:

Individuals to adopt household products powered by renewable energy;
Organizations to adopt renewable energy solutions to run their business operations and production processes;
Governments to promote policies favorable to the production and uptake of renewable energy

The speed and scale of climate change, fuelled by ever increasing consumption of the Earth’s resources, is impacting the whole world. Unless we make efforts to transform our energy production systems to renewables, as far as possible, we will enter into a trajectory of climate instability and energy insecurity that will affect each one of us. Every individual has the power to make this transition possible by taking small, yet significant steps. 



Reinforcing her support to this cause, Shruti Hassan said, “It is my honor to be associated with such an inspiring and meaningful cause like the Earth Hour. If we aspire for a clean & healthy environment, and for cities that develop sustainably, then we should be aware of our part as well, and be willing to change our own behaviour. Imagine the difference that it will make when all of us get together”.



Speaking on the occasion, Farida Tampal, Andhra Pradesh State Director, WWF-India said, “Earth Hour has now become much more than a symbolic action. It has evolved into a self-perpetuating movement driving real actions, big and small, that are changing the world we live in. Taking the legacy forward, Earth Hour 2013 aims to encourage a shift towards sustainable and renewable energy



Earth Hour has already successfully united hundreds of millions of people around the world as it strives to gain the support of more and more people.