Musical a hit among youth

Posted on 01 July 2008
 
|
 

0 Comments


New Delhi, July 1, 2008: A musical play – The Day Unville Found S – organized by WWF-India in association with Kalasmriti productions was an instant hit between young children and parents alike. The play was organized as part of Vanmahoutsav Day Celebrations of WWF-India and was acted, produced and directed by children and young adults not older than 25!



Staged at the India Habitat Centre, the play drew standing ovation from patrons who represented a diverse mix – school and college students, parents, art lovers, WWF-India supporters and media. 



The play was directed by Mr. Arjun Khera, director of the famous play Ghasiram Kotwal -at Hanover University, Neindersachsen, Germany who has also been the recipient of various awards from Centre Stage Pune, Pune Drama Association and All India workshop for contemporary drama and folk theatre. 



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, in his words of encouragement to the young artists said, “Planet Earth is under stress - its renewable resources are being over drawn, the human footprint is increasing beyond the earth's capacity to sustain. We need a sustainable way to secure the future and one that leads to a proper balance and harmony of humans with nature.”



He added, “For this to become a reality, our younger generations – like you - have to own this concept of harmony and mainstream Nature in your consciousness.” 



Elaborating about the play, Arjun Khera, said, “The musical attempts to take us in the world of darkness, where human kind is bereft of any soft emotions in the dying natural world… It takes us to the pinnacle of the rising concrete jungle. It juxtaposes two philosophies a future of rising global economy leading to surfeit. Human-made environment and the diminishing communion with nature, wherein we lose our own natural identity”



(Ends)



For more information, please contact:

Rashmi Asthana, Environment Education Programme, WWF-India

Tel: 4150 4790, E-mail: rasthana@wwfindia.net



Anshuman Atroley, Communications, WWF-India

Tel: 4150 4797, E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net