Promote Sustainable Wood Trade

Posted on 25 September 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








Dr. P J Dilip Kumar, Director General of Forests & Special Secretary to Govt. of India being given the FSC certified memento



© WWF-India



WWF-India, MOEF and Industry call for use of certified wood products

WWF-India today along with other stakeholders participated in the Global FSC (forest stewardship council) day celebrations. FSC is a leading international non governmental body, ensuring forest resources are managed to meet the social, economic and ecological needs of present and future generations. The FSC label offers people the opportunity to buy products from environmentally appropriate, socially beneficial and economically viable managed forests  



The event was organized as a part of the WWF’s Global Forest and Trade Network (GFTN) initiative which works towards promoting credible forest certification in the country. On this occasion FSC India and WWF India/GFTN presented a memento to Dr P J Dilip Kumar, Director General of Forests & Special Secretary to Govt. of India in New Delhi. This wooden memento has been manufactured by an Indian company that has secured FSC certification. Indian companies have secured 132 FSC Certificates so far, a significant increase vis-a-vis twent five FSC Certificates a year back. 



There is a need to have adequate area under forest certification in the country in order to provide certified wood to these companies. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has a crucial role to play in this regard with the support from other stake holders. By presenting the memento, the delegation has expressed their cooperation and support to the initatives of the Government towards credible forest certification.



On this occasion WWF-India’s Secretary General and CEO, Mr. Ravi Singh, stated “It is essential that the Indian wood based industry applies the process of certification for promoting conservation of our natural resources and for acceptance of standards of the global wood market which is progressively moving towards certified trade practices.”



WWF-India is supporting FSC in order to promote sustainable forestry by encouraging use of wood and pulp sourced from certified forests thus discouraging illegal felling of trees. 



Dr. P J Dilip Kumar, Director General of Forests & Special Secretary to Govt. of India said “The Indian Government has given highest priority to setting up a suitable certification enabling structure for forest certification. However, this will be done in a phased manner. The National Forest Certification committee report has now been received in the MOEF. This will be discussed individually with all stakeholders in the next few months and subsequently a consensus will be arrived on the way forward.” 



The delegation comprised of representatives and stakeholders of wood trade and handicrafts some amongst whom have already received FSC certification and were keen put forward their experiences.



FSC in India

The number of FSC certificates secured by Indian companies have increased from 4 to 22 in last two years and several companies are in progress to secure forest certification. As on 1st September 2009, India has secured 21 Chain of Custody (CoC) certificates and one Forest Management Unit (FMU) certificate. The demand for FSC has increased in India and this will continue in the coming years. National initiative to develop India specific standards of FSC Principles and Criteria will be launched shortly.



For more information, please contact: 

Shaila Sam

Senior Manager-Communications Incharge

WWF-India

172-B, Lodhi Estate

New Delhi-3

Email: ssam@wwfindia.net 

Ph- +91-11- 4351-6248 



Dr T R Manoharan

Head- Forest Programme

& FSC National Contact Person in India

WWF-India Secretariat

172-B, Lodi Estate

New Delhi – 110003,India



Tel: +91 -11 - 41504815-18

Direct:+ 91- 11- 41504787

Mob.+91- 9350501113 

Fax: +91-11-41504779

Email: tmanoharan@wwfindia.net