WWF-India applauds the declaration of the Gangetic River Dolphin as India’s National Aquatic Animal

Posted on 06 October 2009
 
|
 

9 Comments








Ganges Freshwater Dolphin



© François Xavier PELLETIER/WWF



The docile and graceful river dolphin is now India’s National Aquatic Animal. On Monday, 5th of October , the Central Government declared this endangered species as India’s National Aquatic Animal according it equal status with the Peacock, India’s National Bird and the Tiger, India’s National Animal. The Ganges River Dolphin is an endemic species of the Ganges, Brahmapura and Meghna River systems, extending from the foot of the Himalayas to the tidal zone in India, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan.
 
The Central Government also announced a Rs. 15,000 crore plan for cleaning up the Ganges over a span of ten years. Speaking on the occasion Environment and Forests Minister, Jairam Ramesh said ‘ increasing the number of of dolphins in the Ganges would be the ‘One and Only Yardstick’ to gauge the success of the 15,000 crore ‘ Mission Clean Ganga’ project as dolphins do not respond to captive breeding. The presence of dolphins in a river is symbolic of a healthy eco-system.
 
The Ganges River Dolphin, Platanista gangetica, prefers deep waters, in and around the confluence of two or more rivers. It has a sturdy, yet flexible, body and weighs upto 150 kg. These dolphins are generally blind and catch their prey in a unique manner. They emit an ultrasonic sound which reaches the prey. The dolphin then registers this image in its mind and subsequently catches hold of its prey.
 
Once present in tens of thousands of numbers, the Ganges River Dolphin has dwindled abysmally to less than 2000 during the last century owing to direct killing, habitat fragmentation by dams and barrages, indiscriminate fishing and pollution of the rivers.
 
WWF-India adopted Ganges River Dolphin as a species of special concern. A Ganges River Dolphin Conservation Programme was initiated in 1997 to build a scientific database of the population status of the species and study the habitat quality of the dolphin’s distribution range.


WWF-India has been working closely with various government departments, specially the State Forest Department ,local NGOs, scientists, researchers and universities to ensure the implementation of the action plan through capacity building and carry out conservation awareness and education activities. A River Watch Programme has been initiated to identify hot spots and develop management plans with the help of the Forest Department and create awareness in target areas.
 
WWF-India has also tied up with the University of Tokyo and the Indian Institute of Technology to develop new insights into the behaviour of the dolphins. This partnership is utilizing a unique technology through which precise underwater movements and sonar-range of dolphins can be observed even in shallow water. An acoustic data logger system has also been demonstrated that can count the number of dolphins.The result findings will help sharpen and increase the scope of WWF-India's already well established River Dolphin programme.
 
The announcement of Gangetic River Dolphins as India’s National Aquatic Animal is an achievement for the many conservation organizations alongwith WWF-India, who working to protect the river dolphin. From 1996 to the present, the population of river dolphins in the 165 kilometers strech of the Ganges between Brijghat and Narora has more than doubled largely due to these efforts. The organization hopes that national recognition of the threat that the dolphin faces along side sincere efforts to safeguard their habitat will save this species from extinction.