Multiple perspective approaches to biodiversity- voices from south-east Asia

Posted on 02 November 2014
 
|
 

1 Comment











© WWF-India



The UNESCO New Delhi Office in association with SEED India, Department of Environment- Government of NCT Delhi, GLOBE, Indian Environment Society, WWF-India and DAV Public School Dwarka, Delhi, organized a South-Asian Regional Workshop on Education for Sustainable Development (ESD)- Multiple Perspective Approaches to Biodiversity on 31 October and 1st November 2014.



The first day of the workshop was held at the WWF-India Auditorium and the second day at D.A.V Public School, Sector 6, Dwarka.



The workshop was a follow up to the first "National Teacher Training Workshop on Introducing “Multiple Perspective Approaches (MPA) to Biodiversity" organized by UNESCO in association with SEED India and the City Montessori School, Lucknow on 23, 24 and 25th June 2014.  The objective of this workshop was to further strengthen and expand the initiative by presenting a variety of innovative experiences from a South Asian perspective of MPA application in the secondary school system.



The dignitaries included Dr. Ram Boojh (Programme Chief, Natural Sciences, UNESCO),  Dr. B.C. Sabat ( Senior Scientific Officer, Department of Environment, Government of Delhi), Dr. Deshbandhu (President, Indian Environmental Society), Ms. Monika Mehan ( Principal of D.A.V. Public School, Dwarka), Mr Ravi Singh (CEO, WWF-India), and  Mr. Mitrasen Bhikajee, Senior Programme Specialist, Natural Sciences, Cluster Office for Bhutan, India, Maldives and Sri Lanka was the Guest of Honor for the workshop.Various people from different organizations explained their work under the ESD program.



Participants from WWF-India presented the work that they have done in ESD in the states of Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal. Ms. Mita Nangia Goswami, Director, Environment Education gave an introduction to WWF-India’s work in ESD and how they have been “Building Bridges for Conservation through Education”. She explained how WWF-India follows a four-pronged approach to embed ESD in the education framework of the country holistically. The four verticals of this approach are:

Policy Intervention at the state and national government level.
Training Master Trainers from district, state and national level education authorities.
Creating Model Schools to demonstrate the practical application of ESD
Developing resource materials as guides and aides for teachers and master trainers

WWF-India representatives from four states, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, Assam, (accompanied by the headmasters/staff of the ESD model schools they are working with) presented the work they had done in their respective states. 



Mr. Shantanu is the principal of Dhablat Laxman PB School located in Sagar Island, Sunderbans. He was accompanying the State Representative from West Bengal and spoke about the various projects their school has undertaken under ESD. They have installed solar panels, rainwater harvesting, herbal gardens, meteorological instruments and tapsfor sanitation in their school. The students are also now running a seed bank preserving variety of local paddy seeds through which the community has reaped economic benefits.



The school representatives felt that through ESD, their students have become empowered and confident, and the relationship betweenteachers and students has improved significantly. 

The second day of the workshop was hosted at DAV School, Dwarka.



Two teachers from the school spoke of the efforts of the students of the eco club “Sanjeevani” in sensitizing their society, teachers and parents towards environmental issues. Further, the students spoke about Van Mahotsav celebrations in school, how their school recycles biodegradable waste, herbal garden, kitchen garden and a pond in their school etc. This was followed by presentations by people from different organizations like TERI, Centre for Environment Education, and Centre for Environmental Studies (CES) etc.



The last few hours of the workshop were dedicated to Group discussions. The purpose of these discussions was to provide some time and space to the participants to reflect on the workshop, and also to seek some recommendations on how ESD can be taken forward. For this, participants were divided into four groups. Post the Group Discussions, one participant, chosen randomly from each team, had to present a summary of their key points and recommendations. Some of the recommendations were that UNESCO should utilize IT and media optimally to make ESD reach far and wide, all B.Ed. students and teachers should go through capacity building processes, and that teachers should not be the sole bearers of the responsibility of Environment Education.

To conclude the session, Dr. Ram Boojh delivered the vote of thanks followed by the presentation of a summary of the workshop by WWF-India.