Roundtable on ‘Challenges and Issues on producing Sustainable Sugar in India’

Posted on 12 January 2012
 
|
 

0 Comments








Challenges and Issues on producing Sustainable Sugar in India



© WWF-India



Pune: A Roundtable on ‘Challenges and Issues on producing Sustainable Sugar in India’, was recently organized by WWF-India in order to address sugar related issues with all relevant stakeholders in the sugarcane production system and sugar manufacturing chains. 



Ms Bhavna Prasad, Director - Business & Industry, in her welcome address remarked that the Roundtable is an attempt to demonstrate responsible production to the sugar producers and to encourage them to respond to the growing market drivers seeking to support sustainable agriculture. 



The Roundtable brought together sugar companies, research institutions, financial institutions, governmental agencies and other stakeholders to learn about new developments in the sugarcane production areas and discuss the challenges in promoting sustainable sugarcane. 



Dr. D G Hapse, Sugarcane expert, DGHA, Pune, in his keynote address highlighted the causes for low cane yield and poor sugar recovery in India. Identifying the need for better water management he said, “We are pulling the water from the soil but making negligible or no efforts to put back the water into the soil, which is crucial for sustainable Sugarcane production.”



In a session on Industry perspective on sustainability of raw materials of sugarcane, Mr. P K Singh, General Manager, Cane Production, Triveni Sugar, reiterated the need to increase the seed productivity, water productivity, agro productivity and cane productivity to ensure production of more sustainable Sugarcane. He also highlighted that the cane development program within the sugar industries requires serious attention. 



Sugarcane is the second largest agro based processing industry in India. WWF-India, under the Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative, supports farmers to move towards more sustainable and economical sugarcane production methods by adopting Better Management Practices (BMP) with a special focus on water management. Significant results in this field with approximately 1000 farmers adopting BMPs in 12 villages in Aurangabad district have been observed. 



For further information:

Baya Agarwal, WWF-India, bagarwal@wwfindia.net, +91 11 4150 4788