Bio-remediation should be scaled up: Principal Secretary, Government of UP

Posted on 24 November 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mr. UN Tiwari, Additional Municipal Commissioner, Kanpur Nagar Nigam; Dr. Suresh Kumar Rohilla, Team Leader - Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership; Mr. Alok Ranjan, IAS, Principal Secretary, UP Urban Development and Environment, Government of Uttar Pradesh and Mr. Najaf Rizvi, Mr Najaf Rizvi, Vice President and Head of North Region, HSBC, at the inagural session of the workshop.



© WWF-India



Workshop on Pollution Abatement in Ganga Basin



Kanpur, November 24, 2009: Shri Alok Ranjan, IAS, Principal Secretary, UP Urban Development and Environment, inaugurated the workshop organized by WWF India, Kanpur Nagar Nigam and IIT Kanpur. The workshop was organized by WWF-India’s Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership on Bio-remediation to standardize and mainstream effective waste water management leading to pollution abatement in the Ganga basin. He acknowledged the success of the pilot projects conducted by WWF-India and highlighted the potential of bioremediation as a low-cost and eco-friendly technology. Mr. Alok Ranjan in his address said, “Bioremediation is a promising technology solution with a huge potential particularly for domestic waste water”. 



Dr. Suresh Rohilla, Team Leader, Living Ganga Programme mentioned that WWF India is in the process of developing a conceptual feasibility study for scaling up treatment of municipal wastewater in Kanpur city. Shri Rajeev Sharma, Commissioner, Kanpur Nagar Nigam emphasized the timeliness of the workshop which would help the city of Kanpur in dealing with wastewater in an energy efficient, cost-effective manner with low O & M costs. Shri U N Tiwari, Additional Municipal Commissioner, Kanpur Nagar Nigam, and several senior officials from Jal Nigam, Jal Sansathan participated in the workshop. 



Mr Najaf Rizvi, Vice President and Head of North Region, HSBC, emphasized the commitment of the partnership and appreciated the progress of Living Ganga Programme. The workshop is part of series of activities under the partnership that will that will not only help the bank emerge as a cleaner and greener bank but also help reduce the footprint of Kanpur on the Ganga system.



The workshop was attended by several experts from Institute of Microbial Biotechnology (IMTEC), Chandigarh; National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur; IIT Kanpur, UP Jal Nigam, UP Jal Sansthan, Ecofriends and several technology providers.



For more information, please contact:

Anshuman Atroley

Communications and Relationship Manager, WWF-India’s Living Ganga Programme under HSBC Climate Partnership

Phone: +91-98101 69262,

E-mail: aatroley@gmail.com