Jiiva joins hands with Earth Hour 2013

Posted on 11 March 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








Jiiva joins hands with Earth Hour 2013



© WWF-India



Chennai: Popular Tamil film star Jiiva has joined hands with WWF-India to pledge his support to Earth Hour – WWF’s global campaign to raise awareness and inspire individual action on climate change. He will be a part of Earth Hour- now the largest global environmental movement that enables individuals, organizations, governments and groups to show support for policies and practices that balance development and environmental concerns.



The message of Earth Hour 2013 is to make the switch to renewable energy. Running in its fifth year, this time, Earth Hour will be observed on 23rd March 2013 from 8:30 – 9:30 PM, and calls for:


Individuals to adopt household products powered by renewable energy;
Organizations to adopt renewable energy solutions to run their business operations and production processes;
Governments to promote policies favourable to the production and uptake of renewable energy

The speed and scale of climate change, fuelled by ever increasing consumption of the Earth’s resources, is impacting the whole world. Unless we make efforts to transform our energy production systems to renewables, as far as possible, we will enter into a trajectory of climate instability and energy insecurity that will affect each one of us. Every individual has the power to make this transition possible by taking small, yet significant steps. 



Reinforcing his support to this cause, at a press conference hosted by Taj Coromandel today in Chennai, Jiiva said, “I believe in the power of individual action, and am delighted to be associated with a campaign like Earth Hour. I am sure Earth Hour 2013 will inspire individuals to become more aware about their responsibility towards the environment. If we want to live in a healthy and clean planet, we must also take action accordingly. When individuals will make the effort to changetheir behavior, together these actions will add up to make the required difference”



Speaking on the occasion Ms. Aarti Khosla, Head – Campaigns,WWF-India, said “In its fifth year now in India, Earth Hour has moved beyond a symbolic lights out campaign. This year, Earth Hour aims to inspire individuals, organizations and governments to make the shift towards renewable energy, through simple and do-able steps. Last year, Earth Hour reached more than 150 cities. This year, we aim to break old records and reach out to more cities across the nation.”



Mr N Prakash, Director of Operations, Oriental Hotels Limited, and General Manager, Taj Coromandel remarked, “Taj Hotels is proud to continue its association with Earth Hour and we are fully committed to supporting the local environment and community responsibilities. Earth Hour is a very spirited and successful campaign to raise awareness about the need to take action on climate change, and it is our honour to be part of this cause across cities. We, at Taj Coromandel, Chennai look forward to participating in Earth Hour 2013 with the active involvement from associates and guests alike, demonstrating our care for the environment.”



Earth Hour has already successfully inspired millions of people and organizations around the world to proclaim their collective support towards climate change.