Asia’s first Rhino Range States meeting secures government-level agreement to bolster conservation efforts

Posted on 07 October 2013
 
|
 

1 Comment








Asian One-Horned Rhino



© WWF-India



New Delhi: WWF-India applauds the world’s first meeting of Asian Rhino Range States, but warns that at-risk rhino populations in Asia will continue to drift towards extinction unless proven methodologies for boosting and protecting rhino numbers are more broadly implemented. Moreover, the momentum of past successes must be maintained in the face of growing pressure from poaching. 



The Asian Rhino Range States Meeting, hosted by the government of Indonesia, concluded with consensus among the government representatives from Bhutan, India, Indonesia, Malaysia and Nepal that maintaining populations and preventing extinction is not enough --- the species needs to recover at specific sites. Endorsing the plan to raise the numbers of the greater one-horned Javan and Sumatran rhinos, WWF also emphasized to the meeting participants that while consensus is valuable, the species needs action more than words. “We have outstanding success stories across Asia. Nepal and India have both successfully expanded their rhino populations,” explained Dr. Christy Williams, WWF Asian Rhino and Elephant Programme, “Their methods have been shared with the region. Now is the time for action, to implement these methods where they are needed most.” 



The international community has paid significant attention to the plight of the black rhinoceros and white rhinoceros across Africa, but relatively little focus has been given to the Asian species. However, there are far fewer rhinos remaining in Asia: as of March 2013 there were only 3,500 rhinos in Asia (compared to over 25,000 across Africa). Some species remain by a thread, in single populations numbering less than 50 animals. 



However, there are proven examples of rhino populations bouncing back from similar numbers. Committed action by governments has resulted in the rhino population more than doubling in numbers in the Indian State of Assam over the last four decades. Strong actions against poaching of rhinos in Nepal and India have seen rhino numbers recover. 



“In India, we faced a situation where rhinos were hunted and poached almost to the brink of extinction”, said Dr. Dipankar Ghose, Director, Species and Landscapes, WWF-India. “With increased protection, monitoring and conservation efforts by the government and civil society, India greatly strengthened the number of rhinos. However, the recent rise in cases of rhino poaching with sophisticated weapons indicate the involvement of organized crime syndicates and is a cause of serious concern." 



Implementing these conservation techniques, and maintaining the momentum where they are in play, is now more critical than ever as the three Asian rhino species: the greater one-horned rhinoceros, the Javan rhinoceros, and the Sumatran rhinoceros remain on the IUCN Red List of threatened species; the greater one-horned as Vulnerable and the Sumatran and Javan rhinos as Critically Endangered. 



"The meeting is a welcome initiative taken by the Asian Rhino Range Countries to share experiences. Such forums will be able to draw the attention of international organizations as well as the Governments of the five Asian Rhino Range Countries to address the issue of rhino conservation more strongly. We look forward to learning the progress and for the second meeting of this forum in Assam next year", said Mr. Suresh Chand, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) & Chief Wildlife Warden, Assam. 



"This forum also opens up the opportunity for international co-operation to seek ways and means of collaboration to tackle the nexus of rhino poaching networks which itself is driven by international demand and markets", added Mr. Amit Sharma, Coordinator, Rhino Conservation, WWF-India. 



Building on the meeting’s call to fight poaching, WWF-India emphasized the need for rhino horn consuming countries to commit to key measures in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) to stem the demand. 



For further information: 

Dr. Dipankar Ghose, Director, Species & Landscapes, 

dghose@wwfindia.net, +91 4150 4782 



Amit Sharma, Coordinator, Rhino Conservation,

 amitsharma@wwfindia.net, +91 943501 5657 



Anil Cherukupalli, Communications Manager, 

anil.cherukupalli@wwf.panda.org, +91 4150 4783