Tiger roar gets louder

Posted on 20 January 2015
 
|
 

3 Comments








This camera trapping exercise in Kosi River corridor has shown tigers thriving. Seen here is a tigress carrying a 1-month old cub (approx). in her mouth in Jan 2012.



© WWF-India/Uttarakhand Forest Department 



Better protection, management of Tiger Reserves give the endangered cats a boost
NEW DELHI: The much-awaited 2014-15 tiger estimation report released today, indicated a significant increase in India’s tiger population. The last decade has seen a clear escalation in numbers– from 1,411 in 2006, to 1,706 in 2010 and 2,226 in 2014.

 

This rise of the tiger population can be largely attributed to better management and improved protection within the Tiger Reserves and other tiger bearing Protected Areas. This time, the estimation methodology was also more rigorous and was further expanded to areas outside the Tiger Reserves. The estimation exercise saw an unprecedented effort from the National Tiger Conservation Authority, state Forest Departments, the Wildlife Institute of India, and conservation organisations including WWF-India, CWS, ATREE, Aaranyak, WRCS and WCT.



The 2014 tiger estimation covered 18 states and more than 300,000 sq km was surveyed. A total of 1,540 individual tigers have been identified so far, through images collected from 9,735 camera trap locations across India’s tiger landscapes. Because of the extensive survey effort and camera trap results, which identified nearly 70% of the estimated tiger number; these figures are most accurate ever.



The report, Status of Tigers in India, 2014, published by the National Tiger Conservation Authority of the Government of India and released by Mr. Prakash Javadekar, Hon’ble Minister of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, throws light on this increase in tiger numbers and highlights that the future of tigers in India depends on maintaining inviolate core habitats for breeding tiger populations, habitat connectivity and protection from poaching of tigers and their prey.


A total of 30 sites were surveyed by WWF-India covering more than 280,000 man hours, with 650 camera traps identifying more than 450 individual tigers.


Speaking during the release ceremony, Mr. Javadekar said, “At a time when the global tiger population is under threat, it is heartening that India’s tiger numbers are increasing. This was not the situation a decade ago and I am proud that we have risen to the challenge and turned the situation around.”



Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India said, “These results confirm that more than half of the world’s tigers are in India, and thus, an up-to-date and precise estimation becomes imperative for assessing the success of future conservation efforts. This demonstrates the impact of bringing together political will, strong science and dedicated field efforts.”



Two other important reports released today include an economic valuation of six Tiger Reserves and a report on corridors highlighting the criticality of maintaining these connectivities between different populations for the long term survival of tigers in our country.



For more information please contact: 

Dr. Dipankar Ghose

Director-Species & Landscape Programme,

WWF –India

011 41504782

dghose@wwfindia.net

 

Rituparna Sengupta                                                                                   

Sr. Manager- Brand, Campaign and Media                               

WWF-India

011-41504797

rsengupta@wwfindia.net

 

Nitya Kaushik

Sr. Manager-Communication, Species & Landscapes

WWF-India

011-41504783

nkaushik@wwfindia.net