WWF-India Launches a Cleantech Innovation Platform

Posted on 28 May 2012
 
|
 

2 Comments








Solar panel



© WWF-India



New Delhi: India is ranked 12th on the Global Cleantech Innovation Index 2012, brought out by WWF and the CleanTech group. As per the report, India has a strong potential to rise through the ranks, as it moves from not only manufacturing cleantech products but, also increasingly originating next generation of innovative cleantech companies. 



Building on this potential, WWF-India launches the Climate Solver platform, to provide an interface between low carbon technology innovators and industry associations, investors, government, incubation centres, and the media. After careful screening and selection of innovative clean technologies, developed by small and medium enterprises, Climate Solver aims to showcase their potential, expand their outreach and generate awareness about them along with the overall value of innovation, as an immediate and practical solution to climate change. The objective of this platform is to promote the use of innovative clean technologies and thereby contribute to reducing emissions and enhancing energy access.



Climate Solver is part of WWF’s global initiative to strengthen the development and widespread use of innovative low carbon technologies. In India, Climate Solver is partnering with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), New Ventures India, Centre for Innovation Incubation and Entrepreneurship (IIM Ahmedabad), Skyquest Technology Consulting Pvt. Ltd., and Technology Development Board (Department of Science and Technology, Government of India).



Climate Solver was first launched by WWF Sweden in 2008 and so far 28 innovative technologies have been awarded. These technologies range from electric vehicles, green materials for buildings to energy storage systems, solar heating and cooling, etc. 



On the occasion of launching Climate Solver in India, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said: “India’s challenges of economic growth and sustainability require an alternative development paradigm. Innovative technological solutions are needed to ensure energy needs of India in a carbon constrained world. Climate Solver platform is a step forward in that direction”.



Small and medium enterprises can be a Climate Solver nominee if their technology is projected to lower carbon emissions by 20 million tonnes annually from 2022 onwards, or if the technology provides sustainable solutions to enhance energy access. Further details regarding the application process, which is open from 28th May till 31st July, are provided on the WWF India - Climate Solver webpage. 



For details and queries please contact:

Ms. Indrani Handa – ihanda@wwfindia.net 

Ms. Kadambari Yadav – kyadav@wwfindia.net