Nominations for WWF-India’s Climate Solver Awards 2014 open

Posted on 16 October 2014
 
|
 

0 Comments








Shri Prakash Javadekar presenting the Climate Solver 2013 awards



© WWF-India



New Delhi: Climate Solver (CS) – WWF’s pioneering climate innovation platform is now open for nominations from small and medium enterprises (SMEs) across the country for the Climate Solver India Awards 2014. The last date for filing the applications is 30 November 2014.  

 

Through this platform, WWF-India encourages and supports low carbon innovative technologies that can contribute towards mitigating climate change.  It also aims to identify and highlight the problems, barriers and challenges faced by innovative entrepreneurs, and improve the market uptake for their technologies.

 

The nominees can apply in two categories - Energy Access and Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Reduction. After careful screening and evaluation, enterprises with the best innovations are honoured with the Climate Solver award under the two themes.



The applicant companies are assessed on their development of cutting-edge technologies that contribute to reducing carbon emissions or enabling energy access through sustainable clean energy solutions. Robust business plans for their proprietary technology and ambitions for largescale deployment of their climate innovation, both nationally and globally, are taken into consideration. Innovative business models for scale up are encouraged as well. For more details about the application process, click here.



Shri Prakash Javadekar, Hon’ble Minister of State for Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEFCC) conferred the CS 2013 awards to the five winners on 1 August 2014.  Launched in 2012, this is the third year of Climate Solver awards in India. So far, nine companies have been awarded with the title.

 

WWF-India has been partnering with the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), New Ventures India (NVI), Centre for Innovation Incubation and Entrepreneurship (CIIE), IIM Ahmedabad, Skyquest Technology Consulting Pvt. Ltd, National Innovation Foundation (NIF) and Technology Development Board (Department of Science and Technology, Government of India) for the Indian chapter of the Climate Solver initiative.



The Climate Solver initiative was launched by WWF-Sweden in 2008 and has now expanded to developing countries including India, China and South Africa.  This platform was developed to raise awareness about such essential technologies and to communicate the value of innovation as an immediate and practical solution to climate change. 

 

Mr. Ravi Singh, SG & CEO, WWF-India said, “With the third year in this global initiative, WWF-India is looking for new and innovative entrepreneurs who can make a transformative difference in reducing carbon emissions and sustainably providing energy access. The SME sector has a huge potential and reach in India, and their innovative technologies can help make a difference in providing clean energy solutions both in the rural landscapes as well as urban areas.” 

 

For more details, kindly contact: 

Ms. Rituparna Sengupta

Sr. Manager- Brand, Media and Campaigns, WWF-India

rsengupta@wwfindia.net

 

Ms. Divya Joy

Communications Officer, Climate Change & Energy, WWF-India

djoy@wwfindia.net