Natural wonders feel the heat

Posted on 05 April 2007
 
|
 

0 Comments


New Delhi, April 5: From the Himalayas to the Amazon, eleven of the world's greatest natural wonders face destruction if the climate continues to warm at the current rate, warns WWF. 



In its latest briefing, Saving the world's natural wonders from climate change, the global conservation organization reports on how the devastating impacts of global warming are damaging the world's greatest natural wonders. 



Two of the eleven wonders viz. the Himalayas and Sunderbans are in the Indian subcontinent. 



Released ahead of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC's) Second Working Group Report, the WWF briefing details the work being undertaken in each of the these regions to build defenses against the damaging impacts of climate change. 



The Himalayas are threatened due to melting glaciers which are receding at an average rate of 10 to 15 meters per year. Himalayas or the “Water Towers of Asia” contribute crucially to the water supply of millions of people, feeding seven of Asia’s great rivers. The Sunderbans, on the other hand, faces threats by the rise in sea levels. Sunderbans is the only mangrove tiger habitat and support the largest tiger population in the world. 



"While we continue to pressure governments to make meaningful cuts in heat trapping greenhouse gas emissions, we are also working on adaptation strategies to offer protection to some of the world's natural wonders as well as the livelihoods of the people who live there," says Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India 



"WWF is actively working in both Himalayas and Sunderbans with local communities, policy makers and other stakeholders to study and assess the impacts of climate change in the region through climate witness and impact assessment programmes; we are also looking at a regional initiative along with China and Nepal to study the impact of climate change on a larger scale” says Mr. Singh. He added, “While adaptation to changing climate can save some, only drastic action by governments to reduce emissions can hope to stop their complete destruction." 



In the Himalayas, WWF-India is examining the effect of glacier retreat on the downstream freshwater regime and their implications for canal irrigation systems, hydro-electric power, water quality, and vulnerable species. In Sunderbans, WWF-India helps people to cope with the impacts of sea level rise on livelihoods. WWF-India is also determining how protected areas will be affected by climate change in the region, especially sea level rise. 



The regions represented in the briefing are: 

1. Melting Glaciers in the Himalayas 

2. Tigers and People in the Sunderbans 

3. Great Barrier Reef and other coral reefs around the world 

4. A desert drying out – Chihuahua (Mexico and USA) 

5. Turtles in the Caribbean 

6. The oldest Climate Witness Alive: Valdivian temperate rainforests (Chile) 

7. China: Upper Yangtze 

8. The Amazon 

9. The fate of the wild salmon - Bering Sea and Pacific North-East/Alsaka, USA 

10. East African Coastal Forests 

11. East Africa Marine 



(Ends) 



Notes to the Editor:

1. About WWF-India: A challenging, constructive, science-based organization, WWF is engaged in wildlife and nature conservation in the country since 1969. Part of WWF global network, the organisation has made its presence felt through a sustained effort not only towards nature and wildlife conservation, but sensitizing people by creating awareness through capacity building and enviro-legal activism. 





For further information: 

Dr. Prakash Rao, 

Senior Coordinator, Climate Change and Energy Programme, 

WWF-India 

Tel: + 91 11 4150 4794, E-mail: prao@wwfindia.net  



Anshuman Atroley, 

Communications Manager, WWF-India 

Tel: +91 11 41504797, E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net