Smart Chip Pvt. Ltd. partners with WWF-India to help conserve olive ridley turtles in Odisha

Posted on 12 January 2016
 
|
 

0 Comments








Mr. Sanjeev Shriya, Managing Director, Smart Chip Private Limited presenting a pledge cheque to Mr. Karan Bhalla, Chief Operating Officer, WWF-India at the partnership event 



© WWF-India



New Delhi: Smart Chip Private Limited, a subsidiary of Morpho, today announced its collaboration with WWF-India to protect the nesting population and conserve the habitat of olive Ridley turtles in Odisha.

 

The olive Ridley Turtles, that are the smallest of all sea turtles found in the world, are found in the warm waters of the Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean. Although marine turtles are a nationally and globally protected species, they continue to face serious threats from fisheries, coastal development and climate change. These threats impose a drastic impact on the globally significant mass nesting population of turtles along the east coast of India, hence requiring immediate and long-term conservation measures. WWF-India has been working in Odisha since 2004 for conservation of the mass nesting rookery in the state in collaboration with the Odisha State Forest and Environment Department.



Speaking about the partnership, Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said, “Like most other marine turtle species, olive Ridleys face serious threats across their migratory route, habitat and nesting beaches due to unfriendly fishing practices, infrastructure development around nesting sites and unregulated tourism. Conservation partnerships such as this will ensure that there is a greater awareness about the threats faced by such species across the world and in India and will help us continue our work in these areas.”

 

Smart Chip has entered into a three-year pact to financially support WWF-India to ensure that this species of the turtle thrive in their habitats. “Conservation is the key to ensuring that we leave a strong legacy behind for our next generations,” said Sanjeev Shriya, Senior Vice President India at Morpho, and Managing Director, Smart Chip Private Limited. 



About Smart Chip

Smart Chip is a subsidiary of Morpho and has implemented several state-of-the-art Biometric and other Identity technologies in India across various e-Governance programs, banks, financial institutions and large corporations. Morpho is a global leader in identity and security solutions for an increasingly digital and connected world. We employ more than 8,600 people in 55 countries and generated revenues of more than €1.5 billion in 2014. Backed by more than 40 years of experience in biometrics, our unique expertise lies in developing innovative technologies for a wide range of markets and applications for people, governments and business. Morpho contributes to managing identities, protecting borders, detecting threats, supporting law enforcement and providing trusted on-line transactions and services. Our solutions protect identities, ensure safety and safeguard privacy, for easier everyday lives.





For Media Queries Please Contact:

 

Smart Chip Private Limited

Communications Department      

Sukrit Varma

Email: sukrit.varma@morpho.com

 

Morpho

Communications Department      

Pierre-Yves ROGER

pierre-yves.roger@morpho.com



WWF-India

Communications Department      

Rituparna Sengupta

Email: rsengupta@wwfindia.net