Earth Hour Center Stage: Bringing people and planet together

Posted on 25 March 2022







Earth Hour 2022



© WWF India



Why is Earth Hour important?



New Delhi: Starting in 2007, Earth Hour has united the world to support people and the planet. Earth Hour has become the world's most significant grassroots environmental movement. It has inspired individuals, communities, businesses and countries worldwide to create positive environmental impacts through the power of collective action.

 

If you thought switching off your lights for one hour could not really make a difference, consider the collective impact of the world switching-off – and using the hour to contemplate climate change and how we could adapt to it? But before you decide to join in the action this year, here are five big highlights for Earth Hour 2022.

 

Earth Hour Center Stage:  A Musical Night with Shantanu Moitra & friends

As we observe the lights switch –off on the night of Earth Hour on 26th March, a special musical odyssey will commence. It will see a host of artists and celebrities Shruti Hasan, Dia Mirza, Shubha Mudgal, Mohit Chauhan, Swanand Kirikre, Papon, Maati Baani, Sid Sriram & Neeraj Arya's Kabir Cafe together with Shantanu Moitra hit musical notes - amidst conversations around Earth Hour.

 


Earth Hour gets the whole world talking 

 The earth is what the world has in common! Moreover, when Earth Hour comes round, as the lights slowly turn off across the globe, it sparks a conversation about the environment that crosses all language barriers. This year, we observe Earth Hour on 26th March 2022, between 8:30pm-9:30pm. The campaign has grown into a movement, joined by 192 countries and territories in 2021!



This year's theme is Shape Our Future. Everyone has the power to shape our future! Now is our biggest chance to course-correct towards a safer and better future for all.

 

How does switching off the lights make a difference: Powering the wheels of change 

Switching off the lights is a symbolic gesture, the first step toward taking a stand for our planet. These powerful are visual reminders that not only do people care about the environmental issues we face, but when individuals unite, the power of the collective can create massive impact. As people turn off

 

the light switch, they switch from passive bystanders to showing they care and are ready to take action for the planet.

 

This year too, important monuments and buildings are joining the campaign by switching off between 8:30pm-9:30pm:

Delhi: India Gate, Rashtrapati Bhavan, Qutub Minar, Purana Qila and Humayun Tomb

Mumbai: Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT), Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai Head Office (MCGM HQ)

Assam: Lokapriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport Guwahati

Rajasthan:  Umaid Palace Bhawan-Jodhpur, Rambagh Palace Hotel-Jaipur, Monsoon Palace-Udaipur

Madhya Pradesh:  Kamlapati railway station Bhopal, Railway station of Jabalpur & Gwalior 

Kolkata: Howrah Bridge, Indian Museum (Imperial Museum), Tata Center

 

People Power: How Can the Public Get Involved? 

Marking India's 75th year of independence, Earth Hour India recognises the efforts of 'Conservation Heroes', who can inspire others with their work. The campaign focuses on the power of 'One India for people and nature'. Old and young, urban and rural - this year, WWF India will promote inspirational stories of local community members to honour their initiatives in helping Shape Our Future. To drive individual actions for the planet, Earth Hour urges people to participate in the #5RForEarthHour challenge. The Earth Hour Anthem (composed by Shantanu Moitra and sung by Mohit Chauhan) appeals to people for urgent action to save the planet.

 

Taking Earth Hour Beyond the Hour

Taking part in Earth Hour isn't only about committing for one hour on one day - it's about committing every day to take care of each other and the one home we all share. Impactful ways like saving water, sustainable living, reducing food wastage, eliminating plastics, and being energy efficient can help you go beyond the hour to shape a brighter future for people and the planet.

 

 

  Event (Earth Hour Centre Stage) will be live on WWF India SM pages from 8:00 pm onwards on 26th March 2022: 

     Facebook

    LinkedIn

   Youtube