Canon and WWF come together to save the splash for the future!

Posted on 13 June 2006
 
|
 

0 Comments


Canon India Pvt. Limited, India’s Complete Digital Imaging Company, and WWF-India, country’s largest conservation organisation, today announced a photo contest as a part of the ongoing World Environment Day Celebrations 2006. 



Addressing the press conference, Ravi Singh, SG and CEO, WWF-India said, “Depleting freshwater resources is a major threat to India’s future. This photographic contest combines the need to show up this issue in its various forms whilst carrying the message for the need for responsible conservation. We hope to attract creativity in substance and form and be able to reach out to different parts of the country. 



Alan Grant, President and CEO of Canon-India said, “Environmental issues have always been central to Canon’s management strategy. A key principle of Canon's business philosophy is Kyosei - which means living and working together for the common good. This golden concept is in harmony with our responsibility to foster environmental issues in all our business and manufacturing processes.” 



He further added, “At Canon we keep looking for newer projects to be associated with. Our corporate membership with WWF is another step to bring more awareness in the country on issues such as water conservation. Through this contest, we wish to involve the community and spread the message of protecting the environment through photography.” 



The contest is open only to Indian nationals and will go on for a period of 45 days. It will entertain entries in two categories i.e. amateurs and professional. The winners in both the categories will not only play an important role in spreading the message of water conservation but they will also win exciting prizes sponsored by Canon and WWF. 



Ends 



About WWF-India 

WWF-India is the largest and one of the most experienced conservation organizations in the country. Since 1969, WWF has been consistently working for the protection and conservation of environment, and towards promoting harmony based on sustainability between human beings and nature. For more information please visit www.wwfindia.org 



About Canon Inc 

Canon Inc. is a global leader in photographic and digital imaging solutions. Its global network now includes 184 companies, employing some more than 108,000 people. It is dedicated to the advancement in technology and innovation and commits 10% of its total revenue each year to R&D. Canon has consistently remained as one of the top 3 companies to have earned the most number of patents over the last decade. Since 1993, Canon continues to be ranked as one of world's largest corporations by the Fortune Global 500 Ranking. Guided by its kyosei philosophy, which focuses on "living and working together for the common good”, Canon delivers high performance and user-friendly products and solutions to improve efficiency both in the office and home environment. More information is available on www.canon.co.in 



Canon in India 

Canon India Pvt. Ltd. is a 100% subsidiary of Canon Singapore Pte. Ltd; a world leader in imaging technologies. Set up in 1997, Canon India markets a comprehensive range of sophisticated contemporary digital imaging products that include photocopiers, multi-functional peripherals, fax-machines, printers, scanners, digital cameras, camcorders and multi media projectors. Five imaging engines of Image Capturing, Electrophotography, Bubble Jet, Semiconductor and Display drive these cutting-edge technology products. The company today has offices in 7 cities across India and employs over 400 people. Canon has 200 channel partners, 191 retail stores, 19 canon care centers, over 100 authorized service centers and more than 2700 IT resellers across 300 towns in India it does business in. 



In 2005, Canon launched a record of 85 new digital imaging products in India across all product categories including the launch of 43 new products at the Canon Expo - the largest portfolio of products introduced by any vendor in the Digital Imaging Space in a single day, a landmark in the industry. Canon aims to achieve NO. 1 market share in all major product categories of the Indian Digital Imaging market. Canon presently has over 127 products offerings in India. 



For more information, please contact:

Anshuman Atroley

Communications Manager

WWF-India 

Tel: +91–11-4150 47 97,  +91-9810169262 

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net