India switches off on March 27- 8.30 pm to 9.30 pm

Posted on 27 March 2010
 
|
 

0 Comments








WWF-India in association with Delhi Government organized an event at India Gate which was also switched off



© WWF-India



New Delhi: Indians across the country today switched off lights from 8.30 pm to 9.30 pm and showcased their support for Earth Hour 2010. Earth Hour is WWF’s global campaign which calls for switching off non-essential lights to inspire individual action on climate change.



From candle light vigils to musical performances, several activities were organized across the country as people joined the largest global campaign on Climate Change.



In New Delhi, a spectacular music and dance evening was organized on the lawns of India Gate with dazzling performances by noted dancer Shovana Narayan and popular rock band Indian Ocean. The Chief Guest of the evening was the Hon’ble Chief Minister of India, Smt Sheila Dikshit, who along with Ravi Singh, Secretary General and & CEO of WWF-India carried out India Gate’s ceremonial switch off at 8.30 pm. Brightly lit candles and solar lanterns came alive and the lights at the iconic India Gate were switched off. 

 

In Mumbai, popular landmarks such as Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus, ITC Grand Maratha, Shivaji Park, Taj Lands End switched off lights. So did headquarters of several public and private sector organisations like, ICICI and HSBC to name a few. Bangalore too showcased its support towards Earth Hour. Brigade Road, ING Vysya, Infosys and Taj Residency are few of the many who came out very strongly to support this cause. 

 

Addressing the media, Chief Minister of Delhi, Smt. Sheila Dikshit thanked citizens of Delhi on the resounding success of Earth Hour. She said, “Delhi has been the pioneer of Earth Hour India and joined world cities where this campaign has brought a change in mindsets of its citizens regarding the global issue of Climate Change.”



Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India said “It has been heartening to see Indians across the country participating in Earth Hour. Truly, this is a reflection of it being a campaign that has gone beyond national, regional, economic and cultural differences. Looking at the huge impact of this extra ordinary campaign, one can assess the power of individual action for tackling global problems.Our planet needs such actions for it’s well being”



He added, “I would like to thank the state Governments, several public and private sector organizations, institutions across the country and all other partners and supporters for making this campaign a roaring success.”



Speaking on the occasion Abhishek Bachchan, Brand Ambassador, Earth Hour 2010 had to say “Being associated with this extraordinary movement called Earth Hour has been a privilege as well as an eye opener. There has always been a critical need to support for action on climate change and what better way than taking this up at an individual level by citizens of this country. It has been heartening to see the support that our very own citizens have lent to Earth Hour. I would like to thank WWF India for giving me this opportunity to be part of this noble cause that I will cherish for the rest of my life.”



India first joined the Earth Hour campaign in 2009 by committing the support of two main cities, Delhi and Mumbai. Five million people in India switched off on that day. Fifty six Indian cities participated in the campaign. India saved 1000MW of power in that one hour with 600MW of energy saving in Delhi alone From the icons of history like Qutub Minar, Red Fort, and Humanyun’s Tomb and Chatrapati Shivaji Terminus to the symbols of modern India- hotels, cinema complexes and shopping malls, all showcased commitment towards the cause and switched off the lights for that one hour.