WWF-India appeals people to join hands for a healthy and living environment on World Environment Day 2006 

Posted on 05 June 2006

WWF- India celebrated the World Environment Day with a unique integration between environment and culture, presented through a breathtaking photograph exhibition and classical dance performance. The photographs clearly captured and brought to life the afflicting issues of environment be it the need for saving birds, species and their habitats and landscapes, or the forest and the myriad colors of nature or the relation between human beings and nature. The photograph exhibition will be on till 7th June



Not only renowned photographers like Raghu Rai, Gopi Gajwani, Avnish Pasricha, Amita Pasricha, Nanak Dhingra, Jagdeep Rajput, Mohit Midha, Deb Mukharji and Soumendra Singh but also the local artistes of Sawai Madhavpur and creative house Ogilvy & Mather, contributed their work of art towards the cause of spreading awareness. Shreya Kumar, pupil of Geeta Chandran, enthralled the audience with their bharatnatyam dance performance 



Mr. Ravi Singh, Secretary General and CEO, WWF-India, in his message, highlighted the issue of Desertification and Deserts (United nations Environment Programme theme for the World Environment Day 2006). He said, “ We need to use the knowledge of the bio diversity of the Aravalli Range and enrich flora and fauna so that desertification of the region beyond the Aravalli range can be prevented. The desertification of the region beyond Aravalli range causes soil erosion and affect the human population and their lifestyles.” 



Ms Madhur Das, Director, Business Department, WWF India, said that, “ Events like World Environment Day provide us the opportunity of addressing burning issues of environment conservation and also urge greater participation from the private sector in forging partnerships and influencing policy, since they play a crucial role in sustainable development. The corporates can help in finding solutions and support sustainable approaches to development issues such as freshwater, sanitation, sustainable tourism and etc. Also, most importantly, promote financing for sustainable development.” 



WWF-India brought in true conservation supporters such as Mr. Amitabh Kant, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, Monika Kapil Mohta, Deputy Director General, ICCR, corporates such as Swarovski, Ogilvy & Mather, Genesis Colors, Taj Hotels, TetraPak, school children, conservationists, senior citizens and media 



The World Environment Day was established by UN General Assembly in 1972. The Environment Day commemorates each year on June 5. It is celebrated to bring people’s attention towards doing a deed for saving the environment and reiterating their commitment towards this endeavor of theirs and organizations like WWF, for the year to come.. Its main agenda is to give a human face to the environment issues. 



WWF-India is the largest and one of the most experienced conservation organizations in the country. Since 1969, we have been consistently working and supporting causes towards protection and conservation of environment and also promoting harmony between human beings and nature on a sustainable scale. 


Ends