Assam’s Kaziranga – Karbi Anglong Landscape gears up for annual floods

Posted on 30 July 2013
 
|
 

0 Comments








View of the meeting room



© David Smith / WWF-India



WWF-India Kaziranga – Karbi Anglong Landscape Programme (KKL) organized an awareness camp in partnership with the Village Defense Party (VDP) and Eco-Development Committee (EDC) of Deosur and Deosur Chang villages on the fringe of Kaziranga National Park (KNP) on 16 July 2013. These areas are located on the fringes of Kanchanjuri and Amguri corridors that link KNP to Bagser Reserve Forest and hills of Karbi Anglong in the south. These villagers around KNP help in rescue and rehabilitation of wildlife during the annual flooding when animals like deers, elephants, rhinos and more move from KNP to the higher grounds in the neighbouring Karbi Anglong district.
FLOOD RELIEF PROGRAM MEETING
The programme was taken up on a request from the KNP authorities and the local VDP & EDC members of the area. It was felt that since the wildlife fleeing the park has to cross over to the hills through these villages, the villagers need to be well aware of their roles and responsibilities. This was WWF-India’s first initiative to involve the VDP and EDC for generating awareness on wildlife conservation at the village level on the fringe of KNP. Mr. Sunil Kumar Barman, Deputy Adviser of VDP, Koliabor Police Station (PS), Mr. Tulsi Prasad Kakati, CO, VDP, Jakhlabandha Police Station and Mr. Jinaram Bordoloi, Range Officer, Burapahar Range, KNP attended the meeting from the respective departments. They all stressed on the vital role of the community in safeguarding KNP and praised the villagers for the help they have been extending over the years.



The officials in their address cautioned that during the past year KNP had seen a rise in rhino poaching incidents. They felt that this could be checked with the help and support of the local villagers as the poachers usually use the fringe villages of KNP as base before going out for poaching. At times, local villagers are also used as local guides inside the park to track rhinos and escape after committing the crime. The officials urged the villagers to check the motive and background of any guest who wants to be hosted by the villagers. The villagers on their part requested the KNP authorities to help in reducing elephant depredation, which causes widespread damage to crop fields and at times damage to life and property as well.



Speaking on the occasion, Dr. Pranab Jyoti Bora of WWF-India reminded the gathering that these two villages had made great sacrifices for KNP by relocating in 1996 to the present location from inside KNP by giving up on their ancestral land, which is presently known as 1st addition of the park. Mr. Rinku Bezbarua of Aaranyak said that rhinos are the pride of the people of Assam and have to be protected at any cost. He urged the villagers to take it upon themselves to save KNP and its wildlife.



Mr. Soumen Dey of WWF-India announced a support package from WWF for the VDP of the two villages comprising a country boat, rain suits & torch lights to help in patrolling duty and water filters for use during flooding of the villages. The Deputy Adviser and the CO of VDP appreciated the support extended by WWF-India and requested for support to three more VDPs from the neighboring villages that also are crucial in guarding KNP.



The meeting ended with the speech of the chairman of the meeting, Mr. Sunil Barman and a vote of thanks extended by a VDP member.