EU’s sustainable energy future must not turn into hot air

Posted on 09 March 2007
 
|
 

0 Comments








The commitment by European leaders to scale up efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by up to 30 per cent by 2020 sets the right path to control climate change at the global level.



© WWF/Andrew Kerr



Brussels, Belgium – Commitment by European leaders to scale up efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by up to 30 per cent by 2020 sets the right path to control climate change at the global level. But appropriate laws and measures are needed to be put into place so that the goal does not remain hot air. 



The leaders agreed to a greenhouse gas reduction in Europe of 20 per cent by 2020, and 30 per cent if other industrialized countries will take action. 



Despite resistance from countries such as France and Poland, the European Council also decided on legally binding energy consumption targets in which 20 per cent will come from renewable sources and 10 per cent from environmentally certified biofuels by 2020. 



“It is clear that the targets decided today will only be achieved with solid laws, measures and incentives,” says Stephan Singer, Head of European Climate and Energy Unit at WWF. 



“The targets must be translated into a shift of investments towards green technologies, rather than to nuclear power stations.” 



According to WWF, the general objective for renewable energy needs to be broken down by sector — transport, buildings and electricity — with laws in support of specific binding targets for each sector. At the same time, coal power stations must be required to fit carbon capture and storage technology. 



In addition, a key element for a strong climate and energy policy in the EU will be for a major push towards energy efficiency in the residential, industrial, commercial, transport and power generation sectors. Although the council conclusions are very weak on this point, energy efficiency is still the easiest, fastest and cheapest way to reduce energy consumption and related climate pollution, according to WWF. 



“There are only 13 years for the EU to accomplish the mission defined today," added Singer. "These years are key to help saving the planet from the dangerous consequences of climate change.” 



For further information: 

Dr Stephan Singer, Head 

WWF European Climate and Energy Unit 

Tel: +32 496 550 709 

E-mail: ssinger@wwfepo.org 



Anshuman Atroley, Communications Manager

WWF-India

Tel:+91-11-4150 4797

E-mail: aatroley@wwfindia.net