WWF-India hosts a seminar on the importance of Environment Information Systems for Policy Making and Planning

Posted on 27 October 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








Over the past 25 years, the ENVIS Centre has been well recognized by users.



© WWF-India



New Delhi: On the occasion of the silver jubilee of the Environment Information System (ENVIS) Centre,-WWF-India organized a seminar on the importance of Environment Information Systems for Policy Making and Planning.



Realizing the importance of Environmental Information, the Government of India, in December 1982, established an Environmental Information System (ENVIS) as a plan programme. The focus of ENVIS since inception has been on providing environmental information to decision makers, policy planners, scientists and engineers, research workers, etc. all over the country.



The seminar was sponsored by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Dr. Nilkanth Ghosh, Statistical Advisor, MOEF., was the Guest of Honour. On this occasion Dr. Ghosh released the Parliament report on “Environment in the Indian Parliament: An Analysis 2008” and Newsletter for July-Sept, 2009. 



Other than WWF-India six other ENVIS Centres, who have a completed their 25 years of service, participated actively in the seminar. These are Development Alternative (DA), Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), The Energy Resource Institute (TERI), National Institute of Occupational Health (NIOH), Indian Institute of Science (IISc) and Industrial Toxicology Research Centre (ITRC)



Speaking on the occasion, Dr. Nilkanth Ghosh, Statistical Advisor, MOEF, said “ The ENVIS Centre at WWF-India is one of the 7 centres established under the ENVIs Scheme. Over the past 25 years, the Centre has been well recognized by users (NGOs, administrators, specialized agencies, researchers, school and college students, and media professionals), both within the country and overseas as a reliable and responsive source of environmental information in India. The centre is a focal point of information on NGOs and the Environment, Parliament and the Environment and Media and the Environment.”



Dr Sejal Worah,Programme Director, WWF-India said “The challenge now is to ensure that the compendium of information collected by the ENVIS centres is accessible, analytical and is used for guiding important environmental decisions in the country.”



For further information:

Dr. G. Areendran, Director- ENVIS Centre

WWF-India

172-B, Lodi Estate

New Delhi - 110 003 

Telephone : +91-011-41504791

E-mail:gareendran@wwfindia.net