G8 and MEF climate talks: It’s progress but still not fair!

Posted on 10 July 2009
 
|
 

0 Comments








U.S President Obama and chairing MEF during G8 Summit makes announcement on plans to address climate change



© WWF



L’Aquila, Italy - Rich and poor nations have not been able to overcome divisions and mistrust during the Major Economies Forum (MEF) and the G8 summit and while some progress was made, leaders of wealthy nations failed to take responsibility for climate change, WWF said.



The two meetings saw positive developments such as a common goal to limit global average temperature increases to two degrees, an absolute minimum to avoid the worst impacts of global warming, but disappointed with the lack of ambitious reduction targets and serious financial commitments by industrialized countries. 



"It’s all about money. Rich countries are telling poor nations: oh poor you. But they avoid committing to pay their fair share" said Kim Carstensen. "This is not enough and it is not fair."



"Wealthy nations have to show true empathy, real leadership, solid financial commitments and not comforting statements."



MEF requested Finance Ministers to report back at the G20 meeting in Pittsburg in September.



“We need Finance Ministers make a commitment which is at least as ambitious as what Gordon Brown proposed recently”, Carstensen said.



Brown proposed 100 billion USD per year for mitigation and adaptation. According to WWF, we need more funds up to 160 billion USD per year by 2017.



"The failure by MEF to agree on halving greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 is a sign of mistrust between developed and developing nations," Carstensen said.



During the meeting of the major economies, bringing together states responsible for approximately 80 percent of world’s emissions, some industrialized nations tried to blame emerging economies for insufficient progress. 



"In order to achieve a compromise the blame game has to be abandoned and replaced by responsible and credible commitments of industrialized countries."



WWF welcomed MEF’s declarations on a two degree warming limit to and to double public funds’ for research in green technologies. It shows there is still some good will and therefore chance for agreement in Copenhagen.



"There are some signs of good will which if continued could result in an agreement. We are convinced that a deal in Copenhagen is still utterly achievable.”