In hopes of locating her family, I posted the cat on social media. Thanks to the many community members who shared her information, the cat’s family was found that same night. They came to my house with proper precautions and identified the cat as Maggy. She had gone missing the night before and the family was searching desperately to find her. Seeing her injured made them heartbroken, but they were so happy to have found her. The family shared with me that they had just moved from a town 20 minutes away because they could no longer pay rent due to the pandemic. Cats have a very strong instinct for territory, so it’s very likely that Maggy was returning to her old home when she got hit by a car. Marcos had rescued Maggy from the streets when she was a kitten and sneaked her into his bedroom. When his father discovered her, he let her stay for a while but eventually giving her to Marco’s older sister, Cynthia, for a permanent home. Cynthia has two children, Valeria and Sebastian, who loved caring for Maggy. With the passing of Marco’s father earlier this year, the whole family – including Maggy – moved together from Zamora Michoacan to a new home in Puerto Aventuras. Losing a father/husband/grandfather and facing financial troubles from COVID-19 has made for an incredibly difficult year for Maggy’s family. Losing Maggy on top of that would have been devastating. Luckily, Maggy recovered after two weeks of specialized care and is now reunited with her loving family. Thanks to our donors, we were also able to help cover Maggy’s medical bills, a great relief for her family. I am very fortunate to have been able to help Maggy receive the emergency care she needed. Her story is the perfect example of why I dedicate my career to helping animals in need and reuniting animals with their families who love them so dearly. Thank you for all the support you give that allows us to make these reunions possible. Stay safe! -Erika Flores, IFAW Veterinarian & Project Manager, Programs