government continues to fuel a dying hunt dwindling demand for seal products Since 1996, hundreds of millions have been spent by the Government of Canada to develop and promote seal products, open market access, and fight the EU trade ban. But efforts to make seal skin fashionable have struggled in the face of a warming climate, global economic crises, and changing attitudes towards fur. Seal meat has struggled to move beyond a novelty item on menus and political photo-ops, and now seems to hold most promise as lobster bait. In 2011, Canada proudly claimed to have signed an export deal with China for seal meat, but by 2014 it had failed to materialize. Seal heart valve transplants were then touted to become a $1.5 billion industry, but ultimately proved unsuccessful. Some have suggested that the most economically viable product from a seal is its penis. Every attempt to make commercial sealing a viable industry has failed. These failures come with high price tags, and many Canadians have had enough. This winter, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador (where the majority of the commercial seal hunt occurs) sued a seal processor who failed to pay back a $1 million bailout from 2015. (They also decided to replace the sealskin covered chairs in the House of Assembly, suggesting that attitudes may be changing, even in the heartland of the seal hunt.) seal hunt widely condemned Although the days of protests on the ice may be over, international opposition to the cruel and unnecessary seal hunt remains high. In fact, the seal hunt is reportedly still the number one topic that makes its way into Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s inbox. Criticism of the hunt is backed by experts including scientists, veterinarians, economists, and global trade analysts. Even the fishing industry has expressed concerns that an expanded seal hunt could have negative impacts on market access and acceptance of Canadian fish and seafood products, with serious economic impacts on coastal fishing communities. We must keep the pressure on. Canada must follow scientific evidence rather than give in to pressure from fisheries unions who incorrectly blame seals for eating too many fish. Please lend your voice and take action today by asking Canada to end the East Coast commercial seal hunt, for good. Sheryl Fink Campaign Director - Canadian Wildlife