Females tend to remain closer to the pack, while males often set out in search of new habitat and a mate. Such a journey is easily hundreds of kilometers long. Fun fact: Wolves in Russia and Finland have been tracked migrating all the way to Norway and Sweden—a distance of 1,000 kilometers (620 miles)! Wolves pose very little risk to human safety in Europe and North America. Researchers have noted that although the statistical risk of a human being attacked by a wolf is above zero, it is far too low to be calculated. In fact, wolves are probably more afraid of you than you are of them—they tend to flee when a human is present. Occasional close encounters between humans and wolves that typically result from habituation are likely to have tragic consequences for the wolves. Humans and wolves can easily coexist. The rule of thumb is, if we leave wolves alone, they will leave us alone. In Canada, wolves are trapped and killed for recreational and commercial purposes. They are also the target of government-led slaughters in British Columbia, Alberta and the Northwest Territories. In parts of Canada and the U.S., deadly poisons—which threaten non-target wildlife, pets and even people—are also used to kill wolves in a misguided effort to reverse the decline of endangered caribou population. In both Canada and the U.S., IFAW is supporting legislation and regulations that would stop the use of the poisons such as sodium cyanide, strychnine and Compound 1080 to kill wolves and other species. The use of these poisons is inhumane and unethical, as they cause intense suffering and a prolonged, painful death. They are also ecologically disruptive and dangerous to the public. By contrast, wolves are strictly protected in the EU, and packs have started to repopulate certain parts of their historic range. In Europe, IFAW’s has focused on raising public awareness, monitoring the wolf repopulation, and enabling the coexistence of wolves and livestock farmers. We support the implementation of livestock protection measures such as wolf-safe fencing and livestock protection dogs. In the U.S., wolves were reintroduced into the lower 48 states in the 1990s after being wiped out during the preceding century. They have since reprised their role as an integral part of their ecosystems, including the landscapes in and around Yellowstone National Park. Populations in North America and Europe require ongoing protection before they—and the ecological services that they provide—are truly sustainable.