All of Priya’s cubs, with the exception of Carmen, stayed at the roadside zoo. Carmen was sent to a Las Vegas magician, who routinely filed down the teeth and declawed the cats used in his shows. Declawing big cats is a procedure condemned by the American Veterinary Medical Association. Records reveal cubs were regularly sent from the roadside zoo to this magician, and often returned to the roadside zoo when they became too large and too dangerous to use in the magic act. Once returned, they were stockpiled in cages like the one below and bred to create more cubs to exploit. It is assumed all the cubs who remained at the roadside zoo were used in public cub petting fundraisers until they were too old to be safely handled. At that time, they were relegated to small, barren enclosures to live out the remainder of their lives. They lived with no grass, little shade, and when TCWR and TIA arrived, the ground was covered in feces and shredded wooden pallets. Metal nails were not even removed from the wood shreds before being spread in the enclosures. Priya’s cub Carolina was housed with two tigers, India and Capriccio, who came from another breeding facility in Oklahoma. Both were sent to Colorado when only one week old. There are currently no laws against this. In contrast, it is illegal in both Oklahoma and Colorado to sell or transfer pet cats and dogs younger than 8 weeks old. Everything changed late this year when Turpentine Creek Wildlife Refuge and Tigers in America took over the roadside zoo and began their rescue operation. Priya and all of her remaining cubs were transported to new homes at Big Cat Rescue, Carolina Tiger Rescue, Forest Animal Rescue, The Wildcat Sanctuary and Turpentine Creek Wildlife Refuge where they have new, spacious enclosures with room to roam and their new caregivers lavish them with attention. Priya and the other animals rescued by Turpentine Creek Wildlife Refuge and Tigers in America suffered for years, but they have a happy ending to their stories. Unfortunately, this is not the case for hundreds, maybe thousands, of tigers, lions and others being used in cub petting operations around the country. The extent of the networks involved in this trade is still mostly unknown, as are the fates of many of the animals involved. What we do know is there are more victims out there who need our help. That is why IFAW works with organizations like TCWR and TIA to provide quality, lifetime care to big cats in the United States that have been abused, neglected and abandoned. --Meredith Whitney