Finding ways to coexist Leadership and community growth From 2000 to 2005, our project has provided micro-credit loans to more than 210 households in seven villages in the Pu’er region, achieving an average annual income growth of 35%, and achieving a 100% repayment rate through fine project management. What has left me with the deepest impression was witnessing the development of a few local women taking part in the project. Initially, they were never willing to give speeches or take charge.. Now, thanks to the skills they have developed through the project, they are the ones guiding their groups, achieving great improvement, winning recognition and serving as the backbone of their community’s development. In addition to this kind of community development project that also benefits people, we have launched the first ever community-level early warning system in Yunnan, covering more than 60 villages in areas where elephants are active. In April this year, together with our local government partners, we launched a human-elephant conflict prevention ranger network named “Community Hero”. IFAW designs curriculums and trains rangers on how to carry out training themselves, enabling us to reach more people. The project has mobilized more than 1,600 villagers to strengthen the prevention of human-elephant conflicts after only one quarter of implementation. Changing minds and promoting long-term coexistence Over the past 20 years, I have seen my fellow villagers endure complications brought by the elephants, but I have also witnessed endless touching stories of encounters between them and Asian elephants. In the summer of 2015, a baby elephant was abandoned in a village. Authorities rushed to the scene after receiving the news. We were worried about the health of the baby elephant, but also worried that its group would return to look for it. However, when we finally arrived we witnessed something that we had not expected. The baby elephant was hiding in one of the villagers’ firewood shed. Initially, it refused to eat, but the villagers brought milk from different brands to feed it, while others brought fruit and someone had even given the elephant a blanket. The whole village was heartbroken to see the ill little baby elephant. A veterinarian quickly sterilized the baby elephant, gave it an injection and prepared milk powder. Finally, the baby elephant was taken to the Asian Elephant Breeding and Rescue Center for rehabilitation and treatment. As the baby elephant was taken away, an old lady was still stroking its head and feeding it milk, afraid that it would be hungry on the way, while at the same time praying for the life of the elephant. The village, which was not in any way rich, had many times had its farmlands destroyed and the villagers’ life and property safety constantly threatened by the elephants. The villagers both loved and feared elephants at the same time. However, as soon they realized that the baby elephant was in trouble, the villagers’ love overcame their fear. I still strongly remember a story once told to me by a ranger when he was monitoring elephants far away. He said that when the elephant went into the mountain forest opposite him to find food, he also sat down and started eating his lunch. In addition to the wind blowing through the leaves, he could also hear the birds singing. “They were having their meal over there and I was having mine. At that time I felt pure happiness. This is what the harmony between elephants and people is all about.” -Dafan Cao, Program Officer, China