safer cookstoves cleaner fuels Things improved further when the government of India launched Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana in 2016. This scheme aims to make clean cooking fuels available to 50 million rural and deprived households. The IFAW–WTI team at Manas jumped on the opportunity and helped villagers use the scheme to buy and install liquid petroleum gas (LPG) connections in their kitchens. LPG is a cleaner-burning fuel, so it also reduces deadly smoke in homes. The Assam Haathi Project has also supported more than 260 families who couldn’t pay for the scheme. They needed to contribute only the deposit while the remaining amount was covered under the project. Narmila Barman, who lives in No 1 Barpathar village, says, ‘I use both the improved cook stove and the LPG. We have a small farmland, and that helps me in saving some refiling cost for the LPG cylinder. We have a smoke-free kitchen, and I feel happy now because we no longer depend on the fuelwood from the forest for our daily needs.’ better relationships Project leader Sanatan Deka estimates that the transformed kitchens have saved more than 10,000 trees from being felled for fuel—a key step to mitigating climate change and boosting ecosystem resilience. Importantly, these interventions have also improved the relationship between park managers and villagers. Sanatan says, ‘Today you will see not a single hand-pulled cart for collection of fuelwoods inside the park, pulled by villagers accompanied by small kids. People use LPG as a source of clean cooking energy and use the fuelwood from their backyard farmland when required, especially in winter and for other social functions.’ The Assam Haathi Project was launched in 2018, in collaboration with Assam Forest Department, IFAW, and Chester Zoo. For almost five years, no human or elephant deaths have been reported in the villages as a result of human-elephant conflict. Today, Rani—whose husband died in an elephant encounter—has an LPG connection in her house and doesn’t depend on firewood to run her kitchen anymore. With poultry in her backyard and a home garden in the front, she no longer needs to risk her life in the forest. *name changed