Ocean time Tangled in trash Larger pieces of plastic, such as bags, six-pack rings, straws, bottles, ropes, take-out packaging, and many of the things we use in our daily lives are called macroplastics. In addition to being an eyesore when they wash up on our beaches, macroplastics can pose a threat to wildlife through entanglement or consumption, when they’re mistaken for food. But the deadly dangers of debris don’t stop there. Breaking down again When plastic breaks down into microplastics it becomes a different kind of threat to wildlife. Microplastics, which are made of particles smaller than five millimetres in size, constitute over 90% of surface water marine plastics. Smaller fish, or those species low on the food chain like plankton and oysters, consume microplastics when filtering water. Microplastics, and the toxins they contain, get passed upwards through the food chain, eventually getting ingested by large marine animals and humans, particularly in rural, Indigenous, and low-income communities that rely on wild foods. Sadly, much of our toothpaste, body wash, scrubs and other sanitary items still contain microbeads, a type of microplastic that’s added as an exfoliant to health and beauty products. Microbeads are now banned in the United States, Canada and the UK, with several other countries considering bans, but they’re still an ingredient in millions of items across the globe. Most water municipalities aren’t equipped to detect or remove these microbeads, so they end up passing through the treatment process and getting into our waterways. Be afraid of ghost gear Beyond what we think of as typical plastic, lost, abandoned, or discarded plastic fishing gear—also called "ghost gear"—is another problem. It remains in our oceans, travelling on the currents and trapping everything in its path. Because this gear is no longer being monitored, it roams free, killing millions of marine animals as it drifts through the ocean, ultimately causing significant financial losses to fisheries as well as damage to vessels. Committed to caring IFAW is committed to solving the plastic pollution problem and addressing the harm it causes to individual animals and the ecosystem. One way we do this is through coastal cleanup programs which help stave off larger plastics fragmenting into smaller pieces and spreading across the globe. It’s not unlikely for plastic originating in Newfoundland, Canada to make its way to the shorelines in the UK, France, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. Of course, there are things you can also do to help reduce the plastic pile-up, from simple to more intentional. Start here: Level up: Lastly, if you can, please donate to IFAW and other organizations who are helping to create and maintain a healthy planet for all of us. And, if you can’t donate, sign our pledge to protect the ocean and marine animals.