Buzz and Woody, best friends forever In early 2021, a mother koala and her joey were attacked by a dog. Sadly, the mother didn’t survive, but wildlife rescuers were able to bring the little koala to our partner Mosswood Wildlife Center for rehabilitation in Victoria, Australia. The little joey received the name Buzz and became fast friends with Woody, another young koala under Mosswood Wildlife Center’s care. The two koalas have become inseparable, often climbing into each other’s baskets to be together. Venus, Tupã, and Joaquim: giant anteaters returning to the wild Meet Venus, Tupã, and Joaquim, three of the orphaned giant anteater pups that were rescued and cared for by Instituto Tamanduá. A majority of the rescued pups were orphaned as a result of the wildfires in the Pantanal region of Brazil. Tupã recovered quickly and in August, he was released back into the wild where he is now thriving! Venus and Joaquim have found great comfort in one another and continue to spend their days together. While they each have their own bed, most nights Joaquim will move to sleep next to Venus in her bed. Being paired up so close in age also means they can better develop their instincts and muscles through playing, exploring and enrichment activities. Once they are old enough and strong enough, the giant anteaters will be released back into the wild. Pompeyo the manatee steals our hearts In August, Huay Pix community members in Mexico discovered a one-month-old manatee on his own in a lagoon. They quickly realized he needed help and reached out to authorities, who activated the local marine mammal stranding network. IFAW stepped up to help provide funding for the manatee’s enclosure and equipment to track the manatee’s health. The manatee, now named Pompeyo, is undergoing rehabilitation for release back to the wild at the Centro de Atención y Rehabilitación de Mamíferos Acuáticos (CARMA). He is developing quickly and learning to forage on his own, a critical skill needed for life in the wild! 600-lb leatherback sea turtle rescue On October 10th, IFAW’s Marine Mammal Rescue team got an urgent call for help: a 600-lb leatherback sea turtle was stranded in Wellfleet, Cape Cod. Our team rushed to the location to support Mass Audubon and the New England Aquarium with rescue efforts. Acting quickly, we were able to transport the turtle to a safer beach and release him into deeper water. 30 days after his release, the turtle’s satellite tag transmitted data revealing signs of good health and behaviors. We’re incredibly proud of our MMRR team and everyone who helped return this beautiful animal back into the ocean. Kala and Kalee, our favorite bear cubs Meet Kala and Kalee, two orphaned Asiatic black bears who were rescued in India after their mother was suspected to be killed by poachers. The cubs were brought to the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC), a facility established by IFAW-WTI to help orphaned Asiatic black bear cubs receive the expert care they need to return to the wild. After three months of rehabilitation, it was time for the cubs’ next step. The team translocated them to a pre-release site in the Pakke Tiger Reserve, where they are currently adjusting to their wild surroundings before returning fully to the wild. Reuniting a leopard cub with mom A tiny leopard cub became separated from its mother after the pair got scared by workers while exploring tea gardens in India. Our partners at WTI rushed to help the little cub and checked her vital signs—she was barely a month old. They set up bedding for the cub inside a box, placed her near the tea garden, and watched from a distance with hopes of the mother returning. In the early morning hours, the mother returned! Searching for her cub, she nudged and sniffed the carton to identify her little one. After a few minutes, the cub was out of the box and reunited with her mother! The two then safely disappeared back into the wilderness. Moses the elephant finds a new family Typically, we find animals in need of rescue—but in this case, Moses found us! One evening, the little elephant calf wandered to the outskirts of the Panda Masuie release site founded and run our partner, Wild is Life Trust. The calf was all alone, with no herd in sight. In a beautiful moment unlike any other, the herd gently comforted the calf and walked him into the center surrounded by love and support. By retracing the calf’s tracks in the forest, the team found that Moses walked at least four kilometers alone from Zambezi National Park. We don’t know what happened to Moses’s herd or how he found his way to us, but we are incredibly happy to have him. A special mother-daughter orangutan duo Ucokwati and Mungil are a mother and daughter pair of orangutans rescued from the illegal pet trade. When COVID-19 hit, funding plummeted at the sanctuary that was caring for them. In April 2021, with IFAW support the team successfully translocated the pair to The Centre for Orangutan Protection, where they began rehabilitation for release to the wild. Ucowatki and Mungil adjusted quickly to their new life and are making great progress towards a return to the wild next year. Trapped jaguar and dog get a second chance In the early hours of the morning on December 4, authorities in Uvero, Quintana Roo received a report of a jaguar that had fallen into a well while attacking a dog. The dog had also fallen into the well with the jaguar and was rescued by community members. IFAW treated the dog for injuries and miraculously is expected to make a full recovery. In a join rescue operation, the Participatory Environmental Surveillance Committee, federal authorities (PROFEPA and CONANP), state authorities (IBANQROO), local organization Aak Mahahual, and IFAW worked together to rescue and release the jaguar from the well. With additional assistance from the Mexican Navy, the team was able to rescue the jaguar while keeping both community members and the animal itself safe from harm's way.