The landscape is characterised by low productivity due to low rainfall and poor soils. Communities in buffer areas have high poverty levels and heavily rely on natural resources for survival. Due to habitat fragmentation, encounters between wildlife and people are frequent during movements across communal land and the protected areas. This human-wildlife interface is not always harmonious with increasing human-wildlife conflict resulting in crop damage, livestock killing, and loss of property and in some instances loss of human life. Given such socio-ecological complexities, IFAW endeavours to promote climate-smart landscapes that enhance communities' resilience and enhance resource use efficiency for conservation impact at scale. Our landscape investment and finance in partnership with ZimParks and other actors will create community-level incentives for good natural resources stewardship and bring marginalised people who live with and directly depend on natural resources at the centre of our programme interventions. Synergies and coalitions need to be established and nurtured to de-risk landscape portfolios, enhance coordination and take our solutions to scale. The role of the private sector in providing both asset and enabling investment is critical for sustainable integrated landscape management. Given the foregoing, it is clear IFAW has a niche and relevant role to play within “The Landscapes for People, Food and Nature Initiative” and its engagement forum, the African Landscapes Dialogue to champion and action investments that support and promote integrated landscape management. IFAW has already started community engagements in various landscapes across Africa, providing youth and women with employment opportunities and skills transfer. In Zimbabwe our local partner, Wild is Life has championed locally-led landscape development at the Panda Masuie Rehabilitation and Release centre, supporting a local school and providing veterinary services to community livestock in Woodlands Estate. IFAW intends to scale up and expand such engagements as part of the bigger vision within our priority landscapes. It is envisaged such collaborative management will open new opportunities to allow communities to better manage their natural resources and contribute to viable and ecologically connected and functional elephant populations in Africa. -Phillip Kuvawoga IFAW Programme Director, Landscape Conservation Phillip Kuvawoga Director - Landscape Conservation