Is whale watching safe for whales? How to pick the right whale watching operator Sustainable whale watching companies should be transparent with their practices and measures to protect whales. Before scheduling a whale watch, check the operator’s website or speak with a representative to ensure that you support the most responsible group. The answers to these questions can help you determine the integrity of a whale watching operator and help you support the best one. Benefits to whales and marine ecosystems Responsible whale watching can greatly benefit whales and other marine life. During whale watching tours, guests are often educated on the importance of respecting and protecting these animals. The experience as a whole can foster a love for the ocean and inspire individuals to take actions that support marine conservation. From an economic standpoint, sustainable whale watching is the best alternative to commercial whaling and it’s becoming easier to make the switch. It creates new local jobs, boosts the economy, and drives tourism to unique locations. How does ifaw promote sustainable whale watching? IFAW has played a major part in the development of whale watching as a sustainable alternative to the cruel and lethal practice of commercial whaling. Since first becoming involved in 1980, our work has created a wave of change around the world, leading to new projects and networks of operators in Latin America, South Africa, Asia, Australia, the Pacific, Europe, North America and the Caribbean. Iceland has become the epicenter of our sustainable whale watching work. Partnering with IceWhale, we created Meet Us Don’t Eat Us to help promote sustainable solutions to the country’s long history of commercial whaling. Working with local restaurants and community members, we raise awareness of sustainable whale watching and encourage tourists to say “no” to the consumption of minke whale meat. Since the start of our campaign, tourist whale meat consumption has been cut in half and the commercial whaling industry has halted.