It can be hard for communities to get excited about playing an active role in protecting the same animals that are threatening their family’s source of income. Monkeys are not only eating crops and thus reducing current yields for local families, but also damaging and killing trees, thereby reducing future yields as well. This is putting the welfare and conservation of Barbary macaques at risk as people may be tempted to retaliate and are less likely to support conservation initiatives if the species is considered a pest. In addition to current risks for human livelihoods and species conservation, future reintroduction of confiscated Barbary macaques will be threatened if we do not develop a successful model for local communities and wildlife to coexist. We learned so much at that first meeting from just listening to people. The only moderately successful method of protecting crops thus far was ensuring human guards were present each day from 5am to sunset. A significant burden for lower resourced farms, this required all family members to participate or simply bear the worst impact of doing nothing at all. All the while guards from other more resourced farms would sometimes chase monkeys directly onto the neighbour’s property rather than back into the forest, putting lower resource households at an even greater disadvantage. We learned that although there were dozens of households in the community, they had never come together to discuss this shared problem and potential collective solutions. Until today. I watched the mood transform from exasperated to hopeful. There was an acceptance of IFAW’s role as facilitator and mediator, rather than the provider of solutions or resources. Although there was an admission that the community has never worked together like this before, they realized how much further they could go together than on their own. This is the day the Cherry Tree Association was born. The road ahead for this community will not be easy. We’re still a long way off from finding a solution to the crop raiding issue, but we have to take time to celebrate every small success for people and animals. Today, I feel proud to celebrate the fact that no one in this community will have to tackle this challenge alone anymore and that the first – and hardest – step towards peaceful coexistence with Barbary macaques has already been taken. -Melissa Liszewski, Senior Progam Manager - Community Engagement