Ocean noise has been rising for decades COVID-19 slows the cruise ship industry During the COVID-19 pandemic, many industrial activities have slowed or stopped, and the cruise industry has been especially impacted, with cruises completely suspended throughout seas and oceans around the world. Cruise ships can have a significant impact on marine and coastal environments – they travel to and through many remote and ecologically sensitive areas, including Marine Protected Areas and National Parks. Many of these areas and the sensitive marine life inhabiting them will be enjoying a quieter time without cruise ships operating this year – the Antarctic Peninsula and the sub-Antarctic island of South Georgia, where blue, minke, fin, humpback and southern right whales spend the summer months feeding, will be relieved of cruise ship presence and the associated noise during the 2020/21 austral summer. Likewise, the blue whale feeding and nursing grounds of Corcovado Gulf and Isla de Chiloe in Chile will also be much quieter for these endangered whales because of fewer cruise ships. The levels of underwater noise produced by ships generally correlate with the speed at which ships travel, with faster ships producing more noise. Cruise ships travelling at high speeds in the Haruaki Gulf, New Zealand, have long been a concern for IFAW and other groups working to protect endangered Bryde’s whales there. Researchers have found that noise produced by large vessels passing can reduce communication space for Bryde’s whales by up to 87% in this area, meaning the ability for these whales to detect one another is dramatically reduced in the presence of ships. Another major issue for these whales is the risk of 'ship strikes' where vessels collide with whales, causing horrific injuries and often death. Watch: Saving marine life could be as easy as adjusting the volume Slower ship speeds benefit marine animals The good news is that underwater noise and ship strike risk can both be greatly reduced by ships slowing down. Also, by travelling at reduced speeds, ships burn less fuel and so produce fewer greenhouse gases (GHGs), which results in both fuel cost savings and progress towards CO2 reduction targets for the shipping industry. So slower speeds can be a win-win for the environment and industry. In many areas, the pandemic has allowed marine animals and habitats a moment of reprieve from some of the negative effects of human activities. Scientists also have a unique opportunity to study the ‘before’ and ‘during’ effects of changes in underwater noise levels on whales and other sensitive marine species, helping us to gain further understanding of how this invisible pollutant is threatening their survival. A wake-up call After the COVID-19 storm has passed, there will be a huge opportunity to reshape how businesses such as the cruise industry restart operations – ‘going back to normal’ should not be a given, as ‘normal’ wasn’t working ecologically. The pandemic can be the wake-up call to make the changes needed to provide better protection for animals, people and the place we call home. -Sharon Livermore, Senior Program Manager, Marine Conservation Learn more For more information about IFAW’s work to protect marine animals, please read about our project looking to reduce ocean noise. Sharon Livermore Director - Marine Conservation