what is CITES? what does CITES do? how many species does CITES protect? what is a CITES appendix There are three appendices to CITES that guide international trade based on how threatened each species is with extinction. Appendix 1 offers the highest level of protection and includes species that are closest to extinction. These species can’t be legally traded, except under special circumstances like scientific research. Species listed in Appendix 1 include only about 3% of all species covered by CITES. Appendix 2 includes plants and animals that are likely to be threatened with extinction if trade isn’t regulated. It also includes “look-alike” species that are similar to those listed in the appendices. International trade is permitted for plants and animals included in Appendix 2, but is monitored, limited and controlled with permits. Most of the species covered by CITES are included on this list (97%). Appendix 3 includes species that are protected by at least one country, which requests cooperation from other governments to ensure that trade doesn’t threaten their survival. Only 1% of all species covered by CITES are included in Appendix 3. what are some examples of CITES-listed species? As one of the most heavily trafficked animals on Earth, all eight species of pangolin are listed by CITES. Since 2014, every species has been included in Appendix 1, with the highest level of protection due to significant concerns about the levels of trade in pangolins, with more than 20 tons of pangolins and their parts traded every year between 2010 and 2015. Pangolins continue to be illegally captured across their range in Africa and Asia and traded illegally for their meat and scales, which are used in some forms of traditional medicine. Two species of elephant are listed by CITES. African savannah elephants are listed on Appendix 1, except for some populations in southern Africa, which are included on Appendix 2. Asian elephants are listed on Appendix 1. Elephants are targeted for their ivory tusks, which have been used to make piano keys, jewelry and even art. Poaching for ivory and the illegal trade that supports has decimated many elephant populations around the world, yet it is only one threat facing elephants, which also suffer from habitat loss and conflict with humans. Jaguars are also covered by CITES and given the highest level of protections under Appendix 1. These large cats were targeted for their fur in the 1960s and 1970s, leaving the species near extinction. They were first covered by CITES in 1975, which helped their populations recover from illegal trade. Unfortunately, they are once again threatened by development and loss of habitat. legal versus illegal trade in wildlife CITES uses a system of permits and certificates to regulate international trade in animals and plants. Each year, more than one million permits and certificates track and monitor trade worth billions of dollars. Legal trade includes products made from wood or leather, medicines and cosmetics made from plants, and even live animals. When species covered by CITES are traded outside of this monitoring and permitting system, it is considered illegal. Countries that have agreed to abide by the CITES agreement are expected to penalize any illegal trade and confiscate the wildlife products. Unfortunately, illegal trade in wildlife products, aka wildlife trafficking, is often pursued by organized crime groups seeking to profit from the black-market. Efforts to conserve and protect vulnerable plants and animals are undermined by criminal activity. International agreements like CITES are important for addressing wildlife trafficking, because without cooperation across borders, even the strongest national protections for a species can be crippled by demand in other countries. When nations collaborate in conservation efforts, wildlife crimes can be caught and stopped at any point in the trade, from collection, to border crossings to markets. how often does CITES meet? The CITES Conference of the Parties (CoP) is held every three years but has many crucial committee and working group meetings that take place in between CoPs to ensure work agreed at the CoP is undertaken, and new recommendations prepared for future CoPs. These meetings include the CITES Standing Committee, that is responsible for implementation of CITES rules on international wildlife trade, including holding governments accountable when they are not implementing CITES correctly.