Malawi’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife, the International Fund for Animal Welfare and African Parks announced the mission completed on schedule this weekend with 263 elephants moved to Kasungu National Park (NP) in Malawi. The translocation is part of a national conservation initiative to maintain healthy habitats in Malawi’s national parks, establish viable elephant populations, and ensure the prosperity of local communities living around the parks. The elephants have moved to Kasungu National Park where IFAW has worked to end poaching since 2015. Since then the park’s elephant population has grown from 50 individuals to about 120—it’s anticipated that the addition of 263 elephants from Liwonde National Park (NP) to Kasungu NP will ensure the long-term conservation of elephants in Kasungu. A wide variety of additional wildlife were also successfully translocated to Kasungu NP from Liwonde NP including 80 buffalo, 128 impala, 33 sable, 81 warthog and 109 waterbuck. Kasungu is the second largest national park in Malawi covering 2,100 square kilometers, which is four times the size of Liwonde. In 2015, DNPW partnered with African Parks to transform Liwonde National Park into a secure wildlife haven and to realize its full potential as a precious resource for Malawi and its people. In 2018, the government extended the mandate to incorporate the contiguous 358 km² Mangochi Forest Reserve, increasing African Parks’ footprint. 10 July 2022 In a significant landmark for the conservation of Malawi, Malawi’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife (DNPW), African Parks (AP) and IFAW have begun translocating 250 elephants approximately 350 km (217 mi) from Liwonde National Park to Kasungu National Park. The translocation will continue through the end of the July as part of a national conservation initiative to maintain healthy habitats in Malawi’s national parks, establish viable elephant populations and ensure the prosperity of local communities living around the parks. Additional wildlife, including buffalo, impala, sable, warthog and waterbuck will also be translocated from Liwonde to Kasungu. On Thursday, a family herd of 10 elephants walked peacefully from their transport vehicles into a holding boma at Kasungu; 41 elephants have been safely released into Kasungu since the translocation began over a week ago.  At the same time, a herd of 80 buffalo literally bounded from the confines of their transport vehicle into a separate boma, clearly happy to stretch their legs after hours on the road from Liwonde National Park. We’ll keep you updated as this incredible effort to restock Kasungu National Park and secure the future for Malawi’s wildlife continues in the coming weeks.