pangolins prized for scales and meat All eight pangolin species are killed for their scales, which completely cover them. Scales are composed of the protein keratin that’s found in hair, skin, and nails. When a pangolin is afraid, it rolls into a ball of nearly impenetrable armor. Sadly, the scales are still used in traditional and folk medicine, while efficacy for treating anything successfully has not been scientifically proven. Their meat is also considered a delicacy among some cultures that view it as a sign of wealth. It’s estimated that approximately 1 million pangolins have been captured in the wild and they, or their body parts, illegally sold on the black market. partnerships help make rescue possible “During this whole case, we were a convenor and also funder who played an important role in the care of the animals post-seizure,” says Hachemin. “Our close partner Wildlife Trust of India or WTI conducted the online investigation on encrypted messaging apps. Building on their work, after being regularly updated throughout this process, we then shared intelligence reports with our partner, the Jakarta Animal Aid Network or JAAN, which contacted local police with information about the seller’s location. The animals were seized within nine days.” IFAW ensured that information was transmitted correctly, quickly, and transnationally so three suspects were arrested. All three pangolins died—one during rescue and two after—due to stress associated with being trafficked. “The outcome was unfortunate, but not surprising, given the fragile nature of pangolins and the inhumane conditions in which animals are trafficked,” Lelanchon says. “It’s a major reason that our Live Animals Seized in Trade efforts are so critical to improving survival rates.” “Our interface with other organizations, and the reach of our network, is testimony to the value of partnerships that allowed us to cover an illegal trade hotspot,” Hachemin says. More efforts that save pangolins can’t come too soon. IFAW doesn’t know exactly how many pangolins exist in the world, but experts project that some pangolin species could decline by as much as 50 to 80 percent over the next three generations.