IFAW Manifesto - What should be the EU's priorities? Wildlife Trafficking
Wildlife crime is the fourth largest illegal global trade after drugs, counterfeiting and human trafficking, worth an estimated 8 to 20 billion Euros annually. Trafficking in wildlife is one of the world’s most profitable organized criminal activities and even poses a direct security threat in some parts of the world. The EU is not only a top destination and transit for illegal wildlife items, but is also an important source region. In response, the EU adopted a five-year Wildlife Trafficking Action Plan in 2016 to address the root causes and identify measures to combat trafficking more effectively while supporting global efforts. These include funding and diplomacy, along with increasing the capacity of specialized cybercrime units and amending national legislation for wildlife crime to be recognized as a serious crime. MEPs should ensure that the commitments of the EU Wildlife Trafficking Action Plan remain after 2020 and that the Member States adopt national Wildlife Trafficking Action Plans. Wildlife Cybercrime
Every year, EU enforcement authorities seize thousands of shipments including millions of protected wildlife specimens. The picture gets even gloomier when looking at the internet, which is largely unregulated, anonymous, and virtually unlimited in reach, and has become the world’s biggest marketplace, offering endless opportunities for criminal activities. To combat the threat posed by online wildlife traffickers, it is critical that public and private sectors unite to improve coordination and communication between governments, inter-governmental organizations, enforcement agencies, private companies, non-governmental organizations, and academics. The Global Wildlife Cybercrime Action Plan brings together critical actors in the fight against online wildlife traffickers: its implementation is critical to defeating such a criminal network. MEPs should ensure the implementation of the Global Wildlife Cybercrime Action Plan in Europe, with a focus on the allocation of sufficient enforcement resources to detect and prosecute wildlife cybercriminals. Animal Confiscations
Wildlife trafficking is not only pushing many species to the brink of extinction, but it also compromises the welfare of animals often trafficked in inhumane conditions to satisfy the demand for live animals. Enforcement authorities face a number of challenges when live animals are confiscated from illegal trade. The EU and the Member States should ensure tools are in place for safeguarding the welfare of confiscated animals through specialized training on humane handling and support of facilities for temporary, and eventually long-term, care of animals if they are unable to be returned to the wild. MEPs should encourage the Member States to strengthen law enforcement capacities, safeguard the welfare of confiscated animals, and both fund and adopt repatriation protocols to, wherever possible, return animals to their natural habitats. Impact of Shipping
Cetaceans – whales, dolphins, and porpoises – face more diverse and complex conservation and welfare threats today than ever before. Whether fatal or reducing the animals’ ability to survive or reproduce, threats such as collisions with ships (known as ‘ship strikes’), and underwater noise (man-made ocean noise) must be addressed urgently. Tragically, whales that are not killed immediately post-collision can suffer from terrible injuries and may have a slow, painful death. Fortunately, solutions exist such as re-routing shipping lanes and adopting speed reduction initiatives resulting in decreased levels of underwater noise, the risk of ship strike and greenhouse gas emissions, benefiting cetaceans and the environment as a whole. MEPs should encourage the EU to address the environmental impact of shipping, such as ship strikes, greenhouse gas emissions, and underwater noise, by calling for a reduction in ships’ speed and re-routing away from critical habitats. Bycatch
The EU and the Member States have a series of obligations arising from international laws and agreements to protect marine mammals. The EU has taken some actions to address bycatch (the unintentional catch of non-targeted marine species) but it remains the main threat to cetaceans in EU waters, with several thousand marine mammals affected every year. Efforts to reinforce and harmonise cetacean bycatch solutions are urgently needed including to ensure adequate bycatch monitoring and fisheries data. MEPs should ensure that reducing marine mammal bycatch becomes a main objective when deciding on new fisheries management methods and that legislation is properly developed and implemented. Environmental, conservation and animal welfare issues are crucial if we want to contribute to a better world for future generations. As an MEP, you will have a responsibility to act, both in supporting the progress made and in addressing the areas for improvement. We also encourage you to join the cross-party interest group MEPs for Wildlife in the European Parliament, campaigning for the EU to step up the fight against wildlife crime. Let's get to work! List of signatories to IFAW's pledge: 1. Petra De Sutter - Belgium
2. Frédérique Ries - Belgium
3. Marc Tarabella - Belgium
4. Hilde Vautmans - Belgium
5. Biljana Borzan - Croatia
6. Heidi Hautala - Finland
7. Sirpa Pietikäinen - Finland
8. Pascal Canfin - France
9. David Cormand - France
10. Karima Delli - France
11. Pascal Durand - France
12. Sylvie Guillaume - France
13. Yannick Jadot - France
14. Younous Omarjee - France
15. Michèle Rivasi France
16. Caroline Roose France
17. Rasmus Andresen - Germany
18. Martin Buschmann - Germany
19. Reinhard Bütikofer - Germany
20. Anna Cavazzini - Germany
21. Ismail Ertug - Germany
22. Daniel Freund - Germany
23. Petra Kammerevert - Germany
24. Ska Keller - Germany
25. Dietmar Köster - Germany
26. Katrin Langensiepen - Germany
27. Erik Marquardt - Germany
28. Hannah Neumann - Germany
29. Niklas Nienaß - Germany
30. Maria Noichl - Germany
31. Jutta Paulus - Germany
32. Tiemo Wölken - Germany
33. Stelios Kouloglou - Greece
34. Eleonora Evi - Italy
35. Bas Eickhout - Netherlands
36. Anja Hazekamp - Netherlands
37. Ernest Urtasun - Spain
38. Jakop Delunde - Sweden
39. Jytte Guteland - Sweden
40. Pär Holmgren - Sweden