A beautiful ecosystem worth protecting Supporting rangers, families, and local communities One of the first achievements of the partnership was the rehabilitation of a key artery in Hwange, the 90km road linking Makona and Hwange Main Camp. Shortly before Covid19 lockdown hit, IFAW’s support had enabled the road to be graveled. This cut travel time from the Makona substation (ranger camp) by half; what used to take 3.5 hours to reach now takes about 90 minutes. The rehabilitated road has also now enabled tourists to visit areas that were previously inaccessible by non-four wheel drive vehicles. Phase 1 of our ambitious plan to invest in conservation infrastructure includes the construction of four new houses for rangers, a recreational facility, an operations center and three ranger field bases. Renovations will benefit the 56 rangers and their families who will live and work in Makona. Pleasingly, 44 community youths, have been employed for the construction work – earning approximately US $10,000 by the completion of Phase 1. We are almost finished with the installation of a landscape-wide VHF radio network to improve response to incidents of poaching. The IFAW-ZimParks partnership recently tackled the long-standing water management problem at Hwange National Park. Nyamandhlovu Pan, a critical waterhole for wildlife and key tourist attraction, hadn’t been scooped in about 20 years. With IFAW’s help, the water volume capacity of the Pan has increased by the equivalent of about five Olympic sized swimming pools and the good seasonal rains have filled it to capacity. Other areas of work supported by the partnership include equipping Hwange National Park’s workshop at the Main Camp with the tools required to maintain the 69 vehicles it services across the Hwange Cluster and refresher training for its artisans. In addition, the Veterinary Field Laboratory has received new equipment and drug supplies, improving veterinary support for Hwange National Park’s dog unit and wildlife rescue efforts in the landscape. Long-term support for conservation initiatives The conservation need is compelling and requires bold and fresh approaches. IFAW is committed to long term financial and technical investment across multifaceted bold and tangible projects to enhance conservation development in the landscape. When we look back where we started, our partnership was received with suspicion by certain constituencies that are not familiar with IFAW as one of the strategic allies for wildlife conservation in southern Africa. As a matter of fact, IFAW has been supporting various conservation initiatives in the region for some time. - Azzedine Downes, IFAW President and CEO & Dr. Fulton U. Mangwanya, Director-General of Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (ZimParks) Azzedine Downes President & CEO I have never been satisfied with just fighting the good fight. We need to actually make a difference.