It was 5:50 AM. The truck was ready for Nania and Whisty to board. Mattresses had been installed to protect the animals, and the team that would ride with them, from any injuries. Branches of tender leaves, a favorite treat enjoyed by our unlikely duo, had been hung up as requested. Several jerricans of water were lodged inside car tires arranged to form an enclosure and provide seating for the team. We had made do with the means available, using our creativity to ensure the wellbeing and safety, not only of Nania and Whisty, but of every one of us. At about 18 months of age, Nania weighed between 500 and 600 kilograms (1,000 to 1,200 pounds). We were no match for her. I approved the relatively cozy setup and made sure that our small team was ready for the next step. 6 AM: time for Nania’s second bottle. Every three hours, she would drink 2 liters of a complex formula adapted to her needs. Idrissa, Souleymane, Salif and Abdoulaye, the caretakers who had become surrogate mothers for the elephant calf, were betting everything on this bottle. I was not so confident. Giving Nania permission to leave her enclosure, Abdoulaye held the bottle before her, drawing her toward the bags of rocks that he had trained her to climb. This had always been easy. Listening to Salif and Idrissa as they encouraged her and keeping her gaze trained on the bottle, Nania put one foot on the first bag, a second on the next, and then stood still. She was not in the mood today. She sensed that the truck, which we introduced her to two days ago, was a trap. So it was Whisty’s turn to act as bait… with no more success. Nania did not want to cooperate. The small, perfectly ripe bananas that she loved were not enough to get her on board, either. For 30 minutes, Nania’s caretakers tried one method after another, and for 30 minutes she foiled their attempts. The truck plan was abandoned. As the sun rose, I announced to the team that we would take Nania to her new enclosure… on foot. Unlike the day before, when I advized everyone to wear good shoes the next morning, the peals of laughter quickly subsided. We had 14 kilometers (8.5 miles) ahead of us. We started off with Nania in the lead, followed by Whisty. Villagers on their way to the fields were flabbergasted to see such an unusual procession. After an hour and a half of walking, we could see the entrance to the 80,600-hectare (200 thousand-acre) national park where Nania would live. We stopped there to let her drink, and she was joined by Whisty, who had ridden part of the way in a car. Nania joyfully wrapped her trunk around the sheep. Together, they covered the remaining 8 kilometers (5 miles) through the savanna. Nania walked in the center of the little group we formed, just as she would in her own herd. She advanced obediently. I felt her trunk swing against my legs with each step we took. At 9 AM, we took a break so that Nania could gulp down her third bottle in seconds, and we sprayed her with water, after which she instinctively covered herself with dirt to protect her fragile skin. The dirt acts as a sunscreen and insecticide. We then resumed our hike, but at a slower pace. At 10:20, a surge of emotion overcame us as Nania crossed the threshold of her rehabilitation enclosure. Finally, she was home. We suddenly realised that we had just opened a new chapter in her life. Probably, it would be unique, like this 4-hour walk during which Nania set the pace, like her trunk, shorter than that of other elephant calves her age, and like her fusional bond with Whisty. The name Nania, which means ‘will’ in Dyula, a local language, suits her perfectly. Céline Sissler-Bienvenu Director – European Disaster Response