working together to save animals Since offering emergency aid at border crossings in Poland, IFAW has issued more than 80 grants to partners in Ukraine and neighboring countries. These funds are being used to purchase pet food and animal supplies, veterinary supplies and medicine, and for operational expenses to help keep shelters and rescue centers care for their animals. IFAW also partnered with the Ukrainian Small Animals Veterinary Association to vaccinate and microchip 20,000 and sterilize 4,000 owned pets from displaced and resident families. The activities are currently being expanded to include several thousands of animals from local shelters, with 13 veterinary clinics participating in Kyiv, Lviv, Kharkiv, Odessa, and Dnipro. With the arrival of winter in Ukraine, IFAW teamed up with Mykolaiv Red Cross and Nova Ukraine to provide mattresses, blankets, and insulated houses for cats and dogs, as well as food for animals of families in need and free home visits by veterinary specialists. IFAW also sent funds to the Ukrainian Equestrian Charity Foundation to supply them with hay and compound feed, saving more than 150 horses. In addition to helping companion animals, IFAW has supported partners like Poznań Zoo and Wild Animal Rescue with the rescue, evacuation, and temporary care of wildlife, such as bears, bats, big cats (including tigers, four lion cubs, and a black leopard cub), wolves, and caracals. the current situation in Ukraine Today, IFAW continues to aid the Ukrainian people and their animals despite hardships on the ground. With more than 40 percent of power grids destroyed by the Russian army, electricity cuts affect the entire country, lasting between 8 and 12 hours per day and leaving millions of people without heat, light, and water. Winter temperatures plummeted as low as -15°C (5°F) in parts of Ukraine. “The Russian army is changing their strategy from mass shelling of transportation routes to fuel deposits and energy infrastructure,” says Kateryna Kyrsta, Ukraine rescue project manager at IFAW. “We need to adapt quickly.” The war left many people and their animals cold, hungry, and without homes. “The situation is dire,” continues Kyrsta. “Many people have let pets into their homes, but people have no jobs and without money, it is difficult for them to buy food for the animals. The situation in animal shelters is also getting worse; there is no electricity, not enough food, and many animals aren’t able to receive veterinary care.” adapting operations and moving ahead While food and veterinary care for companion animals and captive wildlife are a major need, equipping rehabilitation centers with fuel generators and electric batteries is also crucial. That is why IFAW has donated multiple generators to veterinary clinics in need. To better support wild animal rescue efforts, IFAW is putting money toward the purchase of a vehicle for one of its partners to rescue captive wildlife and wounded wild animals. IFAW is shifting from providing emergency grants to individual shelters to purchasing pet food from local manufacturers and then working with local animal welfare organizations so they can distribute the food to shelters, families, and pet volunteers, says Kyrsta. “This approach will help us maximize our capacities in delivering help to animals in need.” Pet volunteers venture into abandoned villages and cities in Ukraine on a daily basis. They travel by foot or bicycle, sometimes bringing shopping carts filled with food and water to stray and homeless animals in need. After one year of giving aid, the war is ongoing and IFAW must constantly adapt to tackle the changing needs on the ground, guided by one unwavering principle: Helping animals also helps those who care about them.