We then spend the day with Marvin Dupree, IFAW’s campaigner who leads the “Meet Us Don’t Eat Us” campaign in Iceland. The objective is to raise awareness among tourists on the urgently needed protection of whales as well as the value of sustainable whale watching as a viable alternative to the negative impact of commercial whale hunt and touristic whale meat consumption. The concept, which is now offered as an Airbnb Experience, is quite simple but very impactful: encourage tourists in Iceland to understand the harm of consuming minke whale meat, choose sustainable whale watching companies, and spread the message to other tourists. Marvin speaks of his work with bright eyes, sharing memories of tourists he has met —those who were shy and wanted to learn more for themselves, and other who really played the game and proactively campaigned. We tour the old harbour and look at the two whaling boats of Hvalur hf, the only company involved in Icelandic fin whaling. Docked in front of several whale watching vessels, what a sweet irony! We take photos after photos, with the goal in mind of sharing our experience with others and engaging with the next volunteers. In the evening, most of us fly north to Akureyri for tomorrow’s Whale Day celebrations. During the one-hour drive between Akureyri airport and our first stop, Husavik, I am amazed at the scenery: small rivers surrounded by wide green spaces that lay below high dark mountains with a dome of snow. I did not know much about Iceland before coming and did not expect to see that much greenery. The incredible view is enhanced by a warm sunlight that pierces through the rainy clouds even though it is past 11pm: on Summer solstice, the sun does not set at all in Husavik. We spend the morning at the Húsavík Whale Museum with museum director Eva Björk Káradóttir, scientists, and whale experts. In honor of Whale Day, the museum is free and visitors slowly begin to arrive. The Húsavík Whale Museum is a very different atmosphere compared to the Whales of Iceland museum. While the latter had this enchanting atmosphere with the life-size models, the former presents real whale skeletons from an extensive variety of specimen, including the blue whale who stranded on an Icelandic beach in 2010. Through posters, infographics, photos and videos, the museum describes the history of whaling in Iceland and its impact on whales. After meeting with Icelandic and international researchers, we drive back to Akureyri where another highlight of the trip awaits us: a whale watching tour. Due to the lack of time, we do not go on the traditional vessel but on speedboat instead. With full body suits, masks, and gloves to protect us from the cold, we are ready! We ride within the magnificent Eyjafjörður fjord, under a beautiful sun, jumping off the waves of the dream blue waters. My mind goes off somewhere else as I try to take in as much of the landscape in my memory – downside of this kind of boat is you need to hold on most of the time, which means less photos to take. Suddenly, a humpback whale swims right below the surface a dozen meters away from us. We slow down and carefully get closer . A second one appears and dives, offering us an iconic tail splashing. Soon there are about five whales swimming in a 50-meter circle around us. Our guide recognizes the whales by their unique markings and tail shapes, and tells us each of their names. An hour later, it is time to ride back to port; reality catches up with us… We finally drive to the villages of Hauganes and Dalvik where we meet IFAW’s whale watching partners who also organized different activities for tourists in celebration of Whale Day. They are proud to show the new IFAW logo present in the office, but they primarily appreciate us coming up north, as they feared all eyes would be solely on Reykjavik. Investing time and energy in these crucial relationships in the field is a key component of IFAW’s work and often is what can make the difference between the success and the failure of a whole project. Giving a sense of ownership to those who do the daily work and will continue to do so for the decades to come is key. We fly back to Reykjavik, meet with the rest of the team to hear about the activities they supervised, and then pack our bags for the return home in the early morning. Whales in Iceland are safe this year, thanks to everyone’s efforts, dedication, and support — but the future remains uncertain. Our work can’t stop. And neither can your support. We’ll continue to campaign for whale protections and promote sustainable alternatives to whaling and whale meat consumption. With the help of tourists and people like you, we can save Iceland’s whales and create a world where we thrive alongside marine mammals. -Benjamin Wiacek, EU Communications Manager Benjamin Wiacek Contributor