human health risks animal welfare concerns conservation threats Exotic pets also endanger other animals. The exotic pet trade rips wild animals away from their homes and families, disrupting ecosystems and pushing endangered species closer towards extinction. If they aren’t killed or abandoned along the way, they may end up with people who severely underestimate how much time and money they need to properly care for a wild animal. Even well-meaning owners frequently make the mistake of “freeing” their pets back into the wild if they can’t continue to care for them. They’re often released into ecosystems that can’t cope with them, though. Hofberg explains: “In Florida, Burmese pythons have been imported for years as pets. But when they get too big, their owners release them into the wild. Now incredibly special ecosystems like the Everglades are overrun by Burmese pythons that are eating everything. “Another example is the red-eared slider, a turtle. They’re very popular because they’re small, but people get bored with them and release them outside, where they become an invasive species, out-eating native turtles and other animals. “These creatures cause serious issues for native wildlife.” how to be an ally for animals It can be as simple as refusing to buy an exotic animal if you have a chance to. Instead, use your influence to educate others about why buying an exotic pet is the exact opposite of caring for wildlife. You might instead consider adopting a rescue dog, cat, or other domesticated animal, because you’ll help an animal that really does need a home. If you’re not a person who could or would buy an exotic animal in the first place, then pledge to be extra careful about not accidentally supporting influencers who show off their exotic pet for social media clout. Your likes, views, and follows on their content are used as currency, bringing them more exposure and sponsorship deals. That exposure can increase popularity and influence others to buy exotic pets, leading to more animals killed, tortured, and abandoned by people who can’t care for them, as well as transmitting new diseases to humans. Here's Hofberg’s advice: “Be a smart consumer of social media. When I see a fox in a home, for example, it makes me suspicious. I want to find out where that animal comes from. If you think someone is involved in wildlife crime, you can report it to the platform, as well as to 1-844-FWS-TIPS or fws_tips@fws.gov. “But it can also be as simple as talking to your friends about why it’s not okay. If you see something suspicious online—like an endangered turtle someone took from the wild—you can turn the conversation from ‘That’s a cute turtle’ to ‘This is not right.’”