Rescuing koalas in the field The difficulty in catching a koala is dependent on the tree it’s in. Sometimes you’ll get lucky and the tree will be small or the koala will be low enough that your flagging poles will reach just above it and encourage it down instead of further up the tree. If not, you either need to set a trap at the base of the tree which puts less stress on the koala but is more time consuming and not guaranteed to work, or you need a tree climber – which also sometimes isn’t guaranteed to work depending on the tree or on the position of the koala. Using a tree climber often allows the team to reach the koala, encourage it down a tree so it can be captured by carers and taken into care with certainty and immediacy. We always aim to do this as carefully as possible to avoid unnecessary stress to the koala. This is our end goal after all, as it means we’re getting that individual koala the care they need and stopping them from spreading any illnesses onto healthy koalas. Every individual koala is important. During our mission, we searched a number of different areas over three days and on the second day we found a male koala with chlamydia showing signs of cystitis. Other than his dirty, wet bum he looked perfect. He was 15-20 metres up a tree but I was able to climb up and safely encourage him to climb down the tree where Friends of the Koala carers and rescuers were waiting to scoop him up and take him in for treatment. I wish my intervention and in general—all human intervention—wasn't necessary but koalas need all the help they can get and sadly, it will become more and more necessary as their survival becomes more precarious. The sick koala that Maria named Kong was suffering from severe chlamydial cystitis and sadly passed away while in care at Friends of the Koala. His rescue meant he wasn’t spreading chlamydia throughout the rest of the healthy population in the area. We also hopefully eased his suffering. It gave me hope to see as many healthy koalas as we did, but there are still sick koalas out there and the pressures keep mounting, so I have a feeling this won’t be the last time I’ll be deployed to help Ballina’s koalas with IFAW. -Kailas Wild, aborist and wildlife rescuer IFAW partner