508-743-9548 what should I do if I find a stranded dolphin? why do dolphins strand? is it ok for a dolphin to be out of water? should I move a stranded dolphin back into the water? Definitely not. Stranded dolphins have experienced trauma similar to a car accident and likely need medical care and treatment before they can be released back into the ocean. When an animal is pushed back it will often restrand in a different location where it might not be reported and cannot receive care, or it can restrand deceased. In addition, dolphins are quite heavy and require specialized stretchers to safely move them and prevent damage to their tail stock, fins and flippers–which have bones that can be dislocated causing the dolphin to be unable to swim. should I pour water on a stranded dolphin or cover it? No. Approaching a stranded dolphin can be stressful for the animal and dangerous for humans and animals alike. Only trained responders should approach, touch, or provide care to prevent further stress or injury to the animal. why aren’t dolphins immediately released back into the ocean where they are found? Often, the location where dolphins strand is shallow and subject to large tidal fluctuations. Based on decades of experience, we know that treatment, along with transport to a location with quick access to deep, open ocean offers the best chance of survival for stranded dolphins. what kind of care do the dolphins receive when they are rescued? Once the dolphins are rescued by our trained responders, they are moved into a one-of-a-kind mobile dolphin rescue vehicle that was custom designed to meet the needs of what is considered a global stranding hotspot on Cape Cod. The vehicle enables IFAW veterinarians and experts to perform health assessments and stabilize the dolphins with IV fluids and other treatments to help counteract the shock the dolphins experience from the stranding, all while quickly reaching the best site for release. are the dolphins tracked after release? Some are! Temporary satellite tags are vital tools that allow us to monitor animals after they are released. Tag data provides information back to our experts, such as swim speed, which can give indications of how well the animal is faring. They can also monitor whether they are returning to habitat that is appropriate for their species. More broadly, they tell us if the animal has survived or stranded again. Learn more facts about satellite tagging dolphins and whales. are you able to save every stranded dolphin? While we are constantly advancing our response protocols to reflect the best available science, we occasionally have animals that do not survive. Our experienced veterinarians assess each animal individually to determine if they are healthy enough for immediate release. Unfortunately, in some cases, humane euthanasia is the best course of action to prevent further suffering. A necropsy (animal autopsy) is often performed so we can learn as much as possible about why they may have stranded in the first place, and how we can better help the next ones that strand on our shores. Coming soon! Some dolphins require short-term rehabilitation prior to release back to the wild to treat conditions caused by a stranding event, such as muscle injury and shock. While this was previously not possible, our exciting new initiative, the Cetacean Intensive Care Unit, will finally enable us to provide much-needed veterinary care to these animals over the course of a few days. In the ICU, dolphins will receive expanded treatments guided by advanced diagnostics to get them healthy enough to be released, allowing us to save even more lives.