9 September 2021 Our teams have safely reached the southern part of the island and are preparing to get to work in impacted communities in and around Les Cayes. Our primary goal is to help over 15,000 animals through emergency and veterinary treatments in the aftermath of this deadly disaster. 24 August 2021 For several days after the earthquake, damaged infrastructure and heightened security risks made an assessment challenging. Now, our local response partners have been able to access the hardest hit areas and complete initial assessments of unmet animal needs, of which the most urgent are: We will support these needs and help people and animals in Haiti recover. Stay tuned for updates from the field as our partners continue to help those most in need. 20 August 2021 Grace made landfall as a Tropical Depression in Haiti this week bringing high winds and heavy rainfall, further compounding the challenges of rescue and damage assessment following the massive earthquake. Our Disaster Response team expects more requests for help to come in as assessment teams are able to access the hardest hit communities. Even as disaster response efforts are underway in Haiti, our rescue teams are responding to additional disasters: In Mexico, Grace hit Tulum and Playa del Carmen as a category 1 hurricane early this morning. IFAW’s veterinarian Dr. Erika Flores and her team helped secure animal shelters and clinics ahead of the storm and are prepared to support local rescue and recovery efforts. And on Cape Cod, our Marine Mammal Research and Rescue team is preparing for emergency response as Tropical Storm Henri approaches hurricane status prior to Sunday’s landfall. 16 August 2021 A 7.2 magnitude earthquake struck the country of Haiti and the surrounding region on Saturday, 14 August 2021. While human search and rescue operations remain a priority for the country, we immediately contacted our local partners to assess the damage to their communities. IFAW is rushing aid to help provide safe shelter and food for animals and people impacted by the earthquake and aftershocks. IFAW previously worked with local partners following the 2010 earthquake and several disasters since. As recovery efforts continue, we will keep the latest updates posted on this page. Thank you for your support.