A history of failure The spread of misinformation The sealing industry continues to spread false information suggesting that seals are competitors with fishermen for commercially important species such as capelin, crab, and cod. Recent publicity stunts such as slicing open the belly of a bearded seal (a relatively rare and uncommon species in Eastern Canada), and claiming their stomach contents as “evidence” that seals need to be culled, is completely unscientific at best, and blatantly dishonest at worst. To give these claims any sort of credibility at all is an insult to the years of research conducted by legitimate scientists who study ecosystem interactions and the impacts of seal predation on fish stocks. Research that concludes there is no scientific evidence to suggest that culling seal populations would be of any benefit to fishermen. To the contrary - culls of seals could actually have unexpected and unintended consequences for ecosystems. If there is one thing to be learned from Covid-19, it is that it is critical for governments and decision makers to listen to the advice of scientists. Seals, whales, and seabirds are not “competition” to be eliminated: they are critical components of healthy, functioning marine ecosystems. It’s time to find real solutions Harp seals are going to need our help if they are to survive the deterioration of their critical ice habitat. Continued overfishing, climate change impacts, ghost fishing gear, and marine plastic debris are all having a greater impact on fish stocks than seal predation. You can help us by taking action and asking the government of Canada to support initiatives that protect seals and their ocean habitat. As the commercial seal hunt fades into history, IFAW remains committed to finding long-term solutions that address the core threats to animals. Solutions that are backed by science. Solutions that benefit, animals, people, and the place we call home. -Sheryl Fink, IFAW Campaigns Director-Canada Wildlife, Programs Sheryl Fink Campaign Director - Canadian Wildlife