We have two main sources of income: statutory contributions from our membership, and voluntary funding for our activities.
    
        INTERPOL’s total revenue in 2023 was 176 million euros.
            
Statutory contributionsEach of our member countries pays a statutory contribution to INTERPOL each year; it is an obligatory payment. The amount paid by each country is agreed by the General Assembly each year, according to an adapted scale of United Nations contributions, essentially based on economic weight.  In 2023, statutory contributions totaled 79 million euros.Statutory contributions generally fund the running costs of the General Secretariat and some of the core policing, training and support activities according to our strategic priorities.Voluntary fundingThe needs of fighting crime today go well beyond the traditional resources that member countries can make available to INTERPOL through their police budgets. For this reason, we seek partnerships and additional funding for our activities and special projects.In 2023, voluntary funding (in cash and in-kind) totaled 87 million euros. Contributions can be assigned to a specific activity or can be unearmarked. In-kind support includes personnel (25% of our staff are police officials seconded by member countries), office space and equipment.Who provides voluntary funding?Most of the voluntary funding comes from government agencies, notably those responsible for policing, but there were also smaller contributions from international and non-governmental organizations, foundations and private entities. The Secretariat also generates a small amount of income directly, which is presented as other revenue.
    
        94 per cent of our voluntary funding comes from partnerships with government agencies.
            
Partnerships with government agencies allow us to tackle challenges in common areas in international law enforcement. By sharing expertise, technology and resources, member countries help strengthen our joint response to international crime.The European Commission, Federal Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Germany), the US Department of State and Global Affairs Canada are among our main donors of voluntary (cash) funding in recent years. Singapore and France are the two highest in-kind donors.The full details of voluntary cash funding received in the past five years are published by year (see external contributions documents below)ProjectsVoluntary cash funding primarily supports specific regional and crime initiatives. We manage a wide range of projects with external funding across all four of our global crime programmes; Counter-terrorism, Cybercrime, Financial crime and Anti-corruption, and Organized and Emerging crime.Financial management and auditOur financial management is governed by our legal framework: the Constitution, the General Regulations and the Financial Regulations.We produce annual financial statements in accordance with internationally accepted accounting standards that are subject to independent external audit. Consistent with the best practice of regular external auditor rotation, the Supreme Audit Office of Poland began a three-year audit term in 2022, replacing the Office of the Auditor General of Canada.We continuously review our funding mechanism to ensure that we have a strong financial, legal and ethical framework that provides confidence to members and donors on how their funding is used.