13th Regional IP Crime Conference for the Middle East and North Africa – 2024Recognizing the ongoing challenges posed by intellectual property (IP) crimes across neighbouring countries, the Regional IP Crime Conference serves as a vital platform for collaboration. This conference is a forum for law enforcement, government officials, and industry experts to share their local expertise in combating the prevalent IP crimes in their region.Held from 20 to 21 February 2024 in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, the 13th Regional IP Crime Conference met with the theme "Unlocking the future” and was co-organized by INTERPOL, Dubai Police and the Emirates Intellectual Property Association (EIPA). The primary goal was to to empower participants with the knowledge and strategies needed to navigate the dynamic landscape of intellectual property. By facilitating the sharing of best practices, encouraging collaborative discussions, demystifying emerging technologies, and addressing challenges related to data analytics, the conference aspired to unlock future opportunities and capabilities. For more information and updates on the 13th Regional IP Crime Conference, follow our social media hashtags #13thINTERPOL_EIPA and #IPCrimeConference.
    
        
            
16th International Law Enforcement IP Crime Conference – 2023We organize the International Law Enforcement IP Crime Conference on an annual basis. It brings together police, customs, regulatory agencies and private sector investigators to share and develop best practices to combat trafficking of illicit goods.INTERPOL and the Norwegian Police Service, in partnership with UL Standards & Engagement, will host the 16th International Law Enforcement IP Crime Conference from 25 to 27 September 2023 in Oslo, Norway.Keep an eye on the IIPCIC Conference page for more information.
    
        
            
12th Regional IP Crime Conference for the Middle East and North Africa – 2023Recognizing the potential links between IP crimes committed in neighbouring countries, we established the Regional IP Crime Conferences. They act as a forum for law enforcement, government and industry experts to share their local expertise in fighting the IP crimes typically encountered in their region.The 12th Regional IP Crime Conference for the Middle East and North Africa took place 21 – 22 February 2023 in Dubai, UAE. INTERPOL and the Dubai Police and Emirates IP Association (EIPA) were the co-hosts of the conference in cooperation with the UAE Ministry of Interior, Ministry of Economy, Dubai Customs, and the Brand Owners’ Protection Group (Gulf BPG).The conference’s theme was “Building Capabilities to Drive IP Leadership”.Check out social media #12thINTERPOL_EIPA and #IPCrimeConference for more information.
    
        
            
IIPCIC AwardsThese prestigious awards recognize the outstanding achievement of law enforcement personnel and governmental agencies who work tirelessly to combat counterfeiting and IP theft.Anyone in the IP community, including law enforcement, stakeholder partners and subject matter experts, may make a nomination. Awards are presented during the IP Crime Conference.