Fighting organized crime in ZimbabweZimbabwe’s primary crime areas of concern include wildlife crime, particularly stock theft, and trafficking in drugs, firearms and human beings. Cybercrime is also a growing national crime phenomenon.Drug syndicates use Zimbabwe as a transit country, especially for cocaine and cannabis bound for the rest of the world. Recent evidence indicates that Zimbabwe itself has a growing consumer market for these drugs too.The international characteristics of these crimes and their links with crime networks around the world make the role of the INTERPOL National Central Bureau (NCB) in Zimbabwe fundamental to maintaining national and regional security.            
    
        
            
INTERPOL in ZimbabweThe Harare NCB is part of the Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) Criminal Investigation Department. The NCB has specialized desks that focus on stolen motor vehicles, fugitive investigations, drugs, financial and cybercrime, stolen and lost travel documents, environmental crime, trafficking in human beings, works of art and firearms. All staff members are police detectives.            
    
        
            
The NCB is the lead ZRP unit to take national investigations beyond Zimbabwe’s borders and bring globally wanted criminals to justice when there is a link with Zimbabwe.By providing globally sourced intelligence about regional crime, the NCB helps police officers across Zimbabwe detect and investigate the flow of illicit goods along trafficking routes in and around the country. The NCB is a strong player in regional INTERPOL operations, particularly when they focus on its specific national crime challenges.Law enforcement in ZimbabweLaw enforcement services across Zimbabwe are provided by ZRP. Headed by a Commissioner General, the ZRP falls under the Ministry of Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage. ZRP has the responsibility throughout Zimbabwe to maintain law and order, protect people and property and to prevent and investigate crime.        
        
            
                
                                            
    
    
                                            
    
    
                                            
    
    
                                            
    
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    4