In 2023, we marked 100 years of international cooperation in the fight against organized crime. Throughout the year, our member countries hosted events and launched activities to celebrate this historic milestone. These included raising INTERPOL’s flag on the summit of Mount Everest as well as organizing commemorative marches and ceremonies.    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            A Nepalese police officer takes centenary celebrations to a record high, carrying the INTERPOL flag to the summit of Mount Everest.
    
                                            
    
            Greece – NCB Athens raises INTERPOL’s flag in front of the Temple of Poseidon on Cape Sounion.
    
                                            
    
            New Zealand - NCB Wellington raises INTERPOL’s flag outside the New Zealand Parliament.
    
                                            
    
            South Africa - NCB Pretoria celebrates INTERPOL’s centenary in front of the Parliament building and the Nelson Mandela statue.
    
                                            
    
            Qatar - The Ministry of Interior was illuminated in blue to mark INTERPOL’s centenary.
    
                                            
    
            Brunei – officials complete 100 I-Le@rn online courses during a digital training programme.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    6
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
The centenary events culminated in Vienna with the Organization’s 91st General Assembly. Austria offered to host this event in recognition of the fact that Vienna is where INTERPOL’s predecessor, the International Criminal Police Commission, was created in 1923.    
        
            
                
                                            
    
            Guyana – NCB Georgetown organized a celebratory march on 16 November 2023.
    
                                            
    
            Kuwait – A parachutist takes INTERPOL’s flag to new heights to celebrate the centenary..
    
                                            
    
            Venezuela - NCB Caracas held a commemorative ceremony on 7 September 2023.
    
                                            
    
            Comoros - NCB Moroni held a centenary celebration on 14 September 2023.
    
                                            
    
            Australia - The INTERPOL flag was raised by Kings Avenue overpass in Canberra in July 2023.
    
                                            
    
            Czech Republic - NCB Prague organized centenary celebrations at the National Museum.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    6