INTERPOL has unveiled a memorial to commemorate the service and sacrifice of law enforcement officers who have lost their lives in the line of duty across its 192 member countries.        
        
            
                
                                            
    
            President Meng Hongwei and Secretary General Jürgen Stock unveil INTERPOL’s Memorial Plaque at the INTERPOL General Secretariat in Lyon 7 March 2018.
    
                                            
    
            INTERPOL’s memorial to the fallen comprises two commemorative stone plaques: one at the INTERPOL General Secretariat in Lyon, France and the other at the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation (IGCI) in Singapore. INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock unveiled the Memorial plaque in Singapore 20 March 2018 in the presence of IGCI staff.
    
                                            
    
            INTERPOL’s Memorial to the fallen at the INTERPOL General Secretariat headquarters was unveiled in the presence of INTERPOL’s Executive Committee members and General Secretariat staff.
    
                                            
    
            The INTERPOL memorial will provide a place for police worldwide to commemorate the loss of their colleagues and preserve their memory.  It will also serve to raise awareness about the dangers faced by police officers worldwide who have put public service above their own safety.
    
                                    
                
                    1 /
                    4
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    
                        
                    
                
            
        
    
The memorial to fallen police officers worldwide comprises two commemorative stone plaques: one at the INTERPOL General Secretariat in Lyon, France and the other at the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation (IGCI) in Singapore.Separate ceremonies were held at the unveiling of each plaque to pay tribute to the men and women who lost their lives.Speaking at a ceremony at the General Secretariat, INTERPOL President Meng Hongwei said: “Police officers face extremely high risks in safeguarding global security and law and order. Every day, in different parts of the world, police officers lose their precious lives whilst serving and protecting the citizens of their country.”“As the world's largest police organization, INTERPOL has the responsibility to permanently honour their sacrifice. They are all heroes.”The memorial represents a permanent reminder that serving the cause of law enforcement is a dangerous occupation undertaken by dedicated men and women worldwide.Unveiling the plaque at the IGCI in Singapore, INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock said: “Protecting communities from crime is a unifying force across borders, languages and cultures, which comes at a heavy price for thousands of police officers every year who are either killed or injured.”“For police colleagues the reward comes in defending our societies, and knowing that their actions will resonate with future generations. The memorial conveys a positive message of courage in the face of danger, and hope in the face of suffering.”The INTERPOL memorial will provide a place for police worldwide to commemorate the loss of their colleagues and preserve their memory. It will also serve to raise awareness about the dangers faced by police officers worldwide who have put public service above their own safety.