Beautiful images with good news have come out from the
emerald forests of Panna, perhaps the most talked about national park of the
country.  After the news of the birth of
four more tiger cubs, Panna has come alive again. Though   it is a common sight in national parks,
sightings of a newly born tiger always assumes greater significance to the park
that had seen it's entire tiger population decimated by poaching barely 12
years ago. This was followed by the translocation of three tigers from
Kanha,Bandhavgarh and Pench national parks. 
Since then, there has been no looking back and  Panna has been  seen as the only successful tiger reintroduction
model in the world.

Also Read: From Unknown Tigress of Kanha to Mother of Panna:The Untold Story of T2

So the park authorities were jubilant  after beginning of the new year when a camera
trap captured the images of  a tigress
-coded as P213(31)   -clutching  delicately in her jaws one of the four
cubs  while moving in the woods  to shift  
it to a safer place. Born about 2 to 3 
months ago, there are four cubs in the litter. This is the second litter
of the tigress. Now the tiger population in the park has gone up to 65-70 which
includes about 20 cubs, the park authorities said. Just like human infants,
tiger cubs need their mother to take care of them. In fact, the cub’s mom needs
to be even more careful and protective in the jungle. Tiger cubs can't see
anything when they come into the world because their eyes are closed .It takes
about two weeks before they open their eyes and see their mother. And as small
as they are, tiger cubs are born with all their stripes. Though they spread out
as they grow, they don't change. Just like no one else has your fingerprints
and no two giraffes have the same spot pattern, no two tigers have the same
pattern of stripes, either.

GPS Collaring 
Programme Continues 

As the number of tigers goes up, the core area ,spread over
576 sq kms ,looks smaller for the increasing number of the big cats. There are
about 30 tigers in the core alone. Besides, the remaining tigers are roaming
around the buffer and outside the park in the Panna landscape.  So successful was the tiger reintroduction
plan of Panna that Cambodia   has decided
to emulate the Panna plan to reintroduce tigers in it's jungles. The
South-Asian nation lost all it's tiger population and the last tiger was
sighted in 2007. A camera trap image of the tiger was captured in the Eastern
plains dry forest landscape in Mondulkiri protected forest. Cambodia currently
has no population of breeding tigers and plans to reintroduce tigers in
Mondulkiri protected forest area.  In
November 2017 a Cambodian delegation comprising top politicians, forest and
tourism officials visited Panna to understand the plan. This was the second
visit of Cambodian delegation to Panna after 2015.

Also Read: Panna landscape Needs 2 More National Parks, NotSatellite Tiger Collaring

When Panna was basking in the glory of it's successful tiger
reintroduction programme, a new threat in the form of Ken Betwa Link (KBL)  project started staring at it.  As the sword of KBL continues to hang over
it,  the authorities  began a new project of satellite GPS
collaring of 14 tigers as a part of the landscape management plan  before the drowning of the jungle .The
Wildlife Institute of India  (WII) is
executing the project with the help of the park authorities. So far two tigers
have been collared . The last one was P234 (31) in the first week of January.