Gharial (Gavialis Gangeticus) has found a new home in Kuno, a tributary of Chambal river in the upstream. Over a year after a female
gharial showed way to a safe haven to it's threatened reptile species, 25
gharials were released in the river , the lifeline of Kuno Palpur national park.
Continued to be threatened by the illegal sand mining in National Chambal
Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary in Morena, the forest department decided to
introduce the reptiles in the river. 
Five males gharials and 20 female-reptiles were
released, said the divisional forest officer of Kuno wildlife division PK Verma
.Besides, threatened  chambal turtles
were also released.Are Gharials Threatened by Illegal Mining in Chambal?One of the six  female gharials, who was radio tagged  in 2017  swam over 40 kms upstream last year for
nesting in Kuno sand-bed. The scientist studying the reptile behavior  revealed to the authorities about the  female reptile’s journey leading to the discovery  of the new habitat. This first ever known
case of gharial migration last year showed that now these reptiles are also
running away from the menacing human presence in their  habitat around Chambal river. The five
remaining  radio tagged gharials  were also found later nesting in Kuno.  Rampant sand mining has threatened this endangered
animal and believed to have been one of the major reasons to force the females
to migrate. Kuno flows through the Kuno Palpur national Park in Sheopur
district of MP, awaiting a pair of lions for two decades for translocation from
Gir.  The river flows from south to north
in the park draining the other rivulets and tributaries into Chambal in Morena,
at MP-Rajasthan border. About 180 km long , it originates from the
Shivpuri plateau and passes through districts of Shivpuri, Sheopur and Morena.

 Also read: Problem of Plenty: Gir Lions Turn Scavengers AsDeadly Virus Stares

The gharials which chose to lay eggs on the quiet banks of
the Kuno River were radio -tagged in 2017 by the scientists of
Madras Crocodile Bank Trust and Centre for Herpetology (MCBTCH) under telemetry
research to learn more on their movements and nesting. Jailabdeen ,  the scientist 
studying the gharials said, “During research, we have found that a
female gharial went to Kuno but didn’t return. When we traced, the gharial  was found along with it's nest in Kuno .
Besides sand mining the rising population of gharials in Chambal may also be
the reason for the dispersal of the reptile.” 
But statistics suggest the gharial population in Chambal River had
declined to 1,255 in 2017 from close to 1,800 in
2015.
For the 2019 census, the department decided to include Parwati
River also, and therefore, the number of gharials in Chambal river basin
increased to 1,681.

The illegal mining disturbs the gharials’ nesting sites as
large numbers of heavy machines are deployed to dig out sand from the river
banks in Chambal and Bhind districts . Besides, transportation of the mineral
by trucks and dumpers creates chaos on the river banks almost 24X7
all around the year . “The colonies and pools of gharials are being destroyed
by the illegal sand mining. The gharials are not finding safe sandbanks to lay
eggs  and that might be the major reason
why they might be moving up to  Kuno and
Parwati,” officials said seeking anonymity. 
There has been a decline in the number of wildlife tourists  in the Chambal sanctuary. Wildlife
photographers are disappointed because of less sightings .According to South
Asia Network on Dams Rivers and People (SANDRP), Madhya Pradesh has emerged at
third place in illegal sand mining activities with 16,405
cases in 2018-19, most of the cases were from Chambal and Narmada
river basins. Unable to control the illegal sand mining, the government is also
mulling over denotifying some of the banks 
to make the mining a legal affair. 
It seems, when the chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan announced a
crackdown on mafia in the state, the sand mafia doesn’t seem to fit in his
scheme.

Shrinking Habitat of Gharial Has Threatened the ReptileExperts said that this reptile is  “not well-suited for land. And they only
leave water either to bask in the sun or to nest in the sand on the river
banks.” There was a time when  the
reptiles used to  be found  in a vast area stretching from Pakistan to
Myanmar but now  their range has shrunk
to two countries: India and Nepal. They are found along the Chambal in MP ,UP
and Rajasthan and Son  river in
Sidhi  district of MP and along the
Narayani River in Nepal.  Like Chambal,
illegal sand mining has disturbed the reptile in Son too.  Their name gharial seems to have been derived
from  the word ‘ghara’  ( 
earthen pot) . Male gharials sport a large   ‘ghara’ like 
growth over their snout .They use their ‘gharas’ to vocalize and blow
bubbles during mating displays, experts said. This fish eating  reptile does not lunge or attack like their
cousin- the crocodile. The reptiles congregate to mate and make nests during
the dry season, when females lay eggs in the sandbanks along slow-moving
sections of water.  During one such
exercise, the female gharial of Chambal had travelled over 40kms  and reached 
Kuno river for safe nesting and a new home.