She is just
15 and already a legend. And she is as famous as a bollywood actress. One of
the most fertile tigresses of the world, Collarwali of Pench tiger reserve has
many stories linked with her. Her catwalk on the pathways of the jungle ahead
of tourist gypsies has made her immensely popular world over. Wildlife
photographers are delighted when she walks along with their vehicles giving
them ample opportunity to click pictures.

But the
incredibly fertile tigress is renowned more not for only giving birth to a
record number of litters but also the success of their survival in the cruel
world of the wild. The celebrated tigress has already given birth to 29 cubs in
8 litters, a world record of sorts.

Her bulging
stomach has already given birth to rumours; rumours abound in the land of
Mowgli that Collarwali is pregnant yet again. Foresters, guides, mahouts- all
talk about the bulging stomach of the celebrity. But the news is yet to be
confirmed. However, one thing is certain -her sibling Langdi is in the family
way. But people are bothered more about Collarwali. Both the tigresses are
progenies of BadiMada, yet another famous tigress of Pench.

Also read
:Bhopal Tigers Do Have The Same Fundamental RightTo A Home As Do We

Motherhood Rarely Witnessed in the WildBorn in
2004-05, Collarwali gave birth to her first litter, of three cubs, in May 2008,
when she was less than 3 years of age- to be precise 2 years and 7 months.  But it was a tragic experience for her . A
first-time mother, perhaps she didn’t know how to take care of them. Very soon,
all three died of pneumonia, reminisces a forest guard posted for a long time
in the park. But she went into heat soon after and gave birth to four cubs, two
each, males and females, in October 2008. They stayed with her for two years.
The third litter comprises five cubs — one male and four females — in October
2010. Barely 19 months later followed the fourth one —this time one male and
two females in May 2012. Nineteen months later in October 2013 came the fifth
liter , all three males. The sixth one was in March 2015, when two males and
two females were born. Three tigers with monikers T30, Chhota Male and
Rayyakasa fathered these cubs.  In 2017,
she delivered 3 more cubs followed by four cubs in January 2019.  The department of Post had issued a special
cover envelope on the tigress in 2016, New Zealand and Canada too issued stamps
on her in the same year. Tiger experts say 8 litters in a lifespan of 14 years
is rare as a tigress normally has her first litter at the age of three and
waits at least two years before the next one. In Collarwali’s case, it’s not
just the number of litters but also the number of cubs in every litter that
makes her special. Much has been talked about her by the wildlife experts about
the reasons behind the success rate of fertility and survival of the cubs. “It
depends on a variety of factors including the habitat and the prey around it.
For long, Collarwali has been occupying one of the best areas of the reserve –
a tapu or an island with plenty of water even in the summers because of the
Pench river. There are plenty of 
sambhars, cheetals ,wild boars and India gaurs –on an average over 100
per square km in the park. And she is agile enough to hunt. There is enough
inspiration to breed, experts believe. But wildlife experts are worried also.
They are concerned over her health when they talk about the possibility of the
ninth litter. “Let’s hope it doesn’t happen. Will she be able to manage it”, a
senior official said. “The forest officials had seen her mating. Her walk
suggests that she is pregnant again. Almost the 
whole staff of the park is monitoring her. But I will confirm this to
you in 8-10 days about the good news”, one of the guides said.

Also
read:  Protect This Wildlife Corridor ToSave The Ganges

The Radio
Collar Tagged ForeverThis  tigress was born  at a time 
when a serious tiger crisis was taking place in Sariska  followed by 
poaching of tigers in Panna tiger reserve around 2007-08. Officially
named as T15 in Pench, a collar was put around her neck by K Shanker, a former
Wildlife Institute of India (WII) scientist in 2009 that gave her the name  . Though the collar fell off a few years
later, the name stuck for eternity. Stories of highly fertile tigresses like
Collarwali , the famous Machchli of Ranthambore, BadiMada featured in the
celebrated BBC documentary Spy in The Jungle by sir David Attenborough, Mai,
the grand old tigress of Maharashtra’s Navegaon-Nagzira Tiger Reserve and  Chandi, a 10-year-old matriarch of  the neighbouring Umred-Karhandla, hold out
hope for India’s tiger story. A guide in Pench 
tiger reserve said   many big cats
of T15’s  lineage are present in Pench
and in the jungles as far as Satpuda tiger reserve . Actually,  all these tigers  belong to the family of BadiMada but her off
spring –Collarwali - has eclipsed her mother’s fame.

Collarwalli
Eclipses Popularity of Handsome Male TigersCollarwali
has been so famous that people wait for just one glimpse of the tigress. She is
the darling of tourists and as they arrive at the park, they would express
desire to see her. “Either they are informed by some tour operator or some
hotelwallah or some guide and  even the
first timers would have an idea about the celebrated tigress”, said an official
. And she has never disappointed. The fearless tigress would simply walk past
their vehicles obliging them with her darshans . There are occasions when she
is not sighted; people have delayed their departure from the jungle for many
days. At this age, she has eclipsed the popularity of some of the most handsome
male tigers of the jungle including Tarzan, the famous L-Mark, Patdev or
Trishul .” Pench ka poora daromdar 
Collarwali pe hai”, commented a resort owner (  the whole responsibility of wildlife tourism
of Pench is shouldered by Collarwali). Both Trishul and L-Mark are two dominant
males ruling  large parts of the park.
There is a mark similar to trident near the left cheek of Trishul while a
pattern of  L-Mark is visible near the
left cheek of the other tiger giving him 
the name. But people are mad after charismatic Collarwali.