In the times of coronavirus, wildlife experts  in the
country are  extremely concerned over another virus. Canine Distemper
Virus or the CDV-– the dreaded pathogen that has already killed a large number
of lions in Gir forest in Gujarat , the only home to  the Asiatic
lions in the world.  The CVD has already killed 1,000 lions, or a third
of the population in the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania in 1994.“Given that it is (the Asiatic lions in Gir) already an inbred
population with much reduced genetic diversity, they have to be managed even
more carefully,” experts have already warned.Besides CDV , Gir National Park  and Sanctuary faces a
number of threats to its ecosystem. They include recurrent drought, cyclones,
and forest fires ,overgrazing, encroachment and excessive traffic among others
.  There are a number of other threats including mining in the
peripherals zone, pollution resulting from the railway lines that also run
through the peripheral zone. Above all, the narrow   genetic
base in lions is of growing concern for the wildlife experts.And amidst all this, while refusing to part with a pair of  lions,  Gujarat  says,
“ lions are safe in Gir, doesn’t require a second home.”Kuno Palpur , now a national park since April this year, awaits
these lions for long. The government has spent over Rs 100 crore  in
the shifting of  over 25  villages from Kuno
and  rehabilitation of about 10,000  families. But Gujarat
always refused to part with a pair of lion. Spread over 748 sq km area, Kuno is
located in Sheopur district of Madhya Pradesh bordering Rajasthan and was
accorded the status of a national park in April this year.After dilly -dallying by Gujarat and a petition in the Supreme
Court, in April 2013, the Court asked the Union government to translocate some
lions to Kuno. It said, while hearing a petition, the Asiatic lions existed in
a single sub-population and were vulnerable to extinction from unpredictable
events, such as an epidemic and a large forest fire et al.“An outbreak of possible epidemic or natural calamity might wipe
off the entire species. A smaller population with limited genetic strength is
more vulnerable to diseases and other catastrophes in comparison to large and
widespread populations,” the court said.Apprehensions are coming trueFollowing the deaths of almost 24 Asiatic lions in Gir
in  September 2018, the apprehensions turned out to be true. A
wildlife biologist who closely works with the Union Environment Ministry on
wildlife surveys said that the canine distemper virus (CDV) that killed at
least 36 lions in Gir, Gujarat in 2018 had not ebbed. There have also been
several more deaths from the virus  this year since January but no
official data was  shared by Gujarat. But  Gujarat
insiders  put the number to “ more than 25 deaths this year ”.
Gujarat officials said that the virus was an issue in 2018 but this year, they
did not get any report  of such deaths. The virus is endemic in livestock and periodically infects lions
so only large-scale vaccination of livestock could be of some help.Beyond wildlife, lion translocation is also a political issue.
Over the years, Gujarat has bitterly contested sending lions to the alternate
sanctuary of Kuno-Palpur in Madhya Pradesh.The Ministry of Environment and Forest initiated the project for
translocating Asiatic lions on the recommendation of the Wildlife Institute of
India (WII), which feared the growing lion population in the limited space of
Gir may lead to inbreeding and make the lions vulnerable to epidemics. A huge
exercise of vaccination dogs   in the villages near Kuno Park
was already on to thwart off the threat of CVD, if any. Poonam Avlokan: Gujarat’s Lion Census exercise



























 When the CVD continues to stare at the  lion
population  confined in one place , its numbers are increasing
.  Recent data  released by  Gujarat
government  shows 674 lions in Gir landscape , a 28% rise from 2015.
Gujarat uses an “unscientific exercise” – to quote wildlife experts - known as
Poonam Avlokan , carried on every  full moon . In fact is a monthly
in-house exercise carried out every full moon night.  This year
it  covered 10 districts where lion movements have been recorded in
recent years, and 13 forest divisions. The field staff and officers spend 24
hours assessing the number of lions and their locations in their respective
jurisdictions.  This exercise is different as, instead of remaining
stationary at water points, teams keep moving in their respective territories
and make their estimates based on inputs provided by lion trackers and on
chance sightings.Wildlife experts like Yadvendra Jhala feel such methods would not
“stand the scrutiny of modern science”.  This year, from June 5-6,
department officials monitored the numbers of the lions. The process involved
1,400 personnel, about 600 less because of the pandemic.Wildlife experts are not convinced with this method of census and
feel that there were all the chances of either overcounting or under counting
of the giant beast. They are of the opinion that modern methods like camera
trapping or statistical estimates based on the animals’ predatory patterns and
numbers of their prey base would  have a scientific approach and the
results would be more reliable. Interestingly, Gujarat has never allowed the
WildlifeInstitute of India (WII)  to hold  census lie what
is being done in the case of tigersAfter the census , the prime minister Narendra Modi  who
was the chief minister of Gujarat   for a long period till 2014
and did not allow the lions to be translocated to Kuno  ,informed the
nation  about the results  of Poonam Avlokan .Wildlife experts even “ suspect” that this year the number of
lions observed could even be more but it is deliberately
being  placed “ on the downside” . “Higher number of lions would have
exerted pressure again on Gujarat to share them with MP
for  translocation in Kuno”.Gujarat forest department however claimed that it follows all the
prescribed protocol while carrying out the census. They  said camera
traps were not yet suitable for lions because of the absence of unique tiger
features of its stripes.Lions turn scavengers, feed on cattle carcassOver 60% of the lions  are estimated  to be
living outside the protected area and
increasing  numbers  is a matter of grave concern. As they
multiply , the free-ranging lions wander farther in search of territory. A WII
study shows that lionesses in human-dominated landscapes need a minimum of 4 sq
km of sacrosanct forest patch to rear cubs in concealment. Besides, the
carnivore needs almost 10 kg of meat every day? How would it get it. The livestock  in
the villages and the  cattle carcass   seem to be the
only answer.The WII says that the number of villages where lions kill
livestock is increasing by about 100 each year. If compensation isn’t revised
regularly and its distribution isn’t as prompt as it is now, pastoral farmers
will suffer severe losses and may not be as tolerant of lions anymore.According to the 2015 lion census, the lion population grew by 126
% outside the Gir Protected Area .A consistent growth in lion population would
have serious implications both for the man and the animal. Research also shows
that lions outside the protected areas (PAs) have learnt to navigate human
settlements and market places at night avoiding humans  as they look
for  cattle carcasses at gaushalas . Experts said that
this  “ tendency of scavenging” may even lead to a situation when
some cubs may not learn how to hunt because of easy availability
of  the food.  This also leads to the danger of
CVD  as dogs also tend to feed on these carcasses and if they carry
any infections, they can transmit them to lions.Experts explain that lions prey on livestock because forest
patches that can support wild ungulates are too few in human-dominated
landscape and livestock is the most readily available prey “This brings them in
direct conflict with humans and their property.What NextNow that Kuno Palpur  has also been accorded the status
of a National Park,  there should be no further delay in
translocation of the lions. The expert committee has suggested a four-phase
plan for the reintroduction of lions in Kuno which involves organisational
commitments, ecological monitoring and quantifying carrying capacity of lion
reintroduction, followed by capture, translocation and soft release of lions in
Kuno. Post-reintroduction monitoring and research, conflict mitigation will
be  followed with an annual review of the project.The first three phases would be undertaken over a period of two
years, after which, upto the next 20 years or so the plan highlights genetic
management and  supplementation, under which six lions (two males and
four females) should be supplemented in the Kuno population from Gir until
16-20 years from the first reintroduction at an interval of 4
years.  But things are not moving ahead as the SC appointed expert
Committee meeting recommendations have been implemented but the committee has
not met for the past 2 years to take a decision on the much awaited
translocation.