Ahead of the controversial Ken-Betwa Link Project (KBLP)
amidst concerns over enormous environmental loss in Panna tiger reserve (PTR),
two major studies have been launched quietly in the PTR -a major project for
GPS Satellite collaring of 14 tigers in Panna and radio tagging of threatened
vultures.  Wildlife Institute of India
(WII)  is involved in both of these, one
of a kind projects. All 14 tigers will be collared to study their dispersal
behavior and 25 vultures will also be radio -tagged to understand movement,
habits and their range of scavenging. The WII is funding both the projects
which are part of the Panna Landscape planning for the KBLP. However, experts
have raised eyebrows,“The project was not at all required. Tiger habits and
their dispersal pattern in Panna is very well known and recorded”, they said.

 “ It’s an Exercise in Futility”Eight big cats roaming in the buffer zone of the tiger
reserve and 6 from Panna landscape including 
the forest divisions surrounding Panna Tiger Reserve and the
jungles  in  Damoh, Sagar and  Chhatarpur will be collared.  All the 8 
tigers from the  buffer zone have
been identified and will be collared one by one in the coming months . The park
director Uttam Kumar Sharma said  that in
the past, radio collaring was done for the protection of individual  tigers in Panna. But now their population is
sustainable. “ In the new study with the help of  satellite 
radio collaring,  research will be
conducted about the behaviour and movement of the tigers, especially those
which are dispersing away”.  One GPS
satellite collar costs around Rs 2.5 lakh and has an “auto-drop” facility on
command. This means whenever it is required to remove the collar,  it would be done without  tranquilization of the tiger.  “One 
computer command and the collar will be removed”,  the director said.  In the beginning, P213 (63), a young
tigress  of 26 months, from Amanganj
buffer area was tranquilized in mid-December and radio collared. The KBLP was
the driving force for the government of India to sanction this project.
The  WII is studying the territory of the
dispersing tigers . But experts remind that, “Many tigers have been moving as
far as Ranipur wildlife sanctuary in Chitrakoot 
( 150 kms from PTR) in Uttar Pradesh to Nauradehi sanctuary (175 kms) in
Damoh district”. In both the cases, tigers have settled down there. “Instead of
the study, the government should think of according the status of National
Parks to both of these sanctuaries”, a senior official of the Union ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change said, “The funds used  for satellite collaring of tigers may be
spent in resettlement of villages from Nauradehi”, they  opined. Besides, they also need to work on
the livelihood issues of these villagers, they said.

Also Read: UNESCO's "Hope for the Planet" Cry
doesn't Gel with Ken Betwa Project

In May 2017, the expert forest panel of the environment
ministry cleared the KBLP ignoring environmental concerns, including the
diversion of around 6000 hectares of the best tiger habitat. About 1.8 million
trees are to be felled for the project. Environmentalists see the KBLP as “ a
disaster in the times of climate change”. “ The tiger rehabilitation in Panna
was an unprecedented  success story. It
has been a long journey for Panna tigers .In the last 11 years , their number
increased  from zero to more than 50. All
that will be drowned once the  KBLP
begins”, experts observed. The environment ministry had already given “the
so-called wildlife clearance to the project”, they said. The  Forest advisory committee (FAC), while
recommending the project, observed that species such as “tiger, vultures and
gharial are the key flagship species that are likely to be impacted by the
project". It recommended a species recovery programme after assessing the
population status, response to disturbance and habitat loss. The vulture and
tiger tagging programmes are seen as a part of the same, experts said.

Also Read: From Unknown Tigress of Kanha to Mother of Panna:The Untold Story of T2

Where Do Vultures Venture?
The  terrain  of 
the  tiger  reserve 
is characterised by extensive plateaus and gorges,  and 
can  broadly  be 
divided  into  three 
distinct tablelands on  the Panna
side of the Ken River: the upper Talgaon Plateau, the middle Hinnauta
plateau  and  the 
Ken  valley.  A 
series  of undulating hills and
plateaus rising on the other side of  Ken
River in  Chattarpur  District 
offers suitable  roosting,  nesting 
and  breeding  habitat for 
vultures.  The  vegetation 
in  the  reserve includes  areas 
of  mixed  dry 
deciduous  forest interspersed
with grassland .A concrete management plan for the conservation of the
threatened species  would be made after
studying the movement, habits and range of the scavenging birds of prey using
the radio tagging. “The movement and habits of vultures and especially their
capacity to travel accurately on a route and find suitable climatic conditions
for roosting has been a matter of deep interest among researchers”, the
said.“After radio tagging, the researchers 
are hopeful of getting more information like how far the birds travel,
how much time do they stay in a place for feeding or even roosting”, they
maintained.