Scion of Rewa royals, Pushpraj Singh fondly remembers the legacy of white tigers. He had seen the legendary Mohan - the white tiger captured by his father Martand Singh Judeo from Mukundpur forest region. He also remembers vividly, Virat- Mohan’s progeny. Mohan is considered a progenitor of all known white tigers in the world. Like his father, Pushparaj is passionate about wildlife conservation.The Legacy
of White Tigers- Mohan, Virat to Mukundpur SafariDuring my
childhood, way back in the mid 60s, I used to return back from Bombay (Now
Mumbai), for summer vacations to Rewa, my native place and major lures awaiting
me would be mangoes and the  white tiger
at Govindgarh fort  as well as the visit
to the Bandhavgarh tiger reserve.

I had never
imagined that one summer holiday would mark the end of one of the major
attractions, the white tiger era when in 1972-73 my father, Maharaja Martand
Singh Judeo decided to close the curtains on keeping this beautiful animal.   Known for his wildlife conservation works,
he was instrumental in the creation of Bandhavgarh as a national park in 1968.

Mohan: the
First White TigerWe all knew
that after the death of Mohan, the illustrious first captive white tiger, my
father was disheartened and dejected. 
But we didn't even dream that he would take such a harsh decision of
doing away with them, after the death of Virat, the last litter of Mohan.

I
distinctly  remember that day early
morning I received a message to get ready, in the official dress and be down (
in the palace) at 10am sharp. When I reached downstairs, my father, an epitome
of punctuality, had already reached. I saw the trophy of Virat in the drawing
room. All the staff of my father wore a solemn look. I also saw a few garlands
kept aside in the sprawling drawing room. “Young and enthusiastic, I tried to
ask a few questions from the staff around but they looked back – almost blank
-making me more curious.

In a few
minutes, siren -hooting blue Ambassador cars arrived, all looked from the
Indian Navy .Some senior officials stepped out , wishing my dad, exchanging
pleasantries.  After a few formalities
they called for a big truck and loaded the trophy ( of Virat) . They presented
a silver miniature tiger trophy to him 
and  left .  I thought maybe a new fleet was to be named
after the white tiger or Virat . But one thing was sure , it marked the end to
this world's most profound unique legacy, maybe forever.

Memories of
Virat : The Last Litter of MohanMy memories
on Virat are a bit more vivid, as by the time ,I grew up and became wiser. He
was perhaps born in 1971 from Mohan and Sukeshi, a brownish striped female
white tiger.  My father named him Virat,
as he had a prominent head and would gaze firmly at us- who were the regular
visitors.

Virat later mated with Chameli, a graceful
tigress who was a "natkhat"(mischievous) as my father would often say
smilingly . I remember my father had a great sense of humour , even  while naming the tigers.  A hideous and ferocious tiger was named
‘Jhagdu’, (  derived from Hindi word
Jhadga  meaning the one who fights).  But after the death of Virat, His Highness decided
to draw the curtains down on the Govindgarh Tiger Carnival.  He sent the skin of Virat to Bangalore now
Bengaluru, to be stuffed, little knowing that the trophy will be given away
little later( presented to the Navy).

A decade
later, when I started my journey into wildlife conservation, my prime agenda
was to get back the white tigers to Rewa. To my fortune, that was the year when
then prime minister Mrs Indira Gandhi made a separate department of
environment, having my uncle and a wildlife expert, Mr Digvijay Sinh, of
Gujarat as a deputy minister under her.

I jumped at
this opportunity and approached him stating that an environmental conference at
Rewa be held and that he would be the chief guest along with then chief
minister Mr Arjun Singh who would preside over the function. After much
discussions and debates the conference took place in 1982 where I demanded the
return of the white tigers but again as fate would have it, my proposal saw the
dark room, till, again, when I got another opportunity in the form of a
conference, named as Rewa Rediscovered in 2003. I raised the issue and got it
announced by then chief minister Digvijaya Singh. My misfortune didn't end, as
his second tenure ended soon  and fresh
elections were held .With that my term as an MLA ended.

White Tiger
Returns to RewaBut I kept
on running after my dream project pursuing it hard to ensure that it
materializes. We launched a massive campaign of collecting 1,00,000 signatures
signed  by the people of Rewa including a
large number of students  to bring back
the white tiger, an  emotional issue for
Vindhya Pradesh. The memorandum signed by  
the people was forwarded to then President of India, the great Dr
APJ  Abdul Kalam.

One fine
morning after a few years, I read in the papers that the white tigers would be
brought back to Rewa.  My Joy knew no
boundaries and I was excited even though the project had been taken away from
me and was being executed by the present ruling people. But that did not deter
me.  I was happy that  at last 
my dream project of bringing back the white tiger to Rewa has been
achieved.

I was
touched by the gesture of then minister and now an MLA Mr Rajedra  Shukla, as he kept me in the limelight during
the time of the inauguration and even later.

However,
today more than 250 acres of the safari park has ultimately emerged as a major
attraction for the wildlife lovers . Besides white tigers, there are lions ,
leopards, sloth bears and a  variety of
antelopes. However,  Maharaja Martand
Singh Judeo White Tiger Safari and Zoo , Mukundpur , as it is named ,still
awaits its real due, a proper marketing plan to increase footfall.

All the
White Tigers which have been brought here have some lineage of Mohan, the great
grandfather. But a lot of work is required to be done to improve the habitat of
the Safari to protect  the animals from
floods or fire.

I fail to
understand why an animal as perfect as the Tiger, be in a forest or cage, has
to continuously face the challenges brought up by man and his greed? Be it the
shrinking forest covers, corridors, or declining prey base, poaching attacking
his kingdom allotted by nature.

But I have
not lost hope as amongst us there still are people who care about the Tiger. May
the head of the pyramid of the ecological chain be protected.