Solo with  her cubAny news
about the death of a tiger always hurts. 
Suspected poisoning of a tigress, one of the most popular, big cats of
Bandhavgarh national park, surrounded by about 100 villages , shocked the
wildlife lovers earlier this week. Before the exact reason of her death is
known and viscera were sent for forensic analysis, various theories started
floating by the mushrooming tiger experts over the suspicious death of Solo,
the 10 year tigress.  A latest picture of
the tigress showed wound marks on her body-a deep wound near her neck exposing
flesh, caused, perhaps, after fight with Chakardhara male, a ferocious tiger of
the park.

Tragic End
of Solo: Who Killed the Tigress SoloOfficially
known as T42, the name Solo  was given
by  a crew of the BBC some years ago
while shooting for its documentary ‘The Hunt’ 
in the tiger reserve. Solo was born to the legendary female Rajbehra and
Jobhi -male in 2011. It was Rajbehra’s first litter of cubs. Solo dethroned her
mother in 2018 and dominated amongst the rest of her three .She was raising her
first litter of four cubs- three females and one male- when she died. Her
highly decomposed body was found lying near a village called Mahaman. Half of
the body  was already consumed by  the wild animals. Body of one of her female
cubs was found lying about 200 meters away from that of the mother.

For the
past  some days , probably in the last
week of September - the tigress started straying near villages and the
villagers insisted the park management take her back to the core area of the
forest. Villagers claimed that  the
tigress had killed a number of cattle .A week before her death which was
reported on October 17 , the park management , perhaps,under  pressure from the villagers, was making
efforts to push the tigress along with her four cubs  back to the core area of the reserve. As many
as 8 elephants were also deployed for the operation.  But a tiger in the wild can’t be controlled
like a pet dog. As there is enough cattle population near the villages, tigers
in Bandhavgarh tend to stray for easy prey only to be poached later. This is
also giving rise to man animal conflict around the  prestigious park for a long time. There is a
long history for the past many years when the tigers are suspected to be killed
by the villagers. After the latest 
incident, the villagers in Mahaman are tight -lipped. This is the second
case of a tiger death linked with the village.

Also read
:Protect This Wildlife Corridor to Save The Ganges

Time to Dump
FSL Sagar and Move to CCMB Hyderabad Sub adult cubs of Solo Though the
forest department has not come out with any reason behind her death, sources
suspect it also a case of retribution killing by villagers. “It is a suspected
case of poisoning”, they claimed. “While the tigress did not have any injury
marks on it, the cub had a small puncture mark on the ribs”, they said. The
tigress has three other cubs and a search was launched to trace them.
Though  the  park management did not release any picture
of the dead tigersses, two photographs ,allegedly  those of Solo and her cub, started
circulating. A decomposed cattle carcass was also spotted a few meters away
from the body of Solo and found consumed by scavengers like vultures. Besides
taking the samples of the carcass, samples of a tiger vomit were also collected
from nearby and sent to the FSL Sagar. As the forensic science lab of Sagar is
busy with a lot of other work because of the pandemic, the viscera reports of
the tigress will be delayed and till then the cause of the death would remain
shrouded in mystery. Even the sample reports of tiger deaths of the past were
also not received from the FSL.Experts however, are baffled  why the samples are not sent to the
prestigious Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB) Hyderabad. “
Reports from the CCMB are delivered early. They are more authentic as well”,
opined the experts. The CCMB  in the past
had cracked many cases of tiger poaching from different parts of the country..

Also read
:Mystery shrouds Panna tiger deaths

This is not
the first mysterious  death of tigers in
Bandhavgarh. In the last three years, at least three iconic tigers have died
under mysterious circumstances. They include Kankatti, Sukhi Patiha and
Rajbehra- female, mother of Solo. All of them were allegedly poisoned by local
villagers. A villager said the tigress along with her four cubs, moved to the
buffer zone of the reserve sometime in the last week of September  and the villagers were terrorized by the
tigress.  With a history of rising
territory fights of the big cats in Bandhavgarh, it is believed that
Chakardhara male might have  pushed her
outside after a fight leading to the injury near the neck. Another theory
suggests  availability of prey around
villages might have lured her  to move
out to the buffer zone. There were reports of 
tiger attacks on some villagers near Kachoha and Manpur villages  near the buffer zone. All such reports are
disturbing and may  intensify further man
-animal conflict. The park has already lost as many as 8 tigers in the last
seven months, including the two cubs on October 10.Three tiger deaths were
reported on April 22, May 2 and September 24, all  allegedly because of territory fight. Solo
and her cub were the latest casualties. The park management  needs to step up the efforts of
confidence-building measures with the villagers to minimise the human wild
animal conflict.

Spotty,
Dotty or Chota Bheem: The Show Will Go On Chota Bheem Bandhavgarh
tiger reserve is known for high tiger density with some popular tigers and  catchy names- Spotty,  Dotty, Kajri and Chota Bheem among others.
Also raring to go are the three sub adults of Solo but they will have to
struggle hard in the absence of their mother. There are many more - almost 100-
in Bandhavgarh..But those sighted in tourists’ range become popular. With a distinctive
‘T’ marking on the right side of her forehead 
a little above the right eye, gave Spotty her name. She became famous
from 2015 onwards when  conquered Tala
range.Sibling of Spotty ,Dotty got her name because of the ‘D’ mark over her
forehead. But Chota Bheem is one of the most famous among them. Barely three
year old , this male tiger was born to Choti Mahaman and Bheem, believed to be
the biggest male tiger of Bandhavgarh. Chota Bheem inherited all the
characteristics of his father . The tourists’ guides in the park call him the
show stopper in Khitauli zone in 2019. This beautiful big cat is now dominating
almost one-third of the tourism zone. People will soon forget Solo and her
memory will vanish from the minds of the visitors.Some new tiger will not only
take over her jungle territory but also catch people's imagination.All the pictures by Ravi Shukla