After the death of three tigers in Maharashtra in the third
week of March, the government of the Western Indian state is on an alert mode
to check the wildlife crime especially the menace of wire snares which are laid
to trap the wild animals including the big cats. Two of the three deaths looked
suspected cases of poaching where claws of the tigers were also missing. With
these three deaths, the tiger mortality count since January 1st this year has
gone up to 14.This included  two cubs
which were killed by tiger named Surya in Umred-Paoni-Karhandla Wildlife
Sanctuary. Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) Nitin Kakodkar
issued directives to the field staff of the forests department to step- up
patrolling  in view of the Holi
celebrations, during which a lot of herbivore poaching is done by deploying
wire snares. One of the World Wildlife Fund(WWF) studies reported that these
snares are insidious and have become a major contributor to the extintction of
animals in the entire Suth-East Asia. Tigers too have fallen in the trap. The
study says these snares are easy to make using wildly available material like
the bicycle cable wires and are easy to set up.

 Missing Paws Create
Poaching SuspicionThe first suspected case of poaching was detected at a small
water body near a village road in Maregaon forest range in Wani tehsil of
Yavatmal district where the body of about 4 -year old tigress was spotted with
injuries around neck . The nearest wildlife sanctuary where the carcass was
spotted is Tipeshwer. The place where the tigress carcass was spotted is also
near Chandrapur district where Tadoba-Andhari tiger reserve is located. “The
animal seemed to be a dispersal tigress from either of the two reserved
forests”, forest department sources said. The forest officers suspected that
the tigress was choked to death due to a wire snare around her neck. However,
the real cause of the death was not known as a post mortem report was awaited .  This incident was reported around 1 in the
afternoon on March 23 ,when a shepherd spotted the animal carcass near Shikar
village on Ghonsa-Sonegaon road.  “The
surrounding area was scanned as per the standard operating procedure of
National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA)”, officials later said. Maregaon's
range forest officer Vikrant Khade informed the local media that there were
injuries on the neck of the tigress and were probably caused due to wire snare.Also read:8- Year After Tiger Killing, Poachers  Get Jail Sentence  in MPIn another suspected case of poaching around 2 pm , yet another
tiger carcass was located by a forest guard of Warpani beat in Risala forest
range near village Sarra .”This area adjoins Nagalwadi range of Pench Tiger
Reserve”, forest department officials said .”All the 4 paws have been found to
be chopped off “,  they said . The full
grown tiger seemed to have died about a week ago. “The probable cause of death
shall be known after post mortem”, the department said.The third was found dead
in an irrigation canal of Bor dharan (dam) on March 21 .The PCCF wildlife Kakodkar
said, “The Bor Dharan case doesn’t seem to be poaching as body parts of the
tigress were intact. The tigress was found in the canal water and may have
possibly drowned due to exhaustion. But it is also possible that the body might
have been thrown in water after being found dead somewhere else. No
electrocution marks, however, have been found.” Officials Deny PoachingDenying poaching suspicion , Kakodkar told the local media ,
“The carcass found near Nagalwadi range was about  week old and in a highly decomposed state.
The gender of the dead tiger will be ascertained after due examination of
pelvic bone. But the teeth of the tiger seem to be highly worn out, indicating
that it was an old tiger and may have died of old age. Sometimes, miscreants do
run away with paws when they find a dead tiger. We will try to trace them on
Wednesday using the dog squad.”Also read :Another tiger loses life in eco-sensitive railzone connecting IndiaRegarding the Maregaon range tiger death,  forest department officials in Maharashtra
said , “the tigress was found with a wire snare around her neck. We suspect the
snare might have been laid for some other animal… and the tigress may have been
trapped in it. All body parts of the tigress, however, are intact”.When all
this was happening, a tiger was also found dead in the core area of the Pench
tiger reserve in Madhya Pradesh. Forest department claimed the tiger died
because of “territory fight”. The tiger carcass spotted in the core zone was
also 5 to 6 days old.Representational file pictures