Shooting  of a tiger in  Bihar's  only national park, Valmiki Tiger Reserve (VTR), shocked the nation earlier this month.
It was also a cause of concern for the conservationists. This was another case
of increasing man- tiger conflict as more tigers turned “pests” necessitating
their elimination .  In the last three years, 125 people have died in the
conflict with the cats. If I put this into perspective in the backdrop of
increasing tiger population but decreasing forest cover and prey base outside
the protected areas,the situation is alarming.

 Huge
Human Population Pressure on VTR
In the VTR, where the young tiger of about 3 year of age was shot dead by special task force of Bihar police in a marathon hunting operation involving about 400 personnel, the number of tigers has gone up from 10 in 2006 to over50 in
2022. In the same period, anthropogenic or human pressure has also gone up manifold around the park
and its buffer.  A recent study - assessing forest health using remote sensing based indicators and fuzzy analytic hierarchy process in Valmiki Tiger Reserve , published in September 2022 revealed, “A total of
136 villages are located in the buffer zone of the study area .Five pilgrim
shrines existed within the Reserve. These pilgrim sites attract devotees in
large numbers every year. The presence of villages indicates heavy
anthropogenic pressure on the forest and wildlife. Large forest areas are
destroyed due to road constructions leading to serious road surface erosion,
direct habitat loss and indirect habitat loss by the fragmentation of an
ecosystem into smaller and more isolated patches.”   Besides, there
is a railway line right inside the park creating vertical divide. Also read: Urban Tigers On The Prowl in Bhopal In all there are 350 villages in the
sensitive zone. Sugar cane harvesting is being practiced on the edge of the
park providing tigers a good hideout.  This tiger was also born in
sugarcane fields and was surviving on the  village cattle. But in the past few months the
tiger had allegedly killed 10 villagers. But there are many  expeerts who believe that all 10 were not killed by the same tiger. There is aother tiger  who is  killing people. The park authorities however denies this.  In February 2021 also, a tiger
was captured after it had killed 3 villagers. The tiger later died in Patna zoo. Many times tigers were also found dead under suspicious circumstances  near VTR  after
alleged revenge killing by the villagers.  The conflict is on the rise.

 Himalayan
Green Necklace Fragmented
In
the backdrop of a 33 % rise in tiger population in India between the two tiger
census cycles from 2014 (2246 tiger ) to 2018 (2967 bug cats ), this is an alarming situation.
 In 2010, India had 1636 tigers.  India is home to 52 tiger reserves
covering almost 75 000 square kms in 18 states. India has 75 % of the global
wild tiger. In fact the whole terai  arc landscape (TAL)  or the low
land area  of Himalayas -mainly spread over three states of India namely
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar- has been facing this problem . TAL is
one of the most fragmented and threatened ecosystems in Asia. The VTR runs
parallel to the foothills of the Himalayas. Also read: Rising Tiger Numbers Midst Shrinking Forest Cover Makes No SenseNearly 70% of this TAL is
directly used by humans for agriculture and settlement. Over the last two
decades, high population growth, agricultural expansion and changing
socio-economic objectives are the critical challenges for forest management in
this landscape, says the study report .VTR has been subjected to more
anthropogenic stressors including overharvesting, overgrazing, illegal logging
and sand mining. The other parks situated in the region include Jim Corbett and
Rajaji  National parks in Uttarakhand,  Dudhwa national park,
Katarniaghat  and Pilibhit in Uttar Pradesh. There are six national parks
in the same region in the adjoining Nepal and it includes the famous Chitwan
national park. TAL is represented by a green necklace around the foothills of
the Himalaya.

 Conflict
 Zones GaloreOf
the 125 human deaths from 2019 to 2021, the maximum deaths -61- occurred in
Maharashtra, Union minister of forest, environment and climate change, told Lok
Sabha in July 2022. One such  conflict zones, Brahmapuri division, is   situated on the edge of  the famous TadobaAndhari Tiger Reserve (TATR) where  5 lakh
people   in 750 villages jostled for space with 100 tigers of
Chandrapur, known as the tiger capital of Maharashtra. As many as 34 people
died and 200 injured in the conflict between 2016 and 2019. Tigers are caught
almost on regular basis, caged and dispatched to rescue centres.No one knows about their fate  afterwards.  Locales in
Brahmapuri division are up in arms against the forest department. A senior
official of the MoEFC&C said, “Shooting a tiger is always the last
thing.  We always want to catch the pest tiger as the conflict derails the
conservation works.”  We seem to have more tigers than the space available in our jungles, comment ae MoEFC&C official. Also read: Avni's killing: Core Issue of Tiger Corridors Lost in Oblivion Many times, the tiger shooting is also
challenged in courts .Avni or T1 was shot dead in 2018 after a hunting
operation led by a civilian hunter and forest department in Yavatmal district
of Maharashtra. The tigress had allegedly killed 13 people from 2016 to 2018.
After a petition, the Supreme Court has sought answer from the government
whether the tigress was indeed “man -eater”. Midst rise in tiger population,
tree felling is continuing at a massive scale. More tigers live outside the
protected areas of national parks. Conflict begins when they move out in the
fragmented forests and in the absence of a jungle corridor; they enter farm
fields, like the one on the sugarcane fields on edge of the VTR.  The
states with large tiger populations are preparing human tiger conflict
mitigation plans also which is also likely to be released with tiger census
data. Representaional cover image. Second image shows  STF personnel looking  to shoot tiger , Tree felling in Himalayan region and  the last image shows the conflict zone of VTR