A simmering
man- animal conflict zone- a wildlife corridor spread over almost 1 lakh
hectares of forest area - is waiting to explode. The corridor connects two
beautiful tiger reserves of Madhya Pradesh- the Bandhavgarh tiger reserve (BTR)
in Umaria district and the Sanjay -Dubri tiger reserve in Sidhi.As many as 30
tigers jostle for space with over 5 lakh people in the highly fragmented   jungle corridor seeking immediate attention
of the government and execution of a concrete wildlife management plan.

The wildlife
corridor:  Victim of government apathy
The glib
-talk –saga of tiger conservation continues and solid conservation works are
missing. Protecting tigers in this corridor assumes greater environmental
significance.  When wildlife conservation
works start, human intervention is restricted which leads to various   precious environmental benefits. And no
price tag can be attached to them . Here, the catchment of two big rivers – Son
and Banas- and their tributaries involving the Ganga basin  are at stake . And for this, we need  to save the pristine Sal forest and a
precious biodiversity of the corridor. As the forest and wildlife do not
attract politicians, this corridor is neglected for long.   Further neglect of the region may cost dear.
A local wildlife activist Ravi Shukla 
campaigning for the corridor said several incidents of man animal
conflict  were reported from the corridor
regularly. Recently, a tiger was chased by a large number of  villagers by beating drums and  bursting crackers.

Besides clean water, one of the most
significant outcomes of tiger conservation and their habitat forests, in terms
of national interest, has been securing provision of a very effective carbon
sink. Water , for long, has been inextricably linked to forests and wetland
ecosystems through the hydrological cycle. “ Forests and wetlands serve as
natural water treatment and purification systems”,  said the conservationists . Protecting tigers
means protecting vital fresh water sources and their entire ecosystem. Conservation
of these landscapes, when done properly, also contributes greatly to
preserving  other endangered species.

Though
authorities of Bandhavgarh tiger rsenational park understand the importance of
this corridor, nothing concrete seems to have been done.  Referring to the issue of the corridor the
BTR said,  " Set in the middle of
Kaimurhill ranges which are the eastern extension of Vindhayachal hills
Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve lies between two other major protected Areas of
Madhya Pradesh: Kanha Tiger Reserve on the southern side and Sanjay Dubri
National Park on the north eastern side. Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve can be a
major source of population to replenish wild animals in the corridor area in
between these two protected areas if the wildlife corridors are managed
properly.”

But who
would manage this beautiful tract of the jungle “ properly”  is a million dollar question  that needs to be answered.

The
umbilical cord needs to be preserved
The corridor
between north Shahdol division,  Panpatha
wildlife sanctuary of Bandavgarh and Dubri sanctuary is a long strip of about
30 km with a width of almost 15km fragmented at several places. This corridor
is a part of the Bandhavgarh-Sanjay-Guru Ghasidas-Palamau  tiger landscape with a length of over 25000
sq km  and a  meta population over 70 tigers.  It has been identified as one of the four
potential tiger meta-population landscapes whose corridor connectivity has
become fragile requiring intervention of policy and restoration for functioning
as an effective wildlife corridor. This corridor is home to wonderful flora and
fauna.  Towering Sal trees dominate the
landscape. Most of the people living in the region belong to the primitive
Baiga tribes. Denied the right to education for years, the poor tribals are
left to fend for themselves . For land cultivation, they are penetrating into
forests. Sloppy implementation of the Forest Rights Act (FRA) has also resulted
in large tracts of forests being cut down 
and  claimed as cultivated land.
The jungle is fast falling prey to human greed and  government disregard for nature. On the
contrary, if the  FRA is implemented
sincerely, it would work  wonders for the
forests.

 Also read : 
Bhopal Tigers Do Have  the Same
Fundamental Rights to a Home As Do We 

With one of
the highest tiger density , Bandhavgarh is situated  on one end of the corridor while on the other
end of the corridor is Sanjay Dubri tiger reserve. Spread over an area 1674.511
sq km, it consists of Sanjay National Park and Dubri Sanctuary along with a
buffer taken from Sidhi and Shahdol districts. It is located in the north
eastern part Madhya Pradesh. Guru Ghasidas National Park in Chattisgarh borders
on south, of which it was a part before formation of Chattisgarh in the year
2000. The contiguous forest patch of 
Sanjay TR and Gurughasidas continues as Tamorpingla wildlife sanctuary
in Surajpur Chattisgarh  from where two
forested arms project eastwards and serve as corridors to connect with Palamau
TR in Jharkhand. Those involved in wildlife conservation believe this habitat
has tremendous potential for recovering tiger populations as the whole stretch
has a low density of tigers . With some wildlife management inputs and
connection with Bandhavgarh source, the big cats can roar again  and  their
population can be revived in the whole stretch.

Wildlife
management will help save the GangesApart from
tigers, the reserve also provides shelter to wild elephants that frequent the
Mohan range, named after the first white tiger spotted and rescued in the
landscape  by the Maharaja of Rewa in
1951. The terrain of Dubri sanctuary is almost plain while that of Sanjay
National Park is undulating. Various perennial rivers including Gopad, Banas,
Mawai, Mahan, Kodmar, Umrari and others flow in the reserve. Bandhavgarh tiger
reserve is watered by more than 20 luminous rivulets . Some of the most
important streams are Johilla, Janadh, Charanganga, Damnar, Banbei, Ambanala
and Andhiyari Jhiria. These streams then merge into the Son river, an important
southern tributary to the river Ganges . Experts believe community and
conservation will have to go hand in hand in the corridor and the Baigas will
have to be made stakeholders to save the corridor. Another section of wildlife
experts believe that the region can be accorded a status of Conservation
Reserve. Or there can be a separate  
wildlife forest division formed for the conservation works.Pic.By Ravi Shukla