Two
back to back tiger deaths in Panna national park in the past one month- in fact
four  tiger deaths in the past seven months-  raise questions on
the  safety of the big cats in the national park, known for  its
famous tiger reintroduction programme. The most serious aspect of these tiger
deaths is “unknown element” of the cause of the deaths.

The Unknown Threat

In all the four cases, the tiger bodies were found after a gap
of 4 to 5 days when the bodies were decomposed and all its parts were missing-
probably eaten by wild animals or consumed by maggots.

The causes of the death remained unknown in all the four cases.
Is it because of some disease ? Or there is some foul play ?  

This has raised question marks on both the protocol and
protection of tigers, experts feel. Only one of the four, tigress-P213 was
collared. The other three remained “unidentified as the body was beyond
recognition.”  

An immediate review of the park security is required, experts
feel.

Mystery shrouds the death of P213, tracked and monitored 24X7
through the radio collar around her neck. Its body was recovered three days
after the death on June 28. Decomposed carcass was found lying in the forest
patch of the core area of the tiger reserve where the feline was born about a
decade ago. Known as the queen of the Panna, P213 was progeny of T2, the
tigress rehabilitated from Kanha National park as a part of the reintroduction
of the big cats in this national park, known for wonderful wildlife. On June
28, when the strong stench of the tigress carcass drew the attention of the
park authorities, the body had already decomposed.

Big Question Mark Over Tiger Monitoring

If they followed the carcass through the stench, it means there
is a big question mark on tiger monitoring.  Experts want to know whether
the protocols of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) are followed.
And whether the M-STrIPES -Monitoring System for Tigers' Intensive Protection
and Ecological Status - is functional in the park.  The android-based
software launched in 2010 is used across all national Tiger reserves of the
country. There are many more questions like whether security audit of the park
is done and  what is the status of the staff strength in the park. Whether
the park management is maintaining the tiger repository and it is in a dynamic
state of just  a formality. 

The M-STrIPES facilitates the patrolling. It has an objective to
strengthen patrolling and surveillance of the endangered tigers . Forest guards
in tiger reserves are equipped with personal digital assistants and GPS 
devices to capture data relating to tiger sightings, deaths, wild life crime
and ecological observations while patrolling.

The software system maps the patrol routes of forest guards, and
the resulting data are then analyzed in a geographic information system. This
also enables the evaluation of human pressure and ongoing monitoring of habitat
change.

Is Panna National Park Over Crowded With Tigers? 

2008 onwards, Panna was in the news for all the wrong reasons as
all the tigers had “vanished”. Whether it was the result of massive poaching is
still unknown.  Thanks to a successful tiger reintroduction and expansion
of the buffer zone, the park again echoed with the roar of the big cat. Though
the number has increased to about 60- about 40 inside the core area-  a
big threat in the form of  Ken- Betwa link project continues to
stare  the 1549  square km national park- 547 sq. km of core area and
1002 sq. km buffer area..  If NTCA guidelines are not followed , the best
of the tiger habitat and vultures among others would be lost forever.

In fact there are about 90 tigers in the Panna landscape -the
forest divisions surrounding Panna Tiger Reserve- North Panna, South Panna-,
Damoh, Sagar and Chhatarpur. Tigers dispersing from the park have travelled as
far as Bandhavgarh national park, about 200 kms away from Panna and Ranipur
sanctuary in Chitrakoot- 150 kms. KS Bhadoria ,the park director said that the
carrying capacity of its core area is 30 and there are 39 in it. Tiger fights
take place because the number is increasing leading to deaths.     

One of the conditions laid down by the NTCA for Ken- Betwa link
project was to ensure the corridors to function in the Panna landscape for
tiger dispersal. They include movement of the tiger in Ranipur sanctuary of
Chitrakoot , Virangana Durgavati   and Nauradehi   sanctuaries
in Damoh. A functional tiger corridor would mean unrestricted movement of the
big cats. It would also help maintain the gene pool.Also Read:Problem Of Plenty: Gir Lions Turn Scavengers As Deadly Virus StaresAlso Read: Another tiger dies : Panna 'queen' death raises question over wildlife protection in MP