If tigers are solitary creatures, don't they get lonely and
depressed? An interesting question ran by Quora on July 29, 2017. About three
years later, a tiger itself seemed to have answered this query. 

This tiger lived , alone ,in Kuno Palpur  Ntional Park of Madhya Pradesh for 10 years,
yes, one decade !  Recently the elderly
tiger reached his home Ranthambhore National Park , almost 100 kms away,
safely. Code named T38 by the officials of this wonderful tiger reserve of
Rajasthan some time in 2006 -07, the big cat was known as “Ranthambhore ka Sher
'' in Kuno,  the park awaiting the
arrival of lions for three decades now. For this reason, Madhya Pradesh has not
relocated any tiger in the park to increase 
their number and for the past 3650 days, T38  was living absolutely unaccompanied  . Interestingly , there was no tigress around
and T38 spent a bachelor’s life. The predator would hunt and was quite healthy.

A tiger expert of Wildlife Institute of India (WII) said in
a lighter vein , “  achcha khasa yahan
reh rahaa thaa, ab budhape mein kyu pitne gaya wapis Ranthambhore" (
living comfortably here, why did he go to Ranthambhore to be thrashed ( by
young tigers). Experts believe that he was pushed to Kuno 10 years ago because
of high density of tigers in Ranthambhore. For ten years he ruled this jungle
before ‘renunciation’.

It was confirmed by PK Verma, divisional forest officer of
Kuno wildlife division , “ there  was no
other tiger in the forest. Presence of the female was never recorded ” .Tigers
do not live in groups like lions do. Mostly , they live solitary lives except
when females are raising cubs. Although rarely seen, the term for a group of
tigers is a "streak”. But living ten years absolutely alone  and 
the "homing instinct" baffled even  the tiger experts. 

In  fact, the capture
of T38 in a trap camera after so many years came as a surprise to  the field staff of Ranthambhore.  The tiger movement was captured in a camera
trap installed near Bhadlav and Chiroli regions of Kundera range on October 19
and 24. Later on November 15, the movement of the big cat was again recorded in
the area of Talada range.

To cross check , Ranthambhore officials matched the latest
pictures of T38 with the images of Kuno-Palpur trap camera’s and  the return journey of T38 was finally  established.

The Jungle Corridor Fragementing Day by Day Tiger corridors are fragmented in IndiaRanthambhore ka tiger was born to tigress T-13, a sibling of
T-39, better known as Noor, one of the most famous tigresses of Ranthambore.
She is very famous among the wildlife photographers. At present, T-13 is the
oldest surviving tigress in Ranthambore, park officials said.

An official said, “There is a possibility that more young
tigers might have reached Kuno and pushed the old tiger from the jungle . They
said after  T38 returned , they have also
written a letter to Madhya Pradesh forest department to closely monitor the
presence of big cats and coordinate with Rajasthan about movement of the
tigers.  In the past, after T38 reached
Kuno, atleast two more tigers migrated from Ranthambhore but they never stayed
in the jungle. Movement of T71 was recorded but it later vanished. Similarly,
T56 lived in the sanctuary before moving further to Datia, about 175 kms , and
then disappeared.

Also read : Protect This Wildlife Corridor to Save Ganges

T38 returned to Ranthanbhore through a   fragmented corridor  ,deteriorating each passing day , connecting
the two jungles. Though there are three rivers, villages and agriculture fields
in between; Ranthambhore -ka -sher succeeded in his return journey.  Between Ranthambhore and Kuno, river Chambal
forms the boundary between MP and Rajathnan .It is not easy for a tiger to  move between the two jungles  from Rajasthan to Madhya Pradesh.  An old guard in Ranthambhore explains
the  route that might have been taken by
T38 while dispersing to Kuno a decade ago. “T38 walked southeast to cross Banas
river and continued to move in a ravine patch of forest, before crossing the Chambal
at its confluence  with Param and then
followed the river upstream to reach Kuno . Of course, it had to cross over
Kuno river and the agriculture fields before finally reaching the park.”  The river kuno and Param pass through Kuno
park while Doni and Seep flows in the larger Kuno landscape.

Ten years later when he started  his return journey, the situation was even
worse. A major project of  flattening of
ravines  in Rajasthan has  further fragmented the corridor destroying
the ravine ecology, officials said.

This fragmentation has 
also denied the famous national park of the desert state of fresh -gene
pool from Madhya Pradesh. “ But nobody 
is bothered about the corridor”, they rued.

Kuno awaits for Asiatic Lions 
Now that the lone tiger has also left Kuno, the jungle is
left without a big cat. Till now there is no fresh evidence of some new tiger .
The lions also continue to elude Kuno. It has been 30  years since Kuno Palpur was first identified
as the site for the relocation of Asiatic lions, from their last habitat in
Gujarat, to protect them from extinction. Currently, there are 674 lions in the
Gir landscape and this relocation project was supposed to have been finished by
2020.  In the present circumstances ,
relocation of the mighty predator doesn’t seem to be happening. Now the
ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate change WII has  started toying with the idea of  introducing cheetahs in Kuno.

Also read: Problem of Plenty: Gir Lions Turn Scavengers AsDeadly Virus Stares

Recently, when a feasibility survey for the translocation of
this fastest animal on four legs is being done, WII experts  also included Kuno for the project
survey.  Though Rs 100 crores  were spent while preparing the jungle to
accord welcome to lions, cheetahs  can
also be brought  in cases conforms to the
criteria for cheetah relocation.

“ If a cheetah is brought, it doesn’t mean  that Kuno can't host lions. They  do coexist in African jungles and they
did  coexist here in India before it was
declared extinct  in 1952”, officials
said.