A team of veterinarians  conducted a post mortem of  Uday, the  six year old cheetah who died at Kuno national park on Sunday. The male feline was translocated from South Africa in February this year.  Twenty -four hours before his death, the cheetah was hale and hearty. Earlier on March 27, Sasha, one of the eight Namibian cheetahs, died of a kidney ailment at the park on March 27.Cause of Death UnknownThe  latest incident is seen as a major setback for the  much hyped and ambitious 'Project Cheetah' for which 20 cats, 8 from Namibia  and 12 from South Africa were  airlifted in  two separate batches in September 2022 and February this year. respectively. After the death of  Uday,  the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) Wildlife, J S Chauhan  said, "During the inspection in the morning ( on Sunday) , a cheetah (Uday) brought from South Africa was found dull with  his head  dropped down. He said that the veterinarians attending him alerted senior officials and the feline was taken out from the large enclosure for treatment. Unfortunately, around 4 pm, the cheetah passed away. The exact cause of the feline's death is not identified yet.  An official release said the officials found Uday unwell in his boma (enclosure) and a closer inspection revealed he was staggering."During the inspection carried out on Saturday evening, Uday was found healthy.Also read: Tiger In Chain, Arunachal Forest Minister Goes For Walk But the next morning on Sunday, the medical team found that the cheetah was  sluggish. Following a due process, the cheetah was tranquilised on the advice of wildlife veterinarians and treatment was started at 11 AM," the release said. The cheetah was treated under the monitoring of wildlife vets and kept in the isolation ward but he died at around 4 PM, the release said. The exact cause of the death will be known after the post-mortem report. In September last year, eight Namibian cheetahs, comprising five females and three males, were brought to Kuno . They were released   in a special enclosure by the prime minister Narendra Modi  on September 17.  By Deshdeep SaxenaRepresentational Images