As
more and more African cheetahs are brought to Kuno national park in an attempt
to introduce them in India, the International community of   cheetah
conservationists and scientists are deeply divided over the controversial
conservation project in the jungle- originally earmarked as a second home to
Asiatic lions. Conservationists and scientists  for and against the project
have been  expressing their opinion in an international journal -Nature ecology & evolution .  About five months after  a group of eminent
scientists and  experts  criticized the project , those in favour of
it including a group from  Namibia and South Africa “respectfully
disagreed” .  But the critics have reacted sharply over the “scientific
evidence” produced in support of the ongoing cheetah project.

"Restoring
Species Essential "About
six months ago a team of international scientists and biologists questioned the
“incomplete”   Cheetah Action Plan with an unscientific  
approach relying on “  decade-old flawed  projections from Namibia”.
Making a scathing attack on the translocation project of the iconic species in
Kuno National Park, 8 scientists and conservationists wrote in the
international journal that the project may lead to “human –cheetah conflict”.
They said it was a flawed project and  “advised”  the government to
“prepare a revised science based” action plan.  In reply, 12 cheetah
experts   Adrian S W Tordiffe, Yadvendradev V Jhala ,Luigi Boitani
,Bogdan  Cristescu ,Richard A Kock  , Leith R C, Meyer, Simon Naylor
, Stephen J O’Brien ,Anne Schmidt-Küntzel, Mark R Stanley Price  ,Vincent
van der Merwe and  Laurie Marker defended the project. While
Tordiffe  is a  key personality  for  the cheetah 
project  in South Africa  and also a faculty of veterinary science in
Pretoria university, Jhala is an eminent scientist   from the
Wildlife Institute of India  and was instrumental in cheetah 
introduction  in Kuno. In a sudden move the government cut short his
services by one year his services surprising many.  Others include experts
from different universities of Namibia, USA and England among others. Two
important figures include Merwe and Laurie Marker and belong respectively
from  the  Metapopulation Initiative and Cheetah Conservation FundNamibia.  They said “ We have been involved in scientifically advising
on the Indian reintroduction project, and we respectfully disagree ( with 
the   theory that the  action plan was flawed and  needs to
prepare a science based plan).Also read:  Cheetahs In Kuno National Park : Future Tense !  “  Herein, we address each of Gopalaswamy (
the  lead author of the  group  against the project)  and colleagues’
arguments and offer scientific evidence in support of this ongoing, restorative
conservation effort”, they said.  They also write “Cheetahs historically
occupied an ecological niche within Indian savannahs and open forest systems
that is now vacant. Filling this void would contribute to the restoration of
the functional ecology of these systems through top-down processes. Restoring
species and their roles in ecosystems is essential for effective and
comprehensive rewilding, and carnivore reintroduction is particularly important
for ecosystem restoration”. Also read: Ultimate Test When Cheetahs Face Leopards in Kuno National Park

 They
also argue “The primary threats, including poaching and human–wild- life
conflict, that caused cheetah extinction in India have abated through effective
legislation and enforcement. Furthermore, reintroduction was proposed within
protected sites in the historical range after habitat and pre availability and
anthropogenic pressures were assessed. There are currently about 100,000
 square of legally protected wildlife reserves within the historical range
of the cheetah in India that can potentially accommodate breeding cheetah
populations and, according to our assessment, 700,000 square of total habitat
that can potentially sustain cheetah occupancy.” 

"Distorted Picture of True Situation"This
rebuttal from Tordiffe , Jhala and  their colleagues  almost
coincided with the  arrival of  cheetahs from South Africa. This was
delayed by almost five months. Following this write up, thewildlifeindia.com
attempted to take the reaction of those who had been skeptical over the cheetah
project. Not all of them could be contracted .But some of them like  Gus Mills ,considered as the world’s most  experienced  wild cheetah
biologist  and ecologist,  has reacted sharply. Gus says,” You
can’t restore an ecosystem by simply introducing large carnivores. Before such
introduction, the habitat and prey populations need to be taken care of.
Restoration should be bottom up, not top down as is stated in the paper”. 

Referring 
to another point raised by Tordiffe and his colleagues over the primary
threats, including poaching and human–wildlife conflict, that caused cheetah
extinction  in India have abated through effective legislation and
enforcement , Gus pointed out, “ The primary threat to cheetahs is habitat
degradation. Has this been adequately addressed in more than a microcosm of the
100,000 square km protected sites, never mind the 700,000  square
kms potential areas of cheetah occupancy, and given the human population
density in India, will it ever be possible to do so? These figures are giving a
highly distorted picture of the true situation.”

 Also read: How would Cheetahs in Kuno Meet and Mate ?

 To
another point raised by the project proponents -all extant cheetah subspecies
have a similar genetic distance from the Asiatic cheetah. The southern African
cheetah population has the greatest documented genetic diversity, Gus said,
“Are not the Horn of Africa -cheetahs genetically the closest to the Asiatic
ones, and is there not a population of this subspecies available, at least in
the medium term, for a reintroduction program? ” He
also contested the view  that the managed cheetah metapopulation in
southern Africa (about 500 individuals) is increasing at 8.8% per annum and
claimed ,” This is a highly managed cheetah population, with artificially high
prey densities South Africa should consolidate its approach to metapopulation
management by consolidating reserves and not artificially harvesting
populations.” The
Horn -of -Africa Cheetah Landscape is a large area of great concern for cheetah
conservation that covers Somalia and the eastern and southern parts of
Ethiopia, the south-eastern corner of South Sudan and a northern strip of
Kenya. It is of special interest due to the illegal trade in cheetahs which is
understood to be sourcing live cubs from this part of the continent for sale as
pets to the Middle East. Also read: Cheetah Revives Hopes Of  Wolf Howling  Reacting on the issue of fenced and unfenced parks- (
Kuno is an unfenced national park with about 748 square km of core area), the
Tordiffe and his colleagues claimed that , “ In a different
project in Namibia, 36 cheetahs were successfully released onto farmlands, or
unfenced or fenced reserves, with 75–96% of individuals achieving independence
after release and a high annual survival rate.  Gus clarified, “ Laurie
Marker has found that cheetah home ranges in this part of Namibia are enormous,
by far the largest that have been measured, over 2000  square km”. Also read: 7000 Cheetahs  , 700 Lions: A Tale Of Misplaced  PriorityDr
Abi Tamim Vanak , an animal ecologist and conservation biologist focusing on
the ecology and conservation of India's semi-arid savanna grasslands
 has  reacted on the claims that  filling the “void  of
Indian savannahs and open forest systems “ would contribute to the restoration
of the functional ecology of these systems through top-down processes.
 The senior faculty at Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the
Environment  said, “ In a recent paper, we showed that the majority of
savannah grasslands and other Open natural ecosystems are not protected.
Indeed, over 70% of them are classified as “Wastelands” by the Ministry of
Rural Development.” He said that “ These grasslands already harbour critically
endangered species such as the Great Indian bustard, black buck, Indian wolf
and other species that are rapidly declining. We call for an urgent action plan
on conserving these ecosystems for their inherent biodiversity values, as well
as the livelihood benefits they provide to millions of people.” By Deshdeep SaxenaRepresentational Images. Cover  Pic : CCF Cheetah