Over two months after the death of Collarwali, the tigress that attracted thousands of wildlife tourists to Pench National park, seems to have created a vacuum in the tiger reserve. The tiger sighting has been very low in the park ever since the aged Collarwali died on January 16 2022. Though Langdi, one of her litters, seems to be occupying her mother’s space to become the next queen of the park , her sighting is also not assured.Collalrwali’s Catwalk Missing Two years ago, it was difficult to  interpret what the guides meant when  some of them in Pench national park would said that Collarwali was  shouldering the responsibility of tourism and that a large number of tourists were  reaching the  tiger reserve to watch her  “ catwalk”. Collarwali was the first of Barimada’s four cubs to set out on her own and establish her territory in the prime area of her mother’s range. Later she consolidated her position in the range and lived there till her death.  Also read: World Awaits Another ‘Good News’ from Collarwali of PenchAs Collarwali was a 'vehicle-friendly' tigress who wasn’t bothered by the moving vehicles of tourists,  they would get ample opportunities to see her and  click  pictures. A tourist guide said that she had often walked along with his gypsy as if she wanted him to pat her on the back. The park officials said many times while monitoring her territory she would accompany the elephant  they were riding on. “And if she was wounded, she would grab our attention by sitting outside in an open space”, an official remembered.Disheartened Wildlife Tourists In Pench 
Now all this is missing. Both tourists and park managers have been missing the legendary tigress. With no tiger sightings, a large number of tourists reaching Pench national park are returning home , dejected and disappointed. A tourist from Nagpur said he  and his family were “ disheartened”  after  no tiger sighting  in his three safaris, each costing about Rs 6500. Also read: Fertility Stories Immortalise Collarwali Tigress of Pench Tiger ReserveEven otherwise, the tiger sighting is a game of luck in any tiger reserve. In a national park like Pench with   more than 60 tigers roaming around the jungle, the number of tigers available in the tourist zones is only about 8 to 10. But it is not sure that one would catch sight of any of them. They take many rounds of the park and wait for tiger sightings by parking vehicles at some strategic location expecting the tiger to cross the road.Langdi or Patdev, Who Would Be Pench’s QueenIn the absence of Collarwali, Langdi, one of her litters, is expected to take over   her territory.  She is seen moving around with her sub adult cub. Those who are lucky get glimpses of Langdi, named so  because of occasional limping,  while she crosses   the jungle pathway   before vanishing  into the  woods again. Those who are lucky get to see  her ,  but the remaining wait  in their vehicles  expecting her to move out again but in vain. Another popular tigress ,Patdev and sibling of Langdi was also expected to take over Collarwali’s  territory. Also read: Like Her Mother in Pench, Patdev Tigress delivers 5 cubsBut she is  seen moving around in the fringes of a village in the buffer zone of the park. Park managers said that when Collarwali was alive, Patdev started indulging in cattle lifting from the village as they are easy prey. She continues her habit. Almost on a regular basis, the park employees pushed her back to the jungle with the help of elephants, but she would go back again. Patdev is seen moving around the jungle  with her five sub adult cubs. Cover Image: NiF Hive:Nature inFocus