Translocation of cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus)   to Kuno Palpur national park in Madhya Pradesh has been delayed. Though the government has been highlighting covid19 spread in Africa as the prime reason, India has yet to receive the permission of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna), an international agreement between governments to preserve plants and animals of the planet to ensure that the international trade in their specimens does not threaten their survival. India’s application to bring this spotted at is yet to be cleared by  this international organisation. India 's Application With CITES Pending Cheetah was scheduled to have been transported from Namibia and South Africa to Kuno in November this year.  In all 8 cheetahs were scheduled to be translocated from the two places. But   India applied “quite late” for the relocation of cheetah leading to delay in the processing of the application.  Now this fastest animal on four legs on the planet may take a few more months to reach Kuno, a beautiful national park nestled in Chambal region of  Madhya Pradesh.  Sources in the Union ministry of Environment and Forest claim that cheetahs may now be brought to India sometime in February or may be later. 
Also read: Fate of Lion project unknown midst Cheetah translocation in Kuno 
“In fact,  the date is yet to be decided”, they said. There are more issues linked with the delay in cheetah's flight to India  A high powered India delegation was also scheduled to fly to South Africa  where the worst ever riots took place in July. As Indians were also targeted in the violence, the Indian contingent scheduled to travel  South Africa had to postpone the visit. Union minister for environment and   forest  would have headed the group comprising officials of Wildlife Institute of India and those from Madhya Pradesh forest department.  There was another reason. Worst ever floods in Sheopur district where Kuno Palpur national park is located, also affected the jungle and the roads around. This has caused delay in the construction of the 500 hectares of the enclosure for the cheetah. As the roads were damaged and bridges  were washed away, material required for the construction of the enclosure could not reach Kuno. “There is almost two months delay in this work”, sources in Bhopal claimed.  Delay in Lion Project Paves Way for Cheetah


After preparing Kuno for the translocation of Asiatic lions from Gir national park, the centre decided to  bring cheetahs to this national park.   Gujarat’s   insistence of  not  allowing a pair of lions to Madhya Pradesh  was also considered as one of the reasons why Kuno was cleared for cheetah.It is believed that Gujarat,  which considers  lions as its pride, would have lost  lion-tourism . 
Also read: Problem Of Plenty: Gir Lions Turn Scavengers As Deadly Virus Stares
After kuno,    this spotted cat might be relocated to some more places in India. A massive vaccination drive for the  dogs around  the national park was also   started. Campaign to create awareness among the villages around the park was also launched. Cheetahs worldwide face a variety of pressures to their existence in the wild, including habitat loss, hunting of their prey base for bush-meat, illegal international trade and conflict with livestock owners. Bushmeat is a phrase for the meat of wild animals, but it most often refers to the remains of animals killed in the forests and savannas of Africa. Globally, this species is considered vulnerable in the IUCN ( International Union for Conservation of Nature)  Red List of Threatened Species, with a declining extant population of less than 7,000 individuals found primarily in the savannahs of Africa. While southern Africa is the cheetah’s regional stronghold, it is considered Critically Endangered in North and West Africa, according to CITES. A small and remnant Asiatic population exists also in Iran, where it is assessed as critically endangered. Cheetah is also the least dangerous big cat.  Cover pic: BBC