Following the history of Ranthambhore National park (RNP) ,
four more tigers have  gone missing.
These tigers have not been sighted for the past over 9
months. One of them- a tigress- is missing with her two cubs making the total
number of missing cats 6. The park authorities have sought
the help of the Kuno Palpur National Park (KPNP) in neighbouring Madhya Pradesh
to help track them. The tigers which vanished from the Ranthambhore include T64,
T95,
T97
and the tigress T73.Two cubs of this tigress have also not been sighted. The
RNP tigers often move out to the MP jungles situated on the banks of river
Chambal.

 Mystery Shrouds the Vanishing ActSince 2009, the park has “mysteriously” lost
30
tigers, including seven old and 23 young ones.  Of these 23, the number of missing
tigresses was 11.And if we include the latest case of four more, the
number becomes 34.  Most of the
time, the park authorities term it “a natural migration”. It is also believed
by Rajasthan forest department that tigers may be moving out to create new
territories because of their population in the park. Referring to the 11
,missing tigresses , experts carry forward this theory of the forest department
and  said 
the female cats  are not known to
move out for creating a territory.

When the four big cats and two cubs were not seen for long,
the Ranthambhore authorities sought the help of 
Kuno in November last year to trace T64, T95, T97
and the tigress T73 which  they said
had not been sighted for the “ past six months” It means the tigers have  now been missing for the past nine months or
so. The RNP authorities have requested the authorities in Kuno to look for
these tigers in their camera traps. Sources said that all the three tigers are sub-
adults. 

The Enigmatic T38There has been a history of tigers from the
Ranthombhore   walking down to Kuno. The
Park authorities cited the recent example of T38, the tiger which had spent 10
years alone in Kuno before going back to Ranthambhore last year. The tiger
movement was captured in a camera trap installed near Bhadlav and Chiroli
regions of Kundera range of RNP on October 19 and 24. Later
on November 15, the movement of the big cat was again recorded in the
area of Talada range.

Also Read: Lonely Tiger Returns Home After One Decade 

To cross check , Ranthambhore officials matched the latest
pictures of T38 with the images of Kuno-Palpur trap camera’s and  the return journey of elderly tiger was
finally  established.  This, in fact, was the same period when the
park authorities had  started  looking for the six missing tigers including
the two cubs when they wrote a letter to Kuno authorities during the same
period. It was suspected that the presence of some young tiger in Kuno might
have  led to the migration of T38.But
so far no other tiger or any sign of its presence has been found in Kuno.

The Black Holes of Ranthambhore

The total area of RTR is around 1334
square kilometers which includes Kaila Devi and Sawai Man Singh Sanctuary also.
Area of critical tiger habitat falling under Karauli district remains a
“problematic region” with dwindling forest cover, low level of prey base and
increasing anthropogenic pressure due to which tiger does not feel safe,
experts believe. A tiger named Mohan or T 47 living in Kunder range and
another big cat called Fateh or T 42 from Phalodi range
were  not sighted since January 2020,
media reports in July last year said. “They are full grown tigers and may have
moved out in the natural process”, the Ranthambhore authorities believed. Fateh
, a very aggressive male, was very popular among tourists and was known for
charging the vehicles. In one instance, this tiger had chased a vehicle
carrying foreign tourists for almost 2 kms.

Eyebrows were raised by the officials of the Union ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change over the “ delay” in efforts to track
the missing   Mohan then. “Sending a
report that T-47 is missing after four months is a face-saving exercise”,
they had said. “The field staff should be deployed to carry out patrolling to
check the  tiger movement in the park”,
they advised.

Also Read: FreshTiger Crisis in MP Midst Favourable Poaching Conditions 

This celebrated national park of Rajasthan, very famous
among the wildlife tourists and wildlife photographers, had seen a major crisis
in 2006
when only 18 tigers were left in the wilderness. After some wonderful
conservation efforts, improved monitoring, better protection works and the
involvement of local communities in the conservation process, the tiger numbers
have grown from 18 to around 65 now in 2020.  And all this had happened amidst
the  “vanishing act of tigers”,  experts said. 
Interestingly, since 2006, only 2 tigers
which include the world famous Machhali or T-16 and Big Daddy aka T-2
could attain full age and the forest department recovered their carcasses.  Tiger experts said that one of the reasons
for the long life of these two big cats may be the attention given to them and
they were getting supplementary food during the fag end of their life.

Experts claimed that there are two areas amounting to 60%
of the total tigers that have gone missing from the park. Both these
areas are natural habitats of the reserve but are close to 13 villages. (All are representational
pictures)