Like tigers,
elephants too are running. They are moving from East to West reclaiming their
lost territories, lost more than 200 years ago. Like the big cats, the beast of
burden is facing a huge crisis of fragmentation of jungle corridors and
shrinking habitat . Following growing urbanisation and deforestation in
elephant areas like west Bengal and Jharkhand in the east, the pachyderms are
pushing westwards towards Chattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh.

 The Great
Elephant Migration
We need to
save this magnificent creature, revered in India because of its connection with
lord Ganesha.  But the way elephants are
treated raises    a question -  Are we Indians hypocrites? Is this reverence
only a show off ?  

According to
data  released by the Union ministry of
environment and forest in February 2019, 373 elephants had died between 2015-16
and 2018-19 (till December 31, 2018) due to reasons like electrocution, train
accident, poaching and poisoning. The number comes out to be almost eight every
month. During the same period, a total of 1,713 human lives were lost in
human-elephant conflict for which a compensation of Rs. 51.66 crore was paid.

The government also paid a compensation of
over Rs 174.42 crore for the loss of crops and damage to property during this
duration.

In the last
one year, the numbers of deaths- both those of humans and elephants- have gone
up creating concern for the wildlife lovers. 
And as the man-elephant conflict rises, the cases of loss of property-
including houses and crops- have also gone up exponentially.

Conservation
EffortsRecently,   news channels were airing pictures of
dead   elephants in Chattisgarh where the
Congress government has fast tracked  the
setting up of Lemru elephant reserve (LER), spread over Korba, Katghora,
Dharamjigarh and Surguja forest divisions of Korba, Raigad and Surguja
districts. So far, about 250 elephants have already crossed over Jharkhand
jungles as they migrate from east to west . It is believed that  the Chattisgarh elephants had died either of
poisoning or electrocution following man- animal conflict in  a large area as the giant animal moved from
one place to another damaging  property,
crops and even killing villagers.

The
present  LER area -1995.48 square kilometers-
is likely to be extended after the catchment area of Hasdeo river spread over
250 sq km is included. However, the state government is facing a major hurdle
because of the presence of four operational mines in the Hasdeo river’s
catchment area, which also includes another five allotted mines and 12 coal
reserves. The pristine Hasdeo Arand forest- where the LER is being set up,
known for its high quality coal reserves.

The BJP
government in 2007 had proposed this reserve in which only nine coal mining areas
were included . The decision will not only help improve the elephant population
but will also help in conserving the entire Hasdeo Arand forest.

Elephant
experts in the prestigious Wildlife Institute of India (WII)  who researched in Chattisgarh said, “ this is
a fantastic investment  for elephant
conservation.”  They said this would go a
long way in re-establishing  the
migrating elephants and  minimizing
conflict with the  pachyderm.”

If all goes
well and  Hasdeo  catchment area is included, it will solve the
issues of  water not only in  Chattisgarh but also in  the neighbouring Odisha, WII experts feel.

“ Like tiger
, it is also an umbrella species and  its
conservation  will lead to the protection
of other species and also recharge the whole region”, they said.

New
Settlements In Madhya Pradesh                                                                               Ravi Shukla 

About 40
elephants from Chattisgarh have also reached Bandhavgarh national park in
Umaria district of MP. There are about 10 more elephants in Sanjay  national park of Sidhi and they came directly  from Palamu in Jharkhand.

For the
first time, Bandhavgarh reserve forest has become a colony of elephants for the
past two years.

While India
is home to 50 per cent of the Asian elephant population, and according to the
2017 elephant census there are 27,312 elephants in the country – a decrease,
however, of nearly 3,000 from the 2012 census – there were no elephants in
Madhya Pradesh then.

Experts said
there were no known reasons for the disappearance  of elephants from  central 
India including MP and until a few years ago Chhattisgarh, but experts
say a loss of habitat could have led to this.

Elephant
experts now say the development is a sign not only of a rise in elephant
numbers in the country, and the fact that they are travelling, but also that
they can thrive at a place given the right conditions.

This is for the
first time in centuries that elephants have  stayed in MP . The present herd arrived in
December 2018. Many experts  hoped that
the  elephant herd from Bandhavgarh would
return  but it did not happen.

Long ago,
the elephants were found in Chattisgarh region’s Sarguja forests, perhaps,  till the 
fag end of Mughal era. But they disappeared in the early 20th century
only to reappear  in the 1990s and
early-2000s. Presently, there are about 250 elephants in north Chhattisgarh
that have mostly come from Odisha and Jharkhand.

 Crisis Looms
Large                                                                          Satyendra Tiwari 

When the
elephants are  spreading in other parts
of the country, the endangered species of the Asian elephant will be faced with
further “heavy loss” in its habitat over the next few decades due to climate
change, said a recent study , which predicts that with this situation, elephant
range would likely shift towards higher elevations in the Himalayas.

This has
also assumed significance as  a
latest  research work on the elephants
warned ,“The Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) 
could lose over 40 % of its current habitat in India and Nepal due to
climate change over the next few decades. The loss in habitat will lead to
elephants seeking refuge at higher elevations in the Himalayan mountains. It could
also lead to greater human-elephant conflict and may impact the future of other
species as well”.

The study,
recently published in the journal Diversity and Distributions emphasised that
climate change will cause redistribution of species, directly through
temperature and water availability and indirectly through further habitat
modification.

Currently,
the Asian elephant occupies only a small fraction of its historical range, with
India and Nepal being home to more than 60 percent of the total population of
the wild Asian elephants, said the study. But the species is under constant
threat from land use changes due to the conversion of its habitat for
agriculture, urbanisation, transportation and industry.

The results
of the study suggested that by the end of this century, around 41.8 % of the
256,518 square kilometres of habitat available at present, will be lost due to
combined effects of climate change and human pressure.

This is the
reason why it is all the more important to protect the elephants.

In fact
Madhya Pradesh and Chattisgarh should join hands  and work together in the direction of
conservation of this beautiful species.

They should
think beyond party lines and sink political differences to save the elephant.
Can they do this? Thewildlifeindia.com would want them to achieve this for the
sake of mother nature.