As tigers explore new territories in Panna national park, a national highway crisscrossing the jungle is preventing further expansion of tiger territory in the core area of the park. Moreover, realignment of the highway- NH39- has been delayed over a year. There is also a state highway crossing the park and the cumulative effect of the two roads is devastating. They have violated the sanctity of the emerald forest. A recent study conducted by the PTR has revealed that about 200 sq km park area is affected by NH39 where 10 to 12 more tigers can find homeRoad or Road Block There are two areas which hold potential for future rise in tiger population in the PTR, says 2022 Mid-Year review of the reserve. The first area is north of NH 39 and it passes through the core of the park crisscrossing about 15 kms . This area, nearly 200 sq km -includes core area of Madla range and Gangau Sanctuary North of NH 39, as well as buffer area of Panna buffer range) holds potential for future rise of tiger population in PTR. This potential area can have 3-4 breeding tigresses with a net addition of around 10-12 tigers in PTR. Also, this includes an area known as ‘Ballyya Seha’, part of Core area of Madla range, where historically tigers were always reported, but is currently without tigers. Main reason seems to be passing of NH 39 which deter tigers to cross it. Besides, a state highway connecting Panna with Damoh divides ore with buffer. A proposal to realign the NH39 has been pending for  over a year.Also read:Tiger Boom of Panna: River Project To Lead Reversal of The Trend “ After  series of meetings with the forest department of Madhya Pradesh, it was decided to   realign the highway from outside the core. As and when it happens, the existing 16 km patch would be abandoned”, sources of National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) confirmed. The NHAI has been engaged in confrontation with forest departments in various states where highways  pass tiger corridors. In May this year, the National Tiger Conservation (NTCA)even asked Madhya Pradesh chief wildlife warden to ask the NHAI to stop road widening work in the Satpura-Melghat tiger reserve corridor on NH-46 (old NH-69) in Betul-Obedullaganj section.  The PTR report  also said that  the second, area West to Ken river, especially in Kishangarh Buffer Range, is also suitable for expansion of tiger territories. Currently nearly 90-100 sq km area of the Kishangarh buffer range has presence of tiger. Rest of the range area, nearly 160 sq km of forest area, is predicted to see fast rise in tiger population due to low biotic pressure in the buffer area. This area is also further connected and in continuation with forest area of Chhatarpur forest division. Emerald Forest Teeming With Tigers The report said,” it is expected that PTR will have 23 breeding tigresses by the end of year 2022.As per recent estimates through continuous camera traps, PTR has around 57-60 tigers – which includes 40-42 adult , 17 to 20 sub-adult tigers and with 12-14 cubs”.  “Six tigresses have produced litter with total 12 cubs till June this year”, it said.  The report also said that tigers were continuously moving across the boundary of PTR in to the Panna Landscape. “There is not only outward movement, it has been observed that tigers which were earlier considered disperse in to landscape have returned back to PTR.  In fact, in addition to dispersal into ‘Panna Landscape’ for space and suitable habitat, tigers are exploring new areas within PTR boundaries, which were earlier having no tiger presence”, it said. Analyzing the  data the report said, “The PTR will see an addition of 12 to 14 tigers in year 2022. This may take tiger population including cubs in PTR to around 84-86 by the end of year 2022,which is in consonance with the tiger numbers predicted for year 2022”. Also read: Monsoon Magic At Bandhavgarh Tiger ReserveSuch high number of tigers  would also lead to conflict- both along the tigers ands and also  tiger human conflicts.  This may also lead to tiger mortality, the report said.  With the available prey in  this tiger occupied area, even tiger number of 50 seems to be on higher side. It has been observed that in certain areas like Akola buffer, tiger territory has reduced to too small, and as this area has become natal area for 4 breeding tigresses, there will be more stress on tiger population and it may see more infighting in future. In terms of density, based on current tiger occupied area of nearly 800 sq km, the tiger density in PTR is around 7 per 100 sq km, which is comparable with Kanha tiger reserve (6.08) and Ranthambore tiger reserve (7.22). Tiger population, in future, will increase in those areas of PTR which are yet to be occupied by tigers at presentSwelling Tiger Numbers Disturbing Prey Predator RatioWith increasing number of tigers and sizeable population of co predator leopard, there was also a need to ascertain the availability of prey. The field director Uttam Kumar also   analysed availability of  prey in the park. In PTR, herbivore (ungulates) density for core area (576 sq km) is around 40 per sq km while for buffer (total area 1021 sq km),it is around 16 per sq km. Hence, total herbivore (ungulates) population in PTR is around 40,000. Taking minimum requirement of 50 prey per year per tiger and a cropping rate of 10%, total prey requirement  including Nilghai, Sambar,  spotted deer  and the wild boar- for a tiger in year would be around 500.As per recent estimates of 57-60 tigers (adult + sub-adult) in PTR, the requirement of prey will be around 28,000 to 30,000. Also read:Why Incredible Tiger Images Keep Coming From Ranthambore ?According to 2018 estimates, the PTR also has nearly 270 leopards and the leopards almost survive on the same prey base. As leopard is nearly one fourth to one fifth in weight of a tiger,  prey requirement for the leopards will be around27,000 to30,000.Hence, total requirement of prey for both tiger and leopard in PTR would be around 5560,000against the availability of around 40,000 prey. We can further add around 500 cattle killed by tiger or leopard in a year in PTR. Still, we are more than 10,000 to 15,000 less prey than required. That is 25% less than  the required prey. Banner Image :Tigers in the PTR