This blog
should have been written on August 4 , the day when International Owl awareness
day was observed . Or, even before, on July21 when a beautiful Eagle Owl was
rescued by the  special task force (STF)  of Madhya Pradesh police ,dedicated to check
the wildlife crime,  from a gang   in Ujjain before it could reach  its client or a sorcerer and killed for some
superstition linked with the bird. Nevertheless, it is still relevant.

 The One Cr
Owl


Though an
endangered species, owls have not been able to get the attention required for
the protection of this important nocturnal and mostly solitary  bird. But when seen together, its group is
called a “parliament” – NO nothing to do with that of our politicians- as owls
have long been considered to be of a wise disposition, like our netas- no
malice intended.

The Indian
subcontinent is home to 32 species of owls, 30 of them are recorded from in
India. All these species are protected under the Wildlife (Protect) Act .All
other owl species are under schedule IV, their trade trapping hunting transport
is banned. 

After a tip
off in Ujjain, the STF sleuths -disguised 
as  customers - approached  the gang members carrying two animals, both
linked with superstitions, an owl (an eagle owl but the gang members call it a golden owl ) and Sand Boa  or do-muha -saamp  with 
scientific name Erycinae . It belongs to a subfamily of stout-bodied
snakes.

 The gang
members had put a price tag of One crore 
on the 'Golden Owl'  and Rs 35 lakh on
the  6 kg -snake.

“ It was a
wonderful  bird. Very cute. Its eyes were
like binocular lenses”, said Deepika 
Shinde, an inspector   with Ujjain
STF  who pretended to be a customer while
arresting the gang members. A wildlife lover, she said the gang members  told her while quizzing  them  that the 
owl was used for tantrik practicing. 
There is good demand for the owls in Ujjain and the neighbouring
villages which have a history of   such
practice especially during Diwali.  Local
priests linked such practices with the presence of many temples.  This is one of the major reasons for the
decline in the Owl population.

 Save The Owl


A report prepared by TRAFFIC,  a wildlife 
trade monitoring network , in 2010 detailed out  such practices.   Imperilled custodians of the Night , a study
on illegal trade trapping and use of owls in India,  said, “ Owls and their body parts are
primarily used for black magic .There is a regular organized trade in live
owls. The clientele are either from tribal areas where the majority of people
are superstitious and use owls to ward off evil spirits or from towns and
cities where demand is created by practicing tantriks. Such tantriks claim to
be able to cure a variety of maladies and ill fortune, ranging from desire for
a male child, prolonged sickness, infertility, the need for a  vashikaran (to control someone). "

It also
said, " Even politicians and industrialists are said to be regular
clients. The tantrik prescribes rituals to be performed using owl parts or
involving live owl  sacrifices on
auspicious days  such as amavasya ( full
moon night ), the amavasya of Diwali is deemed 
to be the most auspicious time for owl sacrifice .It is said that local
shamans can kill an owl and take its soul, its power, and put it in a tabiz (an
amulet).”

The report
further said, “The owl power will then guide the seeker  to find wealth  Black magic practices are either passed on
from an Ustad (master) to a pupil or through books available at religious
bookstores prescribing owl uses and related craft.”

According to
the report , Barn Owl eyeballs, skin and feather roots were to be used for
preparing medicines by hakims (traditional healers) practicing Unani medicine
in Bangladesh

Is MP Big
Centre for The Wildlife Crime


During
TRAFFIC’s   investigations while
compiling the report, owls turned out to be the second most commonly observed
species in trade, including several dead specimens displayed by mendicants on
the roadside, especially in the states of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. The
majority of live Barn Owls observed during the study were recorded from Lucknow
bird market in Uttar Pradesh, followed by Delhi, Kolkata in West Bengal and
Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh. In Madhya Pradesh Baheliyas and Pardi tribes
people involved in other wildlife crimes are believed to be behind owl trapping
and selling also. They are active in 
many parts of the state especially in 
the jungles of Western  MP near
Ujjain and Indore and also in Umaria, 
Shahdol, Mandla and Panna among other districts. From tigers to Sand
Boa, they  deal in all the wild animals.

Ten years ago, India's Environment and Forest
minister Jairam Ramesh had linked the owl crisis with  Harry Potter.

"Following
Harry potter”,  Ramesh had  told the BBC, “ there seems to be a strange
fascination even among the India’s  urban
middle class for presenting  owls to
their children. “

Owls  had featured in the Harry Potter book and
film series to deliver mail to other wizards. Potter’s pet owl Hedwig – a snowy
owl – was given to him as a birthday gift.

His comment
had coincided with the release of TRAFFIC’s work on owl crisis.