As a
country-wide exercise is underway to select the national butterfly of India, a
dedicated group of naturalists wandering in the Amarkantak biosphere have
identified some rare species including Blue Mormonand Crimson rose. So far
almost 100 species  of  butterflies 
have been identified in the jungles around Anuppur and Shahdol
districts.

Considered
as the third  biggest butterfly of
India,  Blue Mormonor Papilio polymnestor
is a fascinating insect. It is a large swallowtail butterfly mostly found in
southIndia and Sri Lanka. It is also the state butterfly of Maharashtra. Protected
under the Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act, the Crimson rose is  mainly found fluttering in the Western Ghats
and South Indian hills .The brightly coloured flyers are also flourishing  from the eastern end of the Himalayas to its
north-western parts. This is also a common visitor to Indian gardens and can
even be found in crowded urban areas. The other butterflies found in the
Amarkantak biosphere region also include the beautiful Indian Mapwing (cyrestis
thyodamas) , Dead leaf (Kallima inachus), Large Oakblue (Arhopala amantes)  and Gaudy Baron (Euthalia lubentina). 

Treasure
Trove of Nature: Amarkantak BiosphereAmarkantak Sanjay pyasiAll of them
are rare species and can be found hovering over the host and nectar bushes and
shrubs in the forests of Amarkantak ,a unique natural heritage area and meeting
point of the the Vindhya and the Satpura Ranges, with the Maikal hills  being the fulcrum.It is also the place where
Narmada , Son and Johila rivers originate.

Also
read:Protect This Wildlife Corridor To Save The Ganges

The  bioreserve is very  rich in terms of flora  and microbial 
diversity.Three of the
seven competitors -the Dead leaf or the Orange Oak leaf , Common Jezebel and
Indian Common Nawab -are found in the Amarkantak biosphere .The Dead leaf is a
colorful butterfly species belonging to the nymphalid family and indigenous to
various parts of tropical Asia stretching from India to Japan. It's ability to
camouflage into dry, dead leaves makes it all the more unique .The Indian
Common Nawab is a fast flying butterfly found in tropical Asia while Common
Jezebel is a medium - sized butterfly found in many parts of Asia  especially in non -arid regions of
India. 

The Seven in
Race and the Great Indian Mega -DiversityCommon Nawab Ritesh KhadiaConsidered as the front runner, Common Jezebel
is most found in Northeastern states, Adaman & Nicobar Islands and
Chhattisgarh;the Five-bar swordtail, found in the Northeastern states, Odisha,
West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, and Karnataka;Krishna Peacock from West
Bengal, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh;Yellow Gorgon again from the eastern regions
of India including Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and  West Bengal; the Common Indian Nawab -it has
a pan India presence; Northern Jungle Queen from  Sikkim, Meghalaya,Arunachal Pradesh and the
Orange Oakleaf, again the Lepidoptera with pan India presence.

India is one
of the 17 mega- diverse countries of the world. It is host to about 1,400
species of butterflies—a spectacular number—with many endemics to the Indian
region. This makes India an especially important region for butterfly diversity
and conservation.“These delicate creatures are an intricate part of the
ecosystem, and act as an important biological indicator in determining the
health of the environment”, said Sanjay Payasi, a business administrator and
documentary maker who left his lucrative career to work as a naturalist in MP.
He also founded Anuppur Nature Club.“ The butterflies may have  started vanishing fast in many urban regions
ofIndia  and abandoned our gardens as the
host and nectar plants have been replaced by exotic species which do not
attract these insects”, he said adding," “ They are still found in
abundance in jungles”.

Ravi Shukla
of the Forest Protectors group ,Shahdol said,” Infact, butterflies warn us of
the changes taking place in nature .This is the reason we have been making
efforts for their conservation”. “Butterflies serve as important plant
pollinators in the local environment, and help pollinate many important plant
crops”, he said.

Also read
:The Great Elephant Migration: Can MP Chattisgarh join hands   

Butterfly Poll Of IndiaCrimson Rose Jagat flora
September
,the Big Butterfly month—witnessed several activities for the conservation of
butterflies. It also includes counting of butterflies across India and sharing
the count on platforms such as the India Biodiversity Portal, INaturalist, or
ifoundbutterflies.  A group of 50
butterfly enthusiasts,researchers, writers, and experts from across the country
also led an initiative to select the ‘national butterfly’ of India. And the
selection process was meticulously examined by well-known butterfly
experts  like Dr Krushnamegh Kunte and
Issac Kehimkar.  Initially 50 species of
butterflies found across India were shortlisted and were  ranked on the basis of several
characteristics. They include : the butterfly should have  national and international
cultural,ecological and conservation significance , it should be charismatic,
and must have an inherently attractive biological aspect that is engaging to the
public;it should be easily identified, observed, and remembered; the species
should not have multiple forms; the butterfly caterpillars should not be
harmful or a pest; it should not be too common-placed, and nor should it be a
species that has already been designated as a state butterfly. Many Indian
states including Maharashtra, Kerala ,Tamil Nadu and Karnataka among others
have identified their state butterflies.

The poll
began on September 11 to allow the citizens to choose their favourite among the
seven species . The poll will conclude on October 8, 2020 and individuals can
cast their votes on  http://tiny.cc/nationalbutterflypoll. "Whichever butterfly the citizens choose will be
nominated to the environment ministry. Informal communication over this has
already taken place with the environment minister. We will be submitting a
proposal to the government of India on or before October 10. And then by the
end of this year or beginning of 2021, we’ll have a national butterfly,”
Divakar Thombre, one of the members of the core polling group has been quoted
in Indian media.Butterfly Needs Umbrella of ProtectionBlue Pierrot Ravi shuklaButterflies
are generally treated as non-target species in the wildlife conservation and
management in India.  The current
“Protected Area Network” of the country set up by the government, is mainly
directed towards the conservation of flagship species’ like the tiger and
Indian rhino. The important inter-specific relationships and landscape-level
ecological processes taking place through smaller life-forms are largely
ignored. Victims of global warming and pollution, they need to be protected.

 Banner
pic:Common Jezbel by Sanjay Pyasi