A week after signing the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)   for the contentious Ken Betwa river link
project, considered as the death warrant for Panna national park, Madhya
Pradesh chief minister enjoyed the sylvan surroundings of the tiger reserve
resting along with his family in a luxury jungle resort situated in the buffer
zone of the park. And as he went around a safari watching the tiger, people in
Panna city took to the streets appealing to him to save the tiger the day festival of colour Holi  was celebrated. Amidst the
raging coronavirus, they did not assemble at one place. Instead they stood at
different places of the city with slogans on 
placards and protested silently. They urged Shivraj to reconsider the
project and the proposed felling of lakhs of trees and save the national
animal-the tiger . But as he spent time leisurely  in the jungle he  was apparently unaware of the cry to save the
same forest.

 "Don't Cut 23
Lakh Trees"Nature and wildlife lovers, 
youth and children carried placards 
and urged the chief minister to stop the proposed cutting  of 23 lakh trees . A child  raised a slogan, “ Mama , Save the
Tigers.”   He said that trees should not
be cut in a drought prone area.  It is
said that  trees  influence rainfall, so with no rainfall , how
would you  fill up the dam, he asks. Some
protesters also carried  the posters near
the buffer zone of the  park which
attracted the attention of the passersby; they also  stood near the   famous Jugal Kishore temple where  Shivraj also visited.Also read: Ken-Betwa Project:Dam of Doom for Panna Tiger ReserveOne of the slogans said, “ stop playing with nature” and the
other read , “ Don’t cut 23 lakh trees and “ save the tigers.” Arun Singh, a
senior journalist and a blogger appealed to the chief minister to save the
national animal.  He said that the
project would cost dearly for the environment and ecology of Bundelkhand, the
backward region already bearing the brunt of climate change and facing erratic
weather conditions of  droughts and
floods.   Two days ago, former  BJP MLA from Panna Kusum Mehedel had already
criticized the project  as it would lead  to the “ destruction of the tiger reserve”.

Apprehensions on the Rise: MP May Not Benefit  Much before the people of Panna protested against the
project, fourteen years ago, a district in Panna had punched holes  in the project and shot a letter to the then
principal secretary of water resources department of Madhya Pradesh and said,”
I will not hesitate to say that the first line of the feasibility report
prepared by the National Water Development Agency is faulty. To say that the
Ken Basin is a “Water Surplus” basin is not only totally erroneous, it holds
disastrous implications for the residents of Panna district as also other
districts of the Ken river basin.” In the state wildlife board meeting in 2015
where Shivraj as  the chairman of the
Board had cleared the project,  a senior
board member had commented , “ na pani milega na park” ( MP will neither get
water nor the Panna park) .Also read: UNESCO's "Hope for the Planet" Cry doesn't Gel with Ken Betwa Project Once completed, in an estimated nine years ,water will be
transferred through a 221-kilometre long Ken-Betwa Link Canal Phase-l which
will be constructed along the left bank of the river Ken. The project will lead
to submergence of over 90 sq km area in the Panna Tiger Reserve, home to over
65 tigers.   Interestingly the green
clearances required for such projects are yet to be issued and it is believed
that the centre is pushing the project 
because of the assembly elections due in Uttar Pradesh  next year.Experts believe that  the project would benefit the neighbouring as
MP will bear the brunt of  submergence of
emerald forests of Panna. Images:  People's
protest in Panna