After four months of monsoon break when Bandhavgarh national park was thrown open for tourists again on October 1, a hot air balloon flying low over core area of the tiger reserve erupted controversy. A member of National Tiger Conservation Authority member Satyendra Tiwari   blew the whistle leading to questions whether hot air balloons should be allowed to fly over such a low height.
Can Hot Balloon Fly over Core Area ?                                                                                                                   Some tourists on a tiger safari on gypsies also spotted the balloon.  But Tiwari, an NTCA member  clicked a picture of the   balloon  and posted it on Facebook . He said if you  see  it (the picture  ) carefully you can see a white dot amongst the trees  which is  a watch tower in Chakradhara meadow and this is the tree line near  cave number 1.  “ No matter  the elevation of the place I was standing , I cannot make this balloon look below the tree line. I took this picture from Sheshshaiyya road from first turn while proceeding upwards”, he said .Also read: Tiger Checks in a Bandhavgarh Hotel “Tree top is higher than the balloon so just imagine where the basket of this balloon was?”, he wondered  over the  height  when the balloon was flying. Was it  a violation of the eco -tourism norms?, environmentalists want to know. Senior officials of the state wildlife division of the forest department said they would look into the matter. A senior official said that  hot air balloon could not be operated over the core area of the national park.  This  would create disturbance to the  wildlife animals as it emanates   babbling noise  of heating of air in its burner. The flame of the burner has 600 degrees Celsius  temperature.Also read: Are Lion Tailed Macaque More Fortunate than Panna Tigers: A Tale of Two Projects Another post  the NTCA member on the Facebook said Union ministry of environment and forest prohibited activities several activities in  a 2019 notification on ecological sensitive zones. The prohibited activities include the tourism activities like hot-air balloons over the national park,Balloon Safari Launched in January 2021
One of the most visited national parks by wildlife tourists from all over the world,  the park introduced India's first hot air balloon safari in January this year. With the highest density of tigers, Bandhavgarh tiger reserve became the first in the country  where this facility was launched by Sky Waltz Ballooning , the company operating  in  Bandhavgarh.  
Also read: Victims of Drones and Selfie Seekers, Jawai Leopards on the Brink
MP Tourism development corporation said that the it is loaded with necessary safety equipment. “An aerial view of the restricted buffer zone and core zone will be an exclusive experience for the safari lovers. One can witness and appreciate the magnificent ancient temple while strolling in the sky. “The balloon with a capacity of nine passengers will take off from the buffer zone, will fly over the core zone of the national park and land outside the core zone”, tourism corporation website said.
Cover Pic: Courtesy Satyendra Tiwari. Other are  representational images