When Walker wandered over 3000 kms last year, the three year
old tiger seemed to have given a wake up call to the government and its officials
busy in achieving a bizarre target, the target of doubling the tiger
population. Termed as TX2, it is a global goal to make the tiger population
two- folds by 2022. In 2010, all the 13 tiger range countries joined hands in
St Petersburg and set the target.  India,
with the largest tiger population in the world, is busy in achieving the
objective. Too obsessed with their tiger number, they seemed to have forgotten
the forests and preservation of the corridors. 
The wake-up call from Walker underlines the significance of forest
corridors.

The Epic WalkIn March, 2020 this radio-collared tiger in India grabbed
global attention by taking a roundabout route of forests starting from
Tipeshwer wildlife sanctuary in Yavatmal district in Maharashtra in June 2019.
From here, the tiger went to Telangana before re-entering Maharashtra again and
finally settling down in Dhyanganga sanctuary in Buldhana. And while doing so,
the big cat had travelled 3,020 kilometres across Maharashtra and Telangana in
13 months, as per the records of the GPS data 
generated by the tiger’s collar. From TWLS T1C1, or Tipeshwar Wildlife
Sanctuary cub C1 born to tigress T1, the tiger became Walker. Distance between
the two Maharashtra districts ( Yavatmal and Buldhana) is about 244 kms. But
Walker had to travel 3020 kms to reach Dhyanganga, the small jungle in
Vidharbha region of Maharashtra known as the island jungle because it has no
forest connectivity. Ever since Walker made this jungle his home, he is all
alone. Though the forest department in Maharashtra is mulling over
translocation of a mate for C1, they have not been able execute this idea.

“Dnyanganga is like an island. Unless it has some
connectivity to other tiger-bearing areas like Melghat in Amravati district and
Muktai Bhavani in Jalgaon district, it makes little sense to facilitate the
growth of Walker’s progeny in Dnyanganga”, officials said. “Where do they go
and how do we ensure their genetic plurality?” is their concern. This has also
highlighted the importance of the forest corridors and the connectivity of one
forest to another to give safe passage to the wild animals.

Dnyanganga, officials 
reiterates,that it needs to be developed into a regular tiger-sustaining
area by developing corridors to connect with other such locations. “We need to
first facilitate connectivity before letting Walker’s tribe grow,” the forest
department officials of Maharashtra have said.

Also read: Protect This Wildlife Corridor To Save The Ganges

Born in late 2016, the sub-adult male C1 was a part of a
project of the Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun, to study the
dispersal of tigers across the eastern Vidarbha landscape.  The WII team which tracked the tiger
throughout his journey  said Walker
strayed into Adilabad division in Telangana and spent considerable time across
inter-state forests of Adilabad and Nanded divisions during August and September
2019 . It criss-crossed several forest divisions and districts crossing
human-dominated landscapes, agricultural fields, canals, villages and highways
before  heading towards  Dhyanganga sanctuary.

Over the months, 6,240 GPS locations were picked up and the
animal was found to have normal predation patterns and achieved all the skills
to survive and avoid humans, according to a report by the team of scientists
and researchers at WII, comprising Bilal Habib, Parag Nigam and Zehidul
Hussain. Citing this as the longest journey ever taken by a collared tiger in
the country, the team submitted its report to the Principal Chief Conservator
of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden of Maharashtra.

Walker Waits for an AnswerWII scientists said that 
“ translocating a tigress  is an
easy task and can be carried out any time. But where would the cubs go after
mating.  But experts warn that “the
challenge is much bigger than that”. The space within Dhyanganga would not be
sufficient to accommodate the family of tigers.

Also read: Lonely Tiger Returns Home After One Decade  

Officials point to two forest stretches that can provide a
larger area for a tiger population to move about: the 74-sq km Katepurna
Sanctuary in Akola and the 18-sq km Karanja Sohol Sanctuary in Washim. But
these proposals  are full of “ifs and
buts”.

For long-term conservation, we need to ensure proper
channels for tigers to move in and out of Dhyanganga. It is a big challenge,
officials in Maharashtra said.

Back in Buldana, , there were demands to preserve Dnyanganga
as a tiger area to facilitate tourism.  A
Shiv Sena  MP Prataprao Jadhav had  even suggested a 10-km elevated corridor
between two villages to replace the 50-km Khamgaon-Buldana road cutting through
the sanctuary. There are also plans to relocate the only village inside the
sanctuary.

Walker’s walk has raised many big questions. The most
important: Is TX2 possible without proper preservation of India’s forests and
the corridors connecting them. Walker awaits an answer.Representational pictures