Your favourite - thewildlifeindia.com is now among the top ten blogs on the Web. And it is the only Indian blog which could find a place in the prestigious list released by Feedspot, a content reader for reading all favourite websites in one place.  Feed post released the latest ranking of the top 60 Wildlife RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds on June 22 where thewildlifeindia ranked at 9th spot.The Hall of Fame
In the last 12 months of period,  thewildifeindia  continues to  be patronized  by its readers  as  it improved its ratings twice in the period.  In January this year, the blog was placed at 14th place  in the Feedspot  ratings in the list of top 60 wildlife Blogs and Websites.  Six months later in June this year, the ratings further improved and thewildifeindia was included in the top ten blogs on the web. Following is the list. https://blog.feedspot.com/wildlife_rss_feeds/1.Global Wildlife Conservation, United States2.Focusing on Wildlife, Switzerland3. National Wildlife Refuge Association, United States4. Wildlife Biology | A Journal for The Science of Wildlife, Eurasia5. Defenders of Wildlife United States6.The Robert E Fuller ,United Kingdom7.Wildlife ACT ,South Africa8.Ireland's Wildlife ,Ireland9.The Wildlife India, India10.Chester Zoo, United KingdomTogether We Can Save the NatureThe blog was conceptualized in the year 2020 amidst the raging corona virus. And the idea was to attract attention of the people towards nature conservation. Though a large number of people already understand the significance of environment protection, many more are still required to be made aware over the green issues. In our country, environmental issues majorly move around tiger conservation. Tigers are a keystone species sitting on the top of the ecological pyramid, and their survival is pivotal to the health of the jungles and wellbeing of several animals, including humans. Also read:  Diamond Digging To Destroy Tiger Corridor In Bundelkhand   Interestingly, in the times of Covid19, a section of environmentalists also started correlating the significance of tiger reserves in checking the zoonotic diseases and have been of the view that several  zoonotic pandemics like Covid-19 could be checked , if not eliminated, through the green buffers. Most of the blogs in these columns are thus devoted to the predator and the readers have also appreciated them. But we would like them to patronize the pieces written on other species also. We would also be happy if we get inputs and suggestions on the stories that you would like to read. We look forward for continuing support from our readers as we continue to bring interesting and exciting stories from the wild.  We believe: “Together we can save the nature.”