There seems to be no place 
in  Madhya Pradesh for Lesser
Florican or Kharmore (Sypheotides) ,one of the most romantic but endangered
birds of the planet . The shy bird, popular for 
it's mid-air courtship gestures ,has been rendered almost homeless by
the  state government.  The State wildlife Board - headed by the
chief minister of Madhya Pradesh- recommended 
last month de-notification of 348.12 sq km area of Sardarpur Kharmoresanctuary in Dhar district, home to Kharmore during its breeding period of monsoon
till October. The sanctuary will now be shrunk only to about 16 sq km area. As
the bird was being banished, ‘esteemed’ members of the Board looked as helpless
as the threatened Florican before the powerful politicians. Though the State
Wildlife Boards have the primary task to manage the conservation and protection
of wildlife at the State Level, it seems to have worked contradictory to  its mandate . There was hardly any voice of
dissent from its members who are empowered to exercise powers bestowed upon
them under the Wildlife Act, 1972.

Along With Florican, Now Mahi River May also Affect

This step will not only further threaten the  bird, 
it is likely to affect the origin of Mahi river, an aspect completely
ignored and overlooked by the government. Mahi originates from Minda village in
Sardarpur. Conservation efforts taken so far 
were helpful in recharging the origin of the river. Post
de-notification, digging of tube-wells and other construction activities are
all set to endanger the river. In 1983 when the sanctuary was notified, it also
included 348 .12 sq km area of 14 revenue villages. There was a ban on the sale
and purchase of the land antagonizing the villagers. However, many experts
believed it happened because of the wrong interpretation of the Wildlife (
protection) Act. There is a provision in Section 24 of the Wildlife Act to
include private land in a sanctuary with full rights. “ It is the politics of
votes .To appease voters, the government de-notified the land. Kharomore
doesn’t  cast a vote and hence not
important for the politician”, a senior 
officer commented. The small bird, protecting the river so far, is known
among ornithologists for it's unique aerial courtship displays. The spectacular
expression in the air begins  with males
puffing their neck and chest feathers, strutting around their territory, and
watching keenly for any signs of a female. Romantic by heart, Florican attracts
females from afar by hopping in air  and
rises to 1.5 meters to 2 meters . Sometimes it happens  as many as 500 times in a day. But the mates
are hard to come by , more so now because of  
dwindling numbers. Once widespread and common but  now breeds in Gujarat, southeast Rajasthan,
northwest Maharashtra, Kurnool district of Andhra Pradesh, and western Madhya
Pradesh. The shape and the size of the bird is like a domestic hen, the male
measures about 46 cm; and the female is slightly larger than the male and
measures about 51 cm. Breeding male is black-and-white coloured with a tuft of
narrow spatulate-ended up-curved black peculiar plumes projecting behind the
head. Non-breeding male is similar to female, but with much white colour on its
wings. 

Grasslands: Victims of Govt ApathyIn the last few decades, India’s grassland habitats
underwent rapid degradation leading to decline 
in the number of these birds . Thrown out from Sardarpur, Florican is
scared of the whooshing sound emanated from the 
large number of windmills   in
Sailana sanctuary  of neighbouring Ratlam
. No bird has visited  the sanctuary of
Sailana for the past 2 years ever since the windmills were installed in the
year 2017-18. The wind -farm with about 50 machines has also affected the
flight of the bird. After the state wildlife board declined to give a go -ahead
to the wind farming in July 2017, it's members were later made sign on  the dotted lines  to clear the project. One of the members
later commented, “ The wildlife board is now 
more like a project clearance 
panel. We talk less on protection (of wildlife) and more on (business)
projects”, he said. Now the government has initiated proceedings to remove more
private areas from the sanctuary in Sailana too, due to this the sanctuary will
shrink to a little more than 12 sq km area only.

Also read: It's Not Cheetah, the Fastest Animal on the Earth
is Shaheen

Kharomore is endemic to India and found in tall grasslands,
which are  victims of  government apathy. Grasslands are threatened
by habitat loss, which are caused by human actions, such as unsustainable
agricultural practices or overgrazing. 
Interestingly,  the issues of
conservation of grasslands  and
protection of the bird were raised by  an
organization that has nothing to do with wildlife . The National Highways
Authority of India (NHAI) in 2019 submitted a report while seeking
environmental clearance for permission to build an 8-lane road  near the sanctuary . What NHAI  had 
recommended to the government should have come from the Wildlife Board,
an official commented. The report noted, “Conservation of tall and thick
grasslands, restoration of degraded tall grasslands, promoting organic
agriculture and grassland development vis-à-vis agriculture, control of
hunting, and avoiding installation of windmills in its habitat are suitable
conservation measures for this species”.