Donation part of National Grid’s Engineering Our
Future Initiative to
support science- and math-focused education programs at the
WCS’s New York Aquarium, Queens Zoo, and Prospect Park Zoo



New York – September 30,
2011- The Wildlife
Conservation Society has partnered with National Grid in support of two
important education initiatives.





National Grid has made a $225,000 contribution
to support WCS science-focused educational programs. This support is a part of
National Grid’s Engineering Our Future Initiative to encourage young people to
study science, technology, engineering, and math. 


National Grid’s multi-year commitment will support:
(1) the docent program at WCS’s New York Aquarium; and (2) Conservation Math
presented by National Grid at WCS’s New York Aquarium, Queens Zoo, and Prospect
Park Zoo, a suite of education programming at all three facilities.



“We are grateful to National Grid for this
opportunity to inspire young people in ways that will help secure a better
future for the next generation," said Bertina Ceccarelli, Executive Vice
President for Global Resources. "Through this support, we can encourage
student participants to make conservation an important part of their daily
lives and to consider careers in the sciences."



A zoo or aquarium visit can provide valuable
knowledge and conservation awareness. For example, a WCS survey demonstrated
that 88 percent of visitors to the Bronx Zoo’s Congo Gorilla Forest stated that
the exhibit helped them understand basic concepts about ecology.



“National Grid is committed to supporting
initiatives that inspire youth to pursue science, technology, engineering and
math skills,” said Ken Daly, National Grid president for New York.  “The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s unique math and science programs are a way to
engage students in an interesting, fun way and at the same time, directly
supports our Engineering Our Future Initiative to make sure that all of our
students have the option to choose engineering as a career choice.” 



About the Initiatives: The Teen Docent Program at the New York
Aquarium: The Teen Docent program helps New York City youth learn important
natural science and ecological principles while developing positive attitudes
toward wildlife and promoting awareness of the environment among aquarium
visitors. Docents work with a team of animal experts who enjoy sharing their
knowledge with others while supporting WCS’s mission to save wildlife and wild
places around the globe. The program has the potential to provide valuable
public speaking skills and hands-on learning opportunities to nearly 100
docents and reaches approximately 40,000 visitors.Conservation Math
Presented by National Grid at
the New York Aquarium, Queens Zoo, and Prospect Park Zoo: From investigating
animal adaptation in the wild to observing species and analyzing survey data in
the classroom, this initiative includes a range of math and science-focused
education programs that serve various school groups throughout the metropolitan
area. National Grid’s support has enabled WCS to offer free of charge 50
Conservation Math classes annually.At the New York Aquarium: This exciting, interactive, content-rich
program serves nearly 700 students and instructors from pre-school through high
school, including children with special needs. A wide range of grade-specific
education programs enrich science and math learning in the classroom and
inspire students to appreciate the wonders of aquatic wildlife. For example,
“In the Sea,” a station-based learning program, encourages preschoolers to
sharpen math and observational skills by exploring symbiosis, camouflage, and
taxonomy among diverse sea animals.    At the
Queens and Prospect Park Zoos: This program, which reaches nearly
1,050 students and instructors from sixth to eighth grade focuses on topics
such as animal behavior and adaptations, animal enrichment and data collection.
The class, Animal Behavior and Enrichment, offers students hands-on experiences
that replicate those of animal behavior researchers, such as animal observation,
data collection, and graphing. Lessons incorporate literacy and math skills and
use the zoos’ animal exhibits to teach biology and help students understand the
importance of preserving natural resources. 





More information about these and other exciting
education programs can be found online at www.nyaquarium.com,
www.queenszoo.com,
and www.prospectparkzoo.com. 




Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org    

 



Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public
events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit
our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com.
Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of
New York. 


The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $8 for adults,
$6 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children fewer
than 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April
through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are
sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush
Avenue. For more information call 718-399-7339 or go to www.prospectparkzoo.com
<http://www.prospectparkzoo.com>




The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for
seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours
are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October,
and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at
53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further
information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.



National Grid is an international energy delivery company. In
the U.S., National Grid delivers electricity to approximately 3.3 million
customers in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York and Rhode Island, and
manages the electricity network on Long Island under an agreement with the Long
Island Power Authority (LIPA). It is the largest distributor of natural gas in
the northeastern U.S., serving approximately 3.4 million customers in
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York and Rhode Island. National Grid also
owns over 4,000 megawatts of contracted electricity generation that provides
power to over one million LIPA customers.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards
nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.

 

Special Note to
the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where
they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places,
please direct them to wcs.org.