New York, N.Y., October 1, 2009 – Prepare for a spook-tacular weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Central Park Zoo! The zoo will present “Boo at the Zoo,” an extreme Halloween extravaganza, October 30 and 31, 10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. The event promises spine-tingling surprises and festivities for zoo-goers of all ages. 

Creatively costumed characters, craft-making, and treats for the animals will make this a frighteningly fun weekend. So if you’re not too spooked, head to the zoos to have a terrifyingly terrific time this Halloween season! 

And if one weekend of Boo at the Zoo isn’t enough, you can also check out the event at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo on select weekends throughout October, and the Queens and Prospect Park Zoos on October 31 and November 1. The New York Aquarium is also featuring “Ascarium” on select weekends throughout October. 

Boo at the Zoo and Ascarium events at all five WCS facilities are presented by Pepsi, a sponsor of the events. 

The line-up of Boo activities includes:

CENTRAL PARK ZOO – “Boo at the Zoo”
Activities (10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m.) include:

Our trick-or-treating animals redefine what we consider Halloween goodies. Watch polar bears, snow monkeys, and Rain Forest and Tisch Children’s Zoo residents dig into pumpkins that are filled with all sorts of treats, from corn-on-the-cob to bamboo to fish.See and hear about all things creepy and crawly when our wildlife witch presents a SPOOKY show in a haunted habitat. (Noon, 1:30 and 2:15p.m.) Learn all about fascinating extinct animals by finding their colorful replicas hidden around the zoo. A special word jumble guides visitors along the trail in search of these “spirits”. Successful explorers receive a special treat. Zoo-goers can get in the spirit of Halloween with face painting–choose from a pumpkin, ghost, bat, or spider design.  A “creepy headband” brings out the creative side of youngsters as they make a paper bat, spider, or snake design. Go batty for a bat chat at the bat exhibit,  (Every hour on the hour starting at Noon.)Contact:
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 212-439-6527

The Central Park Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue. Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Admission includes entry into the main zoo, and the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com