Saturday, May 3
9 a.m. – 12 p.m.

 Brooklyn, N.Y. – April 29, 2014 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo will host Autism Awareness Month activities in collaboration with Autism Speak’s nation-wide Zoos Go Blue event on Saturday, May 3, from 9 a.m. to 12 p.m.

 The event welcomes families affected by autism to enjoy an early opening of the zoo along with visual support materials to prepare for the visit. The day will feature exhibit visits, sensory stations, crafts and other activities. 

 Tickets are $10, which includes one child with one adult, additional family members are $5.

 Zoos Go Blue is an Autism Awareness Month event taking place in several Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA)-accredited across North America.

 More information about the event can be found online at www.prospectparkzoo.com.

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com .

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.