Presents to the Animals: See baboons, meerkats, and other wildlife tear into wrapped presents for their favorite treats
				Every Saturday and Sunday in December at 11 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.
				Zoo is also accepting donations for toy and food drive through December 31

		
		
				
New York, N.Y. November 29, 2010– Wrapping paper will fly through the air as residents of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo receive treat-filled bags and boxes to celebrate the holidays.  

 

Each Saturday and Sunday in December, at 11:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., watch as Hamadryas baboons, Pallas's cats, meerkats, and other critters tear into their gifts. This will be baby baboons Jabari and Azizi’s first holiday season and their interaction with the presents will be a sight to see.


		
 


		
Presents for the animals are a form of enrichment. Prospect Park Zoo provides this and other types of mental and physical stimulation to keep the animals’ minds and bodies healthy and active.


		
				
						Presents for the animals, Saturdays and Sundays 11 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. 


		December 4/5:  Saki monkeys and Geoffrey tamarins 

December 11/12:  Baboons and meerkats 

December 18/19:  North American river otters and Pallas cats

December 25/26:  Baboons and meerkats 

 

Animals at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo always have food to eat and toys to play with, but many New Yorkers aren’t as fortunate. The Prospect Park Zoo, in conjunction with the Bronx and Brooklyn Borough Presidents' offices and the Food Bank for New York City is participating in the annual toy drive and the Food Bank for New York City’s food drive.



From November 22nd through December 31st, the Prospect Park Zoo will be accepting new, unwrapped toys and non-perishable, packaged food items. For every toy or grocery bag filled with ten or more packaged food items donated, you will receive one free general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo.



For more information and donation instructions please visit www.prospectparkzoo.com 

Contact:

Sophie Bass: 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org 

Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

 




Prospect Park Zoo – $8.00 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org/donation.