New York (Sept. 8, 2010) –  Dr. Steven E. Sanderson, President and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation
Society, has announced that he will retire in July 2012.Dr. Sanderson, who has led WCS since 2001, will retire after
more than 30 years serving in wildlife
conservation, poverty alleviation, and academia.



“I am deeply appreciative of the opportunity to serve
with WCS, the most global cultural institution in New York,” said Dr.
Sanderson. “It is a privilege to work with the most dedicated, effective and
creative colleagues anywhere, on behalf of saving wildlife and wild places
around the globe. The point of the announcement is not my retirement but to set
a calendar for the continuation of our mission. During the next two years, we
will continue to work furiously as stewards of conservation and cultural life
in New York.” 



Ward Woods, Chairman of the WCS Board said, “Steve is an
extraordinary champion of WCS, improving our facilities in New York and
expanding our global conservation work into more than 60 nations. He has led a
renaissance at the Bronx Zoo, a successful $650 million capital campaign, and
the beginning of a transformation of the New York Aquarium. Perhaps more
importantly, he has aligned the strengths of our parks and global efforts as
one powerful and unmatched force protecting nature and our planet. Today, WCS
is a non-profit with vision, and management to match. It’s indicative of his
foresight that he has planned a thoughtful transition as well as an outline of
what we want to accomplish during his remaining tenure.”



During Dr. Sanderson’s professional life, he has also tried
to strengthen the connections between deforestation and climate change,
conservation and poverty, and conservation in areas of violent political
conflict. A member of the Council on Foreign Relations and a former Fulbright
Scholar in Mexico, Dr. Sanderson has written and lectured on Latin America,
rural poverty, biodiversity conservation and impacts of global climate change
on wildlife.

Prior
to his appointment in 2001, Dr. Sanderson was Dean of Emory College at Emory
University and he served on the faculty at the University of Florida. In the
1980s, he held a Rockefeller Foundation International Relations Fellowship and
a Council on Foreign Relations International Affairs Fellowship, among others.
He also served as Ford Foundation Program Officer in Brazil. In 1978, Dr.
Sanderson received a Ph.D. in Political Science from Stanford
University.   

Contact: 
Mary Dixon: 347-840-1242, mdixon@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We
do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the
world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx
Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help
people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to
this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.