Zoos set wager on Super Bowl

New York Giants victory means public serenade at Boston’s Franklin Park Zoo of “I Love New York” and Woodman’s of Essex N.E. Clam Chowder

New England victory means Patriots jerseys at Bronx Zoo sea lion show and NY Bagels from Empire Bagels in the Bronx
		

		

		Bronx, N.Y. and Boston, MA – Feb. 1, 2012 – The teams for Zoo-per Bowl XLVI are talking trash. The directors of WCS’s Bronx Zoo and Zoo New England have agreed to terms of their wager on Sunday’s Super Bowl matchup between the New York Giants and the New England Patriots.

If the Pats beat the Giants on Sunday (Not!), Jim Breheny, WCS Executive Vice President and Director of the Bronx Zoo will wear a Pats jersey for a full day of work and the Bronx Zoo’s keepers during a sea lion show will do the same. Breheny will also graciously send to Zoo New England a nice big bag of bagels from Empire Bagels in the Bronx. He isn’t making any promises about the cream cheese. 

If the Giants win Sunday, John Linehan, Director of Zoo New England, will dress in a Giants jersey for the day and he will gather other zoo staff in a front of their gorilla exhibit to sing “I Love New York.” He promises to send to Breheny some delicious New England clam chowder from the famous Woodsman’s of Essex.

“I am already feeling sorry for John Linehan,” said Breheny. “I hope he sings as well as he runs a zoo for the public’s sake.”

Said Linehan: “I hope Jim is out shopping for those Pats jerseys now. Because after the Pats win on Sunday, they will be hard to find.”

Media will be invited to witness the victor receiving, singing, eating or wearing the spoils.
Contacts:
(Bronx Zoo) - Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

(Zoo New England) -  Alyssa Stevens / Hannah Laverty - Marlo Marketing/Communications, astevens@marlomc.com / hlaverty@marlomc.com; 617-375-9700


The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

Zoo New England manages Franklin Park Zoo in Boston and Stone Zoo in Stoneham. Both are accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA). Zoo New England's mission is to inspire people to protect and sustain the natural world for future generations by creating fun and engaging experiences that integrate wildlife and conservation programs, research, and education. To plan your trip, visit www.ZooNewEngland.org or call 617-541-LION.