Credit: ©WCS




 Credit: ©WCS



 Credit: ©WCS



					
					
						BRONX, N.Y. — July 23, 2024 — Pumpkin Nights returns to kick off the Halloween season at the Bronx Zoo.

On Thursday through Sunday nights from September 26th – October 27th, more than 5,000 animal-themed jack o'lanterns will illuminate a half-mile trail in the zoo to ring in the spooky season. This year, guests can expect more local food trucks, refreshments, outdoor games, photo ops, live pumpkin carvings, and more!

Lighting up the Bronx Zoo after the sun sets, Pumpkin Nights will display different ecosystems as guests step into the night and meet the amazing animals who inhabit these wild places. Explore ecosystems such as the bioluminescent deep-sea, African Savanna waterhole, Congo, Amazon rainforest, Himalayas and many more as guests travel through each scene along the trail.

Following a successful debut in 2023, the second annual Pumpkin Nights is brought to life by intricately carved animal sculptures and scenes, special lighting techniques, thematic music, family-friendly activities, and fall treats. Perfect for guests of all ages, attendees can watch pumpkin carvers create amazing animal images, play seasonal lawn games, and enjoy face painting, trivia and more festive entertainment.  

Pumpkin Nights will be held at the Bronx Zoo Thursdays – Sundays, September 26th - October 27th, 7:00-10pm. Starting October 17th, entry will begin at 6:30pm. Last entry is at 9PM. Tickets are on sale now:


 $34.95 for Adults 12 and up, and $24.95 for Children ages 3-12 on Thursdays and Sundays.
 $36.95 for Adults and $26.95 for Children on Fridays and Saturdays.
 Children under 3 are free.
 Wildlife Conservation Society members will receive a 40% discount.
 Tickets can be purchased here: BronxZoo.com/PumpkinNights


In addition to Pumpkin Nights, the Bronx Zoo will continue the tradition of Boo at the Zoo, which will return on Saturdays and Sundays, September 28th through October 27th, plus Monday, October 14th. Tickets for Boo at the Zoo go on sale September 3rd at BronxZoo.com.

###