WCS Bronx Zoo V-Roach Spreads a Lot of Love
				
				
						If You Didn't Get Roached This Year, There Is Always Valentine's Day 2012
						

				
		
		


Bronx, NY –  Feb. 15, 2011 – More than 5,700 romantics sealed Valentine's Day with a hiss.



All 5,707 of those romantics named a Madagascar hissing cockroach after a beloved for Valentine's Day, sending a clear message to their sweethearts. Of course, we hope that message was clearly filled with love.



“The WCS Bronx Zoo roach spread a lot of love on Valentine's Day,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We are thankful to everyone who believed that naming a roach after a loved one was more romantic than chocolate or roses.”



While the naming opportunity has passed for this year, loved ones can once again next year name a roach for their sweetheart for Valentine's Day.



The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo, has more than 58,000 of these roaches living in its Madagascar! exhibit. With its V-Roach gift idea, WCS raised $57,000 to save wildlife and wild places around the world.



Some of the roaches at the zoo are now blessed with such names as: Hissing Hottie, Cranky Frankie, Lisa Lovebug, and Hisssterical.



Madagascar hissing cockroaches are the world’s largest roach species reaching nearly four-inches long. The namesake hissing noise is emitted as a defense mechanism. Like nearly every roach species, Madagascar hissing cockroaches are not considered pests and rarely enter homes.



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 



The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010. 




		If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org/donation