Bronx, NY- Oct. 5, 2011 – 
		Some of the inhabitants of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo are always ready for Halloween. Zoo visitors can get into the spirit of the holiday with these creepy invertebrates in the Bronx Zoo’s JungleWorld exhibit. Visit www.bronxzoo.com/boo for a full list of Boo at the Zoo activities and to vote for the best creepy crawly photo.

 

Just hanging around – African whip scorpions looking stately and suave.

 

Little bundles of scorpion – A tailless whip scorpion is the proud mother of several dozen babies

 

Autumn leaves – or is it? – An insect known as a wandering leaf shows off its fall colors

 

Sticks in Space – Asian walking sticks strike a pose against a black background.

 

Boo at the Zoo returns to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo every weekend in October with Halloween-themed family entertainment and activities. Attractions and activities embrace spirit of the season and highlight wildlife like bugs, bats, snakes, and nocturnal animals that have become iconic to Halloween.  

 

WCS’s Boo at the Zoo is made possible by the following generous sponsors:  

 

Presented by:               
Pepsi

 

Supported by:             
FedEx, Verizon Wireless
Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © WCSContact:
Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

  


The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org