First sea lion ever born at WCS’s New York
Aquarium makes its public debut
						
				
				
						
								View the video at
						 www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xq74WMseBrM
		
		




		





New York – July 23, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium has visitors
ooh-ing over its newest, and first ever, baby California sea lion.



This playful baby girl was born at the aquarium to mom,
Clarice. Only 15 pounds at birth, she is getting a little bigger each day.
Adult female sea lions can weigh as much as 250 pounds, so this pup still has a
lot of growing to do.



“This is the first sea lion ever born at our aquarium, and
we are very excited,” said Jon Dohlin, director of the New York Aquarium. “She
is very sweet, and we are sure she will become an instant Coney Island celebrity and a favorite among our guests.”



On exhibit with fellow sea lions Nav and, of course, mom
Clarice, the pup is still getting used to life in the water. She spends most of
her time exploring the rocks and waters of the aquarium’s Sea Cliffs exhibit,
which is a representation of the sea lion’s natural habitat on the West Coast. 



Animal keepers say the precious pup is doing very well in
her new home. Keepers look forward to her participation in basic sea lion
training when she is a little older. The training is designed to teach
specific behaviors in order to give the sea lions basic veterinary exams to
ensure they are healthy.



Once visitors have a chance to introduce themselves to the
new baby, no one should miss the opportunity to learn about California sea
lions and watch them entertain the crowd at the Aquatheater every day at 11:45
a.m., 1:45 p.m. and 4 p.m.  Private interactive sea lion experiences are
available at the Aquatheater for an additional charge.



As an added treat, a name for this cute pup will be
auctioned off at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Dinner by the Sea, held at WCS’s New York Aquarium on September 22. This
annual benefit supports the aquarium and its mission to educate visitors and
protect local and global marine life. 






Contact:     
Barbara Russo - 212-439-6527; brusso@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220- 5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org




The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



Wildlife Conservation
Society’s New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on
public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH
or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show
support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction
and a beloved part of the City of New York.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.