Exhibit also features a kangaroo, emus, and other Australian natives
		

		

		
Brooklyn, NY-April 11, 2011- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo announces the debut of two baby yellow-footed rock wallabies, called joeys, at its re-opened Australian Walkabout exhibit.

 

The joeys were born late last year and are experiencing life outside the pouch for the first time. After spending the long winter indoors, all the residents of the Australian Walkabout; a Western grey kangaroo, seven yellow-footed rock wallabies, two Cape Barren geese, and two emu are ready to come out for spring.  

 

“The joeys are becoming very independent and learning how to hop around on the rocks,” said Denise McClean, Director of WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo.  “The new emu enclosure will give visitors a chance to experience these unique birds at close range.”

 

Born to moms Adelaide and Sydney and dad Darwin, new joeys Canberra and Windarra join older brothers Melbourne and Joondalup in the Australian Walkabout on Discovery Trail. 

 

The emu have moved to an area close to the trail where visitors can get an up close view of the long-necked birds.  

 

Yellow-footed rock wallabies are native to southern Australia. They have strong hind legs and large feet for jumping and a long, thick tail that helps them balance. 

 

The Prospect Park Zoo announces that spring hours are now in effect. The park will be open 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., daily and 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. 

 

Now that the days are longer there is even more to see at the zoo. The animals enjoy the warmer weather and the zoo is the perfect place to watch flowers and trees bloom. 

		
				Contact:
				
Sophie Bass: 817-925-8888; sbass@wcs.org

 Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

 Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

 
 


 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November  through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue. For more information call 718-399-7339 or go to  www.prospectparkzoo.com 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 




		
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation