Donations to Adirondack Gives will be matched at a 2 for 1 ratio 

 Less than a month left to raise money 

 (SARANAC LAKE, May 29, 2014) – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Adirondack Program—working to conserve wildlife and wild places in the Adirondacks since 1995—is asking for donations to help raise the money to purchase a much-needed field vehicle to conduct its science-based field research.

 Donations can be made at Adirondack Gives by following this link (https://adirondackgives.org/campaigns/field-vehicle-wildlife-research/) until June 15th and will be matched at a 2:1 ratio. This means that if WCS-Adirondacks meets its goal of $5,000 through donations, it will have $15,000 to spend on a vehicle. The money will be used to purchase a reliable 4WD vehicle to transport field staff and their research equipment to backcountry areas in the Adirondack Mountains. 

 “Our scientists need a reliable vehicle to travel to remote locations in the Adirondack Park to conduct critical field research on wildlife and habitats,” says Zoe Smith, the Adirondack Program’s Director. “The support of the community has been tremendous and it’s humbling to hear from people that they value what we do here in the Adirondacks and that they want to help. I encourage anyone who has an interest in wildlife to support this cause. No matter how big or small, your gift makes a huge difference.” 

 WCS-Adirondacks promotes wildlife conservation and vibrant human communities through outreach and community-based conservation programs in the Adirondacks. It does this so that the region will retain the character and biodiversity that makes it a unique place in which to live and work, as well as to visit. Its field staff travels to some of the most remote locations in the Adirondack Park to conduct wildlife research. Currently, there are field sites that staff cannot get to. Funds will help ensure that crews get there safely.

 For further information on this story, please contact Zoe Smith at 518-891-8872 or email zsmith@wcs.org.

CONTACT:
Scott Smith – 718-220-3698;ssmith@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org and www.wcs-heal.org. Follow: @theWCS.