Brooklyn
		, NY
		
				, October 5, 2009 –
The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) recently honored Cynthia Reich, Deputy
Director of Aquarium Administration, at the WCS’s New York
Aquarium’s annual Dinner by the Sea held on September 17.

In her
twenty years at the Aquarium, Ms. Reich has worked closely with city and state
leaders and agencies to ensure the stability and growth of one of the New York’s most
important cultural institutions. Through
the years, the Aquarium has become Brooklyn’s
most popular tourist attraction. Recently, WCS announced a $100 million
transformation that is expected to generate even more visitors from the current
750,000 to 1 million.

Ms. Reich
has worked tirelessly on many important projects at the Aquarium, including Sea
Cliffs, the Aquatic
 Animal Health
 Center, Alien Stingers,
and the Seaside Café.

“Cynthia has
dedicated many years to the Aquarium,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, director
of WCS’s New York Aquarium. “She is a person whose heart and soul
are clearly anchored here at the Aquarium. This institution, Brooklyn and Coney Island have benefited greatly from her passion.”

“Cynthia has helped to solidify our role as a leading
cultural institution in Brooklyn and throughout
New York City,”
said John Calvelli, Executive Vice President of Public Affairs.
 “She has been an integral part of the WCS team that has shaped the
exciting vision we have planned for the future of the New York Aquarium.”


Before
joining the WCS’s NY Aquarium team, Ms. Reich’s concerns for the
environment led her to a community outreach position at the NYC Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA). She eventually managed NYC EPA’s effort to
transform the Pennsylvania Avenue Landfill into a nature preserve. However, it
was her years in the Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, where she
laid the ground work for her ability to navigate the maze of City government.

At the
dinner where she was honored, Cynthia Reich gratefully thanked all the
community leaders that have helped her with her work through
the years, including Borough President Marty Markowitz and NY City Councilman
Domenic M. Recchia Jr.

A Wildlife Conservation Society park, the New York Aquarium, opens
every day of the year at 10 a.m. with seasonal closing times. Admission is $13
for adults, and $9 for children ages 3-12 and $10 for senior citizens (65 and
older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Parking is $12 for
cars and buses. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information,
call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com.
Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the
City of New York.       
Contact: 
Fran Hackett, fhackett@wcs.org, 718-265-3428



 

The Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through
science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. 
Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people
imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org.