Linking artists, scientists and other professionals Karukinka Natural Park will host a one-week workshop
on the topics of conservation, land use and management,
and the relationship between art and the task of
preservation

December 6, 2010 -
Santiago, Chile – initiated by the
curator Camila Marambio, in collaboration with the Wildlife Conservation
Society Chile, Essay N°1 is a
one-week workshop that will take place from February 14th to 21st,
2011 at Karukinka Natural Park, in the extreme locality of Tierra del Fuego,
Chile. The objective of Essay N°1
is to bring together a group of 20, national and international, professionals
from the fields of art, social studies and science to work through a series of
questions that will set the framework for a long-term artist in residency program
at the park. 



The proposal to include an
artist in residency program to Karukinka’s existing conservation model–which
already incorporates a series of scientific residencies- stems from the
consideration that: investigation is a method for conservation. Thus, by
including artistic investigation into its model, Karukinka will add a creative
and critical perspective to its existing conservation goals: establishing
permanent presence, management of the property, sustainable development,
control of invasive species and research and monitoring. “Conservation is about
people, and through Karukinka, WCS expects to promote the culture of
conservation, and the cooperativeness for developing sustainable use of these
unique lands. Art should be part of this conservation culture”, indicates Dr.
Barbara Saavedra, Director WCS Chile.



In recognition of the
essential role that cultural conservation plays in the maintenance of a “sense
of place”, the questions that will de dealt with during the workshop
circumnavigate the issues of land use and management, the concepts of use value
and uselessness, the history, politics and recent trends in conservation, the
role of memory in the task of preservation, the image and its relation to both
conservation and the tourist industry, and finally, economics, funding
strategies and partnerships within sustainable development. The result of the
weeklong discussions and excursions will be documented and both a website and
publication will be launched in June of 2010. This website will serve as the
platform from which to monitor the processes of the future residents and
eventually will also be the place where anyone from around the world can apply
to take part in a residency.



The vision for the
development of an artist in residency program for Karukinka Natural Park – via
a weeklong workshop- arose in February 2010, during an informal visit to the
park by the curator, Camila Marambio. In her words, “I was inspired by: the
particular model for the conservation of biodiversity that Karukinka supports,
the unique history of Tierra del Fuego and the strong sentiment that Tierra del
Fuego is a both a geographic and cultural “center” with the potential to
provide a space for reflecting on the direction of art and its articulation in
regards to conservation. Given this conjunction of interest fields, an expert
meeting to define an artist in residency program seemed like the next logical
step.” 



The participating experts of
Essay N°1 are:



Juan Manuel Garrido, philosopher. PHD in
     Philosophy from the Université 
     Marc Bloch de Strasbourg, France. Teaches philosophy at the
     Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, (Chile).Christy Gast, artist. MA in Fine Arts from
     Columbia University, NYC. Sits on the board of the Everglades National
     Park Art in residency Program. (USA).Eugenio Gárces, architect. PHD in Architecture
     from Escuela Técnica Superior de Architecture de Barcelona, Spain. Teaches
     patrimonial studies of Tierra del Fuego at the Universidad Católica,
     (Chile).Tessa Giblin, curator. Director of Visual Arts
     at The Project, Dublin, Ireland. (New Zealand).Geir Tore Holm, artist. PHD in Art from the Oslo
     Art Academy.  Co-founder of
     Sørfinnset Skole/the nord land (Norway). Manuela Infante, theater director. MA in Cultural
     Analysis from the University of Amsterdam, Holland. (Chile)Søssa Jørgensen, artist and landscape architect.
     Co-founder of Sørfinnset Skole/the nord land, (Norway).Juan Pablo Langlois, artist and architect.
     (Chile)Fabienne Lassere, artist.  MA in Fine Arts from Columbia
     University, NYC.  (Canada).Pierre Laserre, economist. PHD in Economy from
     the University of British Columbia, Canada. Teaches environmental and
     resource economics at the Université du Quebec, Montreal,  (Canada).Alejandra Marambio, architect. MA in Landscape
     Architecture from University of Berkley, California. (Chile).Camila Marambio, curator. MA in Modern Art and
     Curatorial Studies from Columbia University. (Chile).Melissa Memory, archeologist. Chief of Cultural
     Resources, Everglades National Park, (USA).Stefan Mitterer, artist. BA from the Bergen Arts
     Academy, Norway.  (Austria).Alfredo Prieto,
     archeologist. MA in Archeology from the Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona,
     Spain.  Director of the Centro
     de Estudios del Hombre Austral, Universidad de Magallanes, (Chile). Bárbara Saavedra, biologist. PHD in Evolutionary
     Biology from Universidad de Chile. Director of the Wildlife Conservation
     Society Chile.  (Chile)Javier Simonetti, biologist. PHD in Biology from
     the University of Washington, USA. Teaches ecology and biodiversity at the
     Universidad de Chile, (Chile).Ian Szydlowski, artist. Creative Director and
     co-owner of Crevasse Waters of Patagonia, (Chile).Karolin Tampere, curator/artist. MA in Curating
     from the Curatorial  Program,
     de Appel arts centre, Amsterdam, Holland. (Sweden)Paola Vezzanni,
     artist. Regional Director of Culture, Consejo Nacional de la Cultura,
     Punta Arenas, (Chile). Aymara Zeggers, artist. MA in Fine Arts from
     Universidad de Chile, (Chile).



The relevance of the work of
each of the invited participants -as well as their outstanding credentials- is
testimony of the unique and visionary character of the workshop Essay N°1, and places the Wildlife Conservation Society and
Chile alongside the forward thinking organizations, park services and institutions
that have embarked on the mission of generating an active and practical
dialogue between land management, science, social studies and the arts. i.e.
Zion National Park (USA), Everglades National Park (USA), Centro Rural de Arte
in Los Alerces National Park (ARG), just to name a few. 

Contact: 







If you would like more
information, or to schedule an interview, please contact Dr. Bárbara Saavedra
at (562) 2222697; e-mail: bsaavedra@wcs.org;
Camila Marambio at (569) 71851338 or email Camila at lacamitrabaja@gmail.com.
Visit www.karukinkanatural.cl; www.wcs.org 



The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild lands through careful
science, international conservation, education, and the management of the
world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks (including the Bronx Zoo). These
activities change attitudes toward nature. WCS is committed to this work because it believes it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.