Hundreds of Elephants in Central African Republic’s 
Dzanga Bai may be massacred



WCS appeals to neighboring countries and world community to stop slaughter





NEW YORK  (May 10, 2013) —The Wildlife Conservation Society issued statements today following reports that poachers killing elephants in the Central African Republic had entered Dzanga Bai, which is located in a World Heritage Site. Reports from the field indicate that elephants are being shot from where scientists and visitors have observed elephants for decades. WCS staff was forced to evacuate CAR in late April as violence in the country escalated.



WCS President and CEO Cristián Samper, who visited Dzanga Bai in January said: “The elephants here face a sure death as criminals obtain ivory, which fuels even more violence in CAR.  On my recent visit to Dzanga Bai, I stood in awestruck silence as I watched hundreds of elephants gathering in this incredible area.  WCS stands with our conservation partner WWF calling for immediate action to stop the killing of these elephants. CAR’s acting head of state, Michel Djotodia, can help play a leadership role to protect this precious wildlife for the global community in this World Heritage Site.”



WCS Conservationist Andrea Turkalo who has worked in Dzanga Bai for the past 23 years, said: "Dzanga Bai and the surrounding area represents one of the most important areas for forest elephants in the entire Congo Basin.  Our research has continually documented the lives of hundreds of elephants for more than two decades representing a wealth of information on the lesser known species of African elephant.  Allowing criminal bands of poachers to destroy these animals is an unimaginable travesty and sadly represents the need for concrete action to ensure the survival of this iconic species.”



WCS has been in CAR for more than 20 years, in charge of monitoring and research of the elephants of Dzanga Bai. In addition, WCS works immediately across the border in the Republic of Congo to protect the same population of elephants where the government is working to ensure their additional security on that side of the border.



 CONTACT: 
STEPHEN SAUTNER: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)

JOHN DELANEY: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.