Flushing, N.Y. – Oct. 7, 2010- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo is looking
for a few animal lovers to join its team of volunteers. 



Becoming a volunteer with the
zoo’s education department means teaching schoolchildren and zoo visitors about
animals by giving guided tours, assisting with special programs and events, and
participating in many other exciting wildlife-themed activities. 



WCS’s Queens Zoo volunteers will
take part in: 

Teaching visitors about animals and exhibitsGiving guided group tours of the zooNarrating sea lion feedingsAssisting instructors in the presentation of special
     programs



Queens Zoo volunteers will also
have the opportunity to get involved in a variety of seasonal programs,
including the annual Boo at the Zoo and Presents to the Animals events.  Most importantly, becoming a volunteer
means discovering the world of wildlife, the environment, and having fun while
doing it.



Candidates must be at least 18
years or older, available for a multi-week training program, and able to commit
at least four hours every other week. 






Visit www.queenszoo.com
to download an application or call 718-271-7361 to speak to the Volunteer
Coordinator for more information.

Contact:     
Barbara
Russo - 718-265-3428; Cell: 917-494-5493; brusso@wcs.org 






The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission
is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3 for kids 3-12, free for
children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm
weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through
April.  The Queens Zoo is located at
53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or
visit www.queenszoo.com. 


The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. 


Special
Note to the Media: If you would like
to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation