Bronx, N.Y. – April 16, 2015 – WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) is now offering New York City college students complimentary admission to the Bronx Zoo.  The offer applies to students attending a college within the five boroughs, or New York City residents attending a non-New York City college. Students must be enrolled in two- or four-year undergraduate programs. “The Bronx Zoo has always been about providing educational experiences that teach people to appreciate wildlife and expand their understanding of conservation,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “By providing this opportunity to college students who are about to embark on their careers, we have an opportunity to provide a positive influence by facilitating a connection with nature and fostering the next generation of conservation-minded professionals.” “The Bronx Zoo is one of New York’s cultural and educational treasures, and I applaud their move to increasing engagement with students, helping to foster an appreciation for the natural world in our next generation of professionals,” said NYC Cultural Affairs Commissioner Tom Finkelpearl. “Along with the free membership they offer to IDNYC card holders; this signals their commitment to expanding accessibility and openness for all New Yorkers.” Eligible students must show a valid college ID from an institution within the 5 boroughs of New York City, or a valid college ID and proof of NYC residency. The offer is for General Admission tickets.  An upgrade to Total Experience Tickets is available on-site. The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $19.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $17.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.     ###