Wildlife Conservation Society and Canada’s Earth Rangers join forces to protect woodland caribou 
WCS conducts scientific research on caribou, which are threatened by development of their far northern home 
                TORONTO (December 15, 2011) – Just in time for the holidays, the Wildlife Conservation Society and Earth Rangers – a Canadian conservation group that works directly with children and families – have launched a campaign to protect the “real” reindeer, namely woodland caribou that call home to boreal forests of northern Ontario. 

                The campaign, called “Bring Back the Wild – Save the Real Reindeer,” will help fund WCS’s ongoing efforts to safeguard caribou from mining and other development issues in northern Ontario’s “Ring of Fire” region.

                “Woodland caribou – also known as reindeer – are among the world’s most beloved species, particularly this time of year,” said Justina Ray, Director of WCS Canada.  “WCS is delighted to team up with Earth Rangers to engage kids to protect this living symbol of the holidays – and of northern wilderness.”

Woodland caribou have declined by 40 percent over the past 150 years due to industrial development of the boreal forest.  Climate change and increasing pressure to develop this region has put the species at even greater risk.

WCS conducts ongoing aerial surveys of the boreal forest to identify important caribou areas and assess threats, and works on the ground to find solutions to protect the boreal forest.

To learn more about the campaign, go to: www.earthrangers.com 

Contact:Stephen Sauner: 1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org
John Delaney: 1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org
Justina Ray: 1-416-850-9038 ext 22; jray@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org  
 
Earth Rangers is an award-winning charitable organization dedicated to educating children and their families about biodiversity loss and empowering them to Bring Back the Wild™.  Building on children’s natural connection to wildlife, Earth Rangers’ focus is to communicate to children a positive science – based message on the importance of protecting biodiversity and adopting more sustainable behaviours.  Through programs including a children’s website - www.earthrangers.com  , a permanent studio at the Royal Ontario Museum, a national campaign on YTV and an Education Outreach Program featuring live Animal Ambassadors, Earth Rangers is able to reach, inspire and enable millions of children each year to take action to help ensure the lasting survival of species in Canada. 
Visit www.earthrangers.com   (children) www.earthrangers.org   (corporate).