Infant Wolf’s Guenon is the latest addition to WCS’s Congo Gorilla Forest

						
				
		
		
				

				
 

Bronx, NY – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is proud to announce one of its newest residents, a female Wolf’s guenon, born recently to parents Jordan and Gigi. This new addition to WCS’s Bronx Zoo can be seen year-round in the state-of-the-art Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit.

 

Wolf's guenons (Cercopithecus wolfi) are tree dwellers found south of Africa's Congo River primarily between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. These Old World monkeys are very colorful and extremely social. They tend to vocalize frequently and make a wide range of calls.

 

WCS’s Bronx Zoo recently celebrated the 10th anniversary of its Congo Gorilla Forest. This unique exhibit was the first zoological exhibit that directly connected a visit to the zoo to conservation programs in the field.

 

Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher ©WCS
				
						
								Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli - mpulsinelli@wcs.org, 718-220-5182 


The Bronx Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and is closed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King Day.  Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. WCS’s Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
				
		
undefined