Coquerel’s sifaka and collared lemur join the Bronx Zoo’s Madagascar! exhibit
		

		View the videos at:
		
				
						http://youtu.be/psckL953QZM (sifaka)
				
						http://youtu.be/YbX1XGC5_UE (collared lemur)
				

				Bronx, NY – June 1, 2012 – ATTACHED PHOTOS: A Coquerel’s sifaka, born this spring, clings to its mother’s back as she perches on a branch in the Madagascar! exhibit at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo. A collared lemur, also born this spring, curls up to its mother as she reclines on a rock.

All lemur species are endemic to the island nation of Madagascar.  Both the sifaka and the collared lemur are seeing dramatic declines in population due to loss of suitable habitat. The IUCN has designated the Coquerel’s sifaka as an Endangered Species and the collared lemur is listed as Vulnerable. 

Coquerel’s sifakas spend most of their time in trees and leap effortlessly, launching themselves vertically with their strong legs. Like most species of lemurs, the females are dominant to the males, claiming the choicest food and the best sleeping and sunning spots. 

Collared lemurs use their long tails to balance when leaping through the forest canopy. Collared lemurs live in groups of males and females but are not matriarchal like the sifaka and many other lemurs. 

There are five species of lemurs on exhibit in Madagascar! along with many other animals unique to the African island. Opened in 2008, Madagascar! educates zoo visitors about the country’s incredible biodiversity and the challenges it faces. 

The Wildlife Conservation Society works in Madagascar to protect lemurs and other wildlife. 

VOTE ONLINE: The Bronx Zoo is not the only WCS zoo or aquarium with animals born this year. Among the additions are the lemurs at the Bronx Zoo, a mini Nubian goat at Central Park Zoo, and river otters at Prospect Park Zoo. Everyone is invited to vote online for their favorite newborn at www.bronxzoo.com. New choices will be added to the poll throughout the spring and a finalist will be chosen in June when the winners of each round go head-to-head in a best-of-four competition.
		
				

		
		
				
						Contact:
						
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
				

				
				

				The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.