More Than 1,500 Runners and Walkers Dash Across Coney Island’s Famous Boardwalk at the WCS Run for the Wild in Brooklyn												
												Fiona Bayly, New York, N.Y. – First woman to cross the finish line														
												Alessio Asaro, Queens, N.Y. – First man to cross the finish line														
												City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr., and Assembly Member Alec Brook-Krasny were in attendance														
												Christopher Ritchey of Manhattan earns top fundraiser honors with $1,455														
												Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 6, 2012 – More than 1,500 walrus supporters ran, jogged, and walked across the Coney Island Boardwalk at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s 2nd annual Run for the Wild in Brooklyn – a 5K event dedicated to saving walruses, their habitats and other wildlife.  
 At the head of the herd was this year’s winner, Alessio Asaro from Queens, N.Y., who crossed the finish line with a time of 17:40. The top three men and top three women finishers were:
 
 Women:
 Fiona Bayly from Manhattan – 18:55
 Una Broderick from Wantagh, N.Y. – 19:24
 Jennifer Busse from Manhattan – 19:40
 
 Men:
 Alessio Asaro from Queens, N.Y. – 17:40
 Daniel Campos from Brooklyn, N.Y. – 17:58
 David Martinelli from Manhattan - 18:27
 
 This year’s top fundraiser was Christopher Ritchey of Manhattan, who raised $1,455. 
 
 Anyone who did not participate in the run can still contribute to WCS. Donations can be made online at wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium.
  
 “Walruses are facing serious environmental threats in their native Arctic habitat,” said John F. Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “Everyone who is here today running, walking or sponsoring an individual or team should feel proud that they are helping WCS save this species and other wildlife and wild places around the world.” 
 
 The race was emceed by WCS’ John Calvelli and began with opening remarks from City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. 
 
 Walruses are an example of a species forced to cope with the impacts of a changing climate and increased industrialization of the Arctic. Proceeds from the run will help WCS save walruses and further its mission of saving wildlife and wild places around the globe. 
 
 “We are very excited to be hosting the 2nd annual WCS Run for the Wild in Brooklyn,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium. “Thanks to the generosity of everyone here today, we are another step closer to protecting walruses and their fragile northern habitats.”
 
 Participants were encouraged to seek donations and received prizes for their efforts. For $30 in donations, participants will earn a set of WCS Run for the Wild ear buds. Those who raised $60 will get the ear buds plus a turtle plush. Those who raised $125 will receive the ear buds, plush and a Run for the Wild hat. $250 will earn fundraisers the ear buds, plush, hat and a WCS Run for the Wild cooler. Those who raise $500 will receive the ear buds, plush, hat, cooler and a VIP breakfast with New York Aquarium Director, Jon Forrest Dohlin. $750 or more earns participants all of those prizes plus a sea lion kiss at the New York Aquarium. 
 
 Upon finishing the run, all participants were encouraged to visit the walruses and other animals at the New York Aquarium. They enjoyed many exhibits including Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef, Alien Stingers and Explore the Shore. 
 
 Later this year, the aquarium will break ground on Ocean Wonders: Sharks!, a new exhibit that will feature 115 species of marine animals including sharks, rays, sea turtles, thousands of schooling fish and more. It is a visionary public-private partnership that will transform the aquarium into one of the premier tourist destinations in the Northeast and inspire people to care about the world’s oceans.
 
 WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors: 
  
 Presenting Sponsor: Con Edison
 
 Featured Sponsor: Benjamin Moore Paints
 
 Supporting Sponsors: Hard Rock Cafe and Luna Park
 
 Promotional Partners: Aviator Sports and Events Center, Brooklyn Cyclones
 
 Media Partners: ABC 7, Daily News, Z-100
 
 Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
  
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.Contact: 
 Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
 Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
 Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org