Saturday, July 21; 12 p.m. 						 				 										Brooklyn, N.Y. - July 19, 2012 – ATTACHED PHOTO - An aquatic-themed sand sculpture represents the Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium at last year's annual Sand-Sculpting Contest & Unity Day Celebration in Coney Island. The sculpture was created by pro sculptor Chuck Feld and his team from Sound Pounders.
 
 This year's event will be held on Saturday, July 21, kicking off at 12 p.m. Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium, will be one of several Coney Island neighbors who will judge the amateur sculptors participating in the event. All participants will compete in one of five categories: Individual Adult, Individual Child, Adult Group, Child Group and Mixed.
 
 For more information about the event, visit www.nyaquarium.com or www.astelladevelopment.org.
 
   Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York. 
 
   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
 
   Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.