View the Welikia Project video at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Zkv_G0qGd4            
Bronx, NY - February 16, 2012- The Welikia Project led by Eric W. Sanderson, Wildlife Conservation Society senior conservation ecologist, has been submitted to the Buckminster Fuller Challenge – an annual international design challenge awarding $100,000 to support the development and implementation of a strategy that has significant potential to solve humanity's most pressing problems. 
 
The Welikia Project seeks to map the original, historic ecological landscape of New York City. With more than 8 million people living in the New York metropolitan area, The Welikia Project seeks to provide the best model of sustainability.
 
“We are inspired by Buckminster Fuller’s example of integrated anticipatory design,” said Sanderson. “We believe that ecology should be as much a part of the fabric of the city as art, culture, fashion, and technology.  The challenge grant is an opportunity to make our vision come alive.”
 
Sanderson’s Welikia Project was published in the Challenge’s Idea Index 1.0 – an educational networking database of socially-responsible initiatives in need of additional funding. Visitors can communicate directly with project leadership to offer advice, criticism, and encouragement. http://challenge.bfi.org/ideaindex.
 
The Buckminster Fuller Challenge review process, recently named "Socially-Responsible Design's Highest Award" by Metropolis Magazine, brings together influential design science leaders such as Josè Zaglul, Vandana Shiva, Danny Hillis, William McDonough, John Thackara, Hunter Lovins, Kenny Ausubal, and Nina Simon.
 
Those interested in sustainable urban ecosystems are encouraged to participate in the project by joining BFI’s online community and submitting comments and feedback on The Welikia Project page. 
 
The Buckminster Fuller Challenge presents the opportunity to become part of a network that is advancing and accelerating the practice of comprehensive, whole systems thinking and design to develop high impact global solutions.
 
For more information on The Welikia Project, visit welikia.org
Contact:Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
The Buckminster Fuller Institute: Founded in 1983 and headquartered in New York, The Buckminster Fuller Institute is dedicated to accelerating the development and deployment of solutions which radically advance human well being and the health of our planet's ecosystems. BFI aims to deeply influence the ascendance of a new generation of design-science pioneers who are leading the creation of an abundant and restorative world economy that benefits all humanity. BFI's programs combine unique insight into global trends and local needs with a comprehensive approach to design. BFI encourages participants to conceive and apply transformative strategies based on a crucial synthesis of whole systems thinking, Nature's fundamental principles, and an ethically driven worldview. By facilitating convergence across the disciplines of art, science, design and technology, BFI's work extends the profoundly relevant legacy of R. Buckminster Fuller. For further information visit http://www.bfi.org.