Event Date: Saturday, Oct. 6, 2012												
																		Register now>>	
Brooklyn, N.Y. – Sept. 5, 2012–Pacific walruses at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium have been basking in the summer weather -- perhaps resting up for WCS’s Run for the Wild, to be held on the boardwalk at the New York Aquarium on Saturday October 6th. This year’s 5k run and family fun run/walk will benefit walruses and other sea life. Walruses are facing serious environmental threats. Climate change is resulting in melting sea ice in the Arctic which is impacting walrus habitat. To register for the run or to get more information, visit wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium. 
 
 WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors: 
Presenting Sponsor: Con Edison
 
 Featured Sponsor: Benjamin Moore Paints
 
 Supporting Sponsors: Hard Rock Cafe and Luna Park
 
 Promotional Partners: Aviator Sports and Events Center, Brooklyn Cyclones
 
 Media Partners: ABC 7, Daily News, Z-100
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org.
Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
Contact:Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
 Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org