First baboon births in six years for zoo, one big happy troopName the babies at www.prospectparkzoo.com View the Video at: www.youtube.com/watch?v=owQwLMlj5_0
		
				


		
 

New York, NY- August 27, 2010 - There are two new additions to one of the Hamadryas baboon troops at WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo: two male babies who are officially making their public debut.  

 

The zoo is celebrating the arrival of the new baby baboons by partnering with Heart of Brooklyn by offering New Yorkers an opportunity to help name them. Starting today, everyone can submit their suggestions at www.prospectparkzoo.com. Nominations will be accepted for about three weeks up until, Wednesday, Sept. 22, and the winning names will be announced on the zoo's website, Friday, Sept. 24. All names suggested should be suitable for male baboons. After the names are submitted, senior staff at Prospect Park Zoo will pick the best two. There are no prizes with this contest.

 

“This is very exciting because these are the zoo’s first Hamadryas baboon births in six years and the first time we have had two infants at the same time,” said Denise McClean, Director of WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo. “Both mothers and babies are doing very well and are one big happy troop.”

 

The babies have been holding on to their mothers since they were born in July. They are actively playing and crawling on rocks as they explore their new surroundings. 

 

Hamadryas baboons are native to northeastern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. They are large, ground-dwelling monkeys that live in rocky areas and cliffs. Groups of Hamadryas baboons are called troops that typically include one dominant male and many females. They are highly social animals and spend much of their time grooming each other which maintains social bonds.

 

There are two baboon troops at WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo. Bole’s troop includes the two new infants, their father and two mothers, and an additional female. Simen’s troop includes Matara (the mother of the four previous babies born at the zoo) two of her daughters, and two additional females.

 

The Hamadryas baboon exhibit is located in the zoo’s Animal Lifestyles Building along with tamarin monkeys, piranhas, and Pallas cats. The infants are on exhibit with their family from 10am-2pm daily until November 1st when their exhibit time will change. Hours will be posted at www.prospectparkzoo.com. 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society works around the world to save primates and other wildlife. WCS operates 500 conservation projects in 60 countries.
		
				Contact:
				
Sophie Bass: 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org

 Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
 Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

 
		 


The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue. For more information call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 



Heart of Brooklyn (HOB) is a partnership of the leading cultural institutions located near Grand Army Plaza in central Brooklyn: Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn Children’s Museum, Brooklyn Museum, Brooklyn Public Library, Prospect Park, and Prospect Park Zoo. www.heartofbrooklyn.org  . 

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.