The U.S. Navy takes over the aquarium Memorial Day
weekend with exciting diving demonstrationsFriday through
Sunday, May 27-29



Brooklyn, N.Y. – May 23,
2011- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s
New York Aquarium is the place to be this Memorial Day weekend as Navy Divers
make a splash in celebration of Fleet Week. 



Navy divers who support Explosive
Ordnance Disposal (EOD) 
will hold an exciting and educational diving
exhibition at the aquarium Friday through Sunday, May 27 – 29.



Aquarium-goers are invited to
watch as these expert divers show off unique Navy diving capabilities that keep
America safe. Learn about open-circuit SCUBA and closed-circuit MK-16
re-breather diving systems, both commonly used by Navy EOD divers for fleet
operations. All demonstrations will be narrated, and Navy officials will be
available to answer questions from the public. The demonstrations will take
place near the aquarium plaza. 



Between each exhibition,
visitors can stop by the new Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef exhibits, home
to beautiful, exotic animals native to the waters of Belize, African freshwater
lakes, the Pacific Ocean’s coral triangle, and the Amazonian rain forests of
Brazil. 



U.S. Navy EOD is the world’s premier combat force for
countering IEDs, weapons of mass destruction, and mine countermeasures.  Navy
Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technicians render safe all types of ordnance, both
conventional and unconventional, improvised, chemical, biological, and nuclear
to include Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and Weapons of Mass Destruction
(WMD). They perform on land and underwater to locate, identify, render-safe,
and recover (or dispose) of foreign and domestic ordnance.  



Divers in the U.S. Navy are members of the community in the Navy who are qualified in underwater
open/closed circuit breathing apparatus, deep sea type diving apparatus and
saturation (surface supplied) diving. 
Navy Divers are the foremost experts in all types of diving operations
in the U.S. military and serve as the single resource
managers for diving technical knowledge and training across the entire
Department of Defense (DOD).



Navy EOD and divers are part of Navy Expeditionary Combat
Command (NECC). NECC serves as the Navy’s headquarters for all Navy
expeditionary capabilities to include: EOD, Seabees, Riverine, Mobile Diving
and Salvage, and other expeditionary support capabilities.  NECC forces are deployed around the
globe in support of a wide range of missions from majot combat operations to
humanitarian assistance response.  



WCS offers a military discount to members of the United
States Armed Forces – free admission to the Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium.
For more information about the New York Aquarium and the diving demonstrations,
visit www.nyaquarium.com. Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org    Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For
directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium
information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at
http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support
for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a
beloved part of the City of New York.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.