Holiday 4-D experience to run Nov. 6, 2010 – Jan. 2,
2011



Bronx, NY – Nov. 3, 2010 – The Polar Express™ 4-D Experience will be making stops at
the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium for the
holiday season – running from Saturday, Saturday, Nov. 6 through Sunday, Jan.
2, 2011.



The Polar Express™ 4-D Experience is based on the film from Warner Bros. Pictures and
Shangri-La Entertainment and inspired by the beloved Caldecott Medal children’s
book by Chris Van Allsburg. It combines the visual drama of a 3-D film
with a variety of 4-D sensory effects that are built into the seats and theater
environment, bringing the on-screen images to life.



Viewers are immersed in the experience as they follow a
doubting young boy as he takes an extraordinary train ride to the North
Pole.  He embarks on an epic journey of self-discovery that shows him that
the wonder of life never fades for those who believe. 



Tickets for The Polar Express™ 4-D Experience are available for $5 per person or are included in
the attractions benefits of a WCS Membership.



The Polar Express™ 4-D Experience is distributed by SimEx-Iwerks, through a license
agreement with Warner Bros. Consumer Products. SimEx-Iwerks is the leading innovator of immersive 3-D and
4-D attractions and the exclusive distributor of the industry’s best selling
film titles. The company supports over 300 family-friendly attractions in more
than 40 countries.



Mark Cornell, SimEx-Iwerks Vice President, Attraction
Development proclaims, “The Polar Express is by far the finest magical
cinematic experience of our lifetime.”  



This iconic film is brought to life with the perfected use
of SimEx-Iwerks 4-D Special FX technology, creating an unforgettable
multi-sensory adventure. As the Polar Express arrives at the North Pole,
it actually begins to snow inside the 4-D Special FX Theater; when the
conductor sings “Hot Chocolate” and the dancing waiters begin to pour, the
audience can smell the delightful aroma of every cocoa cup.  



The state-of-the-art 3-D Digital projection system makes
images virtually leap off the screen, and when combined with 4-D Special FX, a
blend of realism and fantasy unlike anything seen before is impeccably
delivered.  




Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years
old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for
cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx
River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12,
#19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops
just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s New York Aquarium is open
daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 
Adult General Admission is $13, children (3-12 years old) $9, children
under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $10. Parking is $13. To plan your trip,
visit www.nyaquarium.com or call
718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



About Warner Bros.
Consumer Products            

Warner Bros. Consumer Products, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company, is one of
the leading licensing and retail merchandising organizations in the world.



About The Polar Express            

Castle Rock Entertainment Presents, in Association with Shangri-La
Entertainment, a Playtone / ImageMovers / Golden Mean Production of a Robert
Zemeckis Film: Tom Hanks in The Polar Express. Directed by Robert Zemeckis from
a screenplay by Zemeckis & William Broyles, Jr., the film is produced by
Steve Starkey, Robert Zemeckis, Gary Goetzman and William Teitler and is based
on the book by Chris Van Allsburg. Tom Hanks, Jack Rapke and Chris Van Allsburg
are the executive producers. The production team includes directors of
photography Don Burgess, A.S.C. and Robert Presley; production designers Rick
Carter and Doug Chiang; and editors Jeremiah O’Driscoll & R. Orlando Duenas.
Senior visual effects supervisors are Ken Ralston and Jerome Chen. Co-producer
is Steven Boyd. Music score is by Alan Silvestri, and original songs by Glen
Ballard and Alan Silvestri. The Polar Express is distributed worldwide by
Warner Bros. Pictures, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company. Soundtrack album
on Warner Sunset/Reprise Records. This film is rated G by the MPAA. For more
information, please visit www.polarexpressmovie.com.