Brooklyn, NY – March, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is now accepting applications for summer volunteer docent positions.  Docents contribute to the enhancement of the visitor’s experience in a variety of ways. Once training is complete, WCS New York Aquarium docents will be able to interpret exhibits, staff information and craft tables for aquarium special events, assist the Education Department instructors with school and family programs, assist in our Aquatheater Sea Lion Celebration and staff the touch pool where visitors can interact with horseshoe crabs, sea stars and other local marine species. 

 

WCS New York Aquarium docents will have the opportunity to meet individuals from around the world.  They will work with people who enjoy sharing knowledge with others and will be hands-on in helping WCS achieve its mission of saving wildlife and wild places around the globe.

 

To get involved, applicants must be at least 15 years old. After an interview and orientation, accepted candidates must complete an intensive training course. The training includes sessions on marine science, public speaking skills, and activities designed to foster good relations with aquarium guests. Applicants under age 18 must have a teacher fill out the recommendation form and a parent must sign it. 

For more information, visit http://www.nyaquarium.com/help-wildlife/volunteer.aspx or call 718-265-3450. 

 

Wildlife Conservation Society New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
		
				Contact: 
				
Fran Hackett: 718-265-3428

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.         

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org/donationundefined