UN-REDD and Code REDD to host dialogue on private sector engagement in REDD+

18 September 2013, NEW YORK
						
WHAT: On Wednesday 18 September, the UN-REDD Programme, in collaboration with Code REDD, Wildlife Works and the Wildlife Conservation Society, will convene leaders from the private, public and civil society sectors to discuss synergies for delivering REDD+ at a scale for sustainable development, and to reflect on five years of the UN-REDD Programme.
This “REDD+ Talks: NYC” event will provide a platform for REDD+ stakeholders to explore the contributions the private sector can make to REDD+ through finance, sustainable operations, and sharing expertise.
The forum will include keynote speeches by high profile stakeholders from the business and policy worlds as well as from communities engaged in REDD+. Discussion panels will stimulate conversation on experiences to date in REDD+.

WHO: (Tentatively scheduled) Achim Steiner (Executive Director of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP)); Ed Norton (Actor and UNEP Goodwill Ambassador); Almir Narayamoga Suruí (Chief of the Suruí People, Brazil); TJ DiCaprio (Senior Director of Environmental Sustainability, Microsoft); Dr. Cristián Samper (President and CEO, Wildlife Conservation Society); Mike Korchinsky (CEO, Wildlife Works); and Marie-Claire Daveu (Chief Sustainability Officer, Kering).

WHEN: Wednesday 18 September, 2013 
2-5pm REDD+ Talks: NYC (Speakers and Panel Discussions)
5-7pm Cocktail Reception

WHERE: Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo
REDD+ Talks: NYC: Schiff Family Great Hall
Cocktail Reception: Congo Gorilla Forest Exhibit

WHY: Engagement of the private sector is vital to ensure the long-term success of REDD+ and to build trust and support. In engaging the private sector, however, we also need to acknowledge and address the concerns of indigenous peoples and other forest-dependent communities about the carbon market and private sector involvement. By bringing together business leaders, investors, policy makers and representatives of forest communities, this event will serve as a forum to explore the various roles the private sector can play in REDD+ and consider the many ways that companies can help to scale up the environmental and social gains that are possible through REDD+.

REDD+:  REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) is an effort to create a financial value for the carbon stored in forests, by offering incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions from forested lands and invest in low-carbon paths to sustainable development. REDD+ goes beyond deforestation and forest degradation, and includes the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.
UN-REDD: The UN-REDD Programme was launched in 2008 as a joint initiative of FAO, UNDP and UNEP. UN-REDD supports nationally-led REDD+ processes and promotes the informed and meaningful involvement of all stakeholders, including indigenous peoples and other forest-dependent communities, in national and international REDD+ implementation. UN-REDD supports national REDD+ readiness efforts in 47 partner countries in Africa, the Asia-Pacific and Latin America.

Code REDD: Code REDD, founded by Wildlife Works CEO, Mike Korchinsky, was launched at Rio+20 in order to help support and scale up the REDD+ mechanism to realize its full potential in empowering people, preserving forests, reducing emissions and protecting wildlife. Since its inception, Code REDD has brought together stakeholders to engage the private sector on REDD+, align REDD+ with climate and development policies, and advance the larger REDD+ community.Press contact: To arrange pre-or post-event interviews with speakers, please contact:
 
 David Eastman
UN-REDD Secretariat
Tel: +41 (0) 22 917 8410
E-mail: david.eastman@un-redd.org
 Web page: 
 http://www.un-redd.org/Events/tabid/104448/Default.aspx#REDDTalksNYC