Brooklyn, N.Y. – March 19, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium has added beautiful weedy scorpion fish to its collection of exotic marine animals in the Explore the Shore exhibit.

Scorpion fish are a colorful species native to the Indo-Pacific. Seen here in bright orange, scorpion fish can be found in a wide range of colors, including green, lavender, blue, and many more.

The scorpion fish is one of the most venomous fish. It uses its venomous dorsal spines to protect against predators. Although generally not fatal in humans, the sting usually results in a reaction similar to that of a bee sting.  

The new scorpion fish can be found in the aquarium’s Explore the Shore exhibit. Other animals native to the Indo-Pacific can be found in the aquarium’s Conservation Hall, renovated last year as part of WCS’s A SEA CHANGE initiative, a 10-year plan to revitalize the aquarium and ignite the rebirth of Coney Island. An additional component to A SEA CHANGE includes construction of the Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit, scheduled to break ground later this year. 
Contact:Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli:  718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.