Both facilities are part of the C.V. Starr Science Campus at
the Bronx Zoo.
		
		
		


		


		


		
				Bronx, NY – Oct. 6, 2010
– The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo today celebrated the groundbreaking of the
LaMattina Wildlife Ambassador Center and a Special Care Unit of the Global
Center for Wildlife Health – two facilities that will help WCS continue its
long tradition of connecting people to nature and ensuring exemplary care for
animals.
		


		


		The LaMattina Wildlife
Ambassador Center will be home to the Bronx Zoo’s tractable animals which are
featured in classroom programs offered through its Education Department. The
Special Care Unit will be an addition to the existing Global Center for
Wildlife Health and will be where newly acquired animals receive initial medical
care upon arrival at the zoo.
		


		


		“The LaMattina Wildlife
Ambassador Center will provide the opportunity for people to experience wildlife
up close, creating lasting impressions,” said Steve Sanderson, WCS President
and CEO. “The Special Care Unit of
the Global Center for Wildlife Health will enable us to continue the tradition
of setting the gold standard for animal care. We thank our supporters for
helping WCS continue our great traditions well into the future.”
		


		


		The Wildlife Conservation
Society is grateful for the generous support of those who made these projects
possible:
		


		


		


		


		


		


		
				LaMattina Wildlife
Ambassador Center
				
				
				
John and Mary LaMattina 
The Bodman Foundation 
New York State Senate
New York City Council
The Starr Foundation 
		


		


		


		


		


		


		
				Special Care Unit of the
Global Center for Wildlife Health
				
New York State Senate
The Honorable Michael R. Bloomberg, Mayor
of the City of New York
New York City Council
The Starr Foundation 
		


		


		Sanderson also thanked the
city and state officials who participated in the ground breaking for their
support of the projects: New York State Senators Ruth Hassell-Thompson and Jeff
Klein; New York City Council Majority Leader Joel Rivera; and New York City
Councilwoman Annabel Palma.
		


		


		Construction of both
facilities is expected to last approximately 18 months.
		


		


		The LaMattina Wildlife Ambassador Center
will be a 10,000 square-foot, state-of-the-art building that will house the
zoo’s tractable animal collection.  These “animal ambassadors” participate in fundraising activities
promoting the zoo and WCS conservation activities around the globe.  Specifically designed for the wide
variety of animals that will be housed there, the center will accommodate
special behind-the-scenes tours allowing special guests to experience wildlife
in an intimate, private setting. 
		


		The Special
Care Unit of the Global Center for Wildlife Health will be a technologically
advanced animal holding facility designed to meet environmental needs of the
animals. It will be used to initially house and care for animal acquisitions
and other animals in the collection in need of specialized care.  From baboons to birds – all new animals will
be brought to this facility for their initial health examinations. The Special Care Unit is designed to exceed existing
regulatory requirements with air purification systems and disinfecting
capabilities, furthering WCS’s ability to deliver the highest standard of care
to the animals in all five of its Living Institutions – Bronx Zoo, New York
Aquarium, Central Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, and Prospect Park Zoo. 
		


		


		The LaMattina
Wildlife Ambassador Center and the Special Care Unit of the Global Center for
Wildlife Health are part of the C.V. Starr Science Campus, made possible through the support of
The Starr Foundation and the City of New York.
		


		


		


		
				Contact:    

				
				
				
Max
Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve
Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

		


		
				The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.
		


		


		
				
						The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children
(3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking
is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off
the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the
#9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan
that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.
		


		


		If you
would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make
donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct
them to: www.wcs.org/donation.