Animal experiences, private performances, catered fare and more will make the next birthday one to remember  
		
				New York, N.Y. (date) –The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo is offering a new kind of birthday party for children that caters to those looking for something unique–special animal encounters, live performances, and fine dining. 
 
 This lavish, fully catered affair will be an event to remember for all who attend. WCS’s Central Park Zoo offers a variety of party themes for an over-the-top celebration tailored to suit every child’s interests. 
 
 Included in the new package are themed invitations, private party room, top-of-the-line catering, and personal experiences with some of the famous Central Park Zoo residents. Kids can enjoy the cupcake decorating bar in a private viewing pavilion while watching the snow leopards play and can watch the Wildlife Theater perform just for them. 
 
 There are different party themes that reflect the animals and habitats represented in the Central Park Zoo. For Example, in the King Penguin party, guests will go behind the scenes for a private penguin encounter with the zoo keepers.
 
 For adult attendees, mimosas or sangria will be served, along with a variety of delicacies prepared by Dancing Crane Catering. For those who want more sophisticated fare, a sushi chef is available upon request. 
 
 Each child will take home with a gift bag packed with items selected from the Zootique.
 
 Education staff at WCS’s Central Park Zoo will help design the perfect experience for any child and will create a birthday party that is truly one of a kind. 
 
 More information about birthday parties at the Central Park Zoo can be found online at  www.centralparkzoo.com (just click “Birthday Parties). 
 
 *A portion the cost is tax deductible and proceeds benefit the education department at the Wildlife Conservation Society.
				
						Contact:
						
 Sophie Bass: 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year. Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 
 
 
				The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
   Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation