Brooklyn, N.Y. – March 29, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is now home to tropical sargassum fish in the Explore the Shore exhibit.
 
Sargassum fish are native to parts of the Atlantic Ocean and Indo-Pacific waters. Being masters of camouflage, sargassum fish are usually found in a mottled yellow-brown color to match the seaweeds in their native habitat. Their bodies and fins are covered in weed-like protrusions that further their ability to hide while maneuvering through dense ocean flora. 
 
The new sargassum fish can be found in the aquarium’s Explore the Shore exhibit. Other animals native to the Indo-Pacific can be found in the aquarium’s Conservation Hall, renovated last year as part of WCS’s A SEA CHANGE initiative, a 10-year plan to revitalize the aquarium and ignite the rebirth of Coney Island. An additional component to A SEA CHANGE includes construction of the Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit, scheduled to break ground later this year. 
Contact: 
Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
Max Pulsinelli:  718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
 
 Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.