The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will visit the USA between 7th and 9th December 2014. 



Their Royal Highnesses will travel to New York for a programme of engagements which will also see The Duke visit Washington DC for a day, while The Duchess remains in New York.



The Duke and Duchess will attend events on behalf of the Royal Foundation and other charities with which Their Royal Highnesses are closely associated, and also on behalf of HM Government. 



The charitable themes will include promoting sustainable conservation issues with a particular focus on collaborative working to tackle the illegal wildlife trade, and also supporting organisations which reflect Their Royal Highnesses' interest in young people's mental health and the importance of supporting disadvantaged young people from an early age. As Patron of the University of St Andrews 600th Anniversary Campaign, The Duke accompanied by The Duchess will also attend the University's 600th Anniversary Gala Dinner in New York. 



In support of UK Government initiatives, The Duke and Duchess will attend events that celebrate the successful partnerships between the UK and USA in the technology and creative industries sectors. This follows events in support of these sectors that Their Royal Highnesses attended in 2011 in California, and reflects The Royal Family's ongoing support for the creative and technology sectors. 



During the visit, The Duke and Duchess will also visit the National September 11 Memorial and Museum at the World Trade Center to pay their respects to the nearly 3,000 people who died in the attacks of 26th February 1993 and 11th September 2001. Their Royal Highnesses will learn how the site, which includes the recently-opened One World Trade Center, has been redeveloped and the plans for its future.



The Duke and Duchess will arrive in New York on Sunday 7th December and will attend a private engagement on behalf of the American Friends of The Royal Foundation that evening. 



On Monday 8th December, The Duke will travel to Washington DC, while The Duchess remains in New York. His Royal Highness will attend an anti-corruption conference at the World Bank to discuss a zero tolerance approach to the transportation across borders of illegal wildlife parts. This is a key area of work for the United for Wildlife consortium, of which The Duke is President. The Duke will also attend a working lunch at the World Bank at which a number of programmes in support of the fight against the illegal trade in ivory will be discussed.  



On his return to New York, His Royal Highness will attend a reception organised by the Royal Foundation, in recognition of the conservation work carried out by Tusk Trust and United for Wildlife partners: Wildlife Conservation Society; Conservation International and The Nature Conservancy.  



The Duchess of Cambridge will carry out two engagements in New York while The Duke visits Washington. Her Royal Highness will be accompanied by The First Lady of New York City, Chirlane McCray, on a visit to a local child development centre. They will learn about how this organisation fosters the healthy development of children and families by providing high-quality mental health and educational services, which is an issue strongly supported by The First Lady. Her Royal Highness will also attend a lunch, hosted by the British Consul General in New York, to celebrate the achievements of a successful British community in New York from the culture, arts, hospitality and business sectors. 



On Monday evening, Their Royal Highnesses will attend an NBA Basketball game to support the on-going collaboration between the Royal Foundation, United for Wildlife and the NBA.



On Tuesday 9th December The Duke and Duchess will visit a youth organisation to see the work they carry out in partnership with an inner city youth development foundation. Both organisations focus on programmes and projects that promote positive youth development and social learning. During the visit, The Duke and Duchess will learn about the wide-ranging support services on offer to young people to help them reach their potential, particularly through an arts-in-education model that supports the artistic and intellectual development of the participants.  



The Duke and Duchess will then attend an event celebrating the wealth of British talent in the creative industries based in New York. The reception will be in association with the UK Government's GREAT campaign. The Duke will also attend a technology themed event, hosted by a New York-headquartered technology company, which will bring together entrepreneurs from both the UK and the US.



The final engagement of the visit will be the University of St. Andrews 600th Anniversary Dinner at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The evening event will support scholarships and bursaries for students from under-privileged communities, new student sports facilities in St Andrews, investment in the university's medical and science faculties and a lectureship in American Literature at St. Andrews. 



Notes to Editors:

    
    This is the first visit by either of Their Royal Highnesses to both New York City and Washington, D.C. in any capacity. 
    The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge's last official visit to the USA was to California in 2011.
    Throughout their visit, The Duke and Duchess will be joined by both the British Ambassador to the United States of America, Sir Peter Westmacott and the British Consul General to New York, Mr. Danny Lopez. 
    The Duke and Duchess are formally linked to a number of organisations which support similar charitable initiatives in the conservation, youth development and creative industries sectors, including:
    
        United for Wildlife (The Duke of Cambridge, President)
        Tusk Trust (The Duke of Cambridge, Patron)
        Centrepoint (The Duke of Cambridge, Patron)
        Place2Be (The Duchess of Cambridge, Patron)
        The Art Room (The Duchess of Cambridge, Royal Patron)
        BAFTA (The Duke of Cambridge, President)
    
    
    Application for media accreditation should be made by completing the online form at the following link: http://www.sa-meetings.com/NY_DC_visit. Accreditation for the visit will close at 11:59 EST 21 November 2014. Please note that applications may not in themselves guarantee successful accreditation.





CONTACT: 

Royal Communications:			+44 (0)20 7930 4832

British Embassy and Consulate General: 	usadecembervisit@gmail.com