NEW YORK  (June 15, 2010)—The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Joseph Mulema is
the winner of the Charles Southwick Conservation Education Commitment Award for
his work with the government and local communities in Cameroon to protect the
world’s rarest ape, the Cross-River gorilla. Presented by the International Primatological
Society, the award was established to recognize individuals living in primate
habitat countries who have made significant contributions to conservation
education.

Mulema
is the conservation education coordinator for the WCS Takamanda-Mone Landscape
Project (TMLP), which works with the government of Cameroon and local
communities to establish and manage protected areas for conservation of some of
the most biodiverse highland forests in the world. These habitats are home to
many endangered species, including the most endangered sub-species of chimpanzee,
 a rare monkey known as Pruess’s
guenon, and the Cross River gorilla. 

Mulema previously
worked as education coordinator at the Limbe Wildlife Center, which cares for
orphaned primates whose parents were victims of the bushmeat trade.  His dynamic personality and skill in
working with children earned him a place with WCS in 2006 to head a newly
created conservation education unit focused on working with schools and
communities around protected areas in southwestern Cameroon. 

Since
then, Mulema has developed education programs that have played an important
role in promoting the need to conserve the critically endangered Cross River
gorilla. There are fewer than 300 Cross River gorillas in existence and they are
found only in Cameroon and Nigeria.             

Mulema began his
education project by evaluating the levels of awareness and attitudes towards
conservation. He then tailored focused messages in the form of games, films,
radio broadcasts, school conservation handbooks, and other methods on a site-by
site basis. Some of the materials that Mulema has produced have been adopted by
other conservation projects as far away as Germany.

“Joseph is an inspiration,” said Dr. James
Deutsch, director for WCS’s Africa Program. “His work with dozens of remote, forest-dependent
communities and 34 schools has resulted in widespread community support for
protected areas such as Takamanda National Park and the Kagwene Gorilla
Sanctuary.” 

 Both
Takamanda National Park and the Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary were created in 2008
by the Wildlife Conservation Society in collaboration with the government of
Cameroon. Takamanda is a trans-boundary protected area and Joseph also works
closely with WCS staff based in Cross River National Park on the Nigerian side
of the border. Mulema’s work has therefore not only contributed towards the
creation of Takamanda, but also in fostering conservation collaboration between
countries.

The
German Development Bank (KfW), Great Apes Film Initiative (GAFI), Disney
Worldwide Conservation Fund, Berggorilla, Regenwald Direkthilfe and
International Conservation and Education Fund (INCEF) deserve particular thanks
for their support for Joe’s work.

Contact:              
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
 Sophie Bass:
(1-718-220-6853; sbass@wcs.org)

The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like
to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation