Save the Date: 
				TUESDAY, OCTOBER 5th, 11:00 AM


		
 


		
 


		
				
Will Georgia Soon Get Its Peaches from Upstate New York?
				Is Climate Change Spreading Disease in the Northeaster U.S.? 
				
						Can the Adirondacks Lead an Energy Independence Revolution and Save Money Doing It?
						

				
		

 


The answers may surprise you…


 


Join Wildlife Conservation Society Scientist Jerry Jenkins for an online presentation as he discusses the answers to these questions and the findings of Climate Change in the Adirondacks—the first book-length account of the climate future and energy options for a major U.S. region. 


Who: 
Jerry Jenkins is a scientist with the Wildlife Conservation Society and pre-eminent authority on the ecology in New York’s famed Adirondacks region. His previous works include Acid Rain in the Adirondacks—An Environmental History, and The Adirondack Atlas—A Geographic Portrait of the Adirondack Park.

 

What:
Jenkins will give a 20-minute PowerPoint presentation to the media and discuss:

How climate change is threatening the livelihoods and culture of New York’s famed Adirondacks region; Are alpine skiing, snowmobiling and ice-fishing soon to be a thing of the past?The effects of climate change on wildlife and landscapes; What animals and plants will be lost and how quickly?The realities of “going green” with solar, wind, and hybrid cars; How do we make the truly low-carbon choicesCan rural upstate New York set the foundation for energy independence for others to follow?

The presentation will be followed by a 20-minute question and answer period for press. 

 

When:
Tuesday, October 5th, 11:00 A.M.

 

Where:
This is an online web event for the media. Please send a request for a link to the webinar by email to ssmith@wcs.org. You will be sent a link to the event plus a reminder email the morning of the broadcast.

 

Media Notes:         
All press can ask questions after the presentation through their handheld phone receivers.

 

Contact:
Scott Smith 718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org