Brooklyn, N.Y. - June 30, 2014 – A harbor seal pup (Phoca vitulina) was born at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium – only the second harbor seal born at the aquarium in the past 15 years. 

 The male pup was born on May 27 and weighed 22 pounds at birth.

 “He has already made an impression on visitors and staff,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium. “He is a delightful addition to the aquarium and a treat to everyone who comes through the facility while we work to recover from Hurricane Sandy and toward the opening of Ocean Wonders: Sharks!.”

 The young seal is gaining weight at a rate of a half-pound to one pound a day. As an adult, he could weigh up to 250 pounds. 

 A harbor seal’s gestation period is nine to 10 months. Pups have rounded bodies with spotted coats which range in color from silver to dark brown or black. 

 Harbor seals are protected under the Marine Mammal Protection Act. They are abundant off the coast of New York City and Long Island. The New York Aquarium works to protect harbor seals through the New York Seascape, a conservation program designed to restore healthy populations of local marine species in New York City waters.   

 The New York Aquarium has three harbor seals which live in Sea Cliffs, alongside penguins, sea otters, sea lions and walruses. 

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Tickets are $11.95 per person (ages 3 & up), and include Aquarium admission plus one admission to the new 4-D Theater; children age 2 and under are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, Aquarium admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com  . Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.