From Cuba to the Russian Far East, 28 projects in 22 countries will receive support		
 
 The CLP is a partnership with Wildlife Conservation Society, Fauna & Flora International, BirdLife International, and Conservation International  NEW YORK (June 21, 2012) – The Conservation Leadership Programme (CLP), a partnership including the Wildlife Conservation Society, Fauna & Flora International, BirdLife International, and Conservation International, have announced its 2012 award winners.
 
 The awards will support 28 conservation projects in 22 countries. Projects range from changing attitudes of youth in Amur tiger habitat in Russia to assessing the conservation status and economic importance of Kenya's marlin fisheries.
 
 The two top winning projects received $50,000 each. They include a project in Cuba to conserve the island nation’s plant life and a project in Colombia to protect critically endangered birds. 
 
 The awards are designed to train future conservation leaders who will receive specialized training and mentoring from partner organizations. This year’s winners will attend a training workshop in the Canadian Rockies later this month.
 
 “The Conservation Leadership Program is a smart investment in the future of conservation,” said David Wilkie, WCS Director of Conservation Support. “WCS congratulates this year’s winners and looks forward to working with them as they move forward with their diverse and exciting projects.”
 
 Since its inception in 1985, the CLP has supported almost 560 projects worldwide.
 
 For more information on the program, visit conservationleadershipprogramme.org. 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the Flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.