Kenton Gomez from Bronx, NY spots 201 bird species to claim first place

 Bronx, NY – May 17, 2014 – Birders of all skill levels flocked to the WCS Bronx Zoo at dawn on Saturday to participate in the Wildlife Conservation Society’s first-ever Bronx Zoo Birdathon. 

 Kenton Gomez from the Bronx claimed first place after identifying 201 bird species in the wild and in the zoo exhibits. 

 Some species identified in the wild include black-throated green warbler, blackbumian warbler, and black-crowned night heron. 

 Currently, birds are migrating through New York from regions south. 

 The Bronx Zoo is a birder’s paradise. The park sits on 265 acres of hardwood forest that is transected by the Bronx River – the only freshwater river in New York City. The diverse habitats and access to water make the zoo the perfect environment to host dozens of migratory and local bird species including warblers, vireos, thrushes, woodpeckers, ducks, wading birds, and more.

 Participants were given a checklist of bird species found in and around the zoo and zoo staff directed bird-watchers to areas of the zoo where they were most likely to observe wild birds. Families were also encouraged to seek exotic bird species within the zoo’s expansive exhibits where animal keepers provided facts and chatted with young birders.

 WCS ornithology experts, Dr. Steve Zack, WCS Sr. Conservation Scientist and Coordinator of Bird Conservation; and David Oehler, Bronx Zoo Curator of Ornithology, were on-hand to discuss WCS bird conservation programs, offer birding advice, and answer questions.

CONTACT:
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
John Delaney – 718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.