Second Annual “Run for the Wild” 5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s Bronx Zoo Presented by Con Edison

 The event is over, but it’s not too late to donate to
help WCS save tigers: Text “TIGER” to 25383 to make a $10 donation









 Chris Bauer of Sea Cliff, N.Y. – First to cross the
finish line







 Accomplished marathoner Stephanie Hodge helps lead the pack as she joins the fight to help WCS save tigers



 Bronx, N.Y. – April 24, 2010 – Today, more than 5,000
people descended on the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo as the second
annual “Run for the Wild” turned the nation’s largest urban zoo into the
nation’s most unique 5k course to raise money for a special cause – helping WCS
save tigers."There were more runners today, 5000-plus, than the 3000 
tigers left in the wild," said John Calvelli, WCS executive vice 
president. "We appreciate all our runners helping to save this iconic 
creature."



 This year’s “Run for the Wild” was dedicated to helping save
tigers in the wild. Even though the main event is over, the campaign to raise
money to help these beautiful cats is not.  Even those who did not
participate in the run can still contribute to the conservation of the
species.  Donations can be made online at www.wcsrunforthewild.org
or by cell phone text message by texting “TIGER” to 25383 to give $10. 



 Tigers are in a fight for their 
very existence. A
century ago, about 100,000 of these icons of the wild roamed across 
Asia. As a
result of the many pressures they face, there may be as few as 3,000 tigers left in the wild today, with roughly half of those living in India. Even more troubling, perhaps only 1,000 of these wild cats are breeding females. Tigers have lost much of their habitat to human expansion and development; they occupy only seven percent of their historical range. Habitat loss and fragmentation continue to threaten the world’s remaining tigers, as do conflict with humans and poaching. They are killed for their beautiful pelts and for their body parts which are used in traditional Chinese medicines and their prey are depleted across much of their range due to over-hunting.    There is hope for the future, however. WCS has long-standing conservation programs in nine countries where tigers still exist in the wild (Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Russia, and Thailand).

Among those 5000 participants was decorated marathoner Stephanie Hodge, who crossed the finish line with a time of 19:48. A New York City native, she was named New York Road Runners Club runner of the year for her age group in 2007

Also at the head of the pack was this year’s winner Chris Bauer from Sea Cliff, N.Y., who crossed the finish line with a time of 17:07. The top three men and top three women finishers were:
Men
Chris Bauer from Sea Cliff,
N.Y.   – 17:07
John Ploeg from Madison, N.J. –
17:40
Spencer McCormick from New York
City – 18:06











Women
Fiona Bayly from Manhattan   - 18:33
Stephanie Hodge from Long Island
City   - 19:48
Brianna Cano from Franklin Square,
N.Y.   – 20:01



In addition to the race winners’ prizes, the top individual
and team fundraisers will receive one-of-a-kind VIP animal encounters courtesy
of WCS’s Bronx Zoo. The winners of these experiences will be announced on
the official event website (www.wcsrunforthewild.org) on
Friday, April 30.



Upon finishing, participants were encouraged to stick around
and enjoy a beautiful day at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  Athletes and spectators
alike were invited to take a picture with the ultimate symbol of athletic
prowess – the New York Yankees 2009 World Series Trophy.  Post-race
activities also included the zoo’s Animal Tales Extravaganza, which is
already in full-swing with live musical performances on New York Life’s Main
Stage on Astor Court and children’s book authors bringing their books to life
at the zoo’s Asia Plaza.



 Next year’s “Run for the Wild” is already in the planning
stages. The run will be held on Saturday, April 30, with the proceeds
being raised to help the Wildlife Conservation Society save another endangered
species to be chosen by public vote. 

 

WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following
generous sponsors:  



Presented by: Con
Edison



 Supported by: Aerosoles,
Aquafina, Benjamin Moore Paints, EDUN LIVE, Monroe College, Montefiore Medical
Center, UBS



 Media Partners: Daily
News, WABC, Z-100



 Promotional Partner: New
York Sports Clubs



 In-Kind Partner: D'Agostino





Contact:
 
Max Pulsinelli –
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.

 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 

RULES: RUN FOR THE WILD
2010 FUNDRAISING CONTEST

The decisions of the Wildlife Conservation Society (“WCS”) are final in all
matters relating to this contest, and the declaration of winners shall be at
WCS’s sole discretion. Employees, officers, trustees and agents of WCS and the
immediate families and those living in the same household of any of the above
are not eligible. Winners will be required to execute a liability and publicity
release. Prizes are not transferable or redeemable for cash. Prizes will be redeemed
at a date to be determined. At WCS’s sole discretion, a prize of equal or
greater value may be substituted for any prize that becomes unavailable for any
reason. WCS reserves the right, in it sole discretion, to cancel or modify the
contest for any reason or no reason. False, fraudulent or deceptive entries
will be disqualified. WCS is not responsible for any incorrect or inaccurate
entry information; human errors; technical malfunctions; theft, tampering,
destruction, or alteration of, or unauthorized access to, entries;
typographical, printing or other errors; or any combination thereof. This
contest shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the
State of New York.