Children from PS 205 to make donation of the first toys of the season

WCS to collect toys at all wildlife parks to benefit communities in need

Toy donors will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo

Friday, November 15, 2013

Bronx, NY –– Nov. 13, 2013 – On Friday, Nov. 15, Deputy Bronx Borough President Aurelia Greene will join officials from the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and children from PS 205 at Zoo Center to kick-off Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz, Jr.’s holiday toy drive to benefit Bronx military families.

In honor of the start of the holiday season, school children from PS 205 will be on hand to donate the first toys of the year.

 The partnership between the Bronx Zoo and the Borough President on the toy drive has become an annual tradition. The Bronx Zoo will serve as a collection point for new, unwrapped toys donated by members of the community. Toys will be collected through the end of December and will be distributed by the Borough President’s office to local veterans and active-duty members of the military and their families.

In appreciation for their generosity, those who make a qualifying donation of a new, unwrapped toy at any of WCS’s wildlife parks between Saturday, Nov. 16 and Tuesday, Dec. 31 will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo or New York Aquarium depending on location.

 Toys will also be collected at the other WCS wildlife parks. Toys collected at Central Park Zoo and Queens Zoo will be donated to families in need within the communities they serve. Prospect Park Zoo and the New York Aquarium will collect toys to benefit victims of Hurricane Sandy.  Toys donated at the Prospect Park Zoo and New York Aquarium will receive a ticket to the New York Aquarium. Visit http://www.wcs.org/toydrive/.

Who: Deputy Bronx Borough President Aurelia Greene		John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public AffairsOlga Tirado, Bronx Tourism CouncilSchool children from PS 205What: 	Kick-off event for the Bronx Borough President’s Annual Toy Drive
	Where:	WCS’s Bronx Zoo		2300 Southern Blvd.		Bronx, NY
 When:	Friday, November 15, 2012		10:00 am – 11:00 am
MEDIA NOTE(S): Media who wish to attend the event should contact Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182 or Steve Fairchild 718-220-5189 so that parking and park transportation can be arranged.

Disclaimer: ONE general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, or Queens Zoo. ONE general admission ticket to the New York Aquarium will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the New York Aquarium or Prospect Park Zoo. Limit of four tickets per family, valid 1/01/14–6/30/14. All WCS decisions final. Promotion available from 11/15/13 - 12/31/13. May not be combined with any other offer

CONTACT:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org.