Scientists look to pinpoint paths taken by animals on yearly migration
				
				 


		 


		
NEW YORK (April 11,  2011) – Twenty-one pronghorn were captured and fitted with  GPS collars in the Upper Snake River Plain of Idaho as part of an ongoing migration study by the Wildlife Conservation Society and its partners, the Bureau of Land Management and Idaho Fish and Game, 



 The pronghorn were captured in a helicopter netting operation on February 28, fitted with the collars, and released. The collars are scheduled to “drop off” of the animals at a future date through an automated release mechanism. 



The GPS collars will provide scientists with tracking data collected during the migration of the animals between their summer ranges at the base of the Pioneer Mountains, Pahsimeroi Valley, Lemhi Valley of Idaho, Horse Prairie and the Medicine Lodge regions of MT and their winter range in the Upper Snake River Plain.


 “In previous years, we found that pronghorn follow a difficult, often perilous, 80-mile journey between summer and winter ranges by way of the Birch Creek and Little Lost River Valleys,” said WCS Scientist Scott Bergen. “This migration route is extremely narrow in spots, and has them navigating between lava fields, rolling foothills, and highways.”  



 The scientists will use the GPS data to determine whether the pronghorn are using other migration routes as well—such as that between the Upper Snake River Plain and southwestern Montana.  Understanding the migration pathways of pronghorn is critical to planning their conservation and management—and ensures healthy pronghorn populations by informing decisions on maintaining appropriate harvest levels, protecting key habitats, and reducing the incidence of conflict with agriculture in the area.



WCS North American Program Director Jodi Hilty said, “WCS supports landscape-scale conservation—a key component of the America’s Great Outdoors Initiative—that promotes and protects wildlife corridors used by wide-ranging species like pronghorn. We are pleased to see federal land management agencies, including the Bureau of Land Management (Idaho) working to promote landscape connectivity and expand wildlife corridors for pronghorn and other migratory species.”



 The data collected during this effort will also be used to inform other science-based solutions to the many potential threats pronghorn in the region face which include increased development pressures and loss or restriction of access to food sources and habitat.



WCS is grateful to the Lava Lake Institute for Science and Conservation, Idaho Conservation League, Light Hawk Aviation, National Park Foundation, the National Park Service, The Conservation Fund, Wood River Land Trust, Carey, Howe, and Monteview area landowners and ranchers, The Nature Conservancy, Idaho National Laboratory, and the Craters of the Moon Natural History Association.


Contact: 

Scott Smith (WCS) – 406-522-9333 ext.116; ssmith@wcs.org

Hollie Miyasaki (IDFG) –208-525-7290; hollie.miyasaki@idfg.idaho.gov

 

For more information or to speak with WCS scientists about this study, please call Scott Smith at 406-522-9333 ext.116, or email ssmith@wcs.org 

 

 


		
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 
		If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.