Players save Bubbles the Monkey’s animal friends from poachers in popular new social game from Zynga 		  100% of proceeds from in-game starter pack purchases will help WCS save wildlife around the world   Play Bubble Safari at: http://apps.facebook.com/bubblesafari/   New York, NY – July 17, 2012 – Zynga.org has launched a fun new initiative to raise funds for the Wildlife Conservation Society and its mission to save wildlife and wild places around the globe.    Zynga, the leading provider of social game services, is offering Bubble Safari players a chance to purchase exclusive in-game starter packs that include bundles of in-game Safari Cash, coins, and power-ups at a special discount. All proceeds will go to the Wildlife Conservation Society.   Bubbles Safari is a new social arcade game from Zynga where players help Bubbles the monkey  save his animal friends from illegal hunters. Because poachers are a threat to Bubbles’ real-life counterparts in the wild, Zynga has incorporated the game’s central storyline into a philanthropic campaign by Zynga.org.    Starting today, players can purchase an exclusive, in-game starter pack, and 100 percent of the purchase price will go directly to the WCS. Starter packs include bundles of in-game Safari Cash, Coins, and Power-Ups – all at a special discount.    Players will have the opportunity to learn more about WCS’s anti-poaching activities and enter to win an iPad on the Bubble Safari game page. Visit http://apps.facebook.com/bubblesafari/ to play Bubble Safari and help the Wildlife Conservation Society save wildlife around the world. Since 2009, hundreds of thousands of Zynga players have made charitable contributions through Zynga games to nonprofit organizations delivering measureable results for those in need around the world. Zynga players are passionate about play and helping others. They have helped build a school in Haiti, generated timely resources for humanitarian relief in the wake of natural disasters and provided much needed funding for children in poverty. Through Zynga.org, Zynga players have raised more than $12 million for world social causes. Follow Zynga.org on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/zynga.org. The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.