The new Arctic Blast program introduces youngsters to the wildlife and native cultures of the world’s polar regions
Register online at: www.nyaquarium.com 
Brooklyn, N.Y. –– Jan. 29, 2014 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is accepting registrations for the new Arctic Blast, a two-day mini camp for children ages 9 to 11 on Thursday and Friday, Feb. 20 and 21, from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.   
The program focuses on the animals and native people of the Arctic. Children will examine artifacts from arctic cultures and participate in games and activities while learning about life in some of the most frigid climates of the world.  There will be opportunities for campers to meet wild animal keepers who care for the aquarium’s polar animal ambassadors, Pacific walruses Nuka and Kulu. 
The two-day camp will include:
·      Guided exhibit tours
·      Crafting
·      Map explorations
·      Stories of Inuit, Aleut and other tribes native to the Arctic
The fee for both days is: $125 (members); $150 (non-members). For more information Arctic Blast or to register for the program, visit 
www.nyaquarium.com or call 718-265-3457
.  



Contact:


Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.
 
Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.