(Credit © WCS) Adult-only celebration includes 40+ pouring stations, 100+ varieties of drinks, and 15+ food vendors




(Credit © WCS) Adult-only celebration includes 40+ pouring stations, 100+ varieties of drinks, and 15+ food vendors



(Credit © WCS) Adult-only celebration includes 40+ pouring stations, 100+ varieties of drinks, and 15+ food vendors



					
					
						BRONX, NY, May 7, 2024 — Brew at the Zoo returns to the Bronx Zoo on Friday, June 21, to celebrate 125 years of the iconic New York City landmark. The annual event includes an evening of craft beers, live music, and festive fun, set against the backdrop of the historic zoo grounds.

Wildlife Conservation Society members are eligible for a 15% discount on general admission tickets with code CHEERS2MEMBERS. Last year’s event sold out. Tickets for nonmembers can be purchased HERE.

The adults-only (ages 21+) celebration from 6-11 p.m., offers guests the unique experience of sampling beer, wine, seltzer, and more, while indulging in food truck fare, playing games, enjoying live music, dancing the night away, and exploring select animal exhibits from 6 – 7:30pm. This year, guests also have access to 125th birthday-themed games, trivia, and more, including Animal Chronicles, a new, quarter-mile walking trail featuring 68 immersive eco-sculptures that showcase key achievements in the Bronx Zoo’s history of saving animal species and connecting New Yorkers to wildlife.

Entertainment at Brew at the Zoo includes a Glow Party for a 360-degree photo booth, salsa and bachata dancing instructions, a live band, a DJ, a pub party with bar games, a patio party with animal trivia and karaoke, as well as two designated areas with a variety of local food trucks.

There will be 40 pouring stations starting at 7pm and enjoy over 100 varieties of drinks. More than 15 food trucks will be lined up across two designated areas, however, food is not included in the ticket price.

The following ticket options for Brew at the Zoo include:


 General admission $84.99

 
  Includes 5 oz. commemorative souvenir cup with unlimited beer samplings
  Enjoy live band and DJ, games, activity areas, complimentary photo booths, and select animal exhibit access from 6-7:30 p.m.
 
 
 VIP $119.99
 
  Express check-in access
  VIP drink stations for access to beer, wine, and seltzer with fewer lines
  VIP Hall with live entertainment, exclusive beer, seating area, and bathrooms
  VIP swag, including a t-shirt, souvenir cup, and more
  VIP photo booth
  Complimentary snacks at all Zoo concession stands
  Complimentary general admission for future visit
 
 
 Designated driver $39.99
 
  Access to all GA perks, without consumption of alcohol
  Guests with tickets will NOT receive a souvenir cup, but do receive complimentary fountain soft drinks at Bronx Zoo cafes
  Designated drivers must be 21 and over to enter
 
 


###