WCS’s Dr. Steve Zack reports on 
		migratory bird studies from remote Arctic Alaska on Yale Environment 360 
		 
		Bronx, N.Y. (July 12, 2011) –The Wildlife Conservation Society announced today that Conservation Scientist Dr. Steve Zack is reporting from the field on Yale Environment 360’s website (click here <http://e360.yale.edu/content/digest.msp?id=3030> ) as he and other WCS scientists gather critical information to inform the future for shorebirds and songbirds in the largest Arctic wetland complex in the world – Alaska’s Teshekpuk Lake. 
 
 Currently designated as a Special Area of the National Petroleum Reserve – Alaska (NPR-A), the Teshekpuk Lake region is a yearly destination to an international assemblage of migratory birds numbering in the millions. WCS studies in the region – which include previous and ongoing research conducted by Dr. Zack on density, diversity, and nest productivity in Teshekpuk and also in the Prudhoe Bay oilfields – are intended to inform Department of Interior decisions on the future balance of development and wildlife protection in this singular landscape. 
 
 From his remote tented camp near Teshekpuk, Dr. Zack will blog about WCS’s latest research efforts which utilize geo-location technology to detail the movements of key migratory bird species that come from Asia and Austral-Asia to breed during Alaska’s brief summer. 
 
 In addition, Dr. Zack will provide daily insights on the challenges of living and working in rugged Arctic conditions, examine the awesome changes a warming climate brings and the effects of climate change on wildlife in the region, and share the wonder of seeing migrants from every continent and ocean breeding in Arctic wetlands. 
 
 Dr. Zack’s blog entries will be posted beginning July 12th.
 
 Yale Environment 360 is an online magazine published by the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies and Yale University that offers opinion, analysis, reporting and debate among thought leaders on global environmental issues. 
Contact: 
Scott Smith: (1-718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org) 
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org) 
 
  The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.