Congressmen George Miller (D-CA) and Pedro Pierluisi (D-PR) Step Up
								
								
										 as Lead Sponsors
								
								
										
										
								
						
						
								
										Legislation Would Reauthorize U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Programs that Protect Threatened Species Abroad
								
								
										 

								
						
				
		
		
				WASHINGTON, D.C.  (May 11, 2011) –
 The Wildlife Conservation Society applauded the introduction of H.R. 
1760, the Great Ape Conservation Reauthorization Amendments Act of 2011,
 and H.R. 1761, the Marine Turtle Conservation Reauthorization Act, in 
the House of Representatives. 
		The 
bills would reauthorize the Great Ape Conservation Fund and the Marine 
Turtle Conservation Fund, which are Multinational Species Conservation 
Fund (MSCF) accounts administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
for international conservation.  Rep. George Miller (D-CA) is the lead 
sponsor of the Great Ape legislation while Rep. Pedro Pierluisi 
(D-Puerto Rico) is the lead for the Marine Turtle legislation, and both 
are joined by a bipartisan group of original co-sponsors.  Along with 
H.R. 50, introduced by Rep. Don Young (R-AK), these bills form a suite 
of legislation that will reauthorize all of the MSCF including those for
 rhinos and tigers, African elephants, and Asian elephants.
		“I
 thank Congressmen Miller and Pierluisi for their extraordinary efforts 
on behalf of some of our most threatened iconic species,” said John F. 
Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “The Species 
Funds are proven to make an impact toward on-the-ground conservation and
 we need to ensure they receive the Congressional support necessary to 
remain successful.  I urge the House of Representatives to quickly pass 
these important bipartisan bills.”
		The 
Great Ape and Marine Turtle Conservation Funds have supported projects 
by several conservation organizations around the world.  The discovery 
of 125,000 western lowland gorillas, triggering the creation of three 
new national parks in the Republic of Congo, was supported by the Great 
Ape Conservation Fund.  The Marine Turtle Conservation Fund supports 
nesting beach protection and anti-poaching efforts in Central America 
that are providing refuge for growing numbers of hawksbill turtles.
		Rep.
 George Miller said, “International efforts to conserve these truly 
amazing creatures are working, but they desperately need our continued 
support. A small contribution from the federal government makes a big 
difference in the field.  We should remain vigilant in protecting our 
closest non-human relatives – the great apes – from human threats around
 the world, while at the same time building stronger relationships with 
countries in Africa and Asia. The Great Apes conservation program has 
been a great success over the last decade and my colleagues and I 
strongly believe we should allow it to continue the good work it funds.”
		Rep.
 Pedro Pierluisi said, “Through its Marine Turtle Conservation Fund, the
 United States plays a leading role in the protection and recovery of 
marine sea turtles.  Marine sea turtles are important to the health of 
our ocean and their imperiled status obligates us to continue our 
efforts to conserve them and their nesting habitats.  By reauthorizing 
the Marine Turtle Conservation Act, Congress would renew our nation’s 
commitment to support on-the-ground partnerships and the science needed 
to most effectively monitor, protect and recover the most threatened 
populations of marine sea turtles abroad.” 
		Both
 the Great Ape Conservation Fund and Marine Turtle Conservation Fund 
will be beneficiaries of a new Wildlife Semipostal Stamp, which will be 
issued by the U.S. Postal Service in September 2011. The stamp will be 
sold at a premium price, with the residual funds supporting the MSCF at 
no cost to taxpayers.
		
				
						 
				
		
Contact:
 Chip Weiskotten: (202-624-8172; cweiskotten@wcs.org)
Mary Dixon: (347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org)

The Wildlife Conservation Society
 saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, 
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest
 system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  
Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help 
people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed 
to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on 
Earth.