America’s national bird to make its home in the Bronx
				Recovery of bald eagle population a true conservation
success story
		
		







Bronx, N.Y. – February 11, 2011 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo has
adopted two rescued bald eagles found injured in Wyoming.



Both eagles had sustained injuries making them unable to fly
and survive in the wild. They were taken by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
and relocated to the Woodford Cedar Run Wildlife Refuge in the New Jersey Pine
Barrens for rehabilitation before being transferred to the Bronx Zoo.



The eagles are juveniles; the male is estimated to be 5
years old, and the female is almost 4 years old.



“The graceful bald eagle is an important symbol of power and
strength,” said Jim Breheny, WCS Senior Vice President of Living Institutions
and Bronx Zoo Director. “Throughout its history, WCS
has played a pivotal role in the conservation of eagles by helping to bring
about a change in public attitudes toward the once heavily hunted birds.”



Bald eagles are the national bird of the United States and
one of the country’s most notable conservation success stories. Because of
protection under the Endangered Species Act, bald eagle populations have
recovered and they are beginning to again populate large areas.



In New York City and surrounding communities, bald eagle
sightings have become more frequent, an indication that they are returning to
an area where they once flourished. Locally, bald eagles have been spotted in
Manhattan’s Central Park, the Meadowlands of northern New Jersey, and even
recently soaring over WCS’s Center for Global Conservation at the Bronx Zoo.



WCS has been on the forefront of
research into the impact of pesticide use on bald eagles. To confront ongoing
threats posed by habitat fragmentation, resource extraction, and climate
change, WCS’s North America Program continues to employ science-based solutions
to protect eagles and other iconic wildlife throughout their range. 







Photo:  Unable to survive on their own in the wild, these two
young bald eagles were rescued and are now on exhibit at the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo. 
They can be seen in the Birds of Prey exhibit year around.



Credit: Julie Larsen Maher
©WCSContact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.