Sign up for special opportunities at Central Park Zoo: Enjoy Apple Donuts and Cider as you carve pumpkins for the monkeys; get a personal tour of puffin, penguin and sea duck exhibits; have breakfast with the birds

 

Programs open for registration

 

New York, N.Y. – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo is accepting registration for its new fall classes and activities; offering an up-close look at the animals and opportunities to learn from animal care and conservation professionals.  

 

Autumn Celebration with Apple Donuts and Cider:

On Sunday, Oct. 24th from 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., WCS’s Central Park Zoo will hold an autumn celebration for children ages four to six. Just in time for Halloween, participants will enjoy apple donuts and cider fresh from the local farmers market and carve pumpkins to give to the snow monkeys. They will also get a chance to meet some of the zoo’s famous residents – including the newest bird of prey, Flaco, the eagle owl.

 

Tour of Zoo’s Penguin, Puffin and Sea Duck Collection/Wine and Cheese Reception:

Adults will have the opportunity to learn about the zoo’s animals and have their questions answered by WCS animal experts. On Tuesday, Oct. 19th from 6:30-8 p.m., Jeff Sailer, Director of WCS’s Central Park Zoo, will share exciting stories about the animals and answer questions at a wine and cheese reception.  An expert on sea birds, Sailer will lead a personal tour of the zoo’s collection of penguins, puffins, and sea ducks.  

 

Breakfast with the Birds:

Sue Cardillo, Assistant Curator of WCS’s Central Park Zoo, will host a “breakfast with the birds” in the Tropic Zone on Saturday, Nov. 13th from 8:30-10 a.m.  Early risers will get a chance to learn about the diversity of the bird collection and help feed them while conducting the morning census. 

 

To view program fees and to register for family and adult programs at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo visit www.centralparkzoo.com/classes-and-programs.aspx. 

 

Registration will be accepted via the web and mail. No drop-in or phone registration will be accepted. If you have any questions regarding registration or programs, please contact the registrar at cpzregistration@wcs.org or call 212-439-6583 and select option “four.”
		
				

		
		
				Contact:
				

				
Sophie Bass:  718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 


 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year. Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.