Flushing, N.Y., October 1, 2009 – Prepare for a spook-tacular weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Queens Zoo! The zoo will present “Boo at the Zoo,” an extreme Halloween extravaganza October 31 and November 1, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.. The event promises spine-tingling surprises and festivities for zoo-goers of all ages. 

Creatively costumed characters, craft-making, and treats for the animals will make this a frighteningly fun weekend. So if you’re not too spooked, head to the zoos to have a terrifyingly terrific time this Halloween season! 

FedEx and Safe Kids USA will be at the zoo on November 1 to remind children and adults how to keep kids safe on Halloween. FedEx will provide reflective giveaways to increase children’s visibility during evening hours and safety tips for parents and drivers. For more information on child pedestrian safety, please visit www.usa.safekids.org/wtw. 

And if one weekend of Boo at the Zoo isn’t enough, you can also check out the event at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo on select weekends throughout October; Central Park Zoo on October 30 and 31; and the Prospect Park Zoo October 31 and November 1. The New York Aquarium is also featuring Ascarium on select weekends throughout October. 

Boo at the Zoo and Ascarium events at all five WCS facilities are presented by Pepsi, a sponsor of the events. 

Ghoulish fun and activities includes:  
Haunted Habitat - Pop over to the Haunted Habitat located on the farm for a frighteningly good time! Pumpkin Picking and Decorating - The early bird gets the pumpkin! The first 200 zoo-goers each day will pick and decorate their own Halloween pumpkin. Face Painting - Zoo-goers can get in the spirit of Halloween with colorful face painting. Pumpkin Enrichment - Pumas and bears get terrifyingly tasty treats. Watch the zoo’s pumas and Andean bears tear into treat-filled pumpkins!  (Pumas at 1 pm and Andean bears at 2:30 pm both days) Trick or Treating - Trick-or-treating was never so much fun.  Treat stations will be located around the zoo.  Children in costume admitted free. 
Contact:
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 212-439-6527


Queens Zoo – $7.00 for adults, $4.00 for seniors 65 and older, $3.00 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadows Corona Park. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.