Video: “Nobody Likes a
Sad Lion”
Cultural Institutions are Economic Engines for NYC
View the full video and
sign the petition at www.SaveNYCulture.org










New York – June 8, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society today released a homemade video
called “Nobody Likes a Sad Lion” to inspire New Yorkers to send a message to
City Hall to restore proposed cuts to New York City’s Cultural Institutions Group
(CIG) – a group of 33 city-funded cultural institutions located in all five
boroughs.



The
video, “Nobody Likes a Sad Lion,” directly addresses the economic repercussions
if the draconian cuts become reality.  While the video is humorous, the
results of further cutting these cultural institutions during these difficult
economic times will be serious. The video shows a sad lion solemnly wandering
in front of some of the city’s most notable cultural institutions only to find
them deserted.



City Hall’s proposed cut to cultural groups comes as the
nation and the city continue to navigate through one of the worst economic
climates in recent history.  The Bronx Zoo and the New York Aquarium –
along with the rest of the city’s cultural institutions – are economic drivers
for New York City’s already hurting communities and families. They drive
tourism, bring business to local merchants, and are educational resources for
families. 



As part of the world-renowned cultural community that makes
up a large part of New York City’s identity, the Bronx Zoo and New York
Aquarium annually generate nearly $290 million in economic impact for their
communities. 



In the Fiscal Year 2010 adopted budget, the Bronx Zoo and
New York Aquarium received a total of $9.3 million. If the proposed cut is
accepted, the zoo and aquarium face a $3.9 million cut; bringing down city
support by 42 percent to $5.4 million – a decrease that will have a significant
impact on stores, vendors, and restaurants adjacent to these world-class
institutions.



If the cuts are allowed to pass, the institutions that help
to make New York City the world cultural capitol could be forced to eliminate
jobs and cut services. 



The Wildlife Conservation Society has initiated a petition
campaign to save the Bronx Zoo, the New York Aquarium and the other New York
City cultural institutions from cuts to their city funding. The campaign
is aimed to build massive community support behind efforts to convince City
Hall to restore funding to the city’s cultural institutions which employ approximately
9,000 New Yorkers and help bolster local economies across New York City.





View the full video
and sign the petition at: www.SaveNYCulture.org







Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
Mary Dixon – 347-840-1242 (cell) mdixon@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



Wildlife Conservation
Society’s New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on
public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH
or visit our website at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the
New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved
part of the City of New York.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.