Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz and Councilman Domenic Recchia join registration opening announcementFirst annual WCS Run for the Wild 5K
run/walk in Brooklyn is dedicated to saving turtles and other wildlife and wild places around
the globeEvent date: Sunday, Oct. 9, 2011 -- 5K Run: 8 a.m.; Family Fun Run/Walk: 8:45 a.m.Registration is now open at wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquariumJune registrants receive $5 off
early-turtle discount























Brooklyn, N.Y. – June 6, 2011 – It is time for
runners, walkers, and animal lovers to gear up and sign up for the Wildlife
Conservation Society Run for the Wild in Brooklyn – kicking off at WCS’s New
York Aquarium. 





Registration has opened online for the run which is set for
Sunday, Oct. 9. Starting times: 8 a.m. for the run; and 8:45 a.m. for the
run/walk. Those who register during the month of June will receive the
early-turtle discount of $5 off regular registration fees. Children and seniors
will also receive a reduced rate.  


To register go to: wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium.



The route of this 5K run and family fun run/walk will take
participants along the famed Coney Island Boardwalk and is dedicated to helping
WCS save sea turtles and their habitats. Proceeds will be dedicated to saving
turtles and wildlife and wild places around the globe.



“Many aquatic animals face serious threats in oceans and
waterways around the world,” said John F. Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice
President of Public Affairs. “Because of habitat loss, pollution, and other
factors, several turtle species are facing extinction. Everyone who
participates in the WCS Run for the Wild – by running, walking, or sponsoring a
runner or team – will be doing a tremendous service for turtle populations
everywhere.”



Said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of
the New York Aquarium, “We’re very excited about hosting this annual WCS event
in Brooklyn for the first time. The WCS Run for the Wild will be a fun,
exciting and rewarding day for all those who participate.”



Said Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz, “The Run
for the Wild 5K on land will help our creatures at sea-and let's face it,
saving the world's sea turtles and other wildlife is one race none of us can
afford to lose. Kudos to the Wildlife Conservation Society for ‘shelling’ out
the proceeds the run/walk will generate to ensure our beautiful sea turtles and
other precious wildlife will be around for generations to come.”



Said Councilman Domenic M. Recchia, Jr., “The WCS Run for
the Wild is a fantastic opportunity for the New York Aquarium to extend its
reach to a worldwide cause. Besides protecting endangered animals and habitats,
it will bring people together in Coney Island to experience the aquarium, and
to learn about the environment. This is an incredibly exciting event, and I
believe this is going to become a great tradition in the years to come.” 



Here’s the schedule for the day: The 5K race for runners
will begin at 8 a.m.; casual runners and walkers can take part in the Family
Fun Run/Walk at 8:45 a.m. 





The run promises an exciting day at Coney Island. There will
be plenty of post-run activities at WCS’s New York Aquarium. 


After the run, participants are invited to visit with the
sea turtles and other aquatic creatures at the New York Aquarium. Everyone will
enjoy the many fascinating exhibits including the new Conservation Hall and
Glover’s Reef, home to aquatic animals native to Belize, the Pacific Ocean’s
Coral Triangle, Africa’s Great Lakes and Brazil’s Flooded Forest. 



Turtles are reptiles that are in serious trouble. Though
they have survived for about 220 million years and once roamed the Earth with
the dinosaurs, half of all turtle and tortoise species are now threatened with
extinction. Proceeds from WCS’s Run for the Wild will go to WCS conservation
efforts to combat threats that plague this animal, including habitat loss and
poaching. 



This event will sell out, so register early. For more
information, to register or sponsor a runner/team, visit wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium.  







Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org   
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. A limited-time
Thrills and Gills combo ticket can be purchased online at www.nyaquarium.com or www.lunaparknyc.com, offering a combined
20 percent reduced admission at both attractions; combo tickets can be
purchased through July 31. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested
donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney
Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other
Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect
time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most
heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards
nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.



Special
Note to the Media: If you would like
to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to
wcs.org. 

 

WCS Digital Community:



Web Sites:

www.wcs.org ● www.bronxzoo.com
● www.centralparkzoo.com
● www.queenszoo.com
● www.prospectparkzoo.com● www.nyaquarium.com















Facebook:
Wildlife Conservation Society http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS
Bronx Zoo www.facebook.com/bronxzoo
Central Park Zoo http://www.facebook.com/centralparkzoo
Queens Zoo http://www.facebook.com/queenszoo
Prospect Park Zoo http://www.facebook.com/prospectparkzoo
New York Aquarium http://www.facebook.com/nyaquarium



WCS Youtube:

http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia



Twitter: 

@TheBronxZoo