20 Ways To Track A Tiger is a multi-sensory e-book experience about the survival of a wild Indian tigress and her two cubs in the Indian jungle

 E-book features videos, photo galleries, original music and jungle sounds

 Book is based on author, explorer, and filmmaker Carol J. Amore’s real-life experience documenting tigers in India’s Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve

To see a video preview of the book, click here


 

 NEW YORK (November 3, 2014) – A new multi-sensory e-book based on the real-life experiences of author, explorer, and filmmaker Carol J. Amore’s as she documented tigers Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve will benefit the Wildlife Conservation Society’s tiger work in India.

 20 Ways To Track A Tiger immerses the reader in a story about the survival of a wild Indian tigress and her two cubs documented from a real wild tiger film expedition by Amore. Tiger videos, photo galleries, filmmaker notes, original music, tiger and jungle sound effects are all part of this discovery journey as one travels through each of this e-book’s interactive chapters.

 While in the tiger’s territory, identifying the tracks of the tiger, listening to wildlife alarm calls, predicting the travels of the tigress and anticipating its hunting techniques are some of the tiger tracker skills learned through the exciting photographs, meaningful captions and story-driven writing. The book has already received an Independent Publishers Print Book Award for Best Animal Book.

 Said actor and producer Glenn Close, about the book: “Wildly authentic, incredibly intriguing!  Immersed in 20 Ways To Track A Tiger, it draws you into the tiger’s world to experience all its senses as the prime predator in the Indian jungle.  It’s non-stop fascination and fun exploring this e-book.  Tigers are extremely endangered and we would be tragically diminished should they disappear. Their legend lives on through this landmark interactive innovation.”

 One of the chapters, called “20 Ways to SAVE Wild Tigers” features WCS field work on tigers and addresses how to protect the remaining 3,200 tigers remaining in the wild especially in India. 

 Said Ullas Karanth, WCS Director for Science in Asia, said: “Tigers are not a lost cause.  Strict protection of key source populations, reductions in human demands and conflicts through fair and generous village resettlement projects, and application of best science for monitoring and managing tiger populations can bring tigers back. WCS tiger conservation models show it can be done.”

The book can be purchased directly from Apple’s ibookstore 



CONTACT:
STEPHEN SAUTNER: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
JOHN DELANEY: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City,  visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org  ; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS ; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.