Giraffe calf joins herd in Bronx Zoo’s African Plains



View  video







Bronx, NY –  Oct. 6, 2011 – A male Baringo
giraffe calf  is making its public debut at the Bronx Zoo’s African
Plains. 


Born on September 14, 2011, James Marjani is the first
giraffe calf born at the Bronx Zoo since February 2009. He was approximately
six feet tall at birth and estimated to weigh more than 100 pounds. As an
adult, he could eventually grow to more than 17 feet and weigh close to 4,000
pounds. 



The baby was born to mother, Margaret Sukari, and father,
James Michael. The Bronx Zoo names all of its giraffes in memory of Mr. and
Mrs. James Carter, benefactors for whom the Carter Giraffe Building is named.
His birth brings the total number of giraffes in the herd to eight. 



In anticipation of the birth, keepers prepared a stall with
a heavy layer of straw bedding to help absorb the impact of the calf’s 6-foot
drop from his mother. Keepers kept mom and baby separated from the other
giraffes for several days to give them time to bond before slowly introducing
them to the rest of the herd. 



The new calf will be on exhibit intermittently for the first
several weeks he adjusts to his new surroundings. Exhibit times will vary.



The gestation period for a giraffe is 14 to 14.5 months and
the baby starts walking within the first few hours of birth. The calf will
nurse for approximately one year, but will begin sampling solid food when three
months old.  Eventually it will transition
to a diet of leaves, alfalfa hay, kale, pelleted grain, and produce. Giraffes
are the tallest animal in the world and have an 18-inch-long tongue that they
use to grasp branches and pull leaves from trees. 



Giraffes are native to grasslands, savannas, and open
woodlands in central, east, and southern Africa. The Baringo giraffe (aka
Rothschild’s giraffe) is found in western Kenya and eastern Uganda. While
populations are still robust in many places, the overall trend is a decreasing
population. The Wildlife Conservation Society works across the globe and throughout the giraffe’s African range to save
wildlife and wild places. WCS is working to protect
giraffes in key African landscapes like Zakouma, Chad, Murchison Falls, Uganda,
and in the Sahel of South Sudan. 

 


Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © WCS
Video Credit: Luke Groskin © WCS




Contact:
Max Pulsinelli (718) 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild
(718) 220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is
$16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+)
are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is
conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2
or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.



Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where
they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places,
please direct them to www.wcs.org.