Brooklyn, N.Y. – Aug. 28, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium presented Darya Inyutkina – the winner of the annual George D. Ruggieri Scholarship – with a check for $5,000 to put toward college expenses. Pictured left to right: Ed Wilensky, Principal of the Rachel Carson High School; Darya Inyutkina, scholarship winner; Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium; Dr. Chanda Bennett, Education Manager at the New York Aquarium. 
 
 Darya is a student at the Rachel Carson High School. She was awarded the scholarship because of her many outstanding achievements. She is a dedicated student and earned a GPA of 3.73. She enrolled in advanced placement courses at her high school and completed College Now readiness courses at Kingsborough Community College. 
 
 An active member of her community, Darya volunteers at an animal shelter, an assisted living complex, and has participated in beach clean-ups. 
 
 She plans to pursue a degree in biology at Pace University this fall. 
CONTACT:  Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
 Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
														 
 Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.