Brooklyn, N.Y. – Nov. 25, 2013 -- Two young hamadryas baboons (Papio hamadryas) spend time with their parents in their exhibit at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo.   

    The baboons, both male, were born just weeks apart. Their arrival marks the first time since 2010, and the second time in nine years, that hamadryas baboons were born at the Prospect Park Zoo.

 Bole, a 21-year-old male, is the father of both infants. Rebecca, a 10-year-old female, was the first to give birth on August 9, followed by Kaia, also 10 years old, who gave birth on September 26.

The older of the two youngsters is proving to be independent for his age and has started to explore his surroundings on his own. The younger infant is still nursing but will become more adventurous in the coming weeks.

 Hamadryas baboons are native to northeastern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. They are large, ground-dwelling primates that are found in rocky areas and cliffs. They live in troops that typically include one dominant male and many females. They are highly social animals and spend much of their time grooming one another, a behavior that maintains social bonds within the troop.

The hamadryas baboon exhibit is located in the zoo’s Animal Lifestyles building along with tamarin monkeys, piranhas, and Pallas cats. The babies are currently on exhibit with the full baboon troop.  

 The Wildlife Conservation Society protects many primate species throughout Africa by saving their habitats and working to curb illegal hunting and poaching. WCS operates more than 500 conservation projects in 60 countries and all four oceans.

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8.00 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org