Toys collected at various sites in Brooklyn will benefit families in need, including those affected by Hurricane Sandy

 Toy donors will receive a free ticket to the New York Aquarium

 Toy drive runs from Monday, Nov. 18 to Tuesday, Dec. 31, 2013 

Brooklyn, N.Y. – Nov. 19, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium and Prospect Park Zoo have launched the annual holiday toy drive in partnership with Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz and the Alliance for Coney Island.

 Toys collected will go to families in need, including those affected by Hurricane Sandy. Toys can be dropped off at the New York Aquarium, Prospect Park Zoo, Applebee’s at 1217 Surf Ave., and Tom’s Diner at 1229 Boardwalk West in Coney Island.  

 In appreciation for their generosity, those who make a qualifying donation of a new, unwrapped toy will receive a free ticket to the New York Aquarium. Toy donors will leave their contact information to receive their free ticket.  The toy drive runs Monday, Nov. 18 to Tuesday, Dec. 31, 2013.  

 “We are happy to once again partner with Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz and this year the Alliance for Coney Island to help families in need throughout the borough this holiday season,” said WCS Vice President and New York Aquarium Director Jon Forrest Dohlin. “It is wonderful to give back to the community that supports both the New York Aquarium and the other WCS facilities throughout the year.” 

 Said Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz: “I grew up in poverty so I know that a new toy means the world to a child in need. That’s why my office is proud to work alongside the Wildlife Conservation Society, Brooklyn’s Prospect Park Zoo, New York Aquarium and the Alliance for Coney Island to help improve the quality of life for Brooklynites and New Yorkers during the holiday season and throughout the year. Join us—the greatest gift during the holiday season is providing a gift to those in need.”

 Toys will be collected through the end of December and will be distributed by the Borough President’s office. 

 The Wildlife Conservation Society will also collect toys at its other WCS wildlife parks – the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo and Queens Zoo. Toys collected at the Central Park Zoo and Queens Zoo will be donated to families in need within the communities they serve. Toys collected at the Bronx Zoo will be donated to Bronx military families. Visit http://www.wcs.org/toydrive/ for details.

 For further information on this holiday story, or to talk with the experts involved, please contact Barbara Russo at 718-265-3428 or email brusso@wcs.org.

 Disclaimer: ONE general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, or Queens Zoo. ONE general admission ticket to the New York Aquarium will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the New York Aquarium or Prospect Park Zoo. Limit of four tickets per family, valid 1/01/14–6/30/14. All WCS decisions final. Promotion available from 11/15/13 - 12/31/13. May not be combined with any other offer.

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org. 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.