WCS’s Bronx Zoo Partners with Bronx Borough
President Ruben Diaz, Jr. on Holiday Toy DriveBronx Zoo partners with the Food Bank For New York
City on Food Drive  undefined









Bronx, N.Y., Nov. 29, 2010 – Animals at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo always have
food to eat and toys to play with, but many New Yorkers aren’t as fortunate. 



The Bronx Zoo is taking part in the Bronx Borough
President’s annual toy drive as well as the Food Bank For New York City’s food
drive. Both of these programs provide families in need with food throughout
winter and toys for their children during the holidays. 



“We are very excited to collaborate with Borough President
Ruben Diaz, Jr., and the Food Bank For New York City to help a community that
has been such a tremendous supporter to the Wildlife Conservation Society over
the years,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs.
“We’re very proud to help New York City families in need have a joyous holiday
season.”Through the end of December, the zoo will collect toys for
underprivileged children. Zoo visitors can bring their new, unwrapped toys to
the Zoo Center building for distribution by the Borough President’s office.“Every child deserves to be happy, especially during the
holidays. By donating a toy, New Yorkers can help make the season a little
brighter for children in need throughout the city,” said Bronx Borough
President Ruben Diaz, Jr.  





The
Bronx Zoo will also partner with the Food Bank For New York City to collect
food for underprivileged New Yorkers. There are more than 1.4 million New
Yorkers relying on emergency food. The Food Bank For New York City solicits,
warehouses, and distributes food to more than 1,000 food pantries, soup
kitchens and other community-based programs around the five boroughs.  




The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo,
Prospect Park Zoo, and Queens Zoo are also participating in the food and toy
drives.  Donations can be dropped
off at the park entrance (no admission necessary). Free tickets can be
collected at your chosen drop off location. 


“At a time when one in five New York City residents is
relying on the Food Bank's programs and services, including one in five
children, we are very grateful to the Wildlife Conservation Society for their
support. The holidays can be an especially daunting time for families who are
struggling to put food on the table. With 93 percent of soup kitchen and food
pantries experiencing an increase in first-time visitors, this has been very
challenging - for the Food Bank and for the families we serve. This
wonderful food drive will certainly help us bring more families together during
the holiday season,” said Lucy Cabrera, Ph.D., President and CEO of the Food
Bank For New York City.



As a
thank you for every new, unwrapped toy or grocery
bag filled with 10 or more packaged food items, we will provide one free
general admission ticket—limit 
four per family, valid 1/01/2011 through 6/30/2011.**



** Disclaimer: ONE general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be
provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy OR for every 10 food items at
the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo or Queens Zoo.  ONE
general admission ticket to the New York Aquarium will be provided for a
donation of one new, unwrapped toy OR for every 10 food items at the New York
Aquarium. Limit of four tickets per family, valid 01/ 01/11 through
06/30/11. Food items must be canned, packaged and/or nonperishable foods
–perishable items are not permitted. All WCS decisions final. Promotion
available from 11/22/10 –12/31/10. May not be combined with any other offer.

Contact:     

Max Pulsinelli - 718-220- 5182; Cell 571-218-7601; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718- 220- 5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through
science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to:
www.wcs.org/donation.