Proceeds from EDUN make-up sales at Sephora benefit
WCS’s work with the Conservation Cotton Initiative




NEW YORK
(June 15)-The Wildlife Conservation Society,
EDUN, and Sephora announced today a partnership to support the Conservation
Cotton Initiative (CCI), which aims to create sustainable livelihoods for local
African farmers through organic agriculture and the conservation of wildlife. 

WCS and EDUN have
collaborated on CCI since 2007 and currently work in Zambia, Madagascar, and
Uganda. CCI trains farmers,
supports their communities, and helps them manage and safeguard their lands,
the environment, and wildlife. The
innovative program shows how economic growth does not have to be at the expense
of people and the environment but that it can support them.

Sephora will be
contributing to CCI by selling limited edition EDUN for Sephora make-up
palettes. Each palette is enclosed in a natural wood case and an organic
cotton drawstring pouch made in Uganda. Three dollars of each
sale will go to the Wildlife Conservation
Society to fund activities of the Conservation Cotton Initiative in Uganda. 

“With a large
percentage of people in Uganda living off the land, it is imperative that their
natural resources are protected,” said Dr. James Deutsch, director of the
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Africa program. “Working with EDUN, which has
been a global leader in promoting markets in Africa, is a natural fit for the
Wildlife Conservation Society. We appreciate Sephora’s support in promoting
this important project.” 
           

WCS has experience
from around the world on working with local communities and conservation of
biodiversity; while EDUN, an ethical clothing company founded in 2005 by Bono
and Ali Hewson, provides a market for the organically produced cotton and helps
their consumers become aware of critical social and environmental issues in
Africa. 

The CCI promotes the adoption of organic,
conservation-friendly farming practices in and around regions of global
importance for biodiversity. By eliminating the use of chemical pesticides and
fertilizers, the farmers earn premium prices from high demand for organic
cotton and the food crops they grow along with the cotton.  Participating
farmers must commit to measures designed to control deforestation and protect
wildlife. Making these incentives work is a key component of CCI.  Although
only a young project, CCI has already trained hundreds of farmers and supported
the conservation large tracts of wildlife habitat.

EDUN’s desire to
be socially and environmentally responsible in the production of their clothing
in addition to their goal of using business to drive economic growth and WCS’s
practice of ensuring that land is well managed and does not threaten wildlife,
brought the two organizations together for this innovative project.

Contact:  
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
John Delaney:
(1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
Sophie Bass: (1-718-220-6853; sbass@wcs.org)




The Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 





Special
Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web
link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild
places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation