Keepers Work with the Animals to Strengthen Bonds, Stimulate Natural Instincts and Behaviors, and Facilitate Care

Do WCS Bronx Zoo Sea Lions Paint Better Than You?
		
				
						
 
		
		
				

Bronx,
 N.Y. (September 30, 2009) –
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo continually improves and
develops its Animal Enrichment Program. The newest breakthrough in
enrichment activities is painting.
		
		“We’re
always looking to find unique ways for the animals to exercise their minds,
express creativity and have fun,” says Melissa Nelson, Curatorial Science
Fellow for Animal Behavior at the Wildlife Conservation Society.  “Painting
is a great new activity for our naturally curious and playful animals to
challenge themselves.”
		

Indy, one
of four female California
sea lions, was the first animal to showcase her new painting skills to the
public.  

“Indy
learned the new art like all new
behaviors, in increments,” says Nelson. “First, she learned
how to hold a stick in her mouth.  When she was comfortable, we replaced
the stick with a brush. Finally, with the brush comfortably in her mouth,
we taught her how to move her head in a manner that replicates a stroking
motion. Once she understood how to put brush to canvas, she began
developing her own motions and techniques different from the ones we
taught.”

“Indy
is a very bright, fast learning animal,” says Nelson. “It
only took a few sessions to get her painting and loving it.  Each time we
paint, her excitement for the activity grows.”

With the
success of this activity resting solely on the enthusiasm of the animals, it is
impossible to say how long the painting will continue.  Nelson reports,
“We’d like to offer painting to as many animals as possible, but it
will only continue if the animals are enjoying it.”

Two other
animals that are learning to paint publicly are Indy’s fellow sea lions
Cleo and Kiani.  

The
Wildlife Conservation Society continues to develop enrichment programs
throughout all five of its New York Zoos and Aquarium. WCS seeks to
exercise animal minds and bodies. Keepers work with their charges to
strengthen keeper-animal bonds, stimulate natural behaviors, and facilitate
care. Other enrichment items, many behind the scenes, can range from a
giant pulley toy for big cats, to a foraging log for birds or octopuses, to a
mobile for monkeys.  Visitors can watch animal play and training sessions
at exhibits throughout the parks.  

The sea
lion painting does not have an established schedule, but if it is occurring it
will take place during regular sea lion feeding times at 11AM and 3PM.Contact:
Maggie Seidel:
718-220-5182
Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189




		
				
						
						
				
		
		
				


				


		
		

The
Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30
p.m. on weekends and holidays through November 2, 2009. Adult admission is $15,
children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are
$13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently
located off the Bronx River
  Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by
bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.