October 10, 11, 17, 18, 24, 25, 31 and November
1, 2009
								
						
				
		

Brooklyn, NY — A safe and not (too) scary
way to spend October weekends with the family. Join WCS’s New York
Aquarium at the Haunted SeaFari Perils of the Deep adventure and a
pumpkin-patch-filled arts and crafts center. Activities for this event are free
with general admission and run from Noon to 4pm each day. Come down and see all
of our sea monsters.

Visit the Haunted SeaFari Perils of the Deep. This
interactive haunted house will provide a fun Halloween experience for all. Visitors
will pass through extinct sea life
tombs, grasping tentacles and a sea jelly field. In the end, visitors make
their way to dry land with a better understanding the threats
to our valuable marine life and virtues of the sea. This experience will be available
each weekend;Make sure to visit our “Alien Stingers” exhibit
for an eerie look at sea jellies;Children in animal themed costumes 3-12 years of age get in
free when accompanied by each paying adultBe sure to catch a walrus, penguin or sea otter feed and
the all new sea lion celebration in the Aquatheater. Times vary throughout the day;Marine themed pumpkin carving demonstrations. This will be
available on 10/24, 25, 31 and 11/1;Sea life themed storytelling with LuAnn Adams. Available on
10/24, 25, 31 and 11/1;Visit www.wcs.org for
information on Boo at the Zoo events
at all WCS parks, Bronx, Central, Prospect and
Queens Zoos;DJ Dave will play kid-friendly marine animal themed music.

Contact:
Fran Hackett, 718-265-3428 



A Wildlife Conservation Society park, the New York Aquarium, opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 years old and $10.00 for senior
citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free.
Visitor admissions on Fridays after 3pm to closing is by donation. The Aquarium
is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street
in Coney Island. For directions, information
on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call
718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com.
Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the
City of New York.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through
science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people
imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media:
If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can
make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please
direct them to www.wcs.org/donation.