Julie Larsen Maher_0389_Holiday Lights with Lanterns_BZ_11 29 20.JPG




 Julie Larsen Maher_9193_Holiday Lights Lanterns and Tree_BZ_11 15 19.JPG



 Julie Larsen Maher_0389_Holiday Lights with Lanterns_BZ_11 29 20.JPG



 Julie Larsen Maher_9193_Holiday Lights Lanterns and Tree_BZ_11 15 19.JPG
12


					
					
						Bronx, NY – Oct. 18, 2021 – New York is back and so is the City’s premiere outdoor holiday tradition – Holiday Lights at the Bronx Zoo. Holiday Lights, a family-favorite holiday light experience, will open to the public on November 19, with new light displays that will connect visitors with nature and the spirit of the season.

Holiday Lights will operate on select dates from November 19 to January 9 with a WCS member preview November 16-18 (sold out). Tickets for Holiday Lights must be purchased in advance and are date specific.  Tickets are now available online. Visit the Know before You Go page for all details.

This year’s event will be a fully outdoor experience. The experience will encompass an expansive area of the zoo and will be include 5 separate lantern safaris representing animals from different geographic regions; the all new larger-than-life Forest of Color; and activity areas spread out across the park. Fan-favorite seasonal activities include professional ice carving demonstrations and competitions, wildlife stilt walkers, Wildlife Theater performances, holiday train rides, seasonal treats, and more.

In addition to the dozens of new animal lanterns, synchronized light shows, and activities, the zoo has added the one-night-only Holiday Cheers event for adults age 21 and older. On December 1, the Holiday Lights experience will feature unlimited food sampling along with select seasonal adult beverages.  Of course, the evening will also include all of the Holiday Lights displays, lantern safaris, music and activities. Tickets must be purchased in advance and are expected to sell out. For more information visit Holiday Cheers online.

MEDIA NOTE: For members of the media, a live opening night event is being planned to open the member preview dates. Information on this event will follow in the coming weeks.

WCS members receive a 40-percent discount. Members at the Conservation Supporter level will receive free admission to Holiday Lights.

Visit the website for information, tickets and the full schedule of activities.

Bronx Zoo’s Holiday Lights is presented by Con Edison