Four new pelicans make an awe inspiring addition to the zoo’s open-air aviary

 Bronx, NY – April 16, 2014 – Four Peruvian pelicans have been added to the Russell B. Aitken Sea Bird Colony at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.

 Peruvian pelicans (Pelecanus thagus) were once considered a subspecies of the brown pelican, but are now classified as a distinct species. The white markings on their head and neck are more abundant than on the brown pelican, creating a beautiful pattern in the plumage. 

 Their natural range is along the west coast of South America, from Central Peru to southern Chile. They feed mostly on fish.

 Pelicans are easily identifiable by their large beak and attached “gular” pouch that is used as a fishing net and can hold more than three gallons of water. They are one of the heaviest flying birds in the world and have air sacs beneath their skin to make them more buoyant in the water. 

 Peruvian pelicans are designated as Near Threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Their numbers in the wild are stable, but climate change and habitat destruction are among the threats to this species. The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places around the globe and in all of the world’s oceans. Among these places, WCS manages field conservation programs throughout South America and within the Peruvian pelican’s range.

CONTACT:
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com  or call 718-367-1010.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS