4th Annual 5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s Bronx Zoo 

Registration is now open at www.wcs.runforthewild.org

Event Date: Saturday, April 28, 2012
		

		Bronx, N.Y. – Feb. 2, 2012 – Calling all runners, walkers, and athletic hopefuls – it is time to lace-up your running shoes to prepare for New York City’s wildest race: the fourth annual Wildlife Conservation Society’s Run for the Wild at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  

This year’s 5k-run/walk takes place on Saturday, April 28, 2012 and is dedicated to saving lions, their habitat and other wildlife. The Wildlife Conservation Society works across Africa and in the native range of lions in places such as Queen Elizabeth National Park, Uganda, and Nigeria’s Yankari National Park. 

WCS’s Run for the Wild registration is now open at www.wcs.runforthewild.org. Registration for the run is $35 for adults, $25 for children (3–15), and $25 for seniors (65+). Participants are encouraged to seek individual sponsors for their run, and all adult (and senior) participants are required to raise a minimum of at least $30 in order to participate. 

“The WCS Run for the Wild has become a favorite of New Yorkers and many have been participating annually since the beginning,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We are anticipating another tremendous turn-out of runners, walkers, families, and wildlife enthusiasts – all of which will be doing their part to help save lions and other wildlife.”

Participants can choose from two different events. The 5k run for individual runners will begin at 8:00 a.m.; casual runners and walkers can take part in the Family Fun Run/Walk at 8:45 a.m. 

The event promises an exciting day for runners and walkers, and there will be plenty of post-run festivities including refreshments, music, children’s activities, and more. 

After the run, participants are invited to stay and enjoy the zoo and its animal residents for the rest of the day. Everyone is encouraged to visit the Bronx Zoo’s famous African Plains exhibit where they can see African lions and many of their prey species like zebras, Thomson’s gazelles, nyala, giraffes, and more. There are many other wonderful exhibits to visit including Tiger Mountain, Madagascar!, Congo Gorilla Forest, and JungleWorld. Complimentary parking and admission will be provided. 

Prizes will be awarded to those who meet various fundraising goals. For $30 in pledges, runners will earn a WCS Run for the Wild T-shirt; $60 earns a plush lion; $125 earns a water bottle; $275 earns a Jackrabbit Sports gift card and a New York Yankees cap; $600 earns a gym bag; $1500 earns a breakfast and a special Bronx Zoo animal experience. Visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org for the details.

The Wildlife Conservation Society works around the globe to save wildlife and wild places. Lions are an iconic species and symbolic of strength. Today, fewer than 30,000 remain. Over the last 50 years, their range has collapsed catastrophically to a relatively small number of countries and protected areas. The lions of Asia have been all but wiped out. Today, Asiatic lions exist only on a single reserve, the Gir Forest in India. North Africa lost all of their lions a century ago and they have been steadily disappearing in other parts of the continent. There are few places conservationists would consider a safe haven for the species. 

This event will sell out, so register early. For more information, to register, or to sponsor a runner/team, visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org.

WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors:  

Presenting Sponsor: 		Con Edison

Featured Sponsors: 		Monroe College, Montefiore

Supporting Sponsors:	Stevia In The Raw, UBS 

Media Partners: 		ABC7


Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on earth.