BRONX, N.Y. — March 7, 2024 — You probably can’t outrun a snow leopard, but you may be able to help protect them at the 16th annual WCS Run For The Wild 5K run and 3K family fun run/walk on Saturday, April 27, at the Bronx Zoo.

Each year, more than 5,000 runners, walkers, and wildlife supporters participate and help raise awareness of the threats facing wildlife while fundraising to support the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) conservation work at the Bronx Zoo and around the world.

Snow leopards are classified as “Vulnerable” by the International Union of Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Because of their secretive nature and the remote areas in which they live, it is difficult to get accurate population numbers in the wild. It is thought there are between 2,700 and 7,500 surviving in the wild. The Bronx Zoo is a world leader in snow leopard care and husbandry and participates in a Species Survival Plan program, a cooperative breeding program designed to enhance the genetic viability of animal populations in zoos accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums.

More than 80 snow leopards have been born at the Bronx Zoo, more than any other zoo in North America. The Bronx Zoo was the first zoo in the United States to exhibit the big cats in 1903. This past fall, two cubs made their debut and can be seen in the Himalayan Highlands exhibit. Currently, the Bronx Zoo has 10 snow leopards.

We have long been a global leader in snow leopard conservation, thanks in part to funds raised during the annual WCS Run For The Wild. Participants 16 and older are required to meet the minimum fundraising level of $35, in addition to the registration fee. Upon completing the required minimum fundraising, all registrants receive:


 Free all-day access to the Bronx Zoo (Star Attractions are included in the Bronx Admission ticket)
 Free parking
 A commemorative WCS Run for the Wild t-shirt and medal
 Post-run entertainment, including music, costumed characters, Wildlife Theater, trivia, games, face painting, and more
 125th birthday celebration activities


Through fundraising, participants can also earn rewards, including a snow leopard plush, water bottle, reusable bag, beanie hat, notebook, and Bronx Zoo tickets with a VIP meal voucher.

This year's run is extra special because we're celebrating 125 years of the Bronx Zoo. Join us for Animal Chronicles, a walking trail of more than a quarter mile, featuring immersive eco-sculptures that showcase key achievements in the Bronx Zoo’s history of saving animal species and connecting visitors from around the world to wildlife. The festivities will also include parades, performances, crafting, scavenger hunts, tours, Wildlife Theater, and much more.

Register to participate in the 16th annual WCS Run For The Wild and help us make tracks for snow leopards.

WCS Run For The Wild is sponsored by Montefiore Einstein.



For Media: