Program teaches children ages 6 to 8 about adaptations marine mammals have to survive the cold
    
    
    Activities include games, crafts, and animal exhibit visits
    
    
    Registration and more information available at www.nyaquarium.com 
    

Brooklyn, N.Y. –– Nov. 20, 2014 – WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society’s) New York Aquarium has announced registration for its winter mini camp, “Baby It’s Cold Outside,” Monday and Tuesday, Dec. 29 & 30, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.  



The program is geared toward children ages 6 to 8 and focuses on ways marine mammals adapt to the cold weather. Activities planned include marine mammal exhibit visits, and various games and crafts that celebrate the aquarium’s well-insulated animals. Fee for both days: $210 members; $225 non-members. Fees are for both days. 



WCS’s New York Aquarium is home to several marine mammal species: Sea otters, sea lions, seals, and walruses. 



For more information or to enroll, visit www.nyaquarium.com or call 718-265-3457. 



CONTACT:

Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Tickets are $11.95 per person (ages 3 & up), and include Aquarium admission plus one admission to the new 4-D Theater; children age 2 and under are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, Aquarium admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation. The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.



Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) 

MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.