Follow @JimBreheny to get first look at the news and pictures from WCS’s zoos, aquarium, and conservation work
		

		Bronx, NY – July 29, 2013 – The attached photo was tweeted by Jim Breheny (@JimBreheny), Director of the Bronx Zoo and WCS Executive Vice President and General Director of the WCS Zoos and Aquarium.
 
Two California sea lions are seen in an impromptu water ballet at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo. 
 
All five WCS wildlife parks in New York City – Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, and the New York Aquarium – exhibit California sea lions. 
 
California sea lions live in colonies along the pacific coast of North and Central America. In the wild, there is usually one dominant male that finds a territory and patrols its borders to protect the colony. 
 
Although they are not endangered, California sea lions are a protected species. Their population was nearly decimated in the 19th century, but they are thriving today due to conservation efforts. 
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com   or call 718-367-1010.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.