Call for Entries:
New York City high school singing groups, glee clubs,
choirs, etc.Compete to be the best in New York CityWin a $2,500 grant and an opportunity to perform at Hard Rock Cafe New York in Times SquareFree to enter, submissions must be received by Friday,
Nov. 19 









New York, NY – November 3, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society and the Hard Rock
Cafe are now accepting applications from high school singing groups to compete
in the first ever city-wide singing competition at WCS’s Bronx Zoo – SING! for
Wildlife. 


Those who wish to compete should submit a music sample
to the Wildlife Conservation Society. The top submissions will be selected to perform at WCS’s Bronx Zoo where
one group will be named “The Best in New York City.” The grand prize includes a $2,500 grant to support the
winning choral group and a chance to perform at Hard Rock Cafe New York in
Times Square. First prize will be a $1,500 grant for the choral group; second
prize will be a $1,000 grant.



SING! for Wildlife supports culture and performing
arts in New York City and supports the One Percent for Culture Campaign.  For more information, visit www.oneforculture.org.



To enter, send a music sample to:  



Email:

sing4wildlife@wcs.org 



Mail:            






SING!
for Wildlife Competition
Wildlife Conservation Society
2300 Southern Blvd.
Bronx, NY 
10460



All submissions must be received by Friday, Nov.
19.  



Competition Stage One:

Once
the submissions are received and considered, the top groups and performance
schedule will be announced on Tuesday, Nov. 23.  These groups will move on to stage two and are invited to
perform at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.



Competition Stage Two:

Each performance group will be assigned a performance date
with all performances to take place on weekends in December. All performances
will consist of four songs: one song that celebrates wildlife, the environment,
or the planet, and three songs of the group’s choosing.  Suggested song choices would include
two contemporary songs and one holiday song.



Competition Stage Three:

The
winning group from each performance date in competition stage two will be moved
into the top five and ranked accordingly as per their scores. (Dates are
subject to change.)

Tuesday, Dec. 28: The
fifth-ranked group will perform at the Bronx Zoo.

Wednesday, Dec. 29:  The
fourth-ranked group will perform at the Bronx Zoo.





Thursday, Dec. 30:  The
top three groups will compete against each other at the Bronx Zoo in
order to determine the grand prize winner. 

A complete listing of competition rules, details, and
submission instructions can be found online at www.bronxzoo.com/sing.



Media Contacts:
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182;  mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild - 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.