This year’s recipient is Jia Yun Chen from Rachel Carson High School for Coastal StudiesScholarship winner to receive $5,000 for college    Brooklyn, NY – July 14, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium today announced the winner of the annual George D. Ruggieri Scholarship. The award went to graduating senior Jia Yun Chen from the Rachel Carson High School for Coastal Studies located in Coney Island.   Ms. Chen was chosen because of her many outstanding achievements. Her cumulative average at the Rachel Carson High School was 93.72% and was one of the top ten students in her school. Chen has received many honors and awards including the English as a Second Language, Chemistry and Math B, and the 2010 MATE International ROV Competition awards. She also has been volunteering at the Light & Love Home in the local community.   “We are proud of the accomplishments of Ms. Chen and are confident that she will continue to excel as she takes the next step in her education,” said Jon Dohlin, Director of WCS’s New York Aquarium, who gave this year’s commencement address for Rachel Carson High School. “She has already made an impression on the community and we applaud her as she works toward a career that will positively impact the environment.”  The award was presented during the Rachel Carson High School commencement ceremony at Kingsborough College. Jia Yun will receive $5,000 to help with her college expenses.   Ms. Chen will be attending Baruch College this fall and will be majoring in environmental accounting which is to accurately analyze and report financial figures relating to pollution control and environmental protection policies. With this knowledge she plans to give back to society by determining the best ways to lower both the environmental impact and the operating costs of a business, encouraging more resourceful, cleaner practices, and to make our planet a healthier place to live.  George D. Ruggieri, Ph.D., S.J., former Director of WCS’s New York Aquarium from 1976 to 1987, was both a Jesuit priest and a marine biologist. The combination made him a great contributor to science, conservation, education, and the community. WCS, dedicated to connecting people with nature, established the George D. Ruggieri Scholarship Fund in 2000 to award scholarships in honor of Dr. Ruggieri’s contributions to the Aquarium and the surrounding community.   The George D. Ruggieri Scholarship had been established by WCS to encourage Rachel Carson High School for Coastal Studies students to pursue higher education and environmental stewardship. Administered by WCS’s New York Aquarium, the scholarship honors students who show clear academic ability, demonstrate a high level of community involvement, and wish to pursue a college degree.    Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.  Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.