Hyenas to join lions, gazelles and other wildlifeon Zoo’s famous African Plains exhibit
												
										
										
												
														
																
																		
																				
																						
																						
																				
																		
																
														
												
										
								
						
						
								
										
												
														
																
																
														
												
										
								
						
				
				
						 
						
								
										 
								
						
						
								 
						
						
								
										
												
														Bronx, NY –The Wildlife Conservation Society announced today that laughter may be heard from the Bronx Zoo’s famous African Plains
exhibit— from  two spotted hyenas, which recently joined the
zoo’s lions, gazelles, zebras and other wildlife.

The hyenas are male and female siblings born in March 2008, at the
Denver Zoo. The female’s name is Kubwa (Swahili for
“big” because her head is bigger than the male’s) and the
male is Kidogo (Swahili for “small,” since he has the smaller
head). Kubwa weighs approximately 91 pounds and Kidogo is 75 pounds.

Most people associate the hyena with its raucous vocalizations that
earned it the nickname “laughing hyena.” However, it
is no laughing matter for the hyena’s prey in the wild, as spotted
hyenas are serious hunters. These predators are the largest members of the
hyena family and live in sub-Saharan Africa on
savannahs and open woodlands.

“More than 30 years have passed since hyenas have been part of
the Bronx Zoo,” said Jim Breheny, Director of the Bronx Zoo and Senior
Vice President of WCS Living Institutions. “We are pleased to have
hyena back at the zoo so that our visitors can get a glimpse
of these amazing creatures and learn more about their importance
to the ecosystem.”

While spotted hyena are not considered endangered, their habitat
is under increased pressure from human incursion. There has
been a great decrease in the hyena population of western Africa.
The Wildlife Conservation Society has a strong presence in Africa, including Southern Sudan where hyenas roam in the wild.

WCS has signed agreements with the Government of Southern Sudan to
launch a long-term conservation strategy that will safeguard the region’s
wildlife and wild lands, which rank among the richest in Africa. 
WCS is working with government agencies and other partners to implement
community-based strategies and sound policies for managing wildlife and
protected areas across Southern Sudan.
								
						
				
		
		






















		
				
						
						
				
		
		

Contact:
Mary Dixon – 718.220.3711/ mdixon@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718.220.5189 / sfairchild@wcs.org


		
				
						
								
								
						
				

The Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays through November 2, 2009. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx
  River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5
or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service
(from Manhattan
that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.





The Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.     







Special Note to the Media:
If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can
make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please
direct them to www.wcs.org/donation

WCS in the Field

To learn more about WCS conservation efforts in Africa and around the world, visit www.wcs.org