FB-the-zoo-premiere-announcement-0312-2020




 FB-the-zoo-premiere-announcement-0312-2020



 FB-the-zoo-premiere-announcement-0312-2020



					
					
						Animal Planet’s THE ZOO takes audiences behind the scenes at the world-famous Bronx Zoo for
 a fourth season to share remarkable stories that shine a light on amazing animals, the expertise of
 staff, and their unique relationships with the animals in their care. The series explains the day-to-day
 activities at the Bronx Zoo and its sister parks as it focuses on the importance of zoos and
 aquariums to a wide range of global wildlife conservation efforts. The all-new season of THE
 ZOO premieres Saturday, Apr. 4 at 9PM ET/PT. Last season, THE ZOO introduced viewers to extraordinary and diverse wildlife including
 Peaches the adorable warthog and Mott Mott the marmot who both learned the ropes to becoming
 animal ambassadors; Barbara Gordon, the Rodrigues fruit bat pup who was reintroduced to her
 colony in “Jungle World”; and Bouba the Andean bear who was reunited with his loyal mate,
 Nicole. Animal Planet audiences also had an up-close look at the building and opening of the
 Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit at the New York Aquarium that included the moving of a group of
 large sand tiger sharks to their new habitat. In this all-new season of THE ZOO, zoo staffers will experience many rare moments and “firsts”,
 including the birth of two adorable Red Panda cubs; the hatching of Roti Island snake-necked
 turtles, a functionally extinct species; and the arrival of Bala, the fourth cub of the beloved snow
 leopard, K2. Audiences will see the keepers devise an ingenious enrichment item for an anteater named Velcro,
 which will keep him enriched while showcasing his extraordinary tongue to the public and perform
 the first known allergy test on a rhinoceros named Penny after she develops some skin sensitivities.
 Animal Planet viewers will also meet an abundance of unforgettable animals including tigers,
 giraffes, puffins and flamingo chicks, as well as witnessing animal rescues and rehabilitations, and
 animals being released into the wild. U.S audiences can view new episodes each week, in addition to streaming all previous seasons
 of THE ZOO in their entirety, on the Animal Planet GO app. Viewers can join the conversation
 on social media by using the hashtag #InsideTheZoo and follow Animal Planet
 on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter for the latest updates. Audiences can also enjoy more
 episodes of the original mid-form series, THE ZOO: FROM THE INSIDE, which goes behind
 the scenes for exclusive looks at operations zoo guests never see. The web series will be available
 to fans on Animal Planet GO. THE ZOO is produced for Animal Planet by Left/Right and Copper Pot Pictures. Banks Tarver,
 Ken Druckerman, Anneka Jones and Michael LaHaie are the executive producers; Jessie Findlay
 is co-executive producer for Left/Right. David LaMattina and Chad Walker are the executive
 producers for Copper Pot Pictures. For Animal Planet, Lisa Lucas is executive producer and
 Patrick Keegan is supervising producer. About Animal Planet
 Animal Planet, one of Discovery, Inc.’s great global brands, is dedicated to creating high quality
 content with global appeal delivering on its mission to keep the childhood joy and wonder of
 animals alive by bringing people up close in every way. Available to 360 million homes in more
 than 205 countries and territories, Animal Planet combines content that explores the undeniable
 bonds forged between animals and humans, optimized across all screens around the world. In the
 U.S., Animal Planet audiences can enjoy their favorite programming anytime, anywhere through
 the Animal Planet Go app which features live and on-demand access. For more information, please
 visit www.animalplanet.com. About Discovery
 Discovery, Inc. (Nasdaq: DISCA, DISCB, DISCK) is a global leader in real life entertainment,
 serving a passionate audience of superfans around the world with content that inspires, informs
 and entertains. Discovery delivers over 8,000 hours of original programming each year and has
 category leadership across deeply loved content genres around the world. Available in 220
 countries and territories and nearly 50 languages, Discovery is a platform innovator, reaching
 viewers on all screens, including TV Everywhere products such as the GO portfolio of apps; direct to consumer streaming services such as Eurosport Player and MotorTrend OnDemand; digitalfirst
 and social content from Group Nine Media; a landmark natural history and factual content
 partnership with the BBC; and a strategic alliance with PGA TOUR to create the international
 home of golf. Discovery’s portfolio of premium brands includes Discovery Channel, HGTV, Food
 Network, TLC, Investigation Discovery, Travel Channel, MotorTrend, Animal Planet, and Science
 Channel, as well as OWN: Oprah Winfrey Network in the U.S., Discovery Kids in Latin America,
 and Eurosport, the leading provider of locally relevant, premium sports and Home of the Olympic
 Games across Europe. For more information, please visit corporate.discovery.com and follow
 @DiscoveryIncTV across social platforms.