NEW YORK
						
						
								 – July 14, 2010 – 
						The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo today announced it has received a gift of $5 million from Margaretta Taylor, a New York City philanthropist and supporter of conservation. 

“It is a pleasure to support such a fabulous cultural institution,” said Mrs. Taylor. “I hope that my gift will ensure that WCS’s Bronx Zoo remains a cultural icon for New York City and the world for years to come.” 

 

Dr. Steven E. Sanderson, WCS President and CEO, said, “We are honored and grateful for Mrs. Taylor’s support. This gift further ensures that we continue to connect millions of visitors to the power of wild nature.” 

 

Jim Breheny, WCS Senior Vice President of Living Institutions and Director of the Bronx Zoo, added, “Mrs. Taylor’s gift to the zoo is an inspiration and will help us continue our nearly 111-year tradition of excellence at the Bronx Zoo.”

 

As a special gesture of gratitude for her extraordinary generosity, The Wildlife Conservation Society is presenting Mrs. Taylor with a gift of her own –  a California sea lion pup born last month at the Bronx Zoo will be named “Margaretta” in her honor.  Visitors can see the new sea lion baby in the famous sea lion pool on the zoo’s Astor Court. 
 

Contact:     

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

Stephen Sautner – 718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society Bronx Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and will be closed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King Day.  Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. WCS’s Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.