WCS Commends Efforts of Mayor Bloomberg, Council
Speaker Quinn, Finance Committee Chair Recchia and Cultural Affairs Committee
Chair Van BramerWCS Delivers Petitions from Over 57,000 New Yorkers to
City Hall 











Bronx,
New York – July 1, 2010 – The following statement was issued by John Calvelli,
Executive Vice President of Public Affairs at the Wildlife Conservation
Society:



Today, we commend our municipal leadership for supporting
New York City’s Cultural Institutions Group in the city’s FY 2011 budget. At a
time when New York is suffering great economic hardship, all of our civic
institutions are being asked to do more with less. We are no different and that
is appropriate. In these circumstances, we wish to express our great
appreciation to Mayor Bloomberg, City Council Speaker Christine Quinn and the
New York City Council for recognizing that a healthy cultural industry is
central to the identity of our city as a premiere tourist destination and to
the health and stability of our local economy.New York City merchants rely on business from our city’s
cultural institutions, which provide tens of thousands of jobs. The approved
CIG budget will enable cultural organizations to continue to provide this
fiscal stimulus. The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and New York
Aquarium alone contribute nearly $290 million to the New York City economy. These
facilities engage and educate more than 2.8 million visitors annually, bringing
business to merchants in economically struggling
neighborhoods and jobs to families in the Bronx and Brooklyn.



The restored funding for the Bronx
Zoo and New York Aquarium will help the WCS to continue to make the Bronx Zoo
and New York Aquarium available to New York City school children and community
groups that might otherwise be unable to attend. As an indication of the depth
of support for our parks and programs, the Wildlife Conservation Society
delivered to City Hall petitions from over 57,000 New Yorkers this spring
calling for sustained support. Another 106 local businesses and community
organizations likewise expressed their strong support.



We are appreciative that so many
New Yorkers sent messages to help the City understand the importance of
cultural organizations in our lives. We also wish to express thanks to City
Council Finance Committee Chairman Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. and City Council
Cultural Affairs Committee Chairman Jimmy Van Bramer, along with Deputy Mayor
Patti Harris and Cultural Affairs Commissioner Kate Levin, for their unswerving
support for our city’s cultural institutions. 




Contact:  
Mary Dixon: (1-347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org)
Max Pulsinelli:
(1-718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org)
Steve Fairchild:
(1-718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org)

            

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.