View video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3ELia_4DEk 


Brooklyn, N.Y. – July
29, 2011 – Tazo, a one-year-old northern sea otter rescued last year
following a storm that separated him from his mother in Alaska, received ice
treats made from krill and capelin fish puree to celebrate the anniversary of
his arrival at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium. 





Tazo was only about three weeks old when he was found
stranded in Alaska. After being given initial care at the Alaska Sea Life
Center, Tazo made his permanent move to WCS’s New York Aquarium last July, and
joined Jacob, the Aquarium’s other sea otter, on exhibit this June. 


Although sea otters, sea lions and all the animals at the
aquarium have plenty to eat and lots of toys to play with, other sea life
around the world suffers the effects of climate change and other environmental
plagues. To help combat this issue, WCS is hosting the first-ever Run for the
Wild in Brooklyn on Sunday, Oct. 9, 2011 to benefit sea turtles and other sea
life. To register for the run or to get more information, visit wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium.

Photo Credit:  Julie Larsen Maher © WCS
Video Credit: Luke Groskin © WCS



Contact:
Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli:  718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

 

The New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary
seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and
$11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are
admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The
Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and
other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at
http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support
for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a
beloved part of the City of New York.





The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth. 


Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.