‘Environmental Design and Construction’ Magazine Recognizes the 40,000-Square-Foot Facility’s State-of-the-Art “Green” Design

		

		
 Bronx, N.Y., July 26, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society is pleased to announce that the Center for Global Conservation, located at WCS’s Bronx Zoo, is the 2010 winner of Environmental Design & Construction’s (ED+C) Excellence in Design Award in the Institutional Category. 

 

WCS’s Center for Global Conservation, which was completed in 2009, won the award for demonstrating outstanding sustainable design techniques. It was constructed with many state-of-the-art green technologies including an east-west orientation that takes full advantage of natural lighting and a microturbine plant that generates electricity for heating needs. Because of this design and construction, the building’s energy consumption is approximately 48 percent less than a traditionally powered building of similar size. 

 

Designed by FXFOWLE Architects, a New York City-based architectural, interior design, planning and urban design firm, the Center for Global Conservation is a 40,000-square-foot “green” facility that serves as WCS’s command center for its conservation work world-wide. The building’s design elements represent WCS’s commitment to sustainable practices by means of environmentally sound architecture and operations. 

 

“We are absolutely honored that our Center for Global Conservation at the Bronx Zoo has won this prestigious award,” said Dr. Steven E. Sanderson, President and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation Society. “I am very proud that WCS has been recognized for its efforts in making this building as ‘green’ and sustainable as possible.”

 

Throughout its short one-year history, the Center for Global Conservation has received other design accolades. It holds the Gold Level of LEED Certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, and was recognized by the Public Design Commission of the City of New York with its Design Award.
		
		Contact:     

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
		 


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.


		



		
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation