New 4-D attraction to open on WCS Bronx Zoo’s Giraffe Lawn on Memorial Day Weekend: Friday, May 28, 2010


		
 

Bronx, NY – Friday, May 21, 2010 – Beginning Friday, May 28 – Memorial Day weekend – the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo will present Dora & Diego’s 4-D Adventure, a new family friendly theatrical film and attraction based on Nickelodeon’s hit animated preschool series Dora the Explorer and Go, Diego, Go!.  For the first time ever, families can see these popular characters animated in digital 3-D, with special effects that make the story burst off the screen into a 4-D experience.  To kick off the new attraction, Dora and Diego costumed characters will make special appearances on Saturday, May 29 and Sunday, May 30 from 12 to 4pm as part of the ongoing line-up of live family entertainment as WCS’s Bronx Zoo continues Animal Tales Extravaganza. 

 

In Dora & Diego’s 4-D Adventure, visitors will join Dora, Diego, and Boots as they travel from the tropical rainforest to the icy Arctic in a high-speed chase to protect the world’s animals from Swiper’s newest invention—a robot butterfly.  The 4-D theater at WCS’s Bronx Zoo combines the visual drama of a 3-D film with a variety of sensory effects that are built into the seats and  theater environment, bringing on-screen images to life with added effects such as water mist, a neck air blast, snow, bubbles, leg ticklers, scents, enhanced floor lighting, and seat vibrations. 

 

The 4-D Theater is included in the price of Total Experience Tickets for $27 for adults; $21 for children; and $23 for seniors. Single tickets are also available for $5 per person or are included in the attractions benefits of a WCS Membership.

 

Dora & Diego’s 4-D Adventure was produced by SimEx-Iwerks and Super 78. SimEx-Iwerks is the leading innovator of immersive 3-D and 4-D attractions and the exclusive distributor of the industry’s best selling film titles. The company supports over 150 family-friendly attractions in more than 30 countries and their attractions entertain and educate over 100 million people every year.

 

Since its launch on Aug. 14, 2000, Dora the Explorer has emerged as a global phenomenon and ranks among the top-rated shows in major television markets worldwide. The show is seen in more than 151 markets around the world and is translated in more than 30 languages.  

 

Nickelodeon, now in its 31st year, is the number-one entertainment brand for kids. It has built a diverse, global business by putting kids first in everything it does. The company includes television programming and production in the United States and around the world, plus consumer products, online, recreation, books, and feature films. Nickelodeon's U.S. television network is seen in more than 100 million households and has been the number-one-rated basic cable network for 16 consecutive years. For more information or artwork, visit www.nickpress.com. Nickelodeon and all related titles, characters and logos are trademarks of Viacom Inc. 

		
				Contact: 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 



 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
undefined