New
Building Awarded Gold Level LEED Certification*CGC
Completes Development of Science Campus at WCS’s Bronx Zoo

 

BRONX, NEW YORK (September 14, 2009)–
The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) will formally open
the WCS Center for Global Conservation at the Bronx Zoo on Monday, October 5th
at 10:00 AM.  







The morning’s events will include a tour of the new
state-of-the-art facility, which has been awarded the Gold level LEED
certification.

The WCS Center for Global Conservation was designed by FXFOWLE
Architects.

 













WHO:         Dr. Steven E. Sanderson, WCS President and CEO
                    U.S.
Congressman José E. Serrano     
                    Florence A. Davis, President of The Starr Foundation
                    John F.
Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President, Public Affairs          
                    City
Officials, TBA

WHAT: 
     Public Opening of the WCS Center for Global Conservation







WHEN: 
    Monday, October 5th, 2009 at 10:00 AM

MEDIA:     Members of the
media wishing to attend should arrive no later than 9:30 AM.  
                    The facility
will be open for set-up at 9:00 AM. 









WHERE:  
Center for Global Conservation – Marsh Meadow
                    2300
Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460

Media
should enter at Rainey Gate off Fordham Road



 
RAIN PLAN:  All takes place in 2nd
floor conference room with tour to follow. 

 
CONTACT: 
Maggie Seidel – 718-220-5182; mseidel@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
Steve Sautner – 718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org









The Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.

Founded over 30 years ago, FXFOWLE
Architects is an architectural, interior design, planning, and urban
design firm with offices in New York, Washington, D.C., and Dubai. The firm’s diverse portfolio of
projects includes work of all types and scales across the globe, and is based
on a core commitment to enrich the built environment by creating projects with
social, environmental, and aesthetic integrity.

 







Directions to the Bronx
Zoo's Rainey Gate

























From Manhattan:

Take the Triborough or Willis
 Avenue Bridge
to the Bruckner Expressway East.

Take the Bronx River
  Parkway North to Exit 7W (Fordham Rd.)

Take the first ramp on your right (in front of the New York Botanical Garden).

Turn left at the light (on the corner by Fordham University)
and left again back onto Fordham Rd.

Turn right at the blinking light into Rainey Gate. This is a big,
ornate gate with animals on it.

At the far end of the lot, please use the stairs on your right.
Administration West is the first building on the right at the top of the
stairs. Reception is at the far end
of the building, past some bird cages. 

 

*The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Rating System was
designed by the U.S. Green Building Council to encourage and facilitate the
development of more sustainable buildings.  Only the platinum rating is
higher.