What can crawl like a caterpillar, do a backbend like a gymnast, bark on cue, and dive down to 600 feet in the ocean? Find out at the Wildlife Conservation Society New York Aquarium’s Aquatheater. This Valentine’s Day and all winter long, catch a training demonstration starring our outgoing and talented California sea lions. Each performance features cool facts about sea lions and their role in the web of life, in addition to music, humor, and lots of mischief.

 

“Our pinnipeds (the scientific term for sea lions, seals, and walruses) also make great teachers,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, Aquarium Director. “You’ll learn how to make seafood choices that are healthy for the planet, why predators like the great white shark are essential to maintaining a balanced food chain, and how the WCS is helping to save threatened marine life and habitats around the globe.”

 

Aquatheater demonstrations take place two times daily, with winter shows occurring at 11:30 am and 3:00 pm.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society works around the world to save marine mammals.  In Argentina, WCS has helped establish marine reserves to protect breeding colonies of southern elephant seals, South American sea lions and South American fur seals. 

 

Photo by: J.L. Maher © WCS
 



Contact:

Fran Hackett, fhackett@wcs.org, 718-265-3428



The New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our website: www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.