Whale shark expert Dr. Rachel Graham presented with award
										
										
												by HRH Princess Anne
										
								
								
										
												One of World’s Most Prestigious Conservation Awards
										
								
						
				
				

				

				

				   

NEW YORK (May 13, 2011) – The 
Wildlife Conservation Society is pleased to announce that WCS shark 
conservationist, Rachel Graham, is this year’s winner of one of the 
world’s most prestigious prizes for grassroots nature conservation: the 
Whitley Gold Award.
Graham, Director of the Wildlife 
Conservation Society’s Gulf and Caribbean Sharks and Rays Program and a 
member of the IUCN Shark Specialist Group, received her prize from HRH 
The Princess Royal (Princess Anne) at the Royal Geographical Society, 
London, during a ceremony hosted by The Whitley Fund for Nature (WFN) – 
the UK-based charity behind the international award.
To accompany the title and her Whitley 
Gold Award 2011 trophy, Graham wins project funding along with 
membership in the influential network of past Whitley Award winners, and
 professional development training.
“Belize’s marine life has a tireless 
champion in Rachel Graham” said Steven Sanderson, WCS President and CEO.
 “Her 20 years of conservation work is turning the tide for sharks and 
drawing needed attention to protect these magnificent marine predators.”
John Robinson, WCS Executive Vice 
President for Conservation and Science, said, “Rachel is a huge asset to
 WCS’s conservation efforts to protect marine ecosystems around the 
world. Her work benefits one of the most pristine marine regions in the 
Western Hemisphere.”
The award recognizes Graham’s work to put 
in place a national action plan for sharks and to encourage more local 
people to protect ocean wildlife and coastal biodiversity, safeguarding 
livelihoods and Belize’s economically-important tourism industry.
Further, it recognizes Graham’s efforts to
 reverse the rapid decline of sharks in Belizean waters, caused mainly 
by over-fishing by foreign fishing fleets supplying white fish meat to 
Latin America and shark fins to Asia.
The Whitley Awards is an annual 
competition first held in 1994. In the 18 years since the awards began, 
they have given grants worth more than £6m (approximately $9.7 million) 
to support the work of inspirational conservation leaders in 70 
countries and built a network of more than 120 Whitley alumni.
Contact:
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
The Wildlife Conservation Society
 saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, 
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest
 system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  
Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people
 imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is 
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of 
life on Earth. 
Special 
Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
 a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save 
wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.