Free admission for soldiers;  Discounts for family members





Bronx, N.Y. – June 15, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society is now offering a new discount* to
members of the United States Armed Forces – free admission to WCS’s Bronx Zoo
and New York Aquarium.



“It is important to remember those who have served our
nation,” said John Calvelli, Wildlife Conservation Society’s Executive Vice
President of Public Affairs. “WCS hopes that this new program will bring
enjoyment to the soldiers and their families who have made – and continue to
make – sacrifices for us all.  This is a small gesture to say ‘thank
you.’” 



The discount applies to any active duty or reserve members
of the U.S. Military when they present a valid military ID at the admissions
gate. The discount includes a free Total Experience Ticket or General Admission
ticket for the active or reserve member of the U.S. Military and a 50 percent
discount for up to three family members included on the same admissions
transaction.



For more information on the new military discount at WCS’s
Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium, please visit www.bronxzoo.com or www.nyaquarium.com. 




Military discounts are not applicable on Wednesdays at the Bronx Zoo or on
Fridays after 3:00pm at the New York Aquarium as admission by pay-what-you-wish
donation is offered to all guests during these timesMilitary discounts are only available for on-site purchases, not for online purchases.









Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



Wildlife Conservation
Society’s New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on
public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH
or visit our website at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the
New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved
part of the City of New York.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.