WCS’s New York Aquarium Partners with Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz on Holiday Toy Drive



Aquarium partners with the Food Bank For New York
City on food drive this season





Brooklyn, N.Y., Dec. 6, 2010 – Animals at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium
always have food to eat and toys to play with, but many New Yorkers aren’t as
fortunate. 



The New York Aquarium is taking part in Brooklyn Borough
President Marty Markowitz’s annual toy drive as well as the Food Bank For New
York City’s food drive. Both of these programs provide families in need with
food throughout winter and toys for their children during the holidays. 



“We are very excited to collaborate with Borough President
Marty Markowitz and the Food Bank For New York City to help a community that
has been such a strong supporter to the Wildlife Conservation Society over the
years,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs.
“We’re very happy to help New York City families have an enjoyable holiday
season.” 



The aquarium will collect toys for underprivileged children
until December 31, 2010. Visitors can bring their new, unwrapped toys to the
aquarium’s lobby for distribution by the Borough
President’s office.  



“As someone who grew up in poverty, I know the importance of
giving, not only during the holiday season but year-round,” said Brooklyn
Borough President Marty Markowitz. Bravo to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s
New York Aquarium and the Food Bank for New York City for helping us provide
toys and food to thousands of Brooklynites. Helping those in need—now that’s
what I call the Brooklyn attitude!”



The aquarium will also partner with the Food Bank For New
York City to collect food for underprivileged New Yorkers. There are more than
1.4 million New Yorkers relying on emergency food. The Food Bank For New York
City solicits, warehouses and distributes food to more than 1,000 food
pantries, soup kitchens, and other community-based programs around the five
boroughs. Starting November 22 through December 31, visitors can bring unopened
packages of food in plastic containers (not glass) to the aquarium’s lobby for
distribution by the Food Bank For New York City.  



“At a time when one in five New York City residents is
relying on the Food Bank's programs and services, including one in five
children, we are very grateful to the Wildlife Conservation Society for their
support. The holidays can be an especially daunting time for families who are
struggling to put food on the table. With 93 percent of soup kitchen and food
pantries experiencing an increase in first-time visitors, this has been very
challenging - for the Food Bank and for the families we serve. This
wonderful food drive will certainly help us bring more families together during
the holiday season,” said Lucy Cabrera, Ph.D., President and CEO of the Food
Bank For New York City.



As a thank you to the public for every
new, unwrapped toy or grocery bag filled with 10 or more packaged food items, WCS
will provide one free general admission ticket—limit 4 per family, valid
1/01/2011 through 6/30/2011.** The Wildlife Conservation Society’s
Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, and Queens Zoo are also participating in
the food and toy drives.  Donations
can be dropped off at the park entrance (no admission necessary). 



** Disclaimer: ONE general admission ticket to the
Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy OR for
every 10 food items at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo or
Queens Zoo.  ONE general admission ticket to the New York Aquarium will be
provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy OR for every 10 food items at
the New York Aquarium.  Limit of four tickets per family, valid 01/ 01/11
through 06/30/11. Food items must be canned, packaged and/or nonperishable
foods –perishable items are not permitted. All WCS decisions final. Promotion
available from 11/22/10 –12/31/10. May not be combined with any other offer.













Contact:
Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718- 220- 5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 


The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide.  We do so through
science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.



Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public
events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit
our web site at www.nyaquarium.com.
Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of
New York.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to:
www.wcs.org/donation