WCS Run for the Wild: World  allows wildlife supporters to participate from anywhere   Annual 5k run/walk at WCS’s Bronx Zoo is dedicated to saving elephants from the worst poaching crisis in two decades   Visit www.crowdrise.com/WCSRunfortheWild from now through the end of April to help WCS save elephants   Bronx, N.Y. – March 7, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society is celebrating the fifth anniversary of the WCS Run for the Wild – this year dedicated to elephants – by expanding the annual 5k run/walk at the Bronx Zoo to encourage participation from around the world.   The new WCS Run for the Wild: World engages wildlife enthusiasts from around the globe and allows them to make tracks for elephants from wherever they are. “Virtual” participants can run on their own, start their own team, or create their own fundraiser to contribute to WCS’s work to save this iconic species. They can also support teams or runners at the WCS Run for the Wild event in the Bronx Zoo.    “The addition of WCS Run for the Wild: World allows wildlife supporters from around the globe to do their part to save wildlife – including areas that are on the front lines in the fight to save elephants,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We anticipate another successful event in New York and welcome the participation and support from around the world.”   Each year, WCS dedicates the WCS Run for the Wild to a different animal species in need of conservation. The decision to dedicate this year’s event to elephants was made out of necessity. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service says that the illegal wildlife trade is now a multi-billion dollar industry that threatens thousands of species around the world. Elephants have been particularly hard hit with 2011 considered the worst year since 1989 for the illegal poaching of elephants for their ivory.    WCS works to stop the killing by collaborating with partners to prevent criminals from slaughtering elephants in Africa's worst killing fields. WCS recruits, trains, and supports ecoguard patrols, focusing their efforts through local intelligence networks and aerial surveillance, and ensuring they get the backup they need from the police, army, and courts.   To stop trafficking, WCS works with governments to detect smuggled ivory at key ports and airports at different points in the trade chain in Africa and East Asia. Techniques are varied and include sniffer dogs to detect ivory, and working with judiciaries and other agencies to increase the number of cases taken to court and rates of successful prosecutions. On both the political and technical sides, WCS aims to ensure that future large ivory shipments are sampled for their DNA, to allow the point of origin of the ivory to be determined, thereby facilitating increased protection of those populations.   The fifth annual 5k-run/walk takes place on Saturday, April 27, 2013 at the Bronx Zoo and is dedicated to saving elephants, their habitat, and other wildlife. Since its inception in 2009, more than 23,000 people have participated and $2.6M has been raised through donations, registration, and sponsorship. Those who cannot be in New York for the event at the zoo can participate in the WCS Run for the Wild: World between now and the end of April. Visit www.crowdrise.com/WCSRunfortheWild.   WCS Run for the Wild is made possible by these generous sponsors:   Presenting Sponsors: Amarula Cream Liqueur; Con Edison   Featured Sponsors: Benjamin Moore Paints; Montefiore   Supporting Sponsors: Hard Rock Cafe; Monroe College; UBS   Media Partner: ABC7; Daily News; Z-100   Promotional Partners: Aviator Sports and Events Center; Brooklyn Cyclones; JackRabbit Sports; The Belmont Business Improvement District   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.    														Contact: 												
								Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org		Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org