Young scientists, Bowie and Zoey, learn about
Galapagos tortoises and their historyReaders can make their own field journalsVisit www.bronxzoo.com/bowieandzoey 





New York, NY – Dec. 8, 2010 –  The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo has teamed up with award-winning children’s book author
Phyllis Shalant to present Bowie and Zoey’s Fantastic, Fun-Filled Field
Journal: Galapagos Tortoise, an interactive online reading experience
for kids. 


The children’s book gives readers a chance
to learn all about the famous Galapagos tortoises through photos,
illustrations, and videos while they discover fun facts and get tips on how to
create their own field journal. At the end of the book, readers can take a quiz
to recap what they learned about the tortoises.



The story is told through the eyes of Bowie and Zoey, a
young pair of budding field scientists, who take readers behind the scenes at
the Bronx Zoo’s World of Reptiles, where the young tortoises live. Readers will
also get to know the tortoises’ ancestors from Isabella Island.


Galapagos tortoises were nearly extinct in 1928 when WCS
conservationists set up a breeding program on the Galapagos Islands to help
recover the population. The little ones featured in Bowie and Zoey’s
Fantastic, Fun-Filled Field Journal are the
grandchildren of the very tortoises saved by WCS field scientists. 



Phyllis Shalant is the author of many books for young
readers. Her previous works include Bartleby of the Mighty Mississippi; Bartleby of the Big, Bad Bayou; and The Great Cape Rescue – the first in the Society of Super Secret Heroes
series.



To read the book, and create a journal, go to: www.bronxzoo.com/bowieandzoey. 

Contact:  





Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182;
mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Sophie Bass –
718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth. 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.