The First WCS Run for the Wild™ 5K and Family Fun Run/Walk at WCS New York Aquarium
				
				David Bosch, Sunnyside, N.Y. – First man to cross the finish line
				
						Fiona Bayly, New York, N.Y. – First woman to cross the finish line
				
				NYC Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. and NYS Assembly Member Alec Brook-Krasny help kick off the event
		
		
		
		
				Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 9, 2011 – More than 2,000 turtle supporters ran, jogged, and walked across the Coney Island Boardwalk at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s first Run for the Wild in Brooklyn – a 5K event to raise money to save sea turtles, their habitats, and other wildlife. 
 
 At the head of the pack was this year’s winner, David Bosch from Sunnyside, N.Y., who crossed the finish line with a time of 17:47. The top three men and top three women finishers were:
 
 Women:
 Fiona Bayly from New York, N.Y. – 18:26
 Lauren Carter from Forest Hills, N.Y. – 19:11
 Cristina Breslin, Jersey City, N.J. – 21:09
 
 Men:
 David Bosch from Sunnyside, N.Y. – 17:47
 Ray Cuadrado from Florham, N.Y. - 18:42
 Chris Ellis from Yonkers, N.Y. – 18:57
 
 Anyone who did not participate in the run can still contribute to WCS. Donations can be made online at www.runforthewild.org <http://www.runforthewild.org/> . 
 
 “It’s inspiring to see so many people running, jogging, and walking along the Coney Island boardwalk to help save animals that live in the ocean just a few hundred yards away,” said John F. Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We thank everyone who made this first-ever WCS Run for the Wild in Brooklyn a tremendous success. There was a lot of terrific turtle support here today.” 
 
 The race began with a beautiful rendition of the National Anthem sung by Staten Island rocker Therina Bella. Therina’s music can be heard at www.therinabella.net <http://www.therinabella.net/> . 
 
 The race also began with opening remarks from City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr., and Assembly Member Alec Brook-Krasny. 
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society works around the globe to save wildlife and wild places. Many turtle species are in serious trouble. Though they have survived for about 220 million years and once roamed the Earth with the dinosaurs, half of all turtle and tortoise species are now threatened with extinction. All proceeds from the WCS Run for the Wild will go to WCS conservation efforts to combat threats that plague this animal, including habitat loss and poaching. 
 
 Participants were encouraged to seek donations and received Turtle Perks for their efforts. For $35 in donations, participants earned a WCS Run for the Wild water bottle. Those who raised $100 will get the water bottle plus a turtle plush. $250 will earn fundraisers the water bottle, turtle plush, and a WCS Run for the Wild hat. Those who raise $500 or more earn all of those prizes plus a sea lion kiss at the New York Aquarium. For official results and details, visit wcsrunforthewild.org.
 
 The first 25 participants that raised $500 received a behind-the-scenes tour of the New York Aquarium and breakfast with the aquarium director for two following the run. 
 
 Upon finishing the run, all participants were encouraged to visit sea turtles and other aquatic creatures at the New York Aquarium. Here, they enjoyed many fascinating exhibits including the new Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef, home to aquatic animals native to Belize, the Pacific Ocean’s Coral Triangle, Africa’s Great Lakes and Brazil’s Flooded Forest. 
 
 WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors: 
 Featured Sponsor: Aquafina
 Supporting Sponsors: Anvil, CUNY, School of Professional Studies, Delta Air Lines, Fairway, Hard Rock Cafe, Luna Park and Stevia In The Raw
 Media Partner: ABC 7 and The Daily News
 Promotional Partners: Aviator Sports and Events Center; JackRabbit Sports
		

		

		Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
 Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
 Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.