Panel of experts address key issues at November 17th event to be held 
						at California Academy of Sciences

				
		
		
 


		

		
 

SAN FRANCISCO (October 28, 2010) –Among the greatest threats to wildlife in the 21st century are that of impeded migrations and fragmented habitats, according to Wildlife Conservation Society scientists speaking at  Saving the Last of the Wild: North American Corridors—an event being held at the California Academy of Sciences. The event is free to the public and will take place on November 17th from 6:00-8:00 PM.



Thousands of species rely on vast, continuous expanses of land in Western North America for their survival. But expanding human development leading to the construction of fences, roadways, and residential areas, is rapidly altering habitat, fragmenting critical landscapes and threatening iconic native wildlife such as elk and pronghorn.



A distinguished guest panel of speakers including WCS Scientists Keith Aune, Joel Berger, and Robert Inman will discuss what is being done to protect connectivity in North America and the opportunities and challenges associated with corridor conservation.



The panel will focus on the WCS’s Corridor Conservation Initiative—an effort to conserve, restore, and to protect corridors and ensure the long-term survival of North American wildlife.



Members of the general public can RSVP for this event at www.wcs.org/patronseventCA. For more information, please call Regina Bergen of the Wildlife Conservation Society at 718-741-1613 or email rbergen@wcs.org



The California Academy of Sciences is located at 55 Music Concourse Drive, Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.

 

Contact:

 Scott Smith: (1-718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org)

Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)

                                           



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

		
		

		
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation