The WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) China program received a prestigious Tech Award for its China Wildlife Guardian App at the 15th annual gala of The Tech Awards on Thursday, Nov. 12, 2015, at the San Jose McEnery Convention Center. The event marks the first time in the event’s history that a Chinese team has been selected laureate of the award.    The Tech Awards — presented by Applied Materials—announced a total of 10 international laureates who are using technology to benefit humanity.    The China Wildlife Guardian App was one of two winners of the Intel Environment Award Category.  The App (see VIDEO here)is used to fight the illegal wildlife trade by providing law enforcement officers with a tool to quickly identify the legal status of commonly traded species.   WCS Scientist and attendee to the event Lishu Li said, “It is a fantastic honor to receive this award alongside other very impressive and noble projects. Of course our greatest reward is that people are using the App successfully to help fight wildlife smuggling and protecting biodiversity.”   The Tech Awards laureates alumni base now numbers 287 inspiring individual and group organizations, many of which have gone on to achieve global success. Since its inception in 2000, the program has awarded laureates $4.85 million in unrestricted cash prizes to help further their causes.    “We are very grateful to Intel and the Tech Museum for its recognition of the China Wildlife Guardian App and congratulate the WCS team that was involved in its creation,” said WCS Asia Program Director Aili Kang.  We will continue to encourage use of the App as we have already seen it paying dividends for wildlife.”   The 2015 laureates are being honored in five categories: the Intel Environment Award, the Microsoft Education Award, the Katherine M. Swanson Young Innovator Award, the Sobrato Organization Economic Development Award, and the Sutter Health Award. Winners receive cash prizes totaling $500,000 the night of the gala, with each taking home $50,000.   The China Wildlife Guardian App was developed in partnership with CITES Management Authority of China, the Anti-Smuggling Bureau at national and provincial levels in Guangdong, and colleagues from the forestry police system. This work was made possible through the support of the blue moon fund; Liz Claiborne and Art Ortenberg Foundation; and Ocean Park Conservation Foundation, Hong Kong.