WCS
Applauds Leadership of Congresswoman Madeleine Bordallo
and
Calls for Port of Entry Monitoring in Global
Wildlife Conservation,
				
				 
				
						Coordination, and Enhancement Act
				
		
		


		


		
				
						WASHINGTON, D.C. (JULY 28, 2009)
				 The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Executive Vice President of Public
Affairs John Calvelli submitted testimony today applauding the leadership of
Subcommittee Chairwoman Madeleine Bordallo (D-GU) for championing the Global
Wildlife Conservation, Coordination,
and Enhancement Act’s (H.R. 3086) broad approach to dealing with
conservation challenges that include habitat loss, illegal wildlife trade,
climate change and emerging wildlife diseases.  
		


		


		
				While the bill offers a far-reaching
array of conservation measures, Calvelli added that it can be strengthened by
provisions for the monitoring of illegal wildlife trade at ports of entry in
the United States.
		
		


		


		
				 “Congress is familiar with the
threats posed by the illegal wildlife trade to endangered species
–unfortunately this is only part of the story,” said Calvelli in
his statement submitted to the House Natural Resources Subcommittee on Insular
Affairs, Oceans and Wildlife. “Threats that trade poses to humans such as
the possibility for spreading disease, or to local ecosystems in the form of
invasive species, must also be considered. We urge Congress to include
provisions that would empower the Department of Interior to partner with
non-governmental organizations in creating regional pilot projects in the U.S. for monitoring
wildlife and wildlife products in large ports of entry. By doing so, the Global
Wildlife Conservation, Coordination,
and Enhancement Act will offer a more comprehensive approach to preventing the
illegal wildlife trade and to mitigating its impacts.”
		
		


		
				
						Contact:  
				
						

						Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
Scott Smith:
(1-718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org)
				
				
						
						
				
		
		


		


		




		
				
						
								The Wildlife Conservation Society
				
				 saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation