The Arakan forest turtle is discovered in dense bamboo forest in Myanmar
						
				
						
								Species previously known only by museum and captive specimens
						
				
		
		 
		
				 
		
		 
		
				
						 NEW YORK (September 3, 2009)
				 – Known only by museum specimens and a few captive individuals, one of the world’s rarest turtle species – the Arakan forest turtle – has been observed for the first time in the wild by scientists according to a new report by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS).
		 
		
				 The WCS team discovered five of the critically endangered turtles in a wildlife sanctuary in Myanmar (Burma) in Southeast Asia. The sanctuary, originally established to protect elephants, contains thick stands of impenetrable bamboo forests and is rarely visited by people according to the report.
		
		 
		
				 The report documenting the turtles’ discovery was prepared by Dr. Steven Platt of Sul Ross State University, Alpine, Texas and Khin Myo Myo of WCS.
		
		 
		
				 The adult turtles measure less than a foot in length; its shell is light brown with some black mottling. The species was believed extinct until 1994, when conservationists found a few specimens in a food market in China. Before then, the last know record of the species was of a single animal collected by a British Army officer in 1908. Many Asian turtle species have been driven to near extinction due to their demand as food. 
		
		 
		
				 The WCS team also found yellow tortoises and Asian leaf turtles in the sanctuary – two other species threatened by the illegal wildlife trade.
		
		 
		
				 “Throughout Asia, turtles are being wiped out by poachers for the illegal wildlife trade,” said Colin Poole, WCS Director of Asia programs. “We are delighted and astonished that this extremely rare species is alive and well in Myanmar. Now we must do what we can to protect the remaining population.”
		
		 
		
				 The report recommends several steps to ensure that the turtles remain protected in the sanctuary. These include training of local protected area staff, conservation groups and graduate students to collect additional data on the species, and establishing permanent guard posts on roads leading in and out of the park to thwart potential poaching.
		
		 
		
				 The research was supported by Andy Sabin and the Turtle Conservation Fund. 
		
		 
		 
		
				
						Cool Turtle Fact
				
		
		 
		
				
						The local name for the Arakan forest turtle is “Pyant Cheezar,” which translates to “turtle that eats rhinoceros feces.” Sumatran rhinos were once found in the area, but vanished half a century ago due to overhunting. 1-718-220-3682
				
		
		Contact: 
		
Stephen Sautner - ssautner@wcs.org 1-718-220-3682
John Delaney - jdelaney@wcs.org 1-718-220-3275

 The Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.
Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help
people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed
to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org  Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation