June line-up includes: Bob the Builder, Elephant and Piggie, The Berenstain Bears, and the Animal Tales Players


Live celebrity children’s book readings:
Kathie Lee Gifford reading The Legend of
Messy M’Cheany
Bernadette Peters reading Stella
is a Star
Mike Berenstain reading The
Berenstain Bears’ Really Big Pet Show

Enjoy arts, crafts, character parades and Little Flower Yoga on Astor Court 

Bronx, NY – June 1, 2011 – Animal Tales
Extravaganza at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo continues
in June with celebrity children’s book readings, live performances, and costume
character meet-and-greets.  



Each weekend through Sunday,
June 26 features top-rated children's entertainment in the New York Life Main
Stage at the zoo’s Fisher-Price® Little People™ Grizzly Goodies
picnic area. 

In June, zoo-goers can watch Bob the Builder and the Can Do Crew in
a special interactive performance on Saturday and Sunday, June 4 and 5 or see
The Berenstain Bears Live in  “Family Matters the Musical” on Saturday and Sunday, June 18
and 19. The Animal Tale Players from the Children’s Theatre Company at Lehman
College are also returning in June with encore performances of “I’ll Huff and
I’ll Quack and I’ll Blow Down Your Porridge.” 



Zoo-goers can “get lost in a
book” as everyone's favorite animal books come to life. Weekends will
include the chance to meet authors and celebrities at special readings on the
Wild Asia Plaza. 

Don’t miss television hostess Kathie Lee Gifford reading The
Legend of Messy M’Cheany on Sunday, June 5; LuAnn Adams reading Elephant
& Piggie on Saturday and Sunday, June 11 and 12; Mike Berenstain reading The
Berenstain Bears’ Really Big Pet Show on Saturday and Sunday, June 18
and 19; and Broadway sensation Bernadette
Peters reading Stella is a Star on
Saturday, June 25.



Performing their original
show “If You Really Love Polar Bears…” on the Wild Asia Plaza, Making Books
Sing will entertain and empower children through music, theater, puppetry, and
physical comedy.



Kids can walk through
larger-than-life pages of some of the most popular children's stories as the
zoo transforms new and classic tales into unforgettable interactive experiences
including Penguin Group USA’s The Very
Hungry Caterpillar, by Eric Carle; Simon & Schuster’s Alphabet by Matthew Van Fleet;
Macmillan’s Moon Bear, by Brenda Z.
Guiberson; and Random House’s Wild About
Books, by Judy Sierra.


Little Flower Yoga will lead
families in animal-themed yoga sessions on Astor Court and the Animal Tales
Players will lead a daily costume character parade starting at the arts and
crafts area at the Dancing Crane Pavilion.



Guests
can visit New York Life's Child ID booths in Astor Court. All children who stop
by will receive a complimentary Identification Card, complete with photograph
and fingerprints. New York Life's Child
ID program provides peace of mind to parents who are concerned about the safety
of their children and want to take action to protect their children.  









Little Flower Yoga - Animal-themed yoga sessions, three
times a day on Astor Court 
Weekends
– June 12 at 1:00pm, 2:00pm, 3:00pm







Making Books Sing – Performances two times a day at Asia Plaza
Weekends
– June 25 at 12:30pm, 2:30pm





Character Parade – Two times a day on dates indicated
Parades
will go from the Dancing Crane Pavilion to the New York Life Main Stage
Led
by performers from the Animal Tales Players at 1:15pm, 3:00pm







 Arts and Crafts – Available throughout the course of the day at the Dancing Crane Pavilion
11:00am
– 4:00pm










Contact:
Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org











The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.

New York
Life Insurance Company, a Fortune 100
company founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the
United States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world.  New York Life has the highest possible
financial strength ratings from all four of the major credit rating
agencies.  Headquartered in New
York City, New York Life's family of companies offers life insurance, retirement
income, investments and long-term care insurance.  New York Life Investments** provides institutional asset
management and retirement plan services. Other New York Life affiliates provide
an array of securities products and services, as well as institutional and
retail mutual funds.  Please visit
New York Life's Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more information.



*New York Life is the largest mutual life insurance
company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within industries, Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune
magazine, May 4, 2009. 
**New York Life Investments is a service mark used by
New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and its subsidiary, New York
Life Investment Management LLC.