Four New Lambs
are Born Just in Time for Spring



New York, N.Y., March 29, 2010 -- The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Queens Zoo is pleased to announce the arrival of four new Jacob’s
four-horned lambs. These adorable fluffy friends were born last week at the zoo
and have been delighting visitors ever since. 



Two males were born to mom, Phoebe, while her sister, Emma,
gave birth to a duo of females. All four cuddly creatures have a coat of downy
black-and-white wool, but it’s easy to tell them apart. The males have mostly
black wool with spots of white, while the females’ colors are reversed. 



Zookeepers report the yet-to-be-named lambs are doing very
well, and they are all very active; spending most of their time jumping,
running, and exploring their exhibit. Since they are all still nursing, they do
not stray too far from their mothers as they continue to discover their new
home. 



Jacob’s
sheep are currently listed as threatened by the American Livestock Breeds
Conservancy.  This species has
fewer than 1,000 annual registrations in the United States. The WCS Queens Zoo
acquired the breed in 2008 as part of a cooperative breeding program designed
to help increase awareness about rare domestic breeds.



WCS conducts and participates in similar breeding programs
at its facilities and around the world, including the Association of Zoos and
Aquariums-administered Species Survival Program that helps maintain genetic
diversity among endangered species in captivity.  The organization is also working to save wild sheep and
goats – including the massive Marco Polo sheep – in Central Asia. 

Contact:            
Barbara
Russo - 212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org



                                                                                                                                           




The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission
is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3 for kids 3-12, free for
children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm
weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through
April.  The Queens Zoo is located at
53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or
visit www.queenszoo.com.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org 



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.