New York, NY, Nov. 4, 2009– The Central Park Zoo is pleased to announce the arrival of four adorable mini Nubian goats. Ace, the only male, along with Angel, Monique and Spirit, now live in the zoo’s Tisch Children’s Zoo alongside pygmy goats and the zoo’s famous full-sized Nubian, Newman. All hail from upstate New York. 

Mini Nubians are a cross between Nigerian dwarf and full-sized Nubian goats. The minis look very similar to the larger breed, with long floppy ears and coats that can be many different colors. The only major difference is…they are much smaller! Three of the zoo’s new goats have dark brown backs accented by white underbellies and ears. Angel, the oldest of the group, stands out from the others by having very light brown hair. She’s also a little bit larger. 

Zookeepers say the new goats are adjusting very well to their new Manhattan digs. Much of their time is spent exploring their surroundings as they continue to get to know their exhibit mates. They also enjoy a variety of tasty browse given to them by keepers, and can often be seen running through their exhibit. 

In addition to other goats, their neighbors in the Tisch Children’s Zoo include alpacas, sheep and other domestic animals. 

Ace, Angel, Monique, and Spirit have brought up the cute factor at the zoo. Their playful personalities and calm demeanor are sure to make this goat group an instant delight to zoo visitors of all ages!

In the field, WCS conservationists are working to protect wild goats and sheep including the spectacular Marco Polo sheep, which is restricted to mountainous regions in central Asia.  Its horns can span an impressive six feet!

Contact:
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 212-439-6527

The Central Park Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue. Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Admission includes entry into the main Zoo and the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Zoo hours are 10am to 4:30 pm daily..  Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation