Volunteer guides enhance zoo-going experience

		

		New York, NY – October 4, 2011 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo is currently accepting applications for its volunteer guide program.


Central Park Zoo guides play a key role in enhancing the zoo-going experience by delivering wildlife and environmental conservation information to zoo visitors, leading tours, supporting zoo school programs, participating in special events, and offering administrative support.

Prospective guides must complete a basic training program. Nine training sessions will be held from January through March. Each session covers basic animal science, ecology, conservation, and interpretation skills.  Applicants must be 18 or older.

 

Once trained, guides will be able to answer questions about the zoo’s animals, conduct guided tours, narrate the sea lion feeding, and participate in a variety of school programs and special events. 

 

For more information, email cpzvolunteers@wcs.org or visit www.centralparkzoo.com and click on the Help Wildlife tab. Admission to the program is competitive. Applications are currently being accepted and must be received by December 31, 2011. Final acceptance of a volunteer into the program is contingent on successful completion of the training course and a 3-month probationary period.Contact: 

Sophie Bass 718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org

 





 The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  General Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children younger than 3. Total Experience Admission is $18.00 for adults, $15.00 for senior citizens, and $13.00 for children 3 to 12.  4-D theater admission is $4.00 for members and $7.00 for non-members. Zoo hours are 10am to 5:30 pm, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com  

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. .                              If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.