Whether in the wild or at the zoo, nobody likes a sad lion.
Yet, the lion portrayed in WCS’s latest video release, "Nobody Likes a Sad Lion,” is just that. He is
upset about New York City’s proposed budget cuts to 33 of its cultural
institutions, which include the Bronx Zoo (home to three new happy lion cubs)
and the New York Aquarium.

City Hall’s proposed cut to the Cultural Institutions Group
(CIG) comes as the nation and the city continue to navigate one of the worst
economic climates in recent history. The Bronx Zoo and the New York
Aquarium—along with the rest of the city’s cultural institutions—are economic
drivers for New York City’s already financially strapped communities and
families. In addition to driving tourism and drawing business to local
merchants, these institutions are important educational resources for families.


As members of the world-renowned cultural community of New York, the Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium
annually generate nearly $290 million in economic impact for their communities.


In the adopted budget for Fiscal Year 2010, the Bronx Zoo
and New York Aquarium received a total of $9.3 million from the city. If the
proposed cut is accepted, the zoo and aquarium face a $3.9 million cut.
Slashing city support by 42 percent to $5.4 million, this decrease will have a
significant impact on stores, vendors, and restaurants adjacent to these
world-class institutions.

If the cuts are allowed to pass, the institutions that help
to make New York City the world cultural capital could be forced to eliminate
jobs and cut services to the public they serve. 






Petition Drive
The Wildlife Conservation Society has initiated a petition
campaign to save the Bronx Zoo, the New York Aquarium and the other New York
City cultural institutions from cuts to their city funding. The campaign aims
to build massive community support behind convincing City Hall to restore
funding to the city’s cultural institutions, which employ approximately 9,000
New Yorkers and help bolster local economies across New York City. Please sign our petition now.