Saturday and Sunday, October 5 and 6

Giant rabbits, cows, sheep and other farm animals are the stars at this event that celebrates farms and domestic animals

Moo at the Zoo is presented by Organic Valley		
		
		Flushing, N.Y. – Oct. 2, 2013 – Amid the bustling scenes and sounds of New York City is the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo, home to a sprawling farmyard where rabbits, cows, sheep and other domestic animals live. To celebrate all things farm-related, the zoo will host for the first time, Moo at the Zoo, on Saturday and Sunday, October 5 and 6 from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.

The fun-filled weekend is presented by Organic Valley and will give visitors a chance to learn about farm animals and how farms work. Live butter-making demonstrations, meet-and-greets with animals, and keeper chats are among the highlights of the event.

Moo at the Zoo weekend activities include:Dairy Demos – A cow-milking simulator will show visitors how milk is collected from cows. Visitors will learn how to make butter and buttermilk at home from Organic Valley dairy experts. Instructions will be given out on how to make butter at home.Animal Encounters – Visitors will have a chance to get up-close with some of the zoo’s farm animals.Keeper Chats – The zoo’s farm animal keepers will discuss and answer questions about the animals that live here. Crafts for Kids – Children will make and take home farm-focused crafts, such as cow masks and puppets. Organic Valley Samples & Giveaways – Organic Valley will be on site offering samples of their homemade butter and chocolate milk, as well as coupons and other giveaways.More information about Moo at the Zoo can be found online at www.queenszoo.com

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo: (718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org)
 Max Pulsinelli: (718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org)
Steve Fairchild: (718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org)The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit www.wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.