Fallen Ecoguards




 Fallen Ecoguards



 Fallen Ecoguards



					
					
						New York, May 23, 2023 -- The Wildlife Conservation Society mourns the loss of two WCS ecoguards this month, Alain Lukinga of Democratic Republic of Congo and Clement Ayang of Northern Cameroon.

WCS and Kahuzi-Biega National Park (KBNP) authority are deeply saddened by the death of ecoguard Mr. Alain LUKINGA, born in Kakongya on June 12, 1989, who sacrificed his life on May 10, 2023, for the protection of KBNP in an armed confrontation at Cibumbiro in South Kivu, DRC. Alain was part of a group of ecoguards who engaged in regular patrols to protect the Park's biodiversity from threats, including mining supported by armed groups. WCS and KBNP would like to pay tribute to his courage, determination, and dedication to the protection of the Park's fauna and flora. WCS and KBNP express their sincere condolences to Alain’s family, friends and colleagues. (Read in French HERE; Official KNBP release Here in French; Official release from Instuit Conlais pour la Conservation de la Nature, ICCN, in French HERE.

WCS is deeply saddened by the death of Mr. Clément AYANG, born April 14, 1988, a conservation support officer for Bénoué National Park under the EcoNorCam project in Cameroon, and who died on May 7, 2023 while on mission to support monitoring and protection of the Park. Mr. Clément AYANG was married with three children. Clément dedicated himself early to the conservation in the periphery of Bénoué National Park, where he had notably assumed the responsibility of a large agroforestry nursery. The staff of the Wildlife Conservation Society and Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife (MINFOF) Services express their sincere condolences to Clément’s family and loved ones as well as to the conservation community of the Northern Cameroon Protected Areas. (Read an in memoriam HERE in English and French)

###

Alain Lukinga of Democratic Republic of Congo; June 12, 1989--May 10, 2023;

Clement Ayand of Cameroon; April, 14, 1988--May 7, 2023

Photos link here: Alain Lukinga and Clement Ayand (Photo Credit: @TheWCS)