$15,000 Awarded to seasonal student employees of the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium
 
		
		

		November 13, 2009 – Bronx, NY – The votes have been tallied and congratulations are in order for three students that have spent their summers working at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium.  

On Friday, November 13, 2009 the winners of the Joe Ruf Memorial Scholarship were announced at a banquet held in the Schiff Family Great Hall at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  Winners of the scholarship each received $5,000 from The Generoso Pope Foundation to help ease the financial burden of college tuition.

“The Joe Ruf Memorial Scholarship Awards Program is one of the many ways in which the Wildlife Conservation Society Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium make a difference for its employees and the community.  We are grateful to Generoso Pope Foundation for making this scholarship possible.” said John Calvelli, Executive Vice President of Public Affairs for the Wildlife Conservation Society.  “This year’s competition was a close one.  There were many deserving candidates, but these three individuals stood out from the pack as I am sure they will continue to in life.”

The winners of the 2009 Joe Ruf Memorial Scholarship are:

Diana Corredor
Diana Corredor has worked as a seasonal employee in the Special Animal Exhibits Department at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.  During her first year, Diana worked in the Children’s Zoo where she provided service to guests and assisted with the daily care of the domestic animals.  In her second season she worked in the Butterfly Garden, observing butterflies.  A native of Columbia, Diana earned a Bachelor of Science Degree in Biology from the National University of Columbia.  Diana is now in her first year pursuing a Masters Degree in Biology at City College of New York.  Diana’s long term career goal is to conduct disease research with a focus on immunology.  

Sara Gonzalez
Sara Gonzalez is a seasonal employee in the Camel Barn at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.  As part of the Camel Barn Team, Sara assists with the day-to-day grooming and care of the camels and assists visitors on and off the camels during the camel rides.  Sara grew up in the Bronx and graduated from Mount Saint Ursula in 2006.  A student at Mercy College with a major in Biology, Sara’s goal is to become a Veterinary Surgeon.  

Glenford Robinson
Glenford Robinson worked as a seasonal employee in the Guest Services Department at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium.  As part of the Guest Services Team, Glenford assisted guests with ticket purchases and provided service to guests.  Glenford grew up in Brooklyn and attended Brooklyn Technical High School, from which he graduated in June 2009.  As a freshman at Lafayette College in Pennsylvania, Glenford intends to pursue a career in medicine.  

The Joe Ruf Memorial Scholarship was established in 2001 by the Generoso Pope Foundation. The scholarship is named in memory of Joe Ruf, who worked at WCS’s Bronx Zoo for more than 50 years. Ruf was a beloved WCS Bronx Zoo employee from 1939 until shortly before his death in 1993. He worked his way up to supervisor in the Mammal Department. 

To qualify for the Joe Ruf Memorial Scholarship, students must be in good academic standing in an accredited degree program, demonstrate a financial need, and must be an outstanding employee at any one of WCS’s five living institutions.  

Contact:

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182 – mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Stephen Sautner – 718-220-3682 – ssautner@wcs.org

The Generoso Pope Foundation was established in 1947. It was the result of a natural progression for the Pope family’s long tradition of giving back to the community in which they flourished. Generoso Pope served as president of the Foundation until his death in 1950. Catherine Pope, served as president for the next 48 years. Catherine’s son, David Anthony Pope, is Executive Vice President of the Foundation and married to Ruf’s granddaughter, Barbara Louise Pope. 
         
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.