Bronx, N.Y. (September 23, 2009)– The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo invites you to spend this Halloween season enjoying a
variety of new fun-filled activities that are all part of having a wild wildlife experience including the
first ever Haunted Safari Adventure, the weekends of October 10/12, 17/18,
24/25 and 31/1. 


This year’s Boo at the Zoo weekends are packed with
activities and festive fun for all ages. Visitors will enjoy wildlife
magic shows, unique, exotically designed pumpkin carving demonstrations,
haunted hayrides that take the adventurer into a spooky area of the zoo,
musical entertainment, recycled wildlife costume making, trick or treats, a hay
maze and the Wildlife Theater Presentation of It’s
a Wonderful Niche. 



The chills and thrills
will be more exciting than ever as Boo at
the Zoo debuts a magical, interactive Haunted Safari Adventure.
 Guests will battle their way through a series of obstacles and exploits
in a journey to “locate
the lost species.”





Special
Offer: To add to the holiday fun, any child wearing a
wildlife costume will receive free general admission with a full-priced adult
general admission purchase. 


Boo at
the Zoo Activities include:

Haunted Safari Adventure

Debuting for the first time, the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx
Zoo will host an interactive spooky Haunted
Adventure.  Visitors will experience an incredible journey as
they walk, crawl and slide through huge fantastical wildlife, designed to
delight. Families will journey through a bat cave, the belly of a snake,
a rainforest swamp and much more as they are challenged to find the missing
creature that has been wandering in our midst.



Musical Performances

Join Annie and the Natural Wonder band for knee-slapping, laughter and fun,
animal-themed musical performances.



Wildlife Theater

Join the Wildlife Theater Players for puppetry, song and interactive fun as
they perform “It’s a Wonderful Niche,” the real story behind
Bata – and how they help our world. The show will be presented at
Asia Theater.



Hay Maze

Let yourself get lost at the zoo while participating in this fun, fall
tradition.



Haunted Hayride

Enjoy an “old style”
hay wagon ride through the beautiful foliage of the season and the natural park
setting. Many special surprises are in store for zoo-goers.

Pumpkin-carving Demonstrations

Watch an expert pumpkin-carver sculpt fascinating and intricate animal themed
designs such as bats, tigers, gorillas, and big cats.



Animal-themed Magic Shows 

Catch one of our thrilling magic shows performed by Trademark Special Events.




CONTACT:   
Maggie
Seidel – 718-220-5182 
Steve Fairchild
– 718-220-5189
Mary Dixon –
718-220-3711



The
Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30
p.m. on weekends and holidays through November 2, 2009. Adult admission is $15,
children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are
$13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently
located off the Bronx River
  Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by
bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led
by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.