Zoo & Aquarium Are Vital Engines of Commerce for Local Neighborhoods



Visit www.wcs.org to Sign the Petition




NEW YORK – June 4, 2010 – Business leaders in the Bronx and Brooklyn are speaking out about City
Hall’s proposed cuts to cultural institutions, including the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium, both of which are vital
economic engines which sparks hundreds of millions of dollars for local
economies every year.



The Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium annually generate nearly
$290 million in economic impact for both the Belmont section of the Bronx and
the ocean-side community of Brooklyn’s Coney Island.  In the Fiscal Year
2010 adopted budget, the Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium received a total of
$9.3 million. If the proposed cut is accepted, the zoo and aquarium face a $3.9
million cut, bringing down city support by 42 percent to $5.4 million – a
decrease that business leaders say will have a significant impact on stores,
vendors, and restaurants adjacent to these world-class institutions.



Specifically, business leaders assert that the proposed cuts
to the zoo and aquarium—which draw an estimated 2.7 million visitors to the
Bronx and Brooklyn annually—will ultimately mean fewer dollars for neighborhood
merchants.



What business leaders are saying:



“Funding for the world-famous Bronx Zoo is not just a
subsidy,” said Frank Franz, chairman of the Belmont Business Improvement
District.  “It’s an important business decision that brings abundant
returns on the investment.  Millions in revenue come to the neighborhood
and the City from Bronx Zoo visitors.” 



Said Lenny Caro, president and CEO of the Bronx Chamber of
Commerce: “Even as our nation and state continue to experience an economic
crisis, the Bronx Zoo continues to generate a substantial amount of business
from visitors to our borough. Proposed budget cuts to the zoo would result in
fewer customers for the neighborhood’s shops and restaurants.” 



Said Carol Albert, operator of the Cyclone Roller Coaster:
“At a time when New York City needs tourist dollars more than ever, the New
York Aquarium remains a vital attraction and cornerstone in the renewal of Coney
Island.  This source of both family entertainment and education needs more
public support, not less.” 



The Wildlife Conservation Society has initiated a petition
campaign to save the Bronx Zoo, the New York Aquarium and the other NYC
cultural institutions from the draconian cuts to its city funding.  The
campaign is aimed to build massive community support behind efforts to convince
City Hall to restore funding to the city’s cultural institutions which employ
New Yorkers and help bolster the local economies in the Bronx and Brooklyn.







Contact: 
Mary Dixon – 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.