NEW YORK (November 16, 2020) – WCS will hold a virtual press conference following a two-day event held in conjunction with the German Federal Foreign Office: “One Planet, One Health, One Future: Moving Forward in a Post COVID-19 World.” The press conference will feature four experts discussing how to prevent future global pandemics using a One Health approach, which looks at the interconnections between human, animal and environmental health. Speakers include:  Dr. Susan Lieberman, WCS Vice President International Policy Dr. Christian Walzer, WCS Executive Director for Health ProgramsDr. John Amuasi, Executive Director, African Research Network for NTDs and Co-Chair of the Lancet One Health CommissionDr. Eckart v. Hirschhausen (TBC), Science Journalist and Founder of "Healthy Planet-Healthy People" (Stiftung Gesunde Erde-Gesunde Menschen) WHO: WCS and German Federal Foreign Office WHAT: Virtual Press Conference: “Can We Prevent COVID-22? A One-Health Approach” WHERE: Via Zoom: https://zoom.us/j/92251118054?pwd=TmdCUlF0bGVERG9WcENsM2R4Ymdjdz09 WHEN: Wednesday, November 18, 2020 1:00 PM ET / 19:00 CET FOLLOW: #OneHealthOneFuture BACKGROUND: Biodiversity, health, and sustainable development are not a zero sum game; if we see it that way, we will all lose. Rather, a “win/win/win” approach that fully integrates them all is critical if we are to combat today’s crises, and to prevent another COVID-like pandemic. To move beyond the present pandemic while also tackling the climate and biodiversity crises, urgent action must be taken to retain the essential health links between humans, wildlife, domesticated animals and plants, and all nature. As we build back we need to recognise and value the foundational health benefits of intact and functioning nature while mainstreaming One Health across all sectors and into all policies. COVID-19 has opened the eyes of the world to the reality of pandemic risk and we have had the unique opportunity to demonstrate the important contributions One Health approaches could make in helping securing the future of our planet.  Learn more about the 2019 One World, One Health, One Future conference and The Berlin Principles on One Health through our website. To get the latest WCS reports, news, and commentary on the COVID-19 pandemic, read more here. ###