Congo Gorilla Forest, Children’s Zoo, Butterfly
Garden, and other seasonal attractions ready for reopeningNew animal babies ready for their spring public debut; baby mandrill at Congo Gorilla ForestSpring line-up packed with family entertainment  as the “Animal Tales Extravaganza” kicks offSpring/Summer season hours to resume *April 3, 2010
























Bronx, N.Y. – March 29, 2010 – Saturday, April 3 marks the first day of spring at the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo as the zoo officially reopens seasonal
exhibits including Congo Gorilla Forest, the Children’s Zoo, the Butterfly
Garden, and more.  The longer, peak-season
hours also go into effect as the zoo will remain open until 5pm on weekdays and
5:30pm on weekends.



Spring at the WCS’s Bronx Zoo is always the season for new baby
animals, and this year is no different. 
Throughout the season, the Bronx Zoo’s new babies will be making their
public debut – starting with the season opening of the Congo Gorilla Forest and
the first look at the new baby mandrill, Gertrude, playfully interacting with
her mother and father, Louise and Mapema.



Other than the arrival of new babies, there is no better
indicator that spring is here than butterflies gently floating through the air,
skipping from flower to flower; and there is no better place to see a
spectacular array of colorful butterflies than in the Butterfly Garden at WCS’s
Bronx Zoo. Dozens of species of butterflies will also begin greeting spring
zoo-goers Saturday, April 3. 



The same weekend will mark the start of the zoo’s Animal
Tales Extravaganza.  For 13 consecutive weekends, from April
through July, there will be a full line-up of family-oriented readings,
performances, and activities themed around new and classic children’s
books.  



Children will be able to walk through larger-than-life pages
of real books including The Very Hungry Caterpillar  by Eric
Carle at Butterfly Garden and Alphabet  by Matthew Van Fleet at
Reptile House.  At Bear Overlook,
walk through the new children’s book, Moon Bear, by Brenda Z. Guiberson and award-winning
illustrator, Ed Young and enjoy a wild ride with Wild About Books by Judy Sierra at Astor Court.  These interactive, walk-through book
experiences have been underwritten by the publishers of the books featured; The
Macmillan Children’s Publishing Group, Penguin Group (USA), Random House
Children’s Books, and Simon & Schuster.



The
experience also includes an opportunity for children to make their own “animal
tale” book and “animal tail” bookmark based on Big Babies, Little Babies, which is published by DK Publishing, one of the
event sponsors.  



Over the course of the 13-weekend extravaganza, favorite children’s
authors from notable publishers including HarperCollins, Little Brown Books for
Young Readers, Macmillan, Penguin Group (USA), Random House Children’s Books,
Simon & Schuster and will be hosting special story-time readings of their
books at the Asia Plaza Theater.  Families will be able to meet their
favorite children’s book authors and listen to them read their new and classic
works then head over to New York Life’s Main Stage on Astor Court for live
entertainment by some of the top-rated children’s entertainers.



The line-up for the first weekend of the Animal Tales
Extravaganza includes the following:



**Saturday, April 3

11am,
1pm, 3pm - Wild Asia Plaza 

Theatrical
reading of Velveteen Rabbit 

Manhattan
Children’s Theater – Manhattan
Children's Theatre is committed to producing affordable, high quality
theatrical experiences for both children and families. It exists to ensure that
the community has access to important works of classic literature and timely,
poignant new work.  Ultimately, the group provides a live theatrical
experience that encourages reading, critical thinking, curiosity of the world
today and the world of tomorrow, as well as communication between children,
their families, and their educators.



11:30am,
2pm - New York Life’s Main Stage

Musical
performance by Sweetbeatz – Sweetbeatz
will rock the zoo with her interactive, jazzy, urban music chops for kids –
This VERY unique and “dazzling” performer creates intimacy with her audience
using humor, winning original lyrics and dramatic effects.  Sweetbeatz writes lively original melodies
inspired by the hustle and bustle of life in the city and is about to release
her first CD.



**Sunday, April 4 

11am,
1pm, 3pm - Wild Asia Plaza 

Theatrical
reading of Velveteen Rabbit 

Manhattan
Children’s Theater (Description above)



11:30am,
2pm - New York Life’s Main Stage 

Musical
performance by Joanie Leeds - Joanie
Leeds joins her band, The Nightlights, for an interactive, high energy
performance. Songs from her brand new CD, I'm A Rock Star, are already hitting
the radio waves.  Her presentation is notable for its child-appropriate
clarity, yet vocally Joanie soars easily through a remarkable array of styles
with such an enviable power and dexterity that adult listeners forget that her
intended audience is under age 10.  www.citykidmusic.com

 

New
York Life is the featured sponsor of the Animal Tales Extravaganza and is hosting a Child ID event every weekend during
the festivities.  The Child ID program provides peace of
mind to parents who are concerned about the safety of their children and want
to take action to protect them. A complimentary Identification Card, complete
with the child’s photograph and fingerprints will be given to the parents.



MEDIA
NOTE(S): 

*             Public
access to some seasonal exhibits is weather dependent. 

**            Scheduled
times and performers subject to change without notice.






Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



New York Life Insurance
Company, a Fortune 100 company
founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the United
States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world.  New York Life
has the highest possible financial strength ratings from all four of the major
credit rating agencies.  Headquartered in New York City, New York Life’s
family of companies offers life insurance, retirement income, investments and
long-term care insurance.  New York Life Investments** provides institutional
asset management and retirement plan services. Other New York Life affiliates
provide an array of securities products and services, as well as institutional
and retail mutual funds.  Please
visit New York Life’s Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more
information.



*New York Life is the largest mutual life insurance
company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within industries, Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune magazine,
May 4, 2009. 



**New York Life Investments is a service mark used by
New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and its subsidiary, New York
Life Investment Management LLC.