WCS joined by New York Botanical Garden and Lehman College on collaborative education program More than $700,000 awarded to develop
“Outside-the-Box” program that will better utilize zoos and botanical gardens
for educationU.S. Reps. José E. Serrano
and Joseph Crowley applaud educational collaboration















Bronx, NY – Nov. 12, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society has been awarded a
three-year grant in the amount of $714,649 from the U.S. Department of
Education’s Office of Postsecondary Education to develop a new program that
will engage living institutions like zoos and botanical gardens in the teacher
preparation process.



The grant, known as “Outside-the-Box
Professional Development: A Living Institution – University Model for Preparing
Elementary Teachers in Science” will involved a collaboration among WCS the New
York Botanical Garden and CUNY Lehman College. The new program will be fully
integrated into a postsecondary teacher education program at Lehman College. 



“The ‘Outside-the-Box’ program will help
teachers to do great things in their classrooms to inspire and challenge
children,” said Congressman José E. Serrano. “I applaud the Department of
Education for funding this unique partnership, and also congratulate the Bronx
Zoo, the New York Botanical Garden, and Lehman College for their work to get
this program up and running. Bronx youth will certainly benefit as their
studies are enhanced by the great resources these institutions have to offer.”





Congressman Joseph Crowley said: “Time and
time again, the Wildlife Conservation Society has proven its commitment to
developing innovative programs that benefit the entire community. I
congratulate them on this latest grant for an initiative that will set a new
bar for postsecondary teacher development. It is clear that there needs to be a
stronger focus on educating students in the sciences, especially in elementary
schools. By educating teachers on how to take full advantage of two of the
Bronx’s brightest gems – the zoo and the botanical garden – they can, in turn,
better connect children to the real-life environmental challenges facing the
world today. The Wildlife Conservation Society’s leadership in environmental
education is just one of the many reasons for why I am such a strong supporter
of the organization.” undefined

The program will be the first
ever to involve a partnership involving a university, a botanical garden, and a
zoo in the development of a broad course of study in teacher education. The
program will be vastly different than the individual courses or workshop
programs for teachers that most institutions currently provide. It will
demonstrate how zoos, botanical gardens, and other living institutions can be
used more effectively as primary training providers, partners, and motivators
in the elementary teacher education process. 





In addition, the program will
involve the development of modules that will be integrated into a range of teacher
education courses at Lehman. The program will lead to a Master of Science in education
as well as teacher certification in childhood education (grades 1-6) with a
sub-specialization in science education.  undefined

“This grant is an important
step toward the realization of a program that will take full advantage of zoos
and botanical gardens for the educational resource they are,” said Don Lisowy,
WCS’s Director of Education. “The ‘Outside-the-Box’ program will teach the next
generation of educators the most effective use of these institutions. As
participating teachers enter the workforce, they will be equipped with an
understanding of the best ways to fully integrate living institutions into
their science lessons.”





Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli –
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards
nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.