Mitik recovering from health issues and receiving around-the-clock care at aquarium
		
				
						

				
		
		
				See the video: http://youtu.be/dAP66R1rnCU
		
		
				
						
						
						

				   Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 20, 2012 – Mitik, an orphaned walrus calf rescued off the coast of Barrow, Alaska, continues to recover at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium. He receives around-the-clock care from our animal care staff and veterinarians. 
 
 “Our veterinarians report to us daily on Mitik's condition,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium. "We anticipate each health report of Mitik with hope and concern."
 
 After he was rescued in July and brought to the Alaska SeaLife Center, Mitik was diagnosed with a bladder infection, a high white blood cell count, and was badly dehydrated. (Initially, his caregivers did not think he would survive.)
 
 After arriving at the aquarium a week ago, Mitik is responding well to medications and is gaining as much as a half a pound each day. His last weigh-in put him at 242 pounds. He is bottle-fed every four hours.   
     Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York. The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.