Premium Stamps Benefit Wildlife Protection for Tigers, Elephants and More at No Cost to American Taxpayers
 
More Than 4 Million Sold in 41 Days
 
Stamps May Be Purchased at Post Offices Nationwide, USPS.com 
WASHINGTON, D.C. (November 30, 2011) – The Wildlife Conservation Society applauded the introduction of legislation to reauthorize the Save Vanishing Species U.S. postage stamp, which features an illustration of a tiger cub and supports efforts to save species like elephants, tigers, and great apes.  The legislation, which would extend the lifespan of the stamp by four years, was introduced by Reps. Michael Grimm (R-NY) and Rep. Pedro Pierluisi (D-PR) and supported by a range of bipartisan co-sponsors. 

The Save Vanishing Species stamps went on sale in September and sold more than 4 million in the first 41 days of issuance.  The stamps are now available at Post Office locations nationwide and online at shop.usps.com/.  They cost 11 cents greater than a First Class Mail stamp — 55 cents — and $11 for a sheet of 20.  Also available is a special commemorative notecard set featuring the stamp’s image. 

“The wildlife stamp is a tremendous opportunity to help save wildlife around the world in a financially responsible way,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “With the success of the stamp in just one month, the American public is making a statement that international wildlife conservation is important to them, so we must continue this momentum by extending the stamp for another four years.  I thank Rep. Michael Grimm and Rep. Pedro Pierluisi for their leadership in this effort.”

The Save Vanishing Species stamps will contribute funding for projects supported by the Multinational Species Conservation Funds (MSCF), which are administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to conserve tigers, rhinos, great apes, marine turtles, African elephants and Asian elephants.

Contact:
Chip Weiskotten: 202-624-8172; cweiskotten@wcs.org
Mary Dixon: 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org								
						
												The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.