Julie Larsen Maher_6624_Dinosaur Safari_BZ_04 08 22.jpeg




 Julie Larsen Maher_7113_Dinosaur Safari_BZ_04 08 22.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_6484_Dinosaur Safari_BZ_04 08 22.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_6624_Dinosaur Safari_BZ_04 08 22.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_7113_Dinosaur Safari_BZ_04 08 22.jpeg
123


					
					
						Bronx, NY – April 12, 2022 – Some of the largest animals that ever roamed the Earth have returned and are now on exhibit at the Bronx Zoo. The Dinosaur Safari is back with MORE dinosaurs than ever before in a new experience that will immerse visitors in a recreation of a world that disappeared millions of years ago.

This is the first time the Bronx Zoo has featured its popular Dinosaur Safari since 2019 and there are some exciting changes for the 2022 season. For the first time, the immersive exhibit is a ¼ mile-long walkthrough experience covering more than 2 acres of hardwood forest. It features 52 life-sized animatronic dinosaurs and pterosaurs that move and roar in an accurate depiction of what life looked like in pre-historic times.

Dinosaur Safari adventurers will be awed by some of the largest animals ever to walk the face of the Earth. Storied beasts like the 40-foot-long Tyrannosaurus rex, a favorite species in popular culture that was the apex predator in its time; the lesser-known Omeisaurus, an herbivore that spans more than 60 feet head-to-tail and towers over the safari trail; and the new Quetzalcoatlus, the largest known pterosaur ever to live will all highlight the diversity of life that existed 100 million years ago.

“Dinosaur species evolved and adapted physically and behaviorally to their environments in much the same way as species we see today.” said Jim Breheny, Bronx Zoo Director. “Guests visiting the Bronx Zoo today are encouraged to compare dinosaur adaptations to some of their modern-day descendants - like birds. We are celebrating the 50th anniversary of the zoo’s iconic World of Birds building in 2022 and take the opportunity to see how a wide variety of avian species from around the world have evolved to survive and thrive in different habitats.” 

This limited engagement is now open to the public and will operate daily through October 31, 2022. Access to Dinosaur Safari is included in the Bronx Zoo Admission Ticket and is free for Zoos PLUS; Land & Sea; and Conservation-level members. For tickets, more information about Dinosaur Safari at the Bronx Zoo, and a full list of daily activities, visit www.BronxZoo.com.

Dinosaur Safari is presented by Bank of America.

“Bank of America’s sponsorship of the Bronx Zoo’s Dinosaur Safari reflects our commitment to supporting cultural programs that enrich our communities,” said José Tavarez, President, Bank of America New York City. “We applaud the Bronx Zoo’s innovative efforts to keep us connected to the natural world – especially these prehistoric marvels – while continuing their work to protect the environment, a cause close to our hearts.”

The dinosaurs featured in the Bronx Zoo’s Dinosaur Safari were created by Dino Don, Inc – an international leader in the design and construction of animatronic robotic dinosaurs.

###