"Naked" Cruise tests participants' ability to bear it all


		
 

New York, NY – February 27, 2010 – The second annual
"Naked" Polar Bear Cruise took place Saturday, February 27. The Coney
Island Polar Bear Club and Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises invited
participants to test how long they could withstand the chilly February
temperatures in their bathing suits to raise money for the Wildlife
Conservation Society. 

 

“The Coney Island Polar Bear Club is proud to partner with Circle Line
Sightseeing Cruises to support an organization as amazing as the
Wildlife Conservation Society,” said Dennis Thomas, President of the
Coney Island Polar Bear Club. “We commend their local work at places
like the Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium as well as their global
efforts to save wildlife and wild places. Additionally, this was a
great opportunity to remind all New Yorkers that New York Harbor is as
awesome in the winter as it is in the summer.”

 

Taking off from Pier 83 in Manhattan, the Circle Line Sightseeing
Cruise floated down the Hudson River with eager participants
challenging their stamina in the freezing morning temperatures.
Participants stayed active, dancing and hula hopping on deck. An
extreme test of endurance, every minute spent on deck raised funds for
WCS.

 

“This is a really fun way to raise awareness and support for WCS,” said
Jim Breheny, Director of WCS’s Bronx Zoo. “I want to thank Circle Line
Sightseeing Cruises and the Coney Island Polar Bear Club as well as all
who participated on this fun ride.”

 

Cruisers were encouraged to seek individual sponsors for the event to
help WCS save wildlife and wild places worldwide. For those passengers
who needed a break from the frosty ride, there was an indoor area where
they could bundle up and enjoy complimentary hot chocolate.


		
				Contact: 

Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

Sophie Bass: (o) 718-220-6853; sbass@wcs.org 

Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
		 

Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises: Sailing since 1945, Circle
Line Sightseeing Cruises at 42nd Street has hosted more than 60 million
passengers in New York City. Owned and operated by New York Cruise
Lines, Inc., Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises is New York's oldest and
largest provider of scheduled and chartered sightseeing and special
function cruises. Cruises are not only designed to provide the best
viewing opportunities, but to also be informative, comfortable and
entertaining as well. Today, the company is recognized as one of the
most famous boat rides in the entire world and is one of the oldest
42nd Street landmarks. Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises is not
affiliated with Circle Line Downtown.  

 

The Coney Island Polar Bear Club, founded in 1903, is the
oldest winter bathing organization in the United States. Our members
swim in the Atlantic Ocean at Coney Island every Sunday from November
through April. www.polarbearclub.org

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban
wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine
wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission
because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your
readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them
to: www.wcs.org/donation