Presented by Con Edison												
 The Wildlife Conservation Society Announces Second Annual WCS Run for the Wild at the New York Aquarium
 
 This year’s WCS Run for the Wild 5K run/walk in Brooklyn is dedicated to saving walruses and other wildlife
 
 Event date: Saturday, Oct. 6, 2012; 5K Run: 8 a.m.; Family Fun Run/Walk: 8:45 a.m. 
 
 Registration is now open at: wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium 				
 
 Brooklyn, N.Y. – July 26, 2012 – Time to lace up the sneakers – and perhaps snowshoes – as the second annual Wildlife Conservation Society Run for the Wild in Brooklyn kicks off at WCS’s New York Aquarium on Saturday, Oct. 6 at 8 a.m. to help WCS save walruses and other wildlife. 
 
 The route of the 5K run and family fun run/walk will take participants along the famed Coney Island Boardwalk of WCS’s New York Aquarium, where real walruses swim. The 5K run will begin at 8 a.m. and casual runners and walkers can take part in the Family Fun Run/Walk at 8:45 a.m. 
 
 “Walruses are facing serious environmental threats. Climate change is resulting in melting sea ice in the Arctic which is impacting walrus habitat,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium. “Everyone who participates in the WCS Run for the Wild – by running, walking, or sponsoring a runner or team – will be helping WCS save walruses and wildlife around the world.” 
 
 Said John Calvelli, Executive Vice President of Public Affairs at the Wildlife Conservation Society: “This year’s WCS Run for the Wild in Brooklyn promises to be a fun and rewarding experience for all those who participate. Everyone who runs, walks, or sponsors an individual or team can be proud that they are helping WCS save wildlife and wild places.” 
 
 Walruses are an example of a species being forced to cope with the impacts of a changing climate and increased industrialization of the Arctic. Proceeds from WCS Run for the Wild will help WCS save walruses and further its mission of saving wildlife and wild places around the globe.
 
 After the run, participants are invited to enjoy all of the post event activities and can spend the day at WCS’s New York Aquarium. Everyone is encouraged to visit Nuka and Kulu, the aquarium’s Pacific walruses. Other marquee aquarium exhibits include the recently renovated Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef, home to aquatic animals native to Belize, the Pacific Ocean’s Coral Triangle, Africa’s Great Lakes and Brazil’s Flooded Forest. 
 
 Registration for the run includes two free rides at Luna Park – a supporting sponsor - that will be open early for run participants (Scream Zone and Cyclone not included).
 
 This year’s run is part of an exciting autumn at the New York Aquarium. Construction of the aquarium’s new Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit is scheduled to break ground in October 2012. Ocean Wonders: Sharks! is part of a part of WCS’s A SEA CHANGE initiative, a 10-year plan to revitalize the aquarium and ignite the rebirth of Coney Island. The new exhibit is expected to open in 2015 and will be home to a variety of sharks and aquatic animals, such as sand tiger sharks, Port Jackson sharks, roughtail rays, clearnose skates, thorny skates, cownose rays, and loggerhead sea turtles. 
 
 For more information, to register or sponsor a runner/team, visit wcsrunforthewild.org/nyaquarium. 
 
 WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors: 

		 Presenting Sponsor: Con Edison
 
 Featured Sponsor: Benjamin Moore Paints
 
 Supporting Sponsor: Hard Rock Cafe and Luna Park
 
 Promotional Partners: Aviator Sports and Events Center, Brooklyn Cyclones
 
 Media Partner: ABC 7
CONTACT: Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
 
 Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our website at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.