New WCS Position Combines Development, Corporate Outreach, and Conservation Finance				
		
BRONX, NY (Dec. 7, 2009)—The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) is pleased to announce the appointment of Bertina Ceccarelli to the position of Executive Vice President for Global Resources. Her assignment begins January 4, 2010.
Ceccarelli will lead development, corporate outreach, and conservation finance efforts for WCS, including its global programs in more than 65 countries; and its five living institutions in New York City, the Bronx Zoo, New York Aquarium, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo and Queens Zoo.
Ceccarelli brings to WCS a wealth of private sector and not-for-profit experience. She has an extensive background in marketing, including online, and development. She will report to WCS President and CEO Steven Sanderson.
“Bertina has a great record of accomplishment, as well as bright promise for the future,” said Sanderson. “She is arriving at a pivotal time, as we recently concluded our Gateways to Conservation capital campaign. The campaign, launched in December 2004, raised $662.9 million for improvements at WCS’s four zoos and aquarium in New York City and for vital conservation work across the globe. Now, it is time for our next great effort.”
Ceccarelli joins WCS following an eight-year tenure at United Way of New York, where she served as Senior Vice President of Institutional Advancement. Prior to that position, she worked in marketing and communications at NBC and at Procter & Gamble, among others.
She holds a B.S. in Industrial Engineering and Operations Research from the University of California, Berkeley; and an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Contact:Mary Dixon - mdixon@wcs.org, 1-347-840-1242

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org