Discovery of new species marks first bald songbird discovered in mainland Asia
		

		“Bare-faced bulbul” is restricted to rugged region in Laos 
		

		Project funded by Minerals and Metals Group 
		

		
NEW YORK – An odd songbird with a bald head living in a rugged region in Laos has been discovered by scientists from the Wildlife Conservation Society and University of Melbourne, as part of a project funded and managed by the mining company MMG (Minerals and Metals Group) that operates the Sepon copper and gold project in the region..

Dubbed the “Bare-faced Bulbul” because of the lack of feathers on its face and part of its head, it is the only example of a bald songbird in mainland Asia according to scientists.  It is the first new species of bulbul – a family of about 130 species – described in Asia in over 100 years.

A description of the new species is published in the July issue of the Oriental Bird Club’s journal Forktail. Authors include Iain Woxvold of the University of Melbourne, along with Wildlife Conservation Society researchers Will Duckworth and Rob Timmins. 

“It’s always exciting to discover a new species, but this one is especially unique because it is the only bald songbird in Asia,” said Colin Poole, director of Asia programs for the Wildlife Conservation Society.  “The discovery also underscores how much there is still to learn from wild places around the world.”

“I am proud to report that news of this remarkable ornithological discovery, like that of the Calayan Rail in 2004, was made public through the pages of the Oriental Bird Club's scientific journal Forktail,” commented Brian Sykes, Chairman of OBC.

The thrush-sized bird is greenish-olive with a light-colored breast, a distinctive featherless, pink face with bluish skin around the eye extending to the bill and a narrow line of hair-like feathers down the centre of the crown.

The bird seems to be primarily tree-dwelling and was found in an area of sparse forest on rugged limestone karsts – a little-visited habitat known for unusual wildlife discoveries.       

“Its apparent restriction to rather inhospitable habitat helps to explain why such an extraordinary bird with conspicuous habits and a distinctive call has remained unnoticed for so long,” said Iain Woxvold of the University of Melbourne.            

Fortunately much of the bird’s presumed habitat falls within legally protected areas in Laos.  However, quarrying of limestone looms as a potential threat to wildlife in this area, along with habitat conversion for agriculture.

In 2002 in this same area, Rob Timmins of WCS described the kha-nyou, a newly discovered species of rodent so unusual it represented the lone surviving member of an otherwise extinct genus.  Three years earlier he described a unique striped rabbit in the region also new to science.  

The full paper describing the Bald-faced Bulbul: An unusual new bulbul (Passeriformes: Pycnonotidae) from the Limestone karst of Lao PDR by I. A. Woxvold, J. W. Duckworth and R. J. Timmins is available upon request.



Contact:
Stephen Sautner – 718.220.36827/ ssautner@wcs.org
John Delaney – 718.220.3275 / jdelaney@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest
system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together
these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people
imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
Visit: www.wcs.org
Special Note to the Media:
If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where
they can make donations in support of helping to save wildlife and wild
places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation