Get Ready for Fleece, Fun, and Wooly Wonders…
		
		

		
				
Fluffy Wool Collected Goes to Those in Need
 


Flushing, N.Y., April 8 – The warm weather has finally arrived which means it’s time for the annual Sheep Shearing Weekend, May 1 and 2, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo. This fleece-filled weekend of fun will feature live wool-processing demos, arts-and-crafts, and of course, the zoo’s wild and wooly sheep. 

 

The highlight of this event is seeing the sheep-shearing process in action. Visitors can watch as the fluffy sheep are helped out of their winter coats by expert shearer Peter Sepe. As the fleece festivities continue, zoo-goers will learn about spinning, cleaning, dyeing, and other wool-processing techniques. 

 

Over 100 lbs of wool was collected after last year’s sheep shearing event. Recently, the zoo had those bales of wool turned into skeins of yarn that were donated to several charitable organizations. About 30 skeins of yarn from the Jacob’s four-horned sheep, Suffolk sheep, and other breeds were donated to Project Linus, Knit for Infants, Hearts and Hands of Love – all charities which knit garments and blankets for those in need. 

 

Activities at this year’s Sheep Shearing Weekend include:  

 

You Can do What with Wool?

Ever wonder how your favorite cozy sweater is made or how it gets that vibrant hue? An expert wool processor will enlighten visitors by showing various spinning and dying techniques. 

 

Fantastic Farm Facts

Education stations will highlight facts about the zoo’s many domestic animals, including pigs, goats, llamas, and of course, the sheep. 

 

Crafts for Kids

Kids can also make their very own farm-tastic sheep puppets. 

 

Sheep Shearing Weekend at WCS’s Queens Zoo is free with admission to the zoo.

 

Contact:
Barbara Russo -  212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org

                                                                                                        
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.