Visitors get “passports” stamped at five zoo exhibits that represent global locations where WCS works to save wildlife and wild places
						
								The weekends of July 31 – August 1 and August 7 –8: Celebrate the cultures of Africa with entertainment and activities courtesy of the Museum of African Art
						
						
								Redeem passport coupons for deals at participating stores, museums, and restaurants throughout New York
								

 


				
		
		
New York – July 29, 2010 – This weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo, Bank of America presents the Zoofari Passport Adventure program –– offering zoo-goers the unique opportunity to sample global culture and entertainment while earning discounts and special bargains.

 

Each guest will receive a special Zoofari passport taking them to five destinations within the zoo representing some of the locations around the world where WCS works to save wildlife and wild places.  

 

Visitors will travel to five exotic locales including:


		
				Asia – where they will encounter Siberian tigers at Tiger Mountain 

				Africa – where they can watch the lion cubs play on the African Plains 

				Madagascar – where the lemurs jump from tree to tree in Spiny Forest 

				South America – where anacondas lurk in the Reptile House 

				North America – where grizzly bears and brown bears roam the rocks of Bear Overlook 


		 

At each of the five destinations, visitors will find a stamping station where they can stamp their Zoofari passport to designate that stage of the Zoofari is complete.  In doing so, zoo-goers will learn fun facts about the continent, the animal, and the work WCS is doing to help save these rare and endangered species in the wild.   Everyone who collects all five Zoofari stamps will receive a ten percent discount at the Bronx Zoo Store, in addition to the special offers and discounts already included. 

 

Bronx Zoo visitors will also enjoy a special immersive cultural experience.  While globetrotting continent to continent to see the animals, visitors will have the chance to experience the customs, art forms, crafts, and performance art that are representative of each region.

 

The weekends of July 31 – August 1 and August 7 – 8 the zoo will celebrate African culture with the help of the Museum of African Art. Everyone will have the opportunity to participate in crafts and activities that represent the cultural diversity of the continent.

  

Celebrating Africa (included free with the price of admission)

 

July 31–August 1  At the pavilion by Dancing Crane Cafe

African Doll Making: 

Learn how to make dolls using African fabrics, cowry shells, and beads in the tradition of the children of Cameroon.

 

August 7– 8   At the pavilion by Dancing Crane Cafe

African Print Making/ Dance and Storytelling: 

Get a rare glimpse into the world of fabric prints known as Adinkra, as created by the Ashanti people of Ghana. Also enjoy interactive dance performances by the Harambee Dance Troupe.

 

WCS’s Zoofari Passport Adventure is made possible by the following generous sponsors:  

 

Presented by:    Bank of America
Sponsored by:    Delta Air Lines 
 


Contact: 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 
 



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.