November 10th Event to Be Held at Boston’s Somerset Club, Open to the Public

		
 


		
 BOSTON (October 27, 2010) –New York State’s famed Adirondacks may be radically changed over the next 100 years due to climate change, according to Wildlife Conservation Society Ecologist Jerry Jenkins, author of  Climate Change in the Adirondacks -The Path to Sustainability. Jenkins will be speaking at a public lecture at the Somerset Club in Boston on November 10th at 6:00 PM, and will present an analysis of the potentially devastating ecological, economical, and cultural impacts that can now be observed, or expected to occur in the Adirondacks should warming trends continue.



Climate Change in the Adirondacks -The Path to Sustainability is the first book-length account of the climate future and energy options for a major U.S. region. In the book, Jenkins warns that such impacts on the Adirondacks likely include a massive die-off of northern trees such as white pine and sugar maple, the loss of iconic wildlife such as moose and common loons, and the spread of pests such as the mountain pine beetle and black-legged tick. 



But that’s not all: Climate change threatens a transformation that will affect human livelihoods and the culture of this and other areas dependent on the income of winter activities such as skiing, snowmobiling, and ice-fishing. In summary, the Adirondacks may be substantially altered by the end of this century.



The news is not all bad, however. In his discussion, Jenkins explores various energy options, with sometimes surprising results, and offers in detail the concrete steps that residents of the Adirondacks can take that will result in cost savings, energy efficiency, and carbon emission reduction.  Ultimately, a path to a sustainable future will be offered for the Adirondacks and for other regions wishing to follow Jenkins’ model.



The event is free and open to the public who can RSVP at www.wcs.org/patronseventMA.



For more information about the event call Regina Bergen of the Wildlife Conservation Society at 718-741-1613 or email rbergen@wcs.org

 

Contact:
 Scott Smith: (1-718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org)

Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
                                           


 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation