Brooklyn,
N.Y. – May 4, 2011- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is
looking for dedicated marine animal lovers to join its team of volunteer
docents. The aquarium’s docent program is made possible in part through the
generous support of National Grid – part of a multiyear commitment to the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s education programs.   



Becoming a docent within the aquarium’s education department
means enlightening schoolchildren and aquarium visitors about animals and
helping aquarium instructors with a variety of exciting wildlife-themed
activities. 



Docents will work with a team of animal enthusiasts who
enjoy sharing their knowledge with others while supporting the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s mission to save wildlife and wild places around the
globe. 



Responsibilities of a New York Aquarium docent include: 

Teaching visitors about animals and exhibitsStaffing craft tables at special eventsAssisting education department instructors with school and family
     programsStaffing the aquarium’s Touch Pool where visitors interact with
     horseshoe crabs and sea stars

 

For more information, call 718-265-3450 or visit www.nyaquarium.com and click “Help
Wildlife.” Applications are accepted once a year. The docent program is open to
individuals 15 years and older and is very competitive. 



In addition to the docent program at the aquarium, as part
of National Grid’s Engineering Our Future Initiative to encourage young people
to study science, technology, engineering and math, the company generously
supports Conservation Math, a suite of education programs at WCS’s New York
Aquarium, as well as WCS’s Prospect Park and Queens Zoos. 





New York City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. is
another supporter of the aquarium’s docent program. 


“I’m proud to support the docent
program at the New York Aquarium,” said Councilman Domenic M. Recchia, Jr.
“It’s a fantastic experience that engages the youth in our community in a
hands-on, world class environment. There’s no better way to learn, especially
for children who want to pursue a career in science or wildlife care.” 

 

Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after
3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue
at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For
directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium
information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our website at http://www.nyaquarium.com.
Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of
New York.



National Grid is an
international energy delivery company. In the U.S., National Grid delivers
electricity to approximately 3.3 million customers in Massachusetts, New
Hampshire, New York and Rhode Island, and manages the electricity network on
Long Island under an agreement with the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA). It
is the largest distributor of natural gas in the northeastern U.S., serving
approximately 3.4 million customers in Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York
and Rhode Island. National Grid also owns over 4,000 megawatts of contracted
electricity generation that provides power to over one million LIPA customers.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

 Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.