Celebrate a New York Halloween traditionat WCS’s Bronx Zoo		 		  Safe, family-friendly activities include: The Haunted Habitat Mansion, Creepy Hollows Hayride, Costume Parade, music, magic, and MORE   Pumpkin carving demonstrations are back   Boo at the Zoo festivities run FIVE weekends beginning Saturday, Sept. 29   Sept. 29-30; Oct. 6-8, 13-14, 20-21, 27-28New York – Sept. 6, 2011 – Boo at the Zoo returns to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo for five full weekends of Halloween-themed family entertainment and activities. Attractions and activities embrace the spirit of the season while highlighting wildlife and conservation.    Annual favorites including a haunted walk-through adventure – The Haunting at Habitat Mansion – and the spooky Hayride through Creepy Hollows headline the festivities and have been enhanced for this year’s Boo at the Zoo. Visitors will enjoy magic shows, musical performances, and costume parades in addition to traditional guest favorites including the hay maze, extinction graveyard, and seasonal craft workshops.   Children 12 and under wearing a Halloween costume will receive free general admission with one paid adult general admission. All Boo at the Zoo activities are included with the price of general admission with the exception of the hayride and haunted mansion. The Creepy Hollows Hayride and the Haunting at Habitat Mansion walk-through adventure are included with the purchase of a Total Experience Ticket.    From Monday, Sept. 17, guests that purchase four or more Total Experience Tickets online will receive a plush snake hat created in the spirit of Boo at the Zoo. Offer is good while supplies last.    Guests are encouraged to visit www.bronxzoo.com for a complete schedule of keeper chats, animal enrichment sessions, and family activities.Boo at the Zoo activities include: The Haunting of Habitat MansionThe Habitat Mansion, once owned by wildlife conservationist Dr. Benton Broome, is said to be the most haunted landmark in the Bronx Zoo. Dr. Broome left his legacy of preserving animal wildlife, habitats and conserving the earth’s precious ecological resources to his son, Dusty. But Dusty is not up for the challenge and the ghost of his father wants to ensure the memory of all endangered species, is not forgotten. In the Haunted Habitat Mansion, ghosts of the past, visions of extinct animals, and the messages of Dr. Broome’s ghostly house servants encourage guests to remember the importance of protecting wildlife from the threat of extinction. Mansion admission is included with Total Experience Tickets.  Location; By Somba Village Time; 11:00am- 5:00pm   Creepy Hollows Hayride  Enjoy a thrilling hay ride beneath a canopy of beautiful fall foliage past the Birds of Prey exhibit and through the animated town of “Creepy Hollows.” The ride includes a look at an abandoned town where anything can happen. Hayride admission is included with Total Experience Tickets.Location; Boarding at Fordham ParkingTime; 11:00am - 5:00pm   Carved Pumpkin Demonstrations and Display  Professional pumpkin carvers from Sand Sculpture USA will be demonstrating their skill and displaying intricate pumpkin carvings that cannot be missed.  Location; Dancing Crane Plaza Time; 11am-5pm    Costume Parade Visitors can join the enchantment of a Halloween Parade. Hand-made puppets and props built by master costumers will be part of the fun as participants march through the zoo alongside an array of characters from the Alice Farley Dance Company.  Location; Starts at Zoo Center Time; 12:00pm and 2:00pm.  Photos available at the end of each performance. Additional photo opportunity 3:30-4:00pm in Dancing Crane Plaza     Children’s Theater Performances “Who Put the Trick in Trick or Treat?” This musical puppet theater performance features three classic tales of mischievous animal tricksters who outsmart their rivals. The performance is created by acclaimed puppeteer Noel MacNeal of Sesame Street and Nickelodeon. Presented by Organic Valley. Location: Asia Plaza Time: 12:30pm, 1:30pm and 2:30pm   Hay Maze Let yourself get lost at the zoo with a Halloween maze filled with sudden starts, stops and lots of adventure. Location: Butterfly Patio  Time: 11:00 a.m.– 5 p.m.   Live Music Gigi and the Lend me a Hand Band will lead zoo audiences on a musical adventure with the Boo Revue. Audiences will be invited to participate in animal-themed musical performances, songs and dances, and games.  Location; Tent by bear exhibit  Time; 11:30am, 1:00 pm, 3:00pm    Animal Themed Magic Shows Enjoy a Boo at the Zoo family tradition with remarkable slight-of-hand and optical illusions from magic man David Levitan. Location; Tent by bear exhibitTime; 12:00pm, 2:00pm, 4:00pm   Treat Stations Special locations around the park will help sweeten your visit.Time: 11:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m.Creepy Crafts Workshop Make a one-of-a-kind Halloween mask of your favorite wild animal. Location: Dancing Crane Plaza
 Time: 11:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.   Extinct Animal Graveyard Learn about endangered and extinct animals at this spooky display.Location: Mouse House lawn.Creature Chats Bronx Zoo animal experts celebrate wildlife iconic to Halloween season.  11am – Spiders – By Sea lion Pool 1pm – Snakes – World of Reptiles 3pm – Bats – Jungle World   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult general admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.Contact:Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgSteve Fairchild –718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org