Wildlife Conservation Society Commemorates Endangered Species Day Bronx, NY – May 15, 2015 – The following statement is from Jim Breheny, WCS Executive Vice President and General Director of the WCS Zoos and Aquarium: “The WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) is commemorating Endangered Species Day at all five of our wildlife parks. “Since its founding 120 years ago, WCS has become one of the world’s leading conservation organizations. WCS has harnessed the expertise in its zoos and aquarium with its global field conservation programs in the name of saving wildlife. Beginning with the Bronx Zoo’s pivotal role in the restoration of the American bison – bringing that species back from the brink of extinction – WCS’s impact on wildlife conservation is evident in our own backyard and around the globe. WCS’s zoos and aquarium have been leaders in providing our animals with exceptional care while helping to ensure viable populations and species sustainability for future generations. Throughout our history, we have hosted more than 400 million visitors, providing many guests their only opportunity to experience wildlife. “Endangered Species Day is an opportunity to recognize that we are the stewards of this planet, and the fragile balance of the Earth’s biodiversity is in our hands. Many species are threatened with extinction due to human activities, but there is much that each of us can do in the name of conservation to help save species around the world.  “The Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) is marking Endangered Species Day by officially launching its SAFE (Saving Animals From Extinction) initiative. AZA SAFE will pool the resources, expertise, and conservation science of the entire AZA-accredited zoo and aquarium community to save endangered species in the wild. Beginning with the African penguin, AZA has identified 10 priority species and is developing conservation action plans for each.  Over time, the AZA SAFE initiative will expand to 100 priority species. “Modern zoos and aquariums must be conservation organizations relating the species in their care and the conduit for protection those species in the wild. Through science, funding, education, and expertise, zoos and aquariums are a major contributor to conservation around the world. The health and wellbeing of global biodiversity is a top priority for AZA-accredited zoos and aquariums and their 180 million annual visitors. Launching the AZA SAFE initiative is a fitting way to mark Endangered Species Day.” CONTACT:    Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgSteve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $19.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $17.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010. Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.    ###