Leo The Snow Leopard: The True Story of an Amazing Rescue
				
				A children’s book that appeals to animal lovers of all ages
				
						Signing at Central Park Zoo follows author’s appearance at Ultimate Block Party in Central Park
						

				
		
		
Sunday, Oct. 3, 2010, 2:30 p.m.
 


		
New York, NY – date – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo is hosting author New York Times bestselling author Craig Hatkoff for the debut and signing of his latest non-fiction children’s picture book: Leo the Snow Leopard: The True Story of an Amazing Rescue. Hatkoff wrote the book along with his daughters Juliana Hatkoff and Isabella Hatkoff. The book is published by Scholastic Press. 

 

The inspiring true story tells of the rescue of Leo as a cub in the mountains of Pakistan and his incredible journey to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo where he lives today.  Leo’s journey will teach young readers about the importance of wildlife around the world, emphasizing how working on conservation issues with local governments, even in conflict zones, is essential to building bridges and knocking down barriers between cultures.

 

Who:     
Craig Hatkoff, author

 

What:     
Book debut and signing

 

Where:   
WCS’s Central Park Zoo 

 Zootique
 830 Fifth Avenue

New York, NY 10065

               

When:    
Sunday, Oct. 3, 2010

 2:30-4 p.m.

 

Hatkoff will come to WCS’s Central Park Zoo following his appearance at the Ultimate Block Party in Central Park. Ultimate Block Party, presented by Play for Tomorrow, will transform the Naumburg Bandshell area of New York City’s Central Park into the world’s most innovative playground, demonstrating the power of fun and games for learning and helping to reinforce that how we play as children helps form who we become as adults.

 

Members of the media interested in attending should contact Sophie Bass at sbass@wcs.org 

 
Contact:

Sophie Bass:  718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org

Mary Dixon: 718-220-3711; mdixon@wcs.org

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 



Craig Hatkoff  is the cofounder of the Tribeca Film Festival, the founder and Chairman of Turtle Pond Publications LLC, and a member of the Board of Directors of WildlifeDirect. Isabella and Craig Hatkoff are the co-authors of the #1 New York Times bestseller Owen & Mzee: The True Story of a Remarkable Friendship and Owen & Mzee: The Language of Friendship. Craig Hatkoff, Isabella Hatkoff and Juliana Hatkoff are also the authors of Knut: How One Little Polar Bear Captivated the World; Looking for Miza: The True Story of the Mountain Gorilla Family Who Rescued One of Their Own; and most recently, Winter’s Tail: How One Little Dolphin Learned to Swim Again. The Hatkoffs live in New York City. 

 

Leo the Snow Leopard: The True Story of an Amazing Rescue

Written by Juliana Hatkoff, Isabella Hatkoff, and Craig Hatkoff

Scholastic Press

Publication Date: October 2010

ISBN: 978-0-545-22927-2

$17.99/ Ages 4-10

 



Play for Tomorrow was formed in 2009, a small group of educators, business leaders, authors and researchers formed Play for Tomorrow to champion the importance of play in the lives of children.  Conceived as a multi-tiered social movement, the groundbreaking initiative aims to ensure that all children are provided with the competitive skills necessary to succeed in the 21st Century global economy as well as build a public dialog to underscore the value of play in fostering lifelong achievement and social, emotional and physical well being.  Play for Tomorrow is committed to working towards affecting policy and education delivery and overcoming the disconnect between what we know about learning and how we are teaching. The organization’s mission is to change attitudes, beliefs and practices about playful learning among families, educators, child-care providers, pediatricians and policymakers.

To learn more about the Ultimate Block Party and Play for Tomorrow, visit www.UltimateBlockParty.com