BRONX, N.Y. — Jan. 17, 2024 — Roses are red, violets are blue; celebrate love with help from the Bronx Zoo.

The popular Name-a-Roach program returns for a 13th year, allowing donors to symbolically name a Bronx Zoo Madagascar hissing cockroach for their Valentine … or ex-Valentine. The cockroaches are located in the Madagascar! Exhibit at the Bronx Zoo. 

Flowers wilt and chocolates melt, but cockroaches last forever. For a $15 donation, your Valentine will receive a digital certificate featuring the name chosen for the roach. Upgrade your order with an additional donation to receive extras like roach socks, a roach plush, or a virtual encounter where you can virtually meet a cockroach and chat live with the experts about caring for these unique and charming creatures. Supplies are limited for upgrades, so make sure you get your unforgettable gift today. 

Name-a-Roach 2024 gift packages include:


 The Original — Digital certificate: $15
 Roach Plush — Plush and printed certificate: $40
 Roach Socks — Socks and printed certificate: $35 one pair/$50 two pairs 
 Valentine's Virtual Encounter & Roach Plush — Encounter, plush and printed certificate: $60
 Valentine's Virtual Encounter & Roach Socks — Encounter, socks and printed certificate: $60 one pair/$75 two pairs
 The Works — Roach Plush, two pairs of Roach Socks, Valentine's Virtual Encounter, and printed certificate: $85 


Orders must be placed by Feb. 8, 2024 in order to receive the gift by Valentine’s Day. Valentine's Virtual Encounters are approximately 15 minutes, with sessions on Feb. 10 at 10 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Feb. 11 at 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., and Feb. 14 at 12:45 p.m. Login details will be included in the information card received with your package (if the order was placed before the shipping deadline of Feb. 8), and in an email that will go out on Feb. 9.

The original Name-a-Roach was launched by the Bronx Zoo in 2011, and thousands of hopeless romantics from around the world have named the Bronx Zoo’s Madagascar hissing cockroaches after friends, family, loved ones, and not-so-loved ones. Previous names chosen have been inspired by politics, music, movies, and more. 

Donations help the Wildlife Conservation Society protect animals, big and small, loved and maligned, at the Bronx Zoo and around the world. Place your order today to benefit roaches and many other species, and join us at the Bronx Zoo soon.

# # #