The stars land at WCS’s Bronx Zoo as Radio Disney’s Road Crew and Rocknoceros bring their special brand of children’s music to New York Life’s Main Stage.



Bronx, N.Y. – April 22, 2010 – What better way to celebrate Earth Day Weekend than at the Animal
Tales Extravaganza at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.  This weekend the zoo welcomes wildlife
conservationist and Animal Planet star Jeff Corwin as he reads from his book, Your
Backyard is Wild and the Radio Disney Road
Crew returns to New York Life’s Main Stage to entertain the masses. 



Also at the zoo’s Asia Plaza, Kristen Earhart, editor at
Seven Footer press, will entertain kids from her latest children’s book, Life
Size Zoo, and Hudson Talbott will take
families through the vibrant illustrations in his popular book, United
Tweets of America. 



On New York Life’s Main Stage at the zoo’s Astor Court, a
special guest from Washington DC, Rocknoceros, will get the crowd jumping with
their award-winning tunes for music lovers of all ages.



And don’t forget about the legendary Bronx Zoo animal
entertainers.  Families can
introduce their babies to the newest members of the Bronx Zoo family – the baby
mandrill, Gertrude, in Congo Gorilla Forest; Ares, the new baby Coquerel’s
Sifaka in the Madagascar! exhibit; and the new Galapagos tortoises in the
Reptile House.



Over the course of the 13-weekend extravaganza, renowned
children’s authors from notable publishers including HarperCollins, Little
Brown Books for Young Readers, Macmillan, Penguin Group (USA), Random House
Children’s Books, and Simon & Schuster will be hosting special story-time
readings of their books at the Asia Plaza Theater.  Families will be able
to meet their favorite children’s book authors and listen to them read their
new and classic works then head over to New York Life’s Main Stage on Astor
Court for live entertainment by some of the top-rated children’s entertainers.



Kids can walk through larger-than-life pages of real books
including The Very Hungry Caterpillar by
Eric Carle at the Butterfly Garden and Alphabet by Matthew Van Fleet at the Reptile House.  At
the Bear Overlook, walk through the new children’s book, Moon Bear, by Brenda Z. Guiberson and award-winning
illustrator, Ed Young and enjoy a wild ride with Wild About Books by Judy Sierra at Astor Court.  These
interactive, walk-through book experiences have been underwritten by the
publishers of the books featured; Penguin Group (USA), Simon & Schuster,
The Macmillan Children’s Publishing Group and Random House Children’s Books.





The experience also includes an opportunity for children to
make their own “animal tale” book and “animal tail” bookmark based on Big
Babies, Little Babies, which is published
by DK Publishing, one of the event sponsors.  


This weekend’s line-up for the Animal Tales Extravaganza includes the following:



**Saturday,
April 24 

11am,
1pm – Wild Asia Plaza

Author
appearance and reading of Your Back Yard is Wild (Penguin Group USA)

Read by Animal Planet’s Jeff Corwin

This
is the first book in a fiction series with characters that have adventures in
different habitats, demonstrating to kids that you can have fun discovering
plants and animals around you whether you live in a city or near a forest. When
budding naturalists Lucy and Benjamin get a chance to visit their cousin Gabe
in Brooklyn, they can’t wait. They are used to seeing fascinating animals and
plants in the Florida Everglades where they live, but they can’t imagine what
they will find in Gabe’s New York City backyard.  The first book in Jeff Corwin’s young middle-grade fiction
series shows kids that no matter where you live, you can have fun discovering
the plants, animals, and natural life around you.



Meet
wildlife biologist, conservationist, and Emmy Award-winning producer and host
of more than a dozen TV series that have been broadcast in more than 100
countries for the following networks: Discovery, Animal Planet, Disney, the
Food Network, NBC, CNN, and the Travel Channel. Jeff Corwin’s popular series
include Animal Planet’s Jeff Corwin Experience, Corwin’s Quest,
Spring Watch, and King of the Jungle; Disney’s Going Wild with Jeff Corwin;
Investigation Earth with the Discovery
Networks, and many more!



11:30am,
1pm – New York Life’s Main Stage

Performance
by Radio Disney Road Crew 

AM
1560, New York’s #1, 24-hour radio station devoted to kids, tweens and families
will host a live station appearance at the Bronx Zoo with the Radio Disney Road
Crew featuring contests, your favorite music, and plenty of great prizes! 
During the appearance, our DJ will keep the energy level high as we engage kids
and families alike in interactive games and activities like dance parties,
trivia contests and more, including custom created games tailored around the
zoo like Monkey Chatter, Animal Roar, and more.



**Sunday,
April 25 

11am,
1pm – Wild Asia Plaza

Editor
appearance and reading of Life Size Zoo (Seven Footer Press)

Read by Kristin Earhart

From
tiny rodents to gigantic elephants—with unparalleled photographs and
informative, fun facts—Life-Size Zoo
is an actual-size animal encyclopedia unlike any other.



Remarkably
vivid and detailed close-up photographs of more than twenty animals were
captured at some of the world’s premier zoos, including a tiger, panda, red
panda, meerkat, sea lion, giraffe, camel, zebra, tapir, rhinoceros, elephant
(adult and baby), aardvark, gorilla, hedgehog, prairie dog, capybara, anteater,
sloth, and armadillo.



3pm
– Wild Asia Plaza

Author
appearance and reading of United Tweets of America, (Penguin
Group USA)

Read by Hudson Talbott

This
colorful parade of state birds competing to be Top Tweet will have readers of
all ages laughing aloud. From Alabama's Yellowhammer to Wyoming's Western
Meadowlark, each bird is a winner and each bird loves to show off the state it
calls home.  



Hudson
Talbott has created an inspired introduction to states and their birds.  His vibrant illustrations infuse the
birds' interactions with energy and humor, making this a great way to spark
kids' interest in United States history, geography, and wildlife.



11:00am,
1pm – New York Life’s Main Stage

Musical
performance by Rocknoceros

Coach
Cotton, Williebob, and Boogie Woogie Bennie are Rocknoceros, the Washington, DC
area's award-winning band that makes very cool music for children of all ages.
They write terrific songs that teach even the youngest music fans, and perhaps
most importantly, they are flat-out fun.



New York Life is the featured sponsor of the Animal Tales
Extravaganza and is hosting a Child ID
event every weekend during the festivities. The Child ID program provides peace of mind to
parents who are concerned about the safety of their children and want to take
action to protect them. A complimentary Identification Card, complete with the
child’s photograph and fingerprints will be given to the parents.

Contact: 



Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



  


MEDIA NOTE(S): 

** 
         Scheduled times and performers
subject to change without notice.

 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010. 


The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



New York Life Insurance
Company, a Fortune 100 company
founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the United
States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world.  New York Life
has the highest possible financial strength ratings from all four of the major
credit rating agencies.  Headquartered in New York City, New York Life’s
family of companies offers life insurance, retirement income, investments and
long-term care insurance.  New York Life Investments** provides
institutional asset management and retirement plan services. Other New York
Life affiliates provide an array of securities products and services, as well
as institutional and retail mutual funds.  Please visit New York Life’s
Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more
information.



*New York Life is the largest
mutual life insurance company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within
industries, Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune magazine, May 4,
2009. 



**New York Life Investments
is a service mark used by New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and
its subsidiary, New York Life Investment Management LLC.