Credit © WCS




 Credit © WCS



 Credit © WCS



					
					
						BRONX, N.Y. – July 18, 2024 – Just in time for summer, a Matschie’s tree kangaroo (Dendrolagus matschiei) has made its first appearance at the Bronx Zoo. The joey, which was born at the end of December, recently emerged its head from its mother's pouch to make its public debut. This is the second of its species born at the Bronx Zoo and to this female since 2021.

Like their kangaroo and wallaby marsupial cousins, the majority of a tree kangaroo joey’s physical development occurs in the mother’s pouch. Internal gestation is about 6 weeks. At birth, the joey is about the size of a human thumbnail and immediately crawls through the mother’s fur to enter her pouch. After about seven months, the joey completely emerges from the pouch, but frequently returns to nurse.

Tree kangaroos are arboreal and live within the canopy of mountain forests, generally at elevations above 4000 feet. An adult male will weigh up to 30 pounds and measure about 30 inches in length, not including the tail. The Matschie’s tree kangaroo is also known as the Huon tree kangaroo as it is native to the forests of the Huon Peninsula in Papua New Guinea. The 14 different species of tree kangaroos are found only in areas of Papua New Guinea, Indonesia and Australia.

Guests can visit and see the joey and its mother in the Bronx Zoo’s JungleWorld exhibit. Exhibit times may vary as the joey matures and adapts to its surroundings.

This birth is significant for the Bronx Zoo and the AZA population. It is the result of the zoo’s participation in a cooperative breeding program administered by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA). AZA accredited zoos and aquariums work together to maintain genetic diversity and demographic stability in zoo animal populations.

The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) classifies the Matschie's tree kangaroo as Endangered. It is estimated that fewer than 2500 remain in the wild. They are threatened by habitat destruction, unsustainable hunting practices, and other human activities.

Also at the Bronx Zoo this summer:

This year marks the Bronx Zoo’s 125th anniversary. Through Sunday, August 4th, guests can experience a temporary exhibit, Animal Chronicles, a quarter-mile walking trail featuring 68 immersive eco-sculptures that highlight achievements in the Bronx Zoo’s history of saving animal species and connecting New Yorkers to wildlife.

###