Wildlife Career
Ladder Program receives Angela
Peterson Excellence in Diversity Award from Association
of Zoos and Aquariums







Bronx, NY – Sept. 22,
2011 – The Association of Zoos and Aquariums awarded its top honor for
excellence in diversity in the field of education to the Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo for the Wildlife Career Ladder program for Bronx teens.



The zoo’s education department was presented with the Angela Peterson Excellence in
Diversity Award at a ceremony at the 2011 AZA Annual Conference in
Atlanta, Georgia. The award recognizes the most
significant innovative, productive, far-reaching program to promote diversity
in institutions throughout AZA. 





Established in 2008-09 with support from the Bronx Institute
of Lehman College through funding from a U.S. Department of Education GEAR UP
grant, the Wildlife Career Ladder is a multi-year program that engages minority
students at the beginning of their sophomore year in high school and takes them
through the beginning of their junior year. The program involves approximately
25 young people at any time – almost all of whom are minorities, and many come
from some of the lowest income communities in the country.  


“We are proud of our partnership
with the Bronx Institute of Lehman College and it is exciting to be
recognized by our peers,” said Don Lisowy, WCS Director of Education. “The Wildlife
Career Ladder program is still in its infancy and has tremendous potential to
expand and serve as a model for development of future programs.”





As currently constructed, the Wildlife Career Ladder
consists of four main components:  After-School and Weekend Program – students
receive an introduction to topics and careers in environmental and wildlife
sciences and have a chance to meet zoo professionals in all fieldsSummer Program – students receive hands-on
instruction in animal health and conservation biologyExplainers Program – students engage in
further study that enables them to interpret exhibits for guests at the Bronx
ZopCareer Ladder Internship – students are
placed in part-time internships throughout WCS in positions including
Environmental Education, Public Affairs, Information Technology, Human
Resources, and Business Services. 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Education Department serves more than 100,000 students and 2,400
teachers annually. It works across New York City to provide science,
technology, engineering, and math education to underserved students. WCS is a
partner with the innovative Urban Assembly School for Wildlife Conservation in
the Bronx and offers subsidized and free programs to thousands of students
from all five New York City boroughs each year.



Contact:
Max Pulsinelli –
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



  


The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult general
admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free.
Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently
located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by
bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from
Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.