3rd Annual 5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s
Bronx Zoo Registration is now open at www.wcs.runforthewild.orgJanuary registrants receive $5 early-bird discountSaturday, April 30, 2011















Bronx, N.Y. – January 13, 2011 – Calling all runners, walkers, and athletic hopefuls
– it’s time to lace-up your running shoes to prepare for New York City’s wildest
race: The Wildlife Conservation Society’s third annual Run for the
Wild at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  



This year’s 5k-run/walk takes place on Saturday, April 30,
2011 and is dedicated to helping save penguins, which the Wildlife Conservation
Society has been working to protect for more than three decades.



Run for the Wild registration is now open at www.wcs.runforthewild.org. Those
who register during the month of January will receive the early-bird discount
of $5 off regular registration fees. 



Participants can choose from two different events. The 5k
race for individual runners will begin at 8:30 a.m.; casual runners and walkers
can take part in the Family Fun Run/Walk at 8:45 a.m. 



The event promises a fun and exciting day for runners,
walkers, spectators, and those who sponsor a runner. There will be plenty of post-run festivities, including
refreshments, music, children’s activities, and more. 



After the run, participants are invited to stay and enjoy
the zoo and its animal residents for the rest of the day. Everyone is
encouraged to visit the Magellanic penguins in the zoo’s Russell B. Aitken Sea
Bird Aviary. There are many other
wonderful exhibits to visit including Tiger Mountain, Madagascar!, and JungleWorld.
Complimentary parking and admission will be provided. 



Online registration is $30 for adults – $25 for those who
register during the month of January – and children and seniors receive a
reduced rate.  



Those who are unable to participate in the event can still
help WCS save penguins by making a donation online or sponsoring a runner or a
team. Runners are encouraged to
seek individual or team sponsors and will receive special Run for the Wild
gifts for their fundraising efforts. 
For $30 in pledges runners will earn a Run for the Wild T-shirt; $100, a
WCS penguin water bottle; $250, a limited edition Hard Rock Cafe pin; and $500
in pledges a will earn a plush penguin and a chance to name one of the penguins
at the zoo. All pledges and donations provide much needed support for WCS field
staff working to ensure a future for these beautiful aquatic birds. 



The Wildlife Conservation Society works around the globe to
save wildlife and wild places. Changing climate, overfishing, and habitat loss
are some of the factors affecting penguin populations. Of the world's 17
penguin species, 12 are experiencing serious population declines with some
facing extinction within the 21st century. WCS is committed to
ensuring a future for penguins where they live, including Punta Tombo on the coast
of Argentina, home to the largest colony of Magellanic penguins in the world.



This event will sell out, so register early. For more
information, to register, or to sponsor a runner/team, visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org.WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following
generous sponsors:  



Presenting
Sponsor:
Con
Edison



Featured
Sponsor:
Fisher-Price®




Supporting
Sponsors:
Aquafina,
Benjamin Moore, Hard Rock Cafe, Monroe College, UBS 



Media Partner:
ABC7






Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.


The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.