Credit: Julie Larsen ©WCS




 Credit: Julie Larsen ©WCS



 Credit: Julie Larsen ©WCS



					
					
						BRONX, NY, Jan 9, 2024—Before the Empire State Building was constructed, before the first New York City subway ride, before the New York Yankees were a team, there was the Bronx Zoo (formally, the New York Zoological Park).

The iconic New York institution first opened its doors in 1899 and celebrates its 125th birthday, Nov. 8, throughout 2024. Over the past century plus, the Bronx Zoo has become a cultural and education leader, a conservation giant, and a gateway to nature, for more than a half billion visitors.

“Generations of New Yorkers and others from around the globe have visited the Bronx Zoo since 1899,” said Jim Breheny, Director of the Bronx Zoo and Executive Vice President of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Zoos and Aquarium. “Throughout our 125 years, we have worked to educate millions about animals and the places they live while working to protect wildlife and nature around the world. Every visitor to the Bronx Zoo has helped us with that mission. We invite everyone to join us in 2024 in celebration of the successes of generations of zoo keepers, curators, veterinarians, and all others who have taken care of the animals and our spectacular 265 acre park.”

Planned festivities to celebrate 125 years of the Bronx Zoo include:


 Animal Chronicles: A NEW temp exhibit opening on April 20, 2024, that includes a walking trail of more than a quarter mile featuring life-size and gigantic, immersive eco-sculptures that showcase key achievements in the Bronx Zoo’s history of saving animal species and connecting New Yorkers to wildlife. Animal Chronicles will be available daily and is included with admission.
 Monthly Birthday Celebrations: Weekend celebrations will be spread throughout the park on select days from April through September, including parades, performances, crafting, scavenger hunts, tours, Wildlife Theater, and much more. Each month will feature a different theme; and this experience will be included with admission.
 Seasonal Programming: The Bronx Zoo’s 125th birthday will be celebrated at beloved holiday events like Boo at the Zoo and Holiday Lights.


Throughout the year, the Bronx Zoo will share fun and interesting facts, and highlight key animal and exhibit stories from over the years. Follow along on Bronx Zoo social media to learn more.

WCS Members have helped support the zoo’s longstanding conservation efforts making 125 years possible. WCS Members will be given exclusive access to special events, discounts, and benefits throughout 2024.

A press event will be held in mid-April to kick off the in-park celebrations.

# # #