To collaborate on field conservation and public education to protect biodiversity in the face of global climate change and human encroachment 



Singapore, January 29, 2010 – Wildlife Reserves Singapore Pte Ltd (WRS), the parent company of Jurong Bird Park, Night Safari and Singapore Zoo, together with its recently established Wildlife Reserves Singapore Conservation Fund (WRSCF) today signed an agreement to collaborate with the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), based in New York, and Wildlife Conservation Society Singapore Limited (WCS Singapore) on field conservation and public education to protect biodiversity in the face of global climate change and human encroachment.



The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed between Ms Claire Chiang, Chairperson of both WRS and WRSCF; Mr Ward W. Woods, Chairman of WCS and Dr Steven E. Sanderson, President and CEO of WCS and Chairman of WCS Singapore, in the presence of President S R Nathan, Patron of WRSCF.  



This MOU marks the start of a stronger commitment to protect biodiversity, not just in Singapore, but in Asia and around the world. Through the joint commission, representatives from all four parties will co-operate to undertake field conservation projects and share best practices and technical expertise contributing to wildlife conservation. They will also collaborate to promote public education and increase awareness on conservation issues.



 “At WRS, an unprecedented level of effort has been invested to conserve and protect biodiversity. To strengthen our commitment, WRSCF was established last year, primarily to conserve endangered native wildlife. This MOU represents another important step forward in our ongoing commitment to preserve our ecosystems and precious wildlife species, many of which are already threatened and in dire need of protection,” said Ms Chiang.



 Established in 1895, the Wildlife Conservation Society has built a strong global conservation network to become the world’s most comprehensive conservation organisation. WCS currently manages about 500 conservation projects in more than 60 countries and educates millions of visitors on important issues affecting our planet at  the five parks they manage in New York City, including the Bronx Zoo, New York Aquarium, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, and Queens Zoo. 



 “Our new partnership with Wildlife Reserves Singapore represents an important step for WCS and the conservation of wildlife in Asia,” said Mr Woods. “WRS’ conservation efforts and programmes have won worldwide acclaim. We look forward to spearheading new initiatives together and developing a regional centre of excellence for the protection of Asia’s most endangered wildlife."



 “We share WCS’ clear mission to save wildlife and wild places across the globe. That is why I am so proud to be part of this joint collaboration to bring our conservation programme to the global arena. This partnership will pave the way for future collaborations and open many doors for all four parties to work towards their shared goal of protecting global biodiversity,” added Ms Chiang.



 With this MOU, the four parties will coordinate efforts to research methodologies and the exchange of multiple sources of knowledge, leading to action plans for conservation, education and key priorities for the management of biodiversity. 



Working in Asia since the early 20th century, WCS has partnered with national and regional governments, local communities and other scientific organisations to protect Asia’s incredible diversity of wildlife and wild places — to bolster environmental policy, train new generations of environmental stewards, support sustainable livelihoods, and connect protected areas. Some notable WCS projects include: working with the government of Cambodia to establish the Seima Protection Forest, created to protect wildlife and conserve carbon; and an ongoing effort to save tigers across Asia (WCS is committed to increasing tiger populations by 50 percent across 10 landscapes by 2016). 



 In the areas of conservation and research, WRS parks in Singapore have undertaken multiple projects, which focus on species such as the oriental pied hornbill, pangolin and orangutan, through collaborations with various organisations and institutions. Recent conservation efforts include hosting a regional Asian pangolin conservation workshop. All WRS parks are designated wildlife rescue centres by the governing authority. 



About Wildlife Reserves Singapore (WRS)

Wildlife Reserves Singapore (WRS) is the parent company of award-winning attractions Jurong Bird Park, Night Safari and Singapore Zoo. WRS parks strive to be world-class leisure attractions, providing excellent exhibits of animals and birds presented in their natural environment for the purpose of conservation, education and recreation. In 2009, Jurong Bird Park served 900,000 visitors, the Night Safari, more than 1.1 million visitors and Singapore Zoo welcomed more than 1.6 million visitors. 



 WRS parks have been conferred the Best Leisure Attraction Experience Award at the Singapore Tourism Awards 18 times. The record achievement affirms WRS parks’ status as Singapore’s premier leisure venues. Visit: www.wrs.com.sg



About Wildlife Reserves Singapore Conservation Fund (WRSCF)

Wildlife Reserves Singapore Conservation Fund (WRSCF) is a charity and Institution of Public Character, established in 2009 by Wildlife Reserves Singapore, the parent company of Jurong Bird Park, Night Safari and Singapore Zoo. The Fund was set up with the primary purpose of conserving endangered native wildlife. As an independent charity, it is supported by a team of specialists from various related organizations. The Fund’s focus will be on native animal conservation efforts and the issue of climate change. Visit: www.wrscf.org.sg



About Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 



 



ISSUED ON BEHALF OF: Wildlife Reserves Singapore 

BY:                                     Citigate Dewe Rogerson, i.MAGE Pte Ltd
                                            1 Raffles Place

                                            #26-02 OUB Centre

                                            SINGAPORE 048616

WRS CONTACT:                Ms. Eileen Bakri / Ms. Laura Chew

OFFICE HOURS:                6534-5122  (Office)

AFTER OFFICE HOURS:  9154-3765/9781-0737  (Mobile)

EMAIL:                               eileen.bakri@citigatedrimage.com /     

                                            laura.chew@citigatedrimage.com             

  

WCS CONTACT:               Mr. John Delaney 

OFFICE HOURS:              1-718-220-3275  (Office)

EMAIL:                              jdelaney@wcs.org