Get
Ready for Ghouls, Goblins, and Ghastly Good Times!

 


		

		
The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park and Queens
Host their Annual “Boo at the Zoo” Weekends

 



New York, N.Y., October 1, 2009 – Prepare for a spook-tacular weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Central Park and Queens Zoos! The zoos will each present “Boo at the Zoo,” an extreme Halloween extravaganza, October 30 and 31 at the Central Park Zoo and October 31 and November 1 at the Queens Zoo. The event promises spine-tingling surprises and festivities for zoo-goers of all ages.     

And if one weekend of Boo at the Zoo isn’t enough, you can also
check out the event at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo on
select weekends throughout October. For more information, please visit www.bronxzoo.com. Creatively costumed characters, craft-making, and treats for the animals will make this a frighteningly fun weekend. So if you’re not too spooked, head to the zoos to have a terrifyingly terrific time this Halloween season! 












Contact: Barbara Russo (212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org)
 The line-up of Boo activities includes:

CENTRAL PARK ZOO –
“Boo at the Zoo”





Activities (10:30 a.m. to 4 p.m.) include:

Our trick-or-treating animals
redefine what we consider Halloween goodies. Watch polar bears, snow monkeys,
and Rain Forest and Tisch Children’s Zoo residents dig into pumpkins that
are filled with all sorts of treats, from corn-on-the-cob to bamboo to fish.

See and hear about all things
creepy and crawly when our wildlife witch presents a SPOOKY show in a haunted
habitat. (Noon, 1:30 and 2:15p.m.) 

Learn all about fascinating
extinct animals by finding their colorful replicas hidden around the zoo. A
special word jumble guides visitors along the trail in search of these
“spirits”. Successful explorers receive a special treat. 

Zoo-goers can get in the spirit of
Halloween with face painting–choose from a pumpkin, ghost, bat, or spider
design.  

A “creepy headband”
brings out the creative side of youngsters as they make a paper bat, spider, or
snake design. 

Go batty for a bat chat at the bat
exhibit,  (Every hour on the hour starting at Noon.)



The Central Park Zoo, a
Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12,
and free for children under 3. Admission includes entry into the main zoo, and
the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays,
and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. Tickets are
sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call
212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com