Toys collected at Bronx Zoo will benefit local military families
		
Toys collected at Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, and NY Aquarium will benefit victims of Hurricane Sandy
Toy donors will receive a free ticket
  to the Bronx Zoo

  Bronx, NY – Nov. 15, 2012 – Officials from the  Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr. were joined by students from PS 205 to donate the first toys of the season to the annual holiday toy drive to benefit veterans and active-duty members of the military and their families.
The Wildlife Conservation Society will also collect toys at its other WCS wildlife parks – Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, and New York Aquarium. Toys donated at these locations will benefit families in need as a result of Hurricane Sandy. 
  The New York Aquarium will be accepting toy donations at Tom’s Diner at 1229 Boardwalk West in Coney Island. 
  In appreciation for their generosity, those who make a qualifying donation of a new, unwrapped toy at the Bronx Zoo between Saturday, Nov. 17 and Monday, Dec. 31 will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo. 
  “The Wildlife Conservation Society is thrilled to have the opportunity to once again work with Borough President Diaz to give back to the community that continually supports the zoo and the mission of WCS,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “The toy drives will benefit those who truly deserve the help: the men and women who have served our country and those that are still suffering in the wake of the hurricane. We are proud to play a role in making the holidays more enjoyable for families in need of a helping hand.”
  Said Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr.: “This toy drive has become an annual tradition here in the Bronx because we know that every child deserves a gift during the holiday season, especially children of military families who deal with the bittersweet feelings brought on by the holidays. We hope that these toys will put a smile on their face and make their holidays a little bit brighter. I also urge folks in other areas to make donations at the other WCS wildlife parks to benefit families that were affected by Hurricane Sandy.” 
  The zoo will serve as a collection point for new, unwrapped toys donated by members of the community. Toys will be collected through the end of December and will be distributed by the Borough President’s office. 
For more information, please visit www.bronxzoo.com.
  ** Disclaimer: One general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, or New York Aquarium (AQ collection at Tom’s Diner). All WCS decisions final. For details on donation items go to bronxzoo.com. Promotion available from 11/17/12–12/31/12. May not be combined with any other offer.
  The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org. 
  Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation. 


  CONTACT: 
  Max Pulsinelli:  (o) 718-220-5182 (m) 571-218-7601; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
  Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189 (m) 914-263-8179; sfairchild@wcs.org