Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo 
								Announces One-of-a-Kind Gift
						
						
								Zoo houses thousands hissing cockroaches in its Madagascar exhibit 
								

						
				
		
		
				
 

		
		

		
 NEW YORK (February 9, 2011) – Forget diamonds, roses, or chocolates.  The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo announced today a light-hearted, one-of-a-kind Valentine’s Day gift: naming one of the zoo’s famous Madagascar hissing cockroaches after a loved one, sweetheart, mother-in-law—or perhaps your favorite “ex.”



And the zoo has plenty to name with thousands of the super-sized bugs on exhibit in Madagascar!—an award-winning habitat for lemurs, crocodiles, and many other unique species.       



Each gift comes with a colorful e-card sent to your loved one announcing that a cockroach has been named in his or her honor.  Each name costs $10 and will help the Wildlife Conservation Society save wildlife and wild places around the world.  To name a hissing cockroach go to: http://www.bronxzoo.com/name-a-roach/



Madagascar hissing cockroaches are the world’s largest roach species reaching nearly four-inches long.  The namesake hissing noise is emitted as a defense mechanism.  Like nearly every roach species, Madagascar hissing cockroaches are not considered pests and rarely enter homes.

		
“Nothing says forever like a cockroach,” said Jim Breheny, Senior Vice President for Living Institutions and Director of the Bronx Zoo.  “They are resourceful, resilient, and have been around for hundreds of millions of years.”  


		
				
						

				
		
		
				Contact: 
				
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)

		



		
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

		
				
				
						Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation