New York, N.Y. – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central
Park zoo has visitors awing over its newest animal addition: an adorable new
California sea lion pup.



“Bruiser,” as he’s named, was born in WCS’s Bronx Zoo last
year. After a brief stay at WCS’s New York Aquarium, he’s finally made his home
in Central Park and is quickly getting adjusted to his new urban home. On
exhibit with fellow sea lions April and Scooter, Bruiser is one baby who likes
to stay active.  He spends most of
his time exploring the zoo’s centerpiece sea lion exhibit, which a
representation of the species’ natural habitat on the West Coast. 



Bruiser is cute and weighs in at a mere 90 lbs., but he’s
packing on two to three pounds a week. Adult male sea lions can weigh as much
as 900 lbs., so this little guy has a lot of growing up to do.WCS’s animal keepers say Bruiser is doing very well in his
new home.  He’s an active, healthy
pup, and has even started to take part in basic sea lion enrichment and
training. Keepers train the sea lions to do specific behaviors in order to give
them a basic exam to ensure they are healthy and in tip-top shape. 



Visitors are invited to see Bruiser, April and Scooter
during their enrichment sessions every day at 11:30 a.m., 2 and 4 p.m. But be
warned: Those in the front might get splashed.



Contact:            
Barbara
Russo: 212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org




The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the
year.  Admission is $10 for
adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children
under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am
– 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November
through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing.
The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further
information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. 




Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.