Will the Cancún climate talks lead to a concrete commitment to REDD+?
				
				
						Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) is a key component in any climate agreement
				
				
						Wildlife Conservation Society: Talks need to result in a REDD+ decision
						

				
		
		

		
				
 NEW YORK  (December 3, 2010) – Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) climate policy experts are available to comment on current efforts to agree on a global solution to climate change as negotiators from around the world gather in Cancún, Mexico for 2010 United Nations Climate Change Conference through December 10th.  WCS is committed to helping create mechanisms that provide incentives for countries to keep high-carbon forests standing, which is the bedrock strategy of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and Enhancing (REDD+).



WCS will be participating in the conference as a registered non-governmental organization to observe the proceedings.  WCS officials will be speaking with negotiators from the U.S. and other countries to urge progress on REDD+ language and financial commitments to REDD+ and adaptation strategies.  In addition, Tom Clements of WCS is part of the Kingdom of Cambodia’s official government delegation and has special insight into the deliberations.



Linda Krueger, WCS Vice President for Policy, leads WCS’s efforts on international climate strategy and is available for interviews on the state of the climate talks by contacting Chip Weiskotten, WCS Federal Communications Manager: 1-202-624-8172, cweiskotten@wcs.org; or Stephen Sautner, Director of Communications: 1-718-220-3682, ssautner@wcs.org. 



The Wildlife Conservation Society is focused on national REDD+ readiness within countries that contain areas with high forest carbon storage through its Carbon for Conservation program.  As an on-the-ground partner in many potential REDD+ sites and landscapes, including the Seima Protection Forest in Cambodia and the Maya Biosphere Reserve in Guatemala, WCS is invested in developing the financial capacity to help people protect their forest and wetland carbon in high-biodiversity landscapes.  



REDD+ has enormous potential to mitigate climate change, support conservation of forests and other natural carbon sinks, and improve livelihoods for forest-dependent peoples.  WCS urges negotiators at the Cancún climate talks to come to a strong decision that will facilitate this winning strategy.





 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 


		
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation