This Fall: Raptors are Happening at the Zoo



















New York, N.Y. - The Wildlife Conservation Society's
Bronx Zoo is debuting a brand new educational Birds of Prey flying
show, September 12/13, 19/20, and 26/27.

Eagles, hawks, falcons, and vultures will be a part
of the presentation during this special three-weekend event in the
Bronx Zoo's Astor Court.

Following the show, there will be an up-close viewing
of these raptors of the wild.  Presenters will be on hand to chat with
visitors about their favorite fliers, their habitats, feeding,
migration, and their role in the ecosystem.

Also, as part of the experience, visitors will be able to:



Create environmentally safe crafts such as
recycled bird feeders to take home and help the birds in their own
backyards.See the world from a bird's-eye-view by
trying out different types of beak-like tools, playing the migration
game, and building their own nests.Attend a Wildlife Theater performance - The Great Migration Adventure.And a variety of other educational activities.














 

This special bird show is being presented by the Hawk Creek Wildlife Center.

Other announcements will be made in the near future
about additional new happenings at the Bronx Zoo this fall. Look for
more information on the zoo's fall hay rides.

Contact: Mary Dixon - 718-220-3711  


The Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays through November 2, 2009.
Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3
are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for
buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12,
#19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that
stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and
wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban
wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine
wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.