WCS’s Central Park Zoo
				 welcomes Patagonian cavy pup
				

				
						
						
				
				
						
 

						
								
										New York, NY- August 25, 2011 –
								
								
										 A two-week-old Patagonian cavy is the latest addition to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo. The yet to be named pup joins parents and older sister in the Tisch Children’s Zoo.  

 

Though they look like rabbits, cavies are rodents whose closest relatives are guinea pigs. They are common in the Patagonian steppes of Argentina and other areas of South America. Cavies are the fourth largest rodent in the world, reaching about 18 inches in height.


								
										 
								
						
				
				
						
								
										Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © WCS
								
						
				
				
						
						
						
								
										Contact: 
								
								
										
Sophie Bass (212) 439-6527; sbass@wcs.org

 
						
						
								

								
										 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue. For more information call 718-399-7339 or go to  www.prospectparkzoo.com
								 


								 


								
										The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
								
										


								
										Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org