New York – May 19, 2016 – Following the rally and press conference held today on the steps of City Hall, the following statement was issued by John F. Calvelli, Executive Vice President of Public Affairs at WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society): “Today’s event on the steps of City Hall shows there is clear support, both in City Council and in the communities, for an increase in funding for New York City’s 1500-plus cultural organizations. “We applaud the remarks made in support of culture led by Council Majority Leader Jimmy Van Bramer, Chair of the Committee on Cultural Affairs and Libraries; Councilmember Julissa Ferreras-Copeland, Chair of the Committee on Finance; and Council Minority Leader Steven Matteo. We thank all of the City Council members who participated and voiced their support for this important cause. “Mayor de Blasio’s executive budget for fiscal year 2017 keeps funding for the 1,500 cultural organizations throughout the five boroughs at essentially the same level it has been since 2008. We urge all of City Hall to join those who made their support clear this morning on the steps to recognize the importance and value of New York City Culture and increase operational support by $40 million for the coming year. “These organizations help make New York City a cultural capital of the world. They provide all New Yorkers opportunity to learn about and experience a vast array of cultural disciplines including dance, music, art, film, history, wildlife and more that serve as inspiration in life and career. “A funding increase would help NYC’s cultural community can provide continued, even increased, access and educational programing to all of the communities and neighborhoods they serve. Money spent on culture in New York City is an investment in the future of the city and its citizens in all five boroughs. “The NYC Inspires (#NYCInspires) campaign highlights cultural organizations of all kinds across the city and the means by which they have inspired their audiences. It tells the stories of individuals that were so inspired by culture as children that they have devoted their lives and careers to pursue a life that reflects those beginnings – bettering the city, their communities, and future generations of artists, musicians, performers, educators, curators, conservationists, scientists, and more. “We call on all New Yorkers to join in support of the city’s cultural organizations by visiting NYCInspires.org and sharing stories of how New York City Culture has impacted your lives.” ###           Stephen Sautner Executive Director of Communications Wildlife Conservation Society Bronx Zoo Bronx, NY 10460 P: 718-220-3682 ssautner@wcs.org Skype: scsautner newsroom.wcs.org Follow: @WCSNewsroom