“This legislation represents the United States’ best chance to address the international conservation crisis head on, thereby preserving our health and security and preventing the extinction of millions of species worldwide.”

WASHINGTON, D.C. – March 26, 2010 – John Calvelli, the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Executive Vice President of Public Affairs, applauded the leadership of Reps. Russ Carnahan (D-MO) and Jeff Fortenberry (R-NE) with the introduction of H.R. 4959, the Global Conservation Act of 2010.  The bipartisan legislation will coordinate the full effect of the United States’ domestic and international conservation efforts into a comprehensive strategy to reduce habitat destruction and prevent species extinction.  

“The Wildlife Conservation Society thanks Rep. Russ Carnahan, Rep. Jeff Fortenberry, and their excellent staff for the leadership, vision, and spirit of cooperation reflected in the introduction of the Global Conservation Act of 2010,” said Calvelli.  “This legislation represents the United States’ best chance to address the international conservation crisis head on, thereby preserving our health and security and preventing the extinction of millions of species worldwide.  We applaud Rep. Carnahan and Rep. Fortenberry for their efforts and look forward to working with them to pass this historic bill.”

The Global Conservation Act of 2010 would mandate the six federal agencies that conduct conservation programs around the world to work under a unified strategy.  Through the coordination of the White House, the bill requires that agencies design a plan to:

Protect millions of square miles of land and sea; 
Address illegal and unregulated fishing around the world; 
Safeguard the natural sources of fresh water to several major population centers around the world; 
Stop the worst wildlife trafficking operations; and 
Stabilize environmental destruction trends in areas vulnerable to conflict and instability
Contact: 

Chip Weiskotten - 202-624-8172, cweiskotten@wcs.org 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
undefined