WCS Central Park Zoo announces opening of 4-D theater experience


		
 


New attraction takes viewers to the frigid Arctic and Antarctic in BBC Earth’s Planet Earth: Ice Worlds 


 

New York  - April 4, 2011– The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo is offering guests the chance to experience the Arctic and Antarctic through the eyes of  polar bears and penguins with the opening of the 4-D theater experience from SimEx-Iwerks.

 

The new attraction, featuring the world premier of the original film Planet Earth: Ice Worlds 4D Experience from BBC Earth, is now open to the public. 

 

The seasonal advance and retreat of polar ice produces some of the greatest physical challenges to wildlife anywhere in the world, shaping the lives and testing the survival skills of polar bears, penguins, and other animals. Planet Earth: Ice Worlds transports viewers to a frozen, danger-filled world with in-theater effects that bring the powerful story to life.

 

The new Central Park Zoo 4-D Theater combines the visual drama of a 3-D film with a variety of sensory effects that are built into the seats and theater environment, such as water, mist, blustery wind, snow, bubbles, scents, seat vibrations, and more.

 

Theater admission is included in the price of Total Experience Tickets, which also includes admission to the main zoo and Tisch Children’s Zoo – $18 for adults and $13 for children (ages 3-12).  4-D Theater Only tickets are also available for $7 per person.  Total Experience Tickets can be purchased on-site or online at www.centralparkzoo.com.   
Contact:     

Sophie Bass: (o) 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  General Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children younger than 3. Total Experience Admission is $18.00 for adults, $15.00 for senior citizens, and $13.00 for children 3 to 12.  4-D theater admission is $4.00 for members and $7.00 for non-members. Zoo hours are 10am to 5:30 pm, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

About SimEx-Iwerks

SimEx-Iwerks is the leading innovator of immersive 3-D and 4-D Attractions and the exclusive distributor of the industry’s best selling film titles. The company supports over 150 family-friendly attractions in more than 30 countries. Our attractions entertain and educate over 100 million people every year— bringing a whole new dimension to the guest experience.

 

Planet Earth

Planet Earth is a BBC/Discovery Channel/NHK co-production, in association with the CBC.

 

BBC Earth 

BBC Earth is the global brand for all the BBC’s natural history content spanning the last 50 years. The BBC is the largest producer of natural history programming in the world and the BBC Earth brand highlights the vast scale of incredible content which is produced in this genre. Visible across all platforms; TV, DVD, licensing and digital, BBC Earth encourages engagement with current as well as classic programs such as Planet Earth and The Blue Planet. BBC Earth branding is only visible in the UK on commercial products, internationally the BBC Earth brand will appear across all platforms, including TV programmes. BBC Earth is from BBC Worldwide, the main commercial arm and a wholly-owned subsidiary of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).