WCS has created a powerful 30-second PSA, narrated by award-winning actress, director and artist Lucy Liu, to raise awareness and spark action to advance legislation to prevent future pandemics. Our campaign, Protect Wildlife. Protect Us.™, sets out to help prevent future major viral outbreaks such as COVID-19 by supporting enactment of U.S. policies to end the commercial trade in live wildlife for human consumption and close associated markets.​ Saatchi and Saatchi Wellness, creative pro bono partner of WCS, developed the look and feel of the campaign and a video which serves as a powerful message about how interconnected our health is to that of wildlife. Other creative partners include The-Artery, and directing duo The Ray Sisters. Horizon Media, pro bono partner of WCS, is providing media placements to bring this message to a wide audience.  The impact of human health and animal welfare merge together in gripping visuals that showcase three wildlife species found in commercial wildlife markets— the pangolin, civet, and chimpanzee—projected onto the face masks of three people representing populations who have been hit hardest by COVID-19—the Hispanic and Black communities, as well as the elderly. This brings to light the interconnection of humans and wildlife, serving as a powerful reminder that when we act to protect wildlife, in turn, we are protecting our own health. John Calvelli, Executive Vice President, WCS Public Affairs said, “We are grateful to all our partners who made this possible.  The talent and generosity of our creative and media partners brings this message to the public in ways that we simply could not accomplish without their support.” Protect Wildlife. Protect Us.™ highlights the interconnection of humans and wildlife, serving as a powerful reminder that when we act to protect wildlife, in turn, we are protecting our own health. The campaign supports two pieces of legislation: the Global Wildlife Trade Biosecurity Act (H.R. 8678) introduced in the House by Reps. Meng and Fortenberry; and the Stop Future Pandemics Act of 2020, introduced by Senator John Cornyn (R-TX) and Senator Cory Booker (D-NJ), along with Representative Mike Quigley (D-IL) and Representative Fred Upton (R-MI) People can take action by visiting ProtectWildlifeProtectUs.org.