“The plight of endangered wildlife and habitats around the world requires an efficient coordination of our government’s resources into a smart strategy, and this bill provides the impetus for that to happen.”


				 

		
		

		
 

WASHINGTON, D.C. – June 17, 2010 – Wildlife Conservation Society’s Executive Vice President of Public Affairs John Calvelli today applauded the leadership of Sens. Tom Udall (D-NM) and Sam Brownback (R-KS) on the Senate introduction of the Global Conservation Act of 2010.  The bipartisan bill, which will coordinate the United States’ conservation efforts into a comprehensive strategy to reduce habitat destruction and prevent species extinction, joins companion legislation in the House of Representatives introduced by Reps. Russ Carnahan (D-MO) and Jeff Fortenberry (R-NE).  

		
 

“The Wildlife Conservation Society appreciates the cooperative spirit and dedication to the cause of species preservation displayed by Sens. Udall and Brownback today in the introduction of the Global Conservation Act of 2010,” said Calvelli. “The plight of endangered wildlife and habitats around the world requires an efficient coordination of our government’s resources into a smart strategy, and this bill provides the impetus for that to happen. I thank Sens. Udall and Brownback for their leadership, and I look forward to working with them and their House counterparts to pass this essential legislation.”

 

The Global Conservation Act of 2010 would mandate the six federal agencies that conduct conservation programs around the world to work under a unified strategy. Through the coordination of the White House, the bill requires that agencies design a plan to:


		
				Protect millions of square miles of land and sea; 

				Address illegal and unregulated fishing around the world; 

				Safeguard the natural sources of fresh water to several major population centers around the world; 

				Stop the worst wildlife trafficking operations; and 

				Stabilize environmental destruction trends in areas vulnerable to conflict and instability. 


		
		Contact: 
Chip Weiskotten - 202-624-8172,
cweiskotten@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.