Children from PS 205 to make donation of the first toys of the season

    

    
    
    
    WCS to collect toys at all five wildlife parks to benefit communities in need

    

    
    
    
    Toy donors will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo or New York Aquarium
    




Bronx, NY –– Nov. 21, 2014 – On Friday, Nov. 21, Deputy Bronx Borough President Aurelia Greene will joined officials from the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo and children from PS 205 at Zoo Center to kick-off Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr.’s holiday toy drive to benefit Bronx military families.



In honor of the start of the holiday season, school children from PS 205 donated the first toys of the year. 



The partnership between the Bronx Zoo and the Borough President on the toy drive has become an annual tradition. The Bronx Zoo will serve as a collection point for new, unwrapped toys donated by members of the community. Toys will be collected through the end of December and will be distributed by the Borough President’s office to local veterans and active-duty members of the military and their families.



In appreciation for their generosity, those who make a qualifying donation of a new, unwrapped toy at any of WCS’s wildlife parks between Saturday, Nov. 22 and Wednesday, Dec. 31 will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo or New York Aquarium depending on location. 



Toys will also be collected at the other WCS wildlife parks. Toys collected at the New York Aquarium, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo and Queens Zoo will be donated to families in need within the communities they serve. Toys donated at the Prospect Park Zoo and New York Aquarium will receive a ticket to the New York Aquarium. 



Disclaimer: ONE general admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, or Queens Zoo. ONE general admission ticket to the New York Aquarium will be provided for a donation of one new, unwrapped toy at the New York Aquarium or Prospect Park Zoo. Limit of four tickets per family, valid 1/01/14–6/30/14. All WCS decisions final. Promotion available from 11/15/13 - 12/31/13. May not be combined with any other offer



CONTACT:

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 
Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS): MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.