Intricate LEGO wildlife sculptures on display throughout the Bronx ZooTour the zoo with a Zoofari passport to learn about each featured animal and how WCS is working to save them in the wildProfessionally built sculptures include tiger, flamingos, gorillas, penguins, giraffe, and moreActivities include: LEGO demos and instruction, interactive Build Zone, African arts and crafts, Wildlife Theater performances, and moreSaturday, July 2 – Friday, September 30              Bronx, NY – June 16, 2011 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is taking visitors on a conservation journey this summer as The Great Summer Zoofari – A LEGO® Wildlife Expedition brings amazing LEGO wildlife sculptures to the zoo to meet their real-life counterparts.  The expedition brings to life the challenges faced by wildlife due to habitat loss and threats to their survival. Its goal is to inspire visitors to help build a future for wildlife.  LEGO Master Builders have created a safari of LEGO block wildlife sculptures that will be on display throughout WCS’s Bronx Zoo. Visitors will be able to journey through the park with their complimentary Zoofari passport and enjoy all of the LEGO creations including a tiger, Chilean flamingos, a gorilla mother and child, penguins, a giraffe, and Khansi spray toads while learning about the real animals and WCS’s work to save wildlife and wild places around the globe. 
 Each guest will be given a Zoofari passport to help them plot their adventure through the zoo and guide them to each of the LEGO displays. Participants can stamp their passport at each of the six stations located throughout the park. There will be a Build Zone construction area and interactive activities where visitors will be able to construct their own LEGO wildlife sculptures and take part in the construction of a mystery mural. Guests can work with LEGO Certified Professionals on one weekend each month of the program.  Wildlife Theater shows, crafts and activities with the Museum for African Art, and conservation learning stations will keep the whole family busy.    The Great Summer Zoofari – A LEGO® Wildlife Expedition
Friday, July 1 – Friday, September 30 LEGO sculptures on display and Zoofari passports distributed daily throughout the park
Build Zone
Children and families can create their own sculptures of animals (Thursday and Fridays) and help complete a LEGO mystery mural (Saturdays and Sundays).   Schedule & Location:
Thursdays–Sundays 10:30 a.m- 4:30 p.m. at Dancing Crane Plaza   LEGO Certified Professionals will work with visitors on building LEGO wildlife sculptures.    Schedule & Location:
Saturday and Sunday July 16–17, at Mouse House Lawn;
Saturday and Sunday August 20–21 at Dancing Crane Plaza
Saturday and Sunday September 17–18 at Dancing Crane Plaza
    Bank of America Explorer Zone
Hands-on activities and educational displays will teach visitors about the tools of conservation. Visitors will learn how field scientists track animals in the wild with camera traps, how gorilla conservationists use data to determine which habitat areas to safeguard, and facts about animal diets. At the lunch tray station, kids can try their hand at preparing “lunch” for gorillas, tigers, and bears.  Schedule & Location:
Daily 11:00 a.m., 1:00 p.m. & 3:00 p.m. at Reptile House Lawn
    Disney’s Animal Kingdom Villas
Immerse yourself in the wonders of the wild.      Schedule & Location:
Daily 10:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m. at the Dancing Crane Pavilion

Workshops with the Museum for African Art/Tabilulu Productions
Participants can enjoy African crafts and music. On Saturday and Sunday, July 16–17 guests can make an African mask, and on Saturday and Sunday, August 20–21 they can make musical shakers. African musician Papa Susso will stop by at 1:00 p.m. on Saturday, August 20 for a special performance.   Schedule & Location:
Saturday and Sunday, July 16–17 at Dancing Crane Plaza
Saturday and Sunday, August 20–21 at Dancing Crane Plaza
    Wildlife Theater Shows
WCS’s outdoor Wildlife Theater shows incorporate conservation and nature lessons with puppets and music for audiences of all ages. This summer’s shows include Journey to the Pond, Passport to Conservation, and Butterfly Trek.    Schedule and Location:
Daily at Wild Asia Plaza – additional shows at the Children’s Zoo on weekends.
Showtimes: every half-hour from 11:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m. except for 1:00 p.m.   
  Contact:
Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org  The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: wcs.org/donation.    LEGO, its logo and the brick and knob configurations are trademarks of The LEGO Group. © 2011 The LEGO Group. All rights reserved. Used with permission.