Flushing, N.Y. – Planning a unique venue for your child’s birthday celebration? Consider the Queens Zoo, where, in addition to party hats, presents and cake, kids can learn about and discover the wild world of animals. 

Zoo birthday parties, which are available in different themes, are a fun combination of activities, crafts and visits to animal exhibits. Zoo educators conduct each party, and take care of all party needs. The best part is, kids can get up-close-and-personal with some live animal guests!

In addition to birthday activities, party packages include invitations, goody bags, and zoo admission. Parents must supply cake, juice, paper goods and utensils. 

Prices are $340 for members and $375 for non-members. Full payment in check or cash must be made two weeks prior to scheduled party date. 50% deposit required at time of booking. 

For additional information, including party themes and availability, visit www.queenszoo.com or call 718-271-7361. Please call far ahead of time as space is limited, especially during summer.

Contact: Barbara Russo 212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org

The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park and is open 365 days a year. Zoo hours are 10am to 5 pm weekdays, till 5:30 p.m. weekend. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors, $3 for children ages 3-12, and free for children under 3. For general information, please call (718) 271-1500, or visit our website at www.queenszoo.com.
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation