Julie Larsen Maher_3392_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ 11 15 21.jpeg




 Julie Larsen Maher_4339_Holiday Lights Opening Ceremony_BZ_11 16 21.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_3327_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ 11 15 21.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_3392_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ 11 15 21.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_4339_Holiday Lights Opening Ceremony_BZ_11 16 21.jpeg
123


					
					
						Bronx, NY – November 17, 2021 – The holiday season is officially underway in New York City as Holiday Lights opened at the Bronx Zoo. Bronx Zoo Director Jim Breheny was joined by a representative from event sponsor Con Edison to officially flip the switch and bring the festivities to life.

“As New York City continues to recover from the pandemic, the City is once again at the heart of the holiday season and festivities. Holiday Lights at the Bronx Zoo is a family tradition that will further demonstrate the resiliency of New Yorkers and the path back to normalcy,” said Jim Breheny, Bronx Zoo Director and WCS Executive Vice President for Zoos & Aquarium. “This year Holiday Lights is a fully outdoor experience and features more wildlife lanterns and light displays than ever before. We welcome everyone to enjoy the festivities, and sincerely wish all New Yorkers happy holidays.”

Holiday Lights encompasses an expansive area of the zoo. It includes 5 unique wildlife lantern safaris representing animals from different geographic regions around the world; the all new larger-than-life Forest of Color; and activity areas spread out across the park. Fan-favorite seasonal activities include professional ice carving demonstrations and competitions, wildlife stilt walkers, Wildlife Theater performances, holiday train rides, seasonal treats, and more.

At the center of the action, the historic Astor court is adorned with new displays and multiple lighted trees that are all synced with holiday music for an immersive light show.

“The Bronx Holiday Lights Festival brings thousands of New Yorkers and visitors together to enjoy this beloved tradition year after year. This outdoor event is a safe, socially distanced way to celebrate the spirit of the season with friends and family,” said Kyle Kimball, Con Edison’s vice president of Government Relations.  “We are proud to be the presenting sponsor of this event and we thank The Bronx Zoo for lighting up the holidays with this show.”

In addition to the dozens of new animal lanterns, light shows, and activities, the zoo has added the one-night-only Holiday Cheers event for adults age 21 and older. On December 1, the Holiday Lights experience will feature unlimited food sampling along with select seasonal adult beverages.  Of course, the evening will also include all of the Holiday Lights displays and activities. Tickets must be purchased in advance and are expected to sell out. For more information visit Holiday Cheers online.

Holiday Lights will open to the public and operate on select dates from November 19 to January 9 with a WCS member preview November 16-18 (sold out). Tickets for Holiday Lights must be purchased in advance and are date specific.  Information, schedules, and tickets are available online. Visit the Know before You Go page for all details and COVID safety guidelines.

Bronx Zoo Holiday Lights is sponsored by Con Edison.