Congress Recently Renewed Stamp that Raised More Than $2.5 Million for Conservation Since 2011 at No Taxpayer Expense

 Purchase the Stamp Online at shop.usps.com

  WASHINGTON, D.C. (October 20, 2014) – The Save Vanishing Species postage stamp, also known as the Tiger Stamp, is back on sale at U.S. Post Offices and online after being reauthorized by Congress earlier this year. 

The stamp costs 60 cents, 11 cents more than a regular first-class stamp. The extra 11 cents from the sale of every stamp goes directly to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Multinational Species Conservation Funds (MSCF), which support conservation programs to save African and Asian elephants, great apes, rhinos, tigers and marine turtles. During its first two years of issue, the U.S. Postal Service sold more than 25.5 million stamps, raising more than $2.5 million for conservation.

The Save Vanishing Species stamp has been hailed as a cost-effective way to raise funds for international conservation at no taxpayer expense and to involve the American public in saving wildlife and wild places. The legislation to renew the stamp for four more years was championed by Sen. Rob Portman (R-OH), Sen. Tom Udall (D-NM), Rep. Michael Grimm (R-NY), Rep. José Serrano (D-NY) and Rep. Ander Crenshaw (R-FL).“The Save Vanishing Species stamp makes the act of conserving wildlife as easy as mailing a letter,” said John Calvelli, Wildlife Conservation Society Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “This is a win-win as we can increase the financial support for conserving some of our most iconic, endangered species and engage everyday Americans in the cause. I encourage the public to use the stamp to mail everything from Christmas cards to the electric bill. And if your local post office says they do not currently have the stamp on hand, ask them to carry them!”

 About the MSCF Semipostal Stamp

Under the law, the price of semipostal stamps marginally exceeds the cost of first class postage. The U.S. Postal Service retains the full first class value of the stamp, with the additional funding raised being transferred to the MSCF, where it has played a critical role in saving wild populations of the world’s most iconic species by controlling poaching, reducing human-wildlife conflict, and protecting essential habitat.

 Since 1989, the Multinational Species Conservation Fund has awarded over 2,300 grants in 54 countries through all its grant programs for international wildlife conservation, targeting key species and regions in coordination with non- governmental organizations, government and community leaders, and private businesses to ensure the protection of some of the world’s most endangered and charismatic animals. The program has consistently proven to be highly efficient, as low administrative costs ensure that 97% of appropriated funds are distributed through grants. Additionally, MSCF investments consistently leverage 2-3 times as much from partner governments, local NGOs, international conservation organizations and private businesses. MSCF enjoys the support of a broad coalition including conservation organizations, zoos, aquariums, circuses, sportsmen, veterinarians and animal rights groups.

Find more information about the Save Vanishing Species stamp at: www.tigerstamp.com 

CONTACT:
Chip Weiskotten, 202-624-8172; cweiskotten@wcs.org 
Stephen Sautner, 718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City,  visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org ; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.