On Thursday, Sept. 27, the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) held its sixth annual SIP FOR THE SEA event to showcase its marine conservation and education work at the New York Aquarium and across the globe. The event featured sustainable seafood and wine pairings along with other delectable offerings from many of New York’s top restaurants. Proceeds will support WCS’s commitment to save wildlife and wild places in New York and around the world.   Notable attendees included: Fabien Cousteau and Lisa Singer, WCS President and CEO Cristián Samper, WCS Chair of the Board Antonia Grumbach, Donald Zucker and Barbara Hrbek Zucker.   Sip for the Sea attendees learned about WCS’s marine conservation programs in New York and across the globe, and the importance of understanding how to consume seafood without harming the ocean.   “At WCS, we have a comprehensive strategy to protect marine habitats across the globe,” said Cristian Samper, WCS President and CEO. “Since launching the WCS Marine Protected Area Fund in 2016, we have helped to create new marine protected area initiatives in 19 countries. By 2020, we aim to secure legal protection for 1 million square kilometers of previously unsecured ocean habitat, which will make an enormous difference in conserving vulnerable species and ecosystems, sustainably regulating fisheries, and improving resilience to the impacts of climate change.”   Added Jon Forrest Dohlin, Director of the New York Aquarium and WCS VP: “With many fish species facing serious threats from overfishing, sustainable seafood options help ensure the longevity of diverse and healthy ocean ecosystems around the world.”   Chefs from the following New York restaurants provided dishes at Sip for the Sea 2018: Almond, Amali, As Is NYC, Atera, Crave Fishbar, Davio’s Northern Italian Steakhouse, Delaware and Hudson, Fulton Landing Seafood Co., Luke’s Lobster, Mastro’s Steakhouse Manhattan, Oceanside Grill at the NY Aquarium, Perrine, Pier A Harbor House, The Sea Grill, Shuka, Takashi, Tavern on the Green, Teranga, Thalassa Restaurant, Tocqueville Restaurant, The Tuck Room.   This year, WCS and the New York Aquarium is celebrating the opening of the Donald Zucker and Barbara Hrbek Zucker Ocean Wonders: Sharks!. This immersive experience connects New Yorkers to sharks and other marine wildlife while inspiring them to protect local waters.   Sip for the Sea was generously sponsored by Blancpain.   For more information about WCS or the Sip for the Sea event, visitwww.wcs.org/sipforthesea and the WCS Newsroom: https://newsroom.wcs.org.