New York, NY– This spring,
the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo offers fascinating
hands-on education programs that give kids a unique chance to learn about the
wonderful world of animals. The programs take children behind the scenes and allow
them to directly utilize their senses, whether they watch a snow leopard pounce
within her exhibit or even prepare delicious treats for many of the zoo’s
residents.




For those extra enthusiastic
animal lovers, there’s even a unique summer camp program for middle school
students. Here, children will get a first-hand experience of what it’s like
working at a zoo.



Any one of these exciting
workshops will encourage kids to relate to wildlife on a genuine level. For
more information, or to register for the following workshops, email cpzregistration@wcs.org.
NEW!!







Junior Zookeepers:
Polar Bear
Kids will learn about the
Arctic’s wildest creature in this new program. They’ll make delicious treats
for the zoo’s polar bears Gus and Ida, and enjoy a chat with the keepers who
care for them.
Ages: 6–10
Saturday, March 13; 9:30
a.m.–11 a.m.

Fee: $40 members; $45 non-members





Tricks of Animal
Training

Ever wonder how the keepers train the sea lions? Want to learn how to teach
your pet to do a cool trick? Participants in this program will learn the
answers to these and other questions from a profession animal trainer. Kids
will learn what it means to target train a sea lion and end the program by
watching keepers interact with the animals during a live training
demonstration. 

Ages: 7–12

Date & Time: Saturday, April
10; 10 –11:30 a.m.

Fee: $40 members;  $45 non-members





Junior Keepers: Snow
Leopard

Kids will be in for a treat when they get a chance to make delicious snacks for
big cats Zoe and Chocolate. They’ll also get to meet their keeper and
participate in a snow leopard tracking activity.

Ages: 6–10

Date & Time: Saturday, April
24 9:30–11 a.m.

Fee: $40 members; $45 non-members






Junior Keepers: Tropic
Zone

Many animals live in the zoo’s Tropic Zone. Here, kids will participate in the
early morning bird census and watch the animals eat their breakfast. Afterward,
they’ll head behind the scenes for a tour of the zoo’s kitchen.

Ages: 6–10

Date & Time: Saturday, May 8;
9 a.m.–10:30 a.m.

Fee: $40 members; $45 non-members


Junior Keepers 

Calling all aspiring zookeepers! This five-day program will show kids what it’s
like to work with animals as a career. They’ll meet keepers, go behind the
scenes, and help prepare special treats for several zoo critters. These junior
keepers will even get to design their own animal exhibit for the end-of-week
“Exhibit Fair.”

Ages: 10–12 years old 

Dates:

Session A: July 26–30

Session B: August 16–20

Time: 9:30 a.m.–2:30 p.m.

Fee: $350 members; $375
non-members



Contact:           
Barbara
Russo,  212-439-6527, brusso@wcs.org 
The Central Park Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at
64th Street and Fifth Avenue. Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior
citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Admission
includes entry into the main Zoo and the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Zoo spring/summer
hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays; 10am to 5:30pm weekends. Fall/winter hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. daily.  Tickets are
sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call
212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com

The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the
management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the
flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation