Competitors announced:
		

		
				
 

Nine New York City high school singing groups compete to win a $2,500 grant and the chance to perform at Hard Rock Cafe New York in Times Square

 

One group of students will be named “The Best in New York City”


		
 

New York, N.Y. – December 6, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society and Hard Rock Cafe are pleased to announce the high school singing groups scheduled to compete in WCS’s Bronx Zoo’s first-ever city-wide singing competition: SING! for Wildlife.

 

The competitors are choral groups from the following schools: 


Marymount School of New York (Manhattan)

Celia Cruz School of Music (Bronx)

Repertory Company High School (Manhattan)

St. Barnabas High School (Bronx)

Martin Luther School (Queens)

Christian Heritage Academy (Brooklyn)

Martin Van Buren School (Queens)

Edward R. Murrow High School (Brooklyn)

Gramercy Arts High School. (Manhattan)

 

SING! for Wildlife was created by WCS to honor the performing arts in New York City, reinforce its importance to our city and our youth, and celebrate conservation and its significance to future generations through song.

 

The competition will kick-off on Saturday, Dec. 18 with the first competitive performances by musical groups from the Martin Van Buren School, Marymount School of New York, and Edward R. Murrow High School.  Each phase of the competition will begin at 12:30 p.m. at the Schiff Family Great Hall at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  

 

On Tuesday, Dec. 28, Repertory Company High School, Christian Heritage Academy, and Gramercy Arts High School will compete.

 

The last three groups, Celia Cruz School of Music, St. Barnabas High School, and Martin Luther School will face-off on Wednesday, Dec, 29. 

 

Once the judges have tallied the results and the finalists have been determined, the final round of competition will bring the remaining groups together in a head-to-head competition on Thursday, Dec. 30. The remaining competitors will sing for the grand prize and the right to be called “The Best in New York.”

 

The grand prize includes a $2,500 grant to support the winning choral group and a chance to perform at Hard Rock Cafe New York in Times Square. First prize will be a $1,500 grant for the choral group; second prize will be a $1,000 grant.

 

All performances will consist of four songs: one song that celebrates wildlife, the environment, or the planet; and three songs of the group’s choosing. Suggested song choices would include two contemporary songs and one holiday song. 

 

As a special treat, musicians from other local cultural institutions will perform on various dates throughout the SING! for Wildlife competition. Competition will open with a special guest performance by the Brooklyn High School of the Arts on Saturday, Dec. 18. The Renaissance Band, a group that works to empower youth to write and perform original songs that spread positive messages, will perform on Wednesday, Dec. 29. Music Unites, a non-profit dedicated to bringing music education to underprivileged children in under-funded inner city school systems, will entertain crowds during the final round on Thursday, Dec. 30. 

 

A complete listing of competition rules and details can be found online at www.bronxzoo.com/sing

 

SING! for Wildlife supports culture and performing arts in New York City and supports the One Percent for Culture Campaign. For more information, visit www.oneforculture.org 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society is thankful to the following sponsors for their support of the SING! for Wildlife competition:


Presenting sponsor:               
Hard Rock Cafe

 

Media Sponsor:      
New York Daily News

 
		
				Media Contacts: 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
		
				

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 


		If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation