One-time only “insider’s tour” gives visitors a closer look at some of the aquarium’s most amazing animalsSaturday, April 9 from 10 – 11:30 a.m.Register now at: www.nyaquarium.com 


		
		
Brooklyn, N.Y. – March 29 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is offering some visitors the one-time only opportunity to go behind the scenes to get a deeper look into several of the aquarium’s beautiful animal exhibits. 

 

Education staff will guide visitors through many exciting adventures during this one-of-a-kind insider’s tour” on Saturday, April 9 from 10 – 11:30 a.m  Participants will walk in an off-exhibit viewing area above the shark tank and see the aquarium’s majestic sand-tiger, reef, and nurse sharks swimming below with exotic loggerhead sea turtles. Inside the Alien Stingers exhibit, visitors will get up close to an array of beautiful brightly colored jellyfish. 

 

The tour includes an opportunity to touch marine life including horseshoe crabs – a species that lives right here in the waters of New York City. This animal will be a part of the aquarium’s research and conservation efforts through the newly launched New York Seascape conservation program. 

 

Aquarium educators will discuss the natural history, behavior, and conservation of the animals featured throughout the tour.  

 

Fees are: $23 non-member adult (ages 13 and up); $19 member adult; $19 nonmember child (ages 6 – 12); $15 member child. Those who participate in the tour must be at least 6 years old. Fees include admission to the aquarium. 

 

To register for the tour, visit www.nyaquarium.com, email nyaregistrar@wcs.org or call 718-265-3457. 

		
				Contact:
				
						

Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 

Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

 
 

Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.


		If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.