“Fish Tales Extravaganza”Sponsored by Pepsi
				Every weekend in June filled with family-friendly entertainment
				Headliners include John Tartaglia’s ImaginOcean, Author Seymour Simon, Author Edel Rodriguez, and Gigi and the Lend Me a Hand Band
				Live music, interactive attractions, author appearances and readings, crafts, and more
				Connect to the wonderful world of marine life at “Fish Tales Extravaganza”

 


		
		
Brooklyn, NY – May 12, 2010 – Swim into beach season with the month-long Fish Tales Extravaganza at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) New York Aquarium every weekend in June.  Summer will be a celebration of children’s books this year at the WCS New York Aquarium. Visitors will be treated with a line-up of special events and performances. Aquarium visitors can give new meaning to the phrase “dive into a book” as WCS’s New York Aquarium brings everyone's favorite marine animal books to life.  Select weekends will include the chance to meet celebrity authors at special readings and book signings by such authors as Seymour Simon, Edel Rodriguez, and Susan Ring on the Explore the Shore Plaza. 


The Fish Tales Extravaganza will bring a full schedule of live family entertainment to the Aquarium.  Weekends include an amazing array of top-rated children's entertainment.  Don’t miss the Alice Farley Dance Theater, John Tartaglia’s ImaginOcean, a theatrical performance of One Fish, Two Fish by Dr. Suess by Manhattan Children’s Theater in celebration of World Ocean’s Day, a special reading of The Little Mermaid in celebration of the Coney Island Mermaid Parade, Disney’s Pixar Pictures featuring a reading of Finding Nemo, Denisha and her puppets from the Sprout Channel, and many more on the Explore the Shore Plaza. Children will also be able to make their own “Fish Tale” book adventure each weekend in the Pavilion Tent from 11am to 4 pm each weekend. After your visit, join in the new exciting happenings in Coney Island and the Aquarium is part of it all, visit ConeyIslandFunGuide.com for more information.


		
Fish Tales Extravaganza June line-up

		

		
SATURDAY, June 5


Sharks (HarperCollins), read by author Seymour Simon – Exceptional nonfiction for children on sharks from two of the most trusted names in science education: Seymour Simon and the Smithsonian Institution. Explore the Shore Plaza – Author appearance and reading 11am, 1pm, 3pm


Seymour Simon has been called “the dean of the (children’s science book) field” by the New York Times. He has written more than 250 books for young readers and is the recipient of the Science Books & Films Key Award for Excellence in Science Books, the Empire State Award for excellence in literature for young people, and the Educational Paperback Association Jeremiah Ludington Award. Explore the Shore Plaza – Performance 12:15pm, 2:30pm


John Tartaglia’s ImaginOcean is a magical undersea adventure for kids of all ages. Tank, Bubbles and Dorsel and three best friends who just happen to be fish, are about to set out on a remarkable journey of discovery. And it all starts with a treasure map. As they swim off in search of clues, they’ll sing, they’ll dance, and they’ll make new friends, including everyone in the audience. Ultimately they discover the greatest treasure of all: friendship. 
Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm


		
				
						SUNDAY, June 6 
						


				

One Fish, Two Fish by Dr. Seuss (Random House), Theatrical performance by Manhattan Children’s Theater in celebration of World Oceans Day

“Did you ever fly a kite in bed? Did you ever walk with ten cats on your head?” Such are the profound, philosophical queries posed in this well-loved classic by Theodor “Dr. Seuss” Geisel. While many rhymes in this couplet collection resemble sphinx-worthy riddles, Seuss’s intention is clear: teach children to read in a way that is both entertaining and educational. Explore the Shore Plaza – Theatrical reading and giveaways 11am, 1pm, 3pm


Manhattan Children's Theatre is committed to producing affordable, high quality theatrical experiences for both children and families. It exists to ensure that the community has access to important works of classic literature and timely, poignant new work.  Ultimately, the group provides a live theatrical experience that encourages reading, critical thinking, curiosity of the world today and the world of tomorrow, as well as communication between children, their families and their educators.


World Ocean’s Day is an opportunity to learn about our world oceans and our personal connection to the sea, to raise awareness about the crucial role the ocean plays in our lives, and the important ways people can help to protect our shared world ocean. 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Musical performance 12:15pm, 2:30pm


Ernie & Neal – Ernie & Neal is a rocking dynamic musical experience from the Philadelphia, New York, and New Jersey area. They bring the joy and art of creating and performing live children’s music to a whole new level. Dubbing their act “music for the young mind,” Ernie & Neal have been entertaining children – and the child in all of us – since 1999. While rocking out, they feature a musical combination of song, play, storytelling, entertainment and education. 
Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm


SATURDAY, June 12 



Finding Nemo, (Disney) - read by Courtney DiGiovanni from Disney, – This Disney*Pixar celebration at the aquarium will include three readings of Finding Nemo and Toy Story. There will also be tons of handouts for aquarium visitors, including Finding Nemo toys, activity sheets, posters, and a chance to win tickets to the advance screening of Toy Story 3. Explore the Shore Plaza – Reading and giveaways

11am, 1pm, 3pm


Explore the Shore Plaza – Alice Farley Dance Theater - Story and Musical Performance (performing The Girl from the Sea, an original story with music and dance) 12:15pm, 2:30pm You’ll see the mysterious creatures of the sea come alive through fantastic sculptural puppets, circus arts and dance. In a story written by Alice and Tuli Farley, you follow a young girl’s adventures as she travels from sea to river to the shores of the city. Haunting music by Peter Garland together with texts from Walt Whitman and St. Jean Perse make real the magical dreams of the sea.


Alice Farley Dance Theater – This award winning company specializes in creating imaginary landscapes for public spaces and has performed throughout the world (Shanghai, Bangkok, Aruba Dance Festival, Quebec Festival D’Ete, Smithsonian, Andy Warhol and Whitney Museums.) The River to River Festival will present their production, HellGate Love Letter in Manhattan this July. 
Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm

                               

SUNDAY, June 13 



Sergio Makes a Splash, read by author Edel Rodriguez – (Hachette), - Sergio is a penguin. He loves fish, soccer, and water. He loves drinking water, bathing in water, spraying water, just about anything with water. But he has one big problem; he can’t swim. So when his class takes a field trip to the ocean, Sergio must decide whether he should face his fear or avoid something he loves. 

Edel Rodriguez was born in Havana, Cuba. He left for America on a boat with his parents and sister when he was 8 years old. His drawings and illustrations have appeared in four picture books, including Float Like a Butterfly and Oye, Celia!, on stamps for the U.S. Postal Service, The New Yorker, and posters for Broadway shows. Edel has also been an art director at TIME Magazine for over a decade. His first book with Little, Brown was Sergio Makes a Splash. Explore the Shore Plaza – Author appearance and reading

11am, 1pm, 3pm


Explore the Shore Plaza – Musical performance 12:15pm, 2:30pm


Alice Farley Dance Theater (description above)

 Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm

SATURDAY, June 19 


Manhattan Children’s Theatre – Theatrical reading (description above) and Little Mermaid giveaways

Pout Pout Fish, by Deborah Diesen (Macmillan) and The Little Mermaid (Disney) – to be read by Manhattan Children’s Theatre – The Pout Pout Fish is a fun, rhyming picture book about a gloomy fish who discovers that being glum isn’t really his destiny. Bright ocean colors, playful language, and engaging characters make the story perfect for sharing at home or at school. The story of Pout Pout Fish is all but guaranteed to turn a cranky child’s pout (or even a grown-up’s pout) upside down. 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Appearance and reading 11am, 1pm, 3pm


Disney’s The Little Mermaid tells the story of Ariel, a young mermaid who gets the change to be human after making a deal with an evil sea witch. Explore the Short Plaza – Performance 12:15pm, 2:30pm



Two of a Kind - An award-winning husband and wife duo, Two of a Kind presents concerts for families and children of all ages, including songs, puppets, movement, and stories – all with an emphasis on interaction and participation. These of songs and stories range from read and books, friendship and animals to social issues such as the environment, conflict resolution and diversity.

Two of a Kind has released eight recordings; seven for children and families, and one for adults. Two of a Kind’s recordings have won a total of 12 national awards, including Parents’ Choice, Children’s Music Web and Kids Radio Mania Awards. In addition, two individual songs have won awards – “Think of it as an Adventure” won a Children’s Music Web Award for “Best Song for Younger Children”, and “I have 2 Stomachs” won in the John Lennon Songwriting Competition and is a finalist in the International Songwriting Competition.


Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm

                               

SUNDAY, June 20 


Where Should Turtle Be, by Susan Ring (Sylvan Dell) – Little turtle was lost. Free from his egg, he climbed out into a big, beautiful new world. Lost and alone, he wondered – where did he really belong? Author Susan Ring helps turtle in this whimsical story of self-exploration and nature. Explore the Shore Plaza –  Author appearance and reading 11am, 1pm, 3pm

Explore the Shore Plaza – Performance by Two of a Kind (description above) 12:15pm, 2:30pm

Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm

                               

SATURDAY, June 26 


Swimmy and Fish is Fish (Random House) – Leo Lionni wrote and illustrated more than 40 highly acclaimed children’s books. He received the 1984 American Institute of Graphic Arts Gold Medal and was a four-time Caldecott Honor Winner – for Inch y Inch, Frederick, Swimmy, and Alexander and the Wind-Up Mouse. Leo Lionni died in October of 1999 at his home in Tuscany, Italy, at the age of 89. 
Explore the Short Plaza – Two Leo Leoni books to be read by Denisha & Chica from The Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout 11am, 1pm, 3pm



Gigi and the Lend Me a Hand Band – “Rockin’ in the Ocean” is a rollicking collection of rock, swing and doo-wop songs about sea mammals and other ocean inhabitants from a highly interactive show written for elementary school children and their parents and teachers at the request and unde3r the guidance of the New York Aquarium. Gigi, a multi-award winning singer, was asked by the Aquarium to write and produce a show celebrating sea mammals in a fun and stylized form reminiscent of blasts from the past, and “Rockin’ in the Ocean” is the result. 
Explore the Shore Plaza – Performance 12:15pm, 2:30pm


Gigi and the Lend Me a Hand Band is a highly acclaimed, interactive family band that keeps families singing, laughing and dancing with a variety of musical styles, puppets and floats. The inter-generational family band led by multi-award winning singer, Gigi received national recognition as finalists in the 2008 Children’s Music Web Awards for both Best Album and Best Song for Pre-Schoolers, for the Movement & Merriment CD. 

Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm

                               

SUNDAY, June 27


Explore the Short Plaza – Two Leo Leonni books to be read by Denisha & Chica from The Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout – (description above)

11am, 1pm, 3pm

Explore the Shore Plaza – Performance by Gigi and the Lend Me a Hand Band 12:15pm, 2:30pm – (description above)

Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts 11am to 4pm
		
				
Contact:
				

Fran Hackett: 718-265-3428, 718-399-7339; fhackett@wcs.org   

		
				

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

Wildlife Conservation Society New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.