Participants of the “Naked” Polar Bear Cruise will raise funds for every minute spent outside in the cold
 
Giveaways and prizes for the longest in the cold 
Saturday, February 2510:30 a.m. 
New York, NY- Jan. 12, 2012 - Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises and Coney Island Polar Bear Club are teaming up on Saturday, February 25th to host the fourth annual “Naked” Polar Bear Cruise (bathing suit required) to benefit the Wildlife Conservation Society.
 
Participating passengers are encouraged to strip down to their bathing suits and enjoy a frosty ride while they raise money to help WCS save wildlife and wild places around the globe.  
 
When:            Saturday, February 25, 2012. 10:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.
                        Boarding begins at 10:30 a.m.
                        Cruise from 11 a.m. – 12 p.m. 
 
Where:            Pier 83 
(West 42nd St. on the Hudson River)
 
What:              “Naked” Polar Bear Cruise
Participants will brave the cold in their bathing suits for the cruise
 
Who:              Circle Line Sightseeing Cruises 
Coney Island Polar Bear Club 
Wildlife Conservation Society
 
Those brave enough to withstand the chilly cruise of the New York Harbor are encouraged to seek individual sponsors who will donate for each minute spent on deck. 
 
The man and the woman who spend the longest time shivering on deck will have the change to win four Total Experience Tickets to WCS’s Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium. Soft shell fleeces from Weatherproof will also be awarded. 
 
There will be an inside area where participants can bundle up and enjoy complimentary hot chocolate. 
 
Participating passengers ride for free.  Spectator tickets can be purchased for $20 at the Pier 83 box office (42nd Street and the Hudson River) by calling 212-563-3200 or online at www.CircleLine42.com  . Sponsorship forms are also available online.
 
MEDIA NOTE(S): 
Members of the media are encouraged to arrive by 10:15 a.m. 
 
Contact:
Media who wish to attend the event should contact Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182 or email mpulsinelli@wcs.org so that arrangements can be made.  
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on earth.