Bronx, NY – July 16, 2015 – Grammy Award winning musician Dan Zanes will perform with his band, Dan Zanes and Friends, On Saturday, July 25 on the historic Astor Court at WCS’s Wildlife Conservation Society) Bronx Zoo. Dan Zanes occupies a unique place in American music where sea shanties, English music hall, North American and West Indian folk music, play party songs, the spirit of early rock-and-roll and soulful originals collide. He and his band have toured the world sharing handmade 21st century social music with enthusiastic crowds of kids and kid sympathizers. His widely-acclaimed music has been featured on Sesame Street, Playhouse Disney, Nickelodeon, HBO Family and Sprout. Dan and his band will perform two shows, 11:30am and 2pm.  This will be his only big outdoor show all summer.  Concert viewing will be first come first serve and is included in the price of admission to the Bronx Zoo. Dan Zanes and Friends are performing at the Bronx Zoo as part of the zoo’s summer concert series celebrating the reopening of the historic Children’s Zoo. Following a year-long renovation, the historic Children’s Zoo, the new exhibit features many news species while maintaining the walk-through trail experience and key features like the tree house slide that have become iconic and a source of nostalgia for many. For more information and a listing of Bronx Zoo performances, visit www.bronxzoo.com/events.Who:               Dan Zanes and FriendsWhat:                         Performance at WCS’s Bronx ZooWhere:           Astor Court, Bronx Zoo, 2300 Southern Blvd., Bronx, NYWhen:             Saturday, July 25; 11:30am and 2pmRain Date:      Sunday, July 26 The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $19.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $17.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010. Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.   ###