September 29th Congressional Hearing to Focus on Future of Crucial Tropical Rainforest 

						
				
		
		
				
						
								
										
WHAT: 

						Leaders of Congo Basin countries, members of Congress, and leading
conservation organizations will gather  in Washington to recognize 10 years of the
Congo Basin Forest Partnership. At a Congressional hearing the future of the
world’s second largest rainforest will be discussed, including how those
forests can help mitigate the climate crisis and contribute to regional security,
effective governance, and sustainable development. 
		
		



WHERE:  U.S. House
of Representatives Interior, Environment and Related Agencies Hearing Room,
B308 Rayburn House Office
 Building



WHEN:  Tuesday, September 29, 2009, 4:00-5:30 PM



WHO:  The
following will be available for expert commentary: 


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										Patrick Bergin of the African
Wildlife Foundation
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										Russell Mittermeier of
Conservation International
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
														
														
												
										
										Michael Fay of Wildlife
Conservation Society 
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
														
														
												
										
										Carter Roberts of World Wildlife
Fund
								
						
				
		
		



WHY:


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										The Congo Basin Forest Partnership
is a global model of cooperation that has helped create millions of acres of
new protected areas, initiate new multi-national anti-poaching initiatives and
reduced the rate of biodiversity loss in the past 10 years. 
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										More support is needed at this
critical time, however, as there are continued threats from bushmeat hunting,
illegal and unsustainable logging, mining and climate change. 
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										This event offers an opportunity
to discuss renewed conservation efforts in the region and how the Congo Basin
Forest Partnership can contribute to the development of strong and sustainable
democratic governments and the health and prosperity of the region's people.
								
						
				
		
		


		
				
						
								
										
												
												
										
										The forests sequester millions of
tons of carbon that could play a crucial role in international efforts to
mitigate global warming and provide economic security for the region.
								
						
				
		
		

 

NOTES: 
The hearing
follows a closed round-table discussion session that is closed to press and the
public. However, interviews with key participants can be arranged.



The forum is sponsored by the International
Conservation Caucus Foundation, an association of public and private sector
representatives in the United
  States that are dedicated to international
conservation. The United States
government has invested more than $100 million along with technical expertise
to support the Congo Basin Forest Partnership in cooperation with the
governments in central Africa.

 

CONTACT:    

John Butler, African Wildlife
Foundation, 202-939-3313: JButler@awf.org

Rob McNeil, Conservation International, 571-232-0455: r.mcneil@conservation.org

Scott Smith, Wildlife Conservation Society, 718-220-3698; 
ssmith@wcs.org 

Lee Poston, World Wildlife Fund, 202-299-6442;  lee.poston@wwfus.org