Edith McBean and Dr. G. Carleton Ray will be honored for their conservation effortsDistinguished conservationist George Schaller among attendees








Brooklyn, N.Y. – Sept. 22, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society will hold the
annual Dinner by the Sea benefit at WCS’s New York Aquarium
today, Wednesday, Sept. 22, at 6:30 p.m.



This year’s honorees are Vice Chair of the WCS Board of
Trustees, Edith McBean, who will receive the Distinguished Leadership in
Conservation Award, and Dr. G. Carleton Ray, who will receive the Achievement
in Conservation Award. 



Highlights will include updates on A Sea Change at the New
York Aquarium — a visionary
public-private partnership that will transform the aquarium into one of the
premier tourist destinations in the Northeast and inspire people to care about
the ocean world. The update will
include the latest on the New York Seascape initiative, a long-term marine
conservation program focusing on the waters surrounding New York City and a key
component to A Sea Change at the New York Aquarium. 



Dinner by the Sea
will raise critical funds for the WCS’s New York Aquarium and its mission to
educate visitors and protect local and global marine life. This year’s event will feature a live
auction conducted by Hugh Hildesley of Sotheby’s. A selection of unique items will be auctioned including: 

The
     opportunity to name the aquarium’s new California sea lion pupA
     chartered SCUBA adventure in New York waters A trip
     for four to Glover’s Reef Marine Reserve and Research Station in BelizeA
     sterling silver belt buckle by Barry Kieselstein-Cord




What: Wildlife
Conservation Society’s “Dinner by the Sea” event







Who: 
Dr.
Steven E. Sanderson, WCS President and CEO
Dr. George Schaller, WCS Senior Conservationist
*Edith McBean, WCS
Vice Chair of the Board of Trustees
*Dr. G. Carleton
Ray
Jon Forrest
Dohlin, Director, WCS’s New York Aquarium

*
This year’s honorees





When: Wednesday,
Sept. 22, 2010
6:30 p.m.:
Reception
7:30 p.m.:  Dinner







Where:  WCS’s
New York Aquarium
Surf
Avenue & West 8th Street
Brooklyn, New York



Special Note to Media:  Please RSVP to Barbara Russo by email; brusso@wcs.org or by phone: 718-465-3428; cell: 917-494-5493.   

CONTACT:     



Barbara Russo - 718-465-3428; Cell: 917-494-5493 brusso@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; Cell: 914-263-8179 sfairchild@wcs.org 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org. 


Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.