Tiger Mountain exhibit at Bronx Zoo transformed to show both Amur and Malayan tigers side-by-side
				Exhibit educates millions of visitors each year about plight of wild tigers
				Tigers are critically endangered with fewer than 3,500 remaining in the wild

		
		
 

View the videos:

Malayan cubs: www.youtube.com/watch?v=ysx5vi4fZ_Y 

Amur cubs: www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-KNDaqdrvE

 


		
				

		
		
Bronx, NY – Thursday, Sept. 30, 2010 – The popular Tiger Mountain exhibit at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is booming as six tiger cubs make their public debut today. 

 

The six cubs include three Amur and three Malayan tigers. The last litter of Amur tigers born at the Bronx Zoo was more than 13 years ago; and this is the first litter of Malayan cubs ever exhibited at the Bronx Zoo. 

 

The arrival of the cubs has brought a new dynamic to Tiger Mountain.  For the first time, zoo-goers will see Amur and Malayan tigers, in adjacent exhibits, allowing them to compare the notable size and coloration differences between the two subspecies. 

 

“The birth of these tiger cubs is true cause for celebration,” said Jim Breheny, WCS’s Senior Vice President of Living Institutions and Director of the Bronx Zoo. “The opportunity to be present and watch as these majestic creatures mature from playful cubs to awe-inspiring adults is an experience every New Yorker will enjoy. That both the Amur and Malayan tigers are part of the Tiger Mountain experience will make it easy for our guests to learn about both subspecies of tigers and how important it is to protect them in the wild.”

 

Two of the three male Amur cubs have been named “Julian” and “Josie” in honor of Life Trustee and supporter Julian Robertson and his wife, the late Josephine “Josie” Robertson. The third Amur cub will be named in the near future. Of the three Malayan tiger cubs, one male was given the name “Pepino” by Patricia Lanza, a dedicated WCS supporter, and the female was named “Claiborne” by WCS in honor of the late Liz Claiborne, a long-time conservationist and WCS supporter. The third Malayan cub, a male, will be named by the zoo’s wild animal keepers.  

 

The two sets of cubs will be in Tiger Mountain separately for the first few weeks. Check www.bronxzoo.com for their schedules.

 

Tigers are a critically endangered species with fewer than 3,500 remaining in the wild – only 1,000 of which are breeding females. The six tiger cubs at WCS’s Bronx Zoo are ambassadors for their species. 

 

A new study released by WCS and other groups reveals an ominous finding: most of the world’s last remaining tigers—long decimated by overhunting, logging, and wildlife trade—are now clustered in just six percent of their available habitat.  The paper identifies 42 “source sites” scattered across Asia that are now the last hope and greatest priority for the conservation and recovery of the world’s largest cat. 

 

The researchers assert that effective conservation efforts focused on these sites are both possible and economically feasible, requiring an additional $35 million a year for increased monitoring and enforcement to enable tiger numbers to double in these last strongholds. 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society has conducted ecological studies on tigers since the 1960s and has a long history of protecting these big cats through the establishment of protected areas, increasing enforcement against poaching, and public education.  Wildlife Conservation Society researchers continue their work across Asia safeguarding tigers throughout their range.
 



		
				Contact:     

Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 


 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.