The Duke of Cambridge is currently involved in a number of initiatives to expand his work in the field of conservation, particularly in respect of protecting endangered species and habitats. 

Through his Foundation, His Royal Highness has brought together an unprecedented collaboration between seven of the world’s most influential conservation organizations and the Royal Foundation of The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and Prince Harry. The partnership, named “United for Wildlife”, is a long-term commitment to tackle the global challenges to the world’s natural resources so they can be safeguarded for future generations. The Duke will be President of the collaboration. 

United for Wildlife will bring together some of the world’s largest environmental organizations and harness the resources and expertise of global leaders in business, communications, technology and the creative industries to tackle a common, universal challenge. The alliance aims to lead the way in delivering effective responses to, and raising awareness of, conservation crises. It will also focus particularly on engaging and inspiring young people and the next generation of conservation leaders. 

The collaboration’s initial work will focus on the illegal wildlife trade. United for Wildlife will use digital media platforms to highlight research results and subsequent successful conservation projects in this area, to engage new conservationists the world over. The United for Wildlife social media platforms will be launched later this year but further information can initially be found at www.unitedforwildlife.com 

His Royal Highness, The Duke of Cambridge, said: "The threats to our natural heritage are extensive, but I believe that this collaboration of the best minds in conservation will provide the impetus for a renewed commitment and action to protect endangered species and habitats for future generations. At the root of the illegal wildlife trade, for example, is the demand for products that require the deaths of tens of thousands of these animals every year, pushing them further towards extinction. We must work together to prevent this catastrophe and allow our children the opportunity to experience wildlife in its many beautiful and varied forms.”

As part of his increased work in this field, The Duke of Cambridge has also joined David Beckham and Yao Ming on behalf of WildAid to film two public service announcements on illegal wildlife products. The messages, recorded in London today, 12th September, focus on reducing demand for rhino horn and ivory and will air globally, with targeted outreach in China and Vietnam, later this year as part of WildAid’s demand reduction campaign.

The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will tonight attend the inaugural Tusk Conservation Awards at the Royal Society in London. As Patron of the charity, The Duke will present two awards, which recognize outstanding achievement in the field of African Conservation.

Notes to Editors
The seven conservation organisations partnering the Royal Foundation for United for Wildlife are: Conservation International; Fauna & Flora International; the International Union for Conservation of Nature; The Nature Conservancy; Wildlife Conservation Society; WWF-UK; and the Zoological Society of London. For more information about the WildAid public service announcements, please visit www.wildaid.org