Get Ready for Ghouls, Goblins, and Ghastly Good Times.
								

								
 
Brooklyn, NY – Prepare for a spook-tacular weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Prospect Park Zoo. “Boo at the Zoo,” is an extreme Halloween extravaganza, on Saturday and Sunday, October 31 and November 1. This event promises spine-tingling surprises and festivities for zoo-goers of all ages.
 
Creatively costumed characters, craft-making, and haunted habitats will make this a frighteningly fun weekend. So if you’re not too spooked, head to Prospect Park Zoo to have a terrifyingly terrific time this Halloween season.

				
		
		
				
				
		

The Prospect
Park Zoo isn’t the only one getting into the spirit of things.
WCS’s Bronx Zoo starts the party early with events
throughout October. For water
lovers, WCS’s New York Aquarium has their own Boo at the Zoo, A-scarium on
October weekends beginning October 10 as well as November 1. For more
information, visit www.wcs.org.

The line-up
of exciting Prospect Park Zoo activities include:

Feel free to wear your Halloween costume to the zoo; many staff
members and volunteers will also be in costume!Follow the darkness through
the zoo’s legendary Haunted Barn to encounter scary characters like a
vampire, a mummy, and the swamp thing! (12 to 4:00 pm)The baboons will have a smashing good time when they receive their
Halloween pumpkin treats! (3:30 p.m.) Meet a keeper and learn about the great-horned owl at 11 a.m. in
the Animals in our Lives
 Building, and at 3 p.m.
meet a keeper at the zoo’s new nocturnal exhibits in Animals in our
Lives. Also, enjoy a chat and get up close and personal with an animal on the
Barn stage at 1:45 p.m.Learn about all things creepy and crawly when Nettie the Wildlife
Witch puts on her spooky shows
that include live animals such as snakes and lizards.Make a Halloween bat craft to take home in the Animals in Art
exhibit.Zoo-goers can get in the spirit of Halloween with face
painting–choose from a pumpkin, ghost, bat, spider design and more (12 to
3 p.m.).Check out the spooky Discovery
 Center, which will be
decorated for Halloween.Learn about Prospect Park Zoo’s new bats in the Animals in
our Lives Building (12 to 4 p.m.).Regularly scheduled sea lion feedings at 11:30 a.m., 2 and 4 p.m.










Contact:
Fran
Hackett, Associate Manager, Communications
718-265-3428 






Prospect Park Zoo –
$6.00 for adults, $2.25 for seniors 65 and older, $2.00 for kids 3-12, free for
children under 3. Zoo
hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and
holidays, April through October. The
Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450
  Flatbush Avenue in Prospect
Park, Brooklyn.
For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media:
If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can
make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please
direct them to www.wcs.org/donation.