Visitors will have a chance to win tickets to see Disney’s ‘Phineas and Ferb: The Best LIVE Tour Ever!’ playing at Madison Square Garden 

Saturday and Sunday, April 7 & 8; 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.
		

		Flushing, N.Y. - March 28, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo is holding its annual Egg–Stravaganza event on Saturday and Sunday, April 7 and 8 from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. This year’s line-up of fun includes real rabbit encounters, spring-themed games, egg hunts, and more.

As to be expected, the stars of Egg-Stravaganza are the zoo’s Flemish giant rabbits: Olivia, Ruby and Herman. Visitors will have an opportunity to take a picture with one of these large and likeable lagomorphs, each weighing close to 20 pounds. Flemish giants are one of the largest and most docile breeds of domestic rabbits. 

Other animals getting into the spirit of spring on the farm include sheep, goats, llamas, and many more. 

Additional Egg-stravaganza activities include:
Egg Quests – Kids will look for colorful plastic eggs scattered throughout the zoo. At the end of their search, they can trade in their eggs for a spring-y surprise. Egg Quests will take place at various times throughout the day.The Easter Bunny – Visitors will be able to meet the Easter Bunny, who will make his rounds throughout the zoo both days. Egg Jeopardy – Visitors will learn about the diversity of animal eggs and then put their knowledge to the test by becoming a contestant in the zoo’s very own Egg Jeopardy game. Spring-Arrival Art – A rabbit’s ears are his showpiece, and kids will celebrate this by making beautifully decorated bunny masks and ears that will be symbolic of the season.
Disney’s Phineas and Ferb: The Best LIVE Tour Ever! will be playing at Madison Square Garden April 5 - 10 as well as other NewYork-area venues. Children who participate in the Easter Egg Hunt at the Queens Zoo will have the opportunity to win tickets to the show. One Grand Prize winner will be chosen on Saturday to win a VIP family four-pack. Additional prizes are also available. 

About the show:
“Mom! Phineas and Ferb are going on a LIVE tour!!!” School’s out for summer and anything is possible as Phineas and Ferb create their biggest invention yet -- Disney’s Phineas and Ferb: The Best LIVE Tour Ever!  Phineas, Ferb, and the whole Tri-State Area gang embark on a bold escape jumping out from behind your TV and onto the stage in a live action adventure – right in your hometown!  And, before you can wonder, “Hey, where’s Perry?” the beloved pet platypus shifts to his secret double life as Agent P to foil another one of Dr. Doofenshmirtz’s evil plans.  Musical madness abounds in an escapade so awesome that even Candace can’t help but join the hilarious hijinks. It’s the ultimate end to summer vacation, so seize the day ‘cause Phineas and Ferb are gonna do it all! More information is at www.phineasandferblive.com. 

Disney’s Phineas and Ferb: The Best LIVE Tour Ever – SHOW DATES: 
Madison Square Garden: April 5 - 10
Westchester County Center: April 12 – 15
St. George Theatre: April 17 & 18
Nassau Coliseum: April 19 & 20
IZOD Center: April 21 & 22

More information about the Queens Zoo’s Egg-stravaganza and other events can be found online at www.queenszoo.com.
Contact:
Barbara Russo 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.