Bronx, NY – Sept. 10, 2018 – Summer may be coming to a close, but fall might be the best season to visit the Bronx Zoo. Halloween celebrations are a Bronx Zoo tradition and this year is no exception.    Boo at the Zoo returns each weekend from Saturday, September 29 through Sunday, October 28 (including Columbus Day, Monday, October 8). Event highlights include traditional favorites such as daily magic shows, costume parades, professional pumpkin carving demos, crafts, and the extinct animal graveyard.   All Boo at the Zoo activities embrace the spirit of the season while incorporating wildlife. Guests will have an opportunity to see and learn about many of the animals often associated with Halloween folklore including, vultures and owls.    Bootoberfest returns to Boo at the Zoo weekends with music, lawn games, and seasonal fare on Astor Court, and the haunted pirate hayride, corn maze, and seasonal fun at the new Nature Trek play will round out a day full of fall fun.    Most activities are included in the price of a General Admission Ticket; all activities are included with the purchase of a Total Experience Ticket. For more information and a full schedule of events, visit www.BronxZoo.com/boo-at-the-zoo   Boo at the Zoo is sponsored by Coca-Cola and MetroPCS.     Brew at the Zoo is back for after-hours seasonal fun for the over-21 crowd. The Halloween edition of the Bronx Zoo’s beer and wine tasting festival is on Friday, October 19 from 6-11pm.   Brew at the Zoo is a craft beer tasting event that hosts dozens of craft breweries serving more than 100 variations of ales, lagers, porters, IPAs, and more. Food options will include NYC food truck staples, local eateries, and variety of classic beer hall bites at any one of the Bronx Zoo cafes.   Guests are encouraged to put together their best costumes as the evening will include Halloween-themed activities including a costume contest, mentalism shows, and a spooky haunted trail.    There will be live music in locations throughout the zoo along with dancing, DJs, animal trivia, and a game room featuring old-school favorites.    Many of the Bronx Zoo’s exhibits will be open late including Madagascar! and World of Reptiles.   VIP tickets are available and offer exclusive access to the VIP area with additional beer, wine and food selections, a special haunted adventure, and more.   GENERAL ADMISSION TICKETS - $79.99 Includes 5 oz. commemorative souvenir cup with unlimited beer samplings, live band and DJ entertainment, bar trivia, karaoke, retro game room, and complimentary photo booth and select exhibit access.   VIP TICKETS - $119.99 Includes all General Admission benefits PLUS express check in and entry to Dancing Crane VIP Beer Hall (with exclusive beer, wines, snacks, and private restrooms), VIP Grizzly Corner and Haunted House. VIP areas include complimentary bar snacks, exclusive wine and beer samples, and a 2018 commemorative t-shirt and a 2019 Bronx Zoo general admission ticket for a future visit. In addition, complimentary fountain soft drinks are available at Bronx Zoo cafes.   DESIGNATED DRIVER TICKETS - $44.99 Responsibly enjoy the event with your friends. Includes all General Admission perks, minus the souvenir cup and alcohol. Complimentary fountain soft drinks are available at Bronx Zoo cafes.   For more information, ticket purchases, and a full schedule of events, visit www.BronxZoo.com/Brew. Must be 21 or over. No children are permitted at this event. Beer and wine pouring starts at 7pm. Select animal exhibits open from 6pm – 7:30pm. Multiple food options will be available for purchase. 
 Proceeds from Brew at the Zoo benefit the Bronx Zoo's mission of providing the highest quality of animal care, science education, and local and global conservation of wild animals and wild places.   Brew at the Zoo is sponsored by MetroPCS and Sakroots.     MEDIA NOTE: Brew at the Zoo is expected to sell out. A limited number of media tickets for Brew at the Zoo will be available to credentialed members of the press only. There will be no admission without an advance ticket. Please email mpulsinelli@wcs.org to inquire.   About the Bronx Zoo: The Bronx Zoo, located on 265 acres of hardwood forest in Bronx, NY, opened on Nov. 8, 1899. It is world-renowned for its leadership in the areas of animal welfare, husbandry, veterinarian care, education, science and conservation. The zoo is accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) and is the flagship park of the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) which manages the world’s largest network of urban wildlife parks including the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo and New York Aquarium. Our curators and animal care staff work to save, propagate, and sustain populations of threatened and endangered species. We have educated and inspired more than 400 million visitors at our zoos and aquarium since our opening and host approximately 4 million guests at our parks each year – including about a half-million students annually. The Bronx Zoo is the largest youth employer in the borough of the Bronx, providing opportunity and helping to transform lives in one of the most under-served communities in the nation. The Bronx Zoo is the subject of THE ZOO, a docu-series aired world-wide on Animal Planet. Members of the media should contact mpulsinelli@wcs.org (718-220-5182) or mdixon@wcs.org (347-840-1242) for more information or with questions.     ###