Saturday, Oct. 12 – Monday, Oct. 14
 Activities will focus on this endangered species and its native South African habitat 

Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 7, 2013- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is extending African Penguin Awareness Day on October 12 with a weekend full of penguin-themed activities, Saturday, Oct. 12 through Monday, Oct. 14, 12 to 4 p.m. The goal of this event is to raise awareness about the African black-footed penguin (Spheniscus demersus), an endangered species native to the southern tip of Africa.

Activities include:
Touch Station – Visitors will see and feel penguin bio-fact materials including real feathers and eggs. Education docents will be available to teach visitors about these flightless sea birds.

Games and Crafts – Children will get creative and make their own penguin craft and participate in exciting penguin-themed games.

Penguin Feedings – These daily demonstrations show visitors how keepers feed the penguins. (Feeding times are subject to change on a daily basis, based on the animals' needs. Times are posted in the aquarium’s lobby each morning).

The New York Aquarium’s black-footed penguin exhibit is home to a total of 15 of these warm-weather birds. Black-footed penguins are a signature species for the aquarium and live in their outdoor exhibit year round, thriving in all temperatures. WCS is working in the field to help save penguins. In Latin America, WCS works to safeguard several species of penguin in coastal Argentina and Chile, and has helped establish marine protected areas in both countries.

The New York Aquarium was devastated by Hurricane Sandy last year. It opened on a partial basis in May and hopes to fully reopen by spring 2016. Visit www.nyaquarium.com to learn how you can help the aquarium rebuild.

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org  
Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.