New York – Feb. 27, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society has teamed up with Fordham University to develop an educational research program focusing on urban ecology and sustainability.  

The Urban Ecology and Sustainability Program is a multi-faceted research program that includes a lecture series along with courses for youth, families, and teens. There are also plans to expand program offerings to undergrads, graduate students, and post-doctorates.  

Intended to address concerns surrounding the dramatic increase in world population and growing demand for natural resources in urban areas, the program seeks to further understand how humans affect ecosystems and how to mitigate the impact of resource consumption.

The Urban Ecology and Sustainability Lecture Series will present on a broad range of topics including lectures about wildlife conservation, sustainable design, green infrastructure, environmental economics, urban habitats, and environmental history.

For more information or to register for the lecture series, please contact the Central Park Zoo Registrar at 212.439.6583 or email cpzregistration@wcs.org.

Penguin Discoveries: Around the World and in New York 
Thursday, April 19, 6:30-7:30 pm
Central Park Zoo - 4D theater
$25 members or valid Fordham ID; $30 non-members; $18 for students with valid ID

Conservation Biologist Alan Clark, JD, PhD will speak about his exciting research conducted in New Zealand and Argentina on mating choices of Magellanic and little blue penguins. Central Park Zoo Assistant Curator of Animals Sue Cardillo will talk about the Wildlife Conservation Society’s work with penguins and penguin conservation and will give a tour of the famous Central Park Zoo penguin exhibit. 

Urban Impacts on Landscape 
Thursday, May 17, 6:30-7:30 pm
Central Park Zoo - 4D theater
$25 members or valid Fordham ID; $30 non-members; $18 for students with valid ID

Urban areas present unique challenges to wildlife, yet they can be surprisingly high in biodiversity. Colin Cathcart, Professor of Architecture, who has completed a wide variety of green architecture projects, will discuss how urban development impacts habitat and agriculture.  Jeff Sailer, WCS Director of City Zoos, will discuss how wildlife responds to and adapts to urban areas. He will focus his lecture on the resilience of sea ducks and will reference the Central Park Zoo’s impressive sea duck collection. The program will conclude with a tour of one of the zoo’s sea duck exhibits. 
Contact:Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org    


The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.