$7.5 million gift will help fund the aquarium’s Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit 												
												New York City Has Committed $93.1 million	
Brooklyn, N.Y. – Sept. 6, 2012 ATTACHED PHOTO: Pictured left to right are: Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) President and CEO Dr. Cristián Samper, NYC Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Don Zucker, WCS Trustee Barbara Hrbek Zucker, City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr., NYS Assembly Member Alec Brook-Krasny, Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs John Calvelli, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium Jon Forrest Dohlin. 
Mayor Michael Bloomberg and the Wildlife Conservation Society recently announced city and private funding for the upcoming transformation of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium. The city has approved $93.1 million for the project and it was also announced that WCS Trustee Barbara Hrbek Zucker and her husband, Don Zucker, were donating $7.5 million. This is the largest private donation the New York Aquarium has ever received. 
 
 Ocean Wonders: Sharks! will feature 115 species of marine animals including sharks, rays, sea turtles, and more. It is scheduled to open in 2015. 
 
 Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
  
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.						
								Contact:	Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
 Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org