Enjoy the aquarium and Luna Park at a 20
percent savings



Brooklyn, N.Y.
– There is no better time
to experience Coney Island than this summer. The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s New York Aquarium and Luna Park are now offering Thrills and Gills,
a new online combo ticket that gives visitors a full-day Coney Island
experience with 20 percent off admission to the New York Aquarium, the
aquarium's 4D Theater Experience, and Luna Park. 



The Thrills
and Gills ticket is a great way to save time and avoid long lines. It
offers four hours of unlimited access to all 19 rides at Luna Park – including
the gravity-defying Air Race and the towering Brooklyn Flyer – and a total
experience package at WCS’s New York Aquarium, which includes all animal
exhibits as well as the exciting 4D Theater Experience. Tickets are sold
exclusively online at the two attractions’ websites and can be redeemed from
May 31 through Labor Day, the end of the regular summer season for Luna Park. 





Thrills and
Gills Ticket
Prices are: 






Weekends and
holidays:
Adult: $39.00
Child: $35.00







Weekdays:
Adult: $35.00
Child: $32.00 



Visitors can use
their tickets to experience everything the New York Aquarium has to offer.
Guests will enjoy the new Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef exhibits, home to
beautiful, exotic animals native to the waters of Belize, African freshwater
lakes, the Pacific Ocean’s coral triangle, and the Amazonian rain forests of
Brazil. 





The newly
renovated Aquatheater is always a crowd pleaser. This is where the aquarium’s
California sea lions strut their stuff, showing off with flipper stands and
high dives at daily interactive musical demonstrations. Showtimes are at 11:30
a.m. and 3 p.m. everyday. 


Luna Park opened over
Memorial Day Weekend in 2010 and drew half a million visitors in its inaugural
season. With no entrance fee and a mix of world-class rides, entertainment,
games and food, Luna Park is fully accessible to visitors from New York and
around the world, from thrill seekers to those wishing to take a stroll through
the park. 



For more
information or to purchase Thrills and Gills tickets, visit nyaquarium.com or lunaparknyc.com.





Contact:
New York
Aquarium:  
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428;brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org






Luna
Park:                                          
Tom Corsillo – 212-889-0808; tom@themarino.org 



 

Wildlife
Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for
children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children
under 3 years of age are admitted free. A limited-time Thrills and Gills
combo ticket can be purchased online at www.nyaquarium.com or www.lunaparknyc.com,
offering a combined 20 percent reduced admission at both attractions; combo
tickets can be purchased May 1 - July 31. Fridays after 3pm,
admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at
West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events
and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our
web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect
time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most
heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

 

Luna Park

Named after an iconic piece
of Coney’s history, Luna Park (www.lunaparknyc.com) represents the largest investment in amusements in
Coney Island in decades.  Luna Park opened over Memorial Day Weekend in
2010, and its inaugural season introduced New Yorkers and tourists from around
the globe to 19 new rides, including the world debut of “Air Race.” In 2011,
Central Amusement International opened the Cyclone Cafe, a 3,000 square-foot
restaurant in Luna Park with seating for 36 that offers a range of classic
American and healthy dining options. The new Luna Park is designed to reflect
the spirit and personality of today’s Coney Island, while capturing the
original look and feel of its namesake.  With no entrance fee, Luna Park
is fully accessible to those who prefer games to rides, or to those simply taking
a stroll down the Boardwalk.

 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org. 

###