Visitors get “passports” stamped at five zoo exhibits that represent global locations where WCS works to save wildlife and wild placesThe weekend of August 14-15: Celebrate the cultures of South America with entertainment and activities courtesy of El Museo del BarrioRedeem passport coupons for deals at participating stores, museums, and restaurants throughout New York      Total Experience Tickets to the Bronx Zoo are available at www.bronxzoo.com for 20 percent off through the end of August         New York – August 10, 2010 – This weekend at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo, Bank of America presents the Zoofari Passport Adventure program –– offering zoo-goers the unique opportunity to sample global culture and entertainment while earning discounts and special bargains. Each guest will receive a special Zoofari passport taking them to five destinations within the zoo representing some of the locations around the world where WCS works to save wildlife and wild places.  Visitors will travel to five exotic locales including: Asia – where they will encounter Siberian tigers at Tiger MountainAfrica – where they can watch the lion cubs play on the African PlainsMadagascar – where the lemurs jump from tree to tree in Spiny ForestSouth America – where anacondas lurk in the Reptile HouseNorth America – where grizzly bears and brown bears roam the rocks of Bear OverlookContact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.