Take the
Bronx Zoo’s
						
						
								Mother’s
Day Quiz and Find Out
								 

						
				
		
		


		





NEW
  YORK – May, 6, 2011 – So what’s all the hoopla
about tiger moms? Maybe you are one; maybe you know one. Or perhaps she is more
of a sea turtle  mom – hands-off and relaxed. Whatever her maternal
style, the mother in your life probably has a match in the animal kingdom. Take
the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo’s newly released
online Mother’s day quiz and find out at: www.bronxzoo.com



The quiz includes five questions about mothers to see if she belongs to
a furry, scaly, or feathery maternity club. After the results are tallied, you
can then send an optional e-card telling mom whether she is one of five
“animal moms” – ranging from the overprotective golden
pheasant to the matriarchal elephant.  Proceeds go to the Wildlife Conservation
Society’s mission to save wildlife and wild places.



The quiz also includes facts about the real-life moms of the animal
kingdom. The results can be shared on Facebook and Twitter so others can see
how the mother in your life ranks in the animal kingdom. 




Contact:
Max Pulsinelli –
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org





The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led
by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards
nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3
are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The
Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train
via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11
Express Bus service (from Manhattan
that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or
viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save
wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.