Wildlife Conservation Society
								 
								releases
first high-quality footage of Cross River gorillas in the wild
						
						
								Footage taken by Germany’s NDR Naturfilm
						
				
		
		


		


		


		


		
				“These
extraordinary images are vital for the fight to save the world’s least known
and rarest ape as well as the mountain rainforest on which they depend”
		
		


		
				—James Deutsch,
Director of WCS Africa Programs
				
						
								
								
						
				
		
		


		


		
				NEW YORK (December 16, 2009)
				—The world’s rarest—and most camera shy—great ape
has finally been captured on professional video on a forested mountain in
Cameroon, according to the Wildlife Conservation Society and Germany’s NDR
Naturfilm.
		
		


		With the assistance of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Cameroon Program, a
film crew from the Hamburg-based NDR Naturfilm managed to video the elusive
Cross River gorilla earlier this year in a stand of montane trees after weeks
of effort in the Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary. The protected area was created in
2008, with the guidance of WCS, specifically to protect the world’s rarest
great ape.
		


		“These gorillas are extremely wary of humans and are very difficult to
photograph or film,” said Dr. Roger Fotso, Director
of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Cameroon Program. “Eventually, we
identified and staked out some of the gorillas favorite fig trees, which is
where we finally achieved our goal.”
		


		“It’s unbelievable
that one great ape subspecies has never been filmed for TV so far,” said Jörn
Röver, Head of NDR Naturfilm. “We hope that our international production helps
to raise awareness for these magnificent creatures and the work of the WCS.”
		


		The only previous footage available of the rare apes was taken from a long
distance with a shaky, hand-held camera in 2005 by a field researcher.
		


		Due to the steep mountain terrain, tracking gorillas in Kagwene is
time-consuming and sometimes treacherous. Through the years, WCS researchers
have developed an effective non-invasive monitoring system aimed at keeping track
of the gorillas without disturbing them or getting them used to human presence.
After weeks with WCS’s assistance, the crew finally filmed several minutes of
two gorillas feeding on figs some 30-40 feet above the forest floor.
		


		“These
extraordinary images are vital for the fight to save the world’s least known
and rarest ape as well as the mountain rainforest on which they depend,” said
Dr. James Deutsch, Director of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Africa
Program.   “Over the past
twenty years, local communities, the governments of Cameroon and Nigeria,
funders, and committed conservationists have laid the foundation for a great
conservation success story.  We
hope these pictures will introduce to the world the lead players in this story,
the Cross River gorillas themselves.”
		


		Funders for efforts
to conserve Cross River gorillas include: the US Fish and Wildlife Service,
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (the German Development Bank), the Arcus
Foundation, WWF, the Margot Marsh Biodiversity Foundation, the Taronga
Foundation, the Kolmarden Fundraising Foundation, and the North Carolina Zoo. 
		


		Classified as
Critically Endangered by IUCN’s Red List, the Cross River gorilla is the rarest
of the four subspecies of gorilla, numbering fewer than 300 individuals across
its entire range in Cameroon and Nigeria.  It is one of two subspecies of western gorilla, the other being the
western lowland gorilla. The eastern gorilla includes two subspecies: the
eastern lowland gorilla, and the famous mountain gorillas of the Virunga
Mountains and southern Uganda (the latter of which numbers approximately 700
individuals).
		


		
				The Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary is a small reserve, only 19.5
square kilometers in size. Nevertheless, it contains a genetically important
segment of the entire Cross River gorilla population; it is estimated that the
sanctuary currently contains approximately 16 individual animals.
		
		


		
				While many populations of gorillas are threatened by
poachers, the gorillas of Kagwene have been protected by the local belief that the
apes are people and therefore cannot be hunted or consumed. 
		
		


		Elsewhere, hunting
continues to be one of the biggest threats to Cross River gorillas in addition
to habitat destruction. Gorillas are occasionally targeted by bushmeat hunters in
the region, and genetic analysis of the population reveals a reduction in
numbers over the last 200 years that is most likely due to hunting. The
fragmentation of their forest habitat is caused by farming, road-building, and
the burning of forests by pastoralists to encourage new grass for their herds. To view the Cross River gorilla footage, click here.


Contact:
Stephen Sautner - ssautner@wcs.org, 1-718-220-3682
John Delaney - jdelaney@wcs.org, 1-718-202-3275







		


		
				
						
								The
Wildlife Conservation Society 
				
				saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

		
		


		
				
						
						Special Note to the Media: If
you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can
make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please
direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation