Dinosaurs in Darkness-The Hatching.jpeg




 Dinosaurs in Darkness-The Hatching.jpeg



 Dinosaurs in Darkness-The Hatching.jpeg



					
					
						Bronx, NY – Sept. 14, 2022 – Boo at the Zoo is a fall tradition at the Bronx Zoo and the seasonal celebration it is set to return in October. The Halloween-themed event annually marks the unofficial start of the fall season with seasonal activities and performances that transform the zoo.

New for 2022, the Bronx Zoo is adding an after-hours event – Dinosaurs in Darkness: The Hatching. This is the zoo’s first-ever Halloween nighttime event for older audiences. Dinosaurs in Darkness transforms the fan favorite Dinosaur Safari into a thrilling nighttime experience each Friday and Saturday night from October 7-29.

Dinosaurs in Darkness: The Hatching is a scary Halloween walk-through experience that sends participants on an adventure that brings them up close with prehistoric creatures in a whole new way as they follow the story of a rare dinosaur egg, found intact after 66 million years, that is finally ready to hatch! What could possibly go wrong?

Dinosaurs in Darkness: The Hatching is an after-hours event and is ticketed separately from Bronx Zoo admission. It is recommended for ages 13 and up. More information and tickets are available at https://bronxzoo.com/dinos-in-darkness. 

The tradition of Boo at the Zoo will operate at the Bronx Zoo during normal open hours each Saturday and Sunday from October 1 to 30 (including the holiday, Monday October 10). Outdoor activities will include the popular professional pumpkin carving demonstrations and displays; magic and mind reading shows; trick or treating on the Candy Trail; and the spooky extinct animal graveyard. Animal-themed costumed stilt walkers and Halloween animal puppets will headline the costume parade, and everyone can meet live vultures, owls, ravens and other birds each day on the zoo’s historic Astor Court. Finally, October and Boo at the Zoo is the last chance to catch the Dinosaur Safari. The experience will go extinct on October 30.

Boo at the Zoo is for all ages and included with Bronx Zoo admission. For more information, tickets and a full schedule of activities, visit the website at BronxZoo.com/Boo-at-the-Zoo.

Media Videos:

Dinosaurs in Darkness: The Hatching

Boo at the Zoo