WCS’s Bronx Zoo begins everyday discounts for military personnelU.S. Marine and U.S. Navy Sailor to read from the NY Times Bestseller “Nubs: The True Story of a Mutt, a Marine & a
Miracle” on Saturday, May 29Newly crowned Miss USA® 2010, Rima Fakih, to make special appearance on Sunday, May 30 





















Bronx, N.Y. – May 26, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is the place to be for
Memorial Day weekend as the zoo introduces a year-round discount for members of
the military and welcomes a full line-up of patriotic guests to “Animal Tales
Extravaganza,” including representatives from the U.S. Marine Corps and U.S.
Navy and the newly crowned Miss USA® 2010, Rima Fakih.



Beginning Saturday, May 29, WCS’s Bronx Zoo will offer
military discounts* to any active duty or reserve members of the U.S. Military
when they present a valid military ID at the admissions gate. The discount
includes a FREE Total Experience Ticket or General Admission ticket for the active
or reserve member of the U.S. Military and a 50 percent discount for up to
three family members included on the same admissions transaction.



Saturday and Sunday May 29 and 30 will feature readings of Nubs,
The True Story of a Mutt, a Marine and a Miracle at the zoo’s Asia Plaza. On Saturday, Nubs will be read by two special
guests – a U.S. Marine and a U.S. Navy Sailor – and on Sunday, it will be read
by Miss USA.



“I am so thrilled to be attending the Bronx Zoo’s ‘Animal
Tale Extravaganza,’ said Rima, Fakih, Miss USA 2010.  “I am also honored to be here on Memorial Day weekend in
support of our troops with a reading of Nubs, The True Story of a Mutt, a
Marine and a Miracle. I am grateful for the
troops that fight every day for our country and I am proud to represent the
United States of America.”



Once zoo-goers have had a chance to hear the amazing story
of Nubs, they can head over to Astor Court where Dave Grover and Grover’s Gang
will be entertaining the crowd with a special brand of family-friendly folk
music from New York Life’s Main Stage.



Over the course of the 13-weekend extravaganza, renowned
children’s authors from notable publishers including HarperCollins, Little
Brown Books for Young Readers, Macmillan, Penguin Group (USA), Random House
Children’s Books, and Simon & Schuster will be hosting special story-time
readings of their books at the Asia Plaza Theater.  Families will be able
to meet their favorite children’s book authors and listen to them read their
new and classic works then head over to New York Life’s Main Stage on Astor
Court for live entertainment by some of the top-rated children’s entertainers.



Kids can walk through larger-than-life pages of real books
including The Very Hungry Caterpillar by
Eric Carle at the Butterfly Garden and Alphabet by Matthew Van Fleet at the Reptile House.  At
the Bear Overlook, walk through the new children’s book, Moon Bear, by Brenda Z. Guiberson and award-winning
illustrator, Ed Young and enjoy a wild ride with Wild About Books by Judy Sierra at Astor Court.  These
interactive, walk-through book experiences have been underwritten by the
publishers of the books featured; Penguin Group (USA), Simon & Schuster,
The Macmillan Children’s Publishing Group, and Random House Children’s Books.



The experience also includes an opportunity for children to
make their own “animal tale” book and “animal tail” bookmark based on Big
Babies, Little Babies, which is published
by DK Publishing, one of the event sponsors.  



This weekend’s line-up for the Animal Tales Extravaganza includes the following:

 

**Saturday,
May 29

New
York Life’s Main Stage – Musical Performance

11:30am,
2pm

Dave
Grover & Grover’s Gang has been called
“the Jerry Garcia of the elementary school set.”  Grover’s style has been compared to Mr. Rogers, Paul Simon,
James Taylor, and Raffi.  He’s won
countless awards spanning two decades, including a Grammy and Emmy nomination. Performing
at the White House, the Goodwill Games, The United Nations, and The Today
Show.  It is folk-rock for every
generation.



Wild
Asia Plaza – Special Guest Reading for Memorial Day Weekend

11am,
1pm, 3pm

Nubs:
The True Story of a Mutt, a Marine & a Miracle

 by Major Brian Dennis, Mary Nethery, and
Kirby Larson (Little, Brown)

To
be read by a United States Marine and a United States Navy Sailor



Nubs,
an Iraqi dog of war, never had a home or a person of his own. He was the leader
of a pack of wild dogs living off the land and barely surviving. But Nubs's
life changed when he met United States Marine, Major Brian Dennis. The two
formed a fast friendship, made stronger by Dennis's willingness to share his
meals, offer a warm place to sleep, and give Nubs the kind of care and
attention he had never received before. Nubs became part of Dennis's human
“pack” until duty required the Marines to relocate a full 70 miles away –
without him.  Nubs had no way of
knowing that Marines were not allowed to have pets.  So began an incredible journey that would take Nubs through a
freezing desert filled with danger to find his friend. 



In
honor of Memorial Day, the Bronx Zoo is bringing in a United States Marine to
read this New York Times
Bestselling story. 




**Sunday,
May 30

New
York Life’s Main Stage – Musical Performance

11:30am,
2pm

Dave Grover & Grover’s Gang 

(Description Above)




Wild
Asia Plaza – Special Guest Reading for Memorial Day

11am,
1pm

Nubs:
The True Story of a Mutt, a Marine & a Miracle 

by
Major Brian Dennis, Mary Nethery, and Kirby Larson (Little, Brown)

To be read by Miss USA® 2010 - Rima
Fakih 

(Book description above)



The
Miss Universe®, Miss USA® and Miss Teen USA® Pageants are a Donald J. Trump and
NBC Universal joint venture. Utilizing its nationwide grass roots
infrastructure, the Miss Universe Organization is committed to increasing
HIV/AIDS awareness and increasing awareness of breast and ovarian cancers. By
forging relationships with organizations committed to research and education
such as the Latino Commission on AIDS, Susan G. Komen for the Cure and Gilda's
Club, the women who champion these causes during their reign are armed to
impact women today. The titleholders of the Miss Universe Organization
personify the combination of beauty and intelligence that defines the 21st
Century.




** Scheduled
times and performers subject to change without notice.




New York Life is the featured sponsor of the Animal Tales
Extravaganza and is hosting a Child ID
event every weekend during the festivities. The Child ID program provides peace of mind to
parents who are concerned about the safety of their children and want to take
action to protect them. A complimentary Identification Card, complete with the
child’s photograph and fingerprints will be given to the parents.

 

MEDIA NOTE(S): 

** 
         Scheduled times and performers
subject to change without notice.



*            This
military discount will also be offered at the New York Aquarium.



*            Military
discounts are not applicable on Wednesdays at the Bronx Zoo or on Fridays after
3:00 PM at the New York Aquarium as admission by pay-what-you-wish donation is
offered to all guests during these times.



*            Military
discounts are only available for on-site purchases, not for online purchases.

 






Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



New York Life Insurance
Company, a Fortune 100 company
founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the United
States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world. New York Life
has the highest possible financial strength ratings from all four of the major
credit rating agencies.  Headquartered in New York City, New York Life’s
family of companies offers life insurance, retirement income, investments and
long-term care insurance.  New York Life Investments** provides
institutional asset management and retirement plan services. Other New York
Life affiliates provide an array of securities products and services, as well
as institutional and retail mutual funds. Please visit New York Life’s
Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more
information.



*New York Life is the largest
mutual life insurance company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within industries,
Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune magazine, May 4, 2009. 



**New York Life Investments
is a service mark used by New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and
its subsidiary, New York Life Investment Management LLC.