New space features woodland reading nook, nature play area, puppet theater stage, and more												
												Brooklyn, NY – Dec. 11, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo has re-opened its popular Discovery Center following extensive renovations that include the addition of several nature-themed learning areas for children and families.   The redesigned space includes:A campsite where parents and children can read nature booksActivity boxes for children to explore nature and wildlife items with magnifying glassesA woodland stage with puppets and costumes for kids to perform their own wildlife playsAn area where kids can make their own animal-themed magnetic tangram puzzlesAn area just for tots to play with foam blocks and stuffed animalsThe new Discovery Center maintains several of the popular activity areas that zoo-goers have enjoyed in the past including the striped mice, great horned owl, and mud turtle exhibits, as well as the zoo vet center for kids and the scoop on poop exhibit.  The Prospect Park Zoo’s Discovery Center is open on weekends from 11am to 3pm. During the week school groups, play groups, and camps can reserve a private visit for up to 35 people for $150. Price includes the cost of zoo admission and an educational live animal encounter. The Discovery Center is also available for birthday parties for kids ages 2 to 8.   For more information or to book a private visit, call 718-399-7327 or email ppzeducation@wcs.org.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8.00 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on earth.   If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org.		CONTACT: Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org