WCS New York Aquarium Helps Coney Island Recover from Hurricane Sandy, Provides an Economic Stimulus to this Historic Neighborhood and Tourist Destination

Council Member Recchia: “Families from all over the city will benefit from the return of our beloved aquarium, as will the local economy." 
Coney Island, Brooklyn, May 24, 2013 -- The Wildlife Conservation Society will partially reopen the New York Aquarium to the public, this Saturday, May 25, after seven months of closure following the devastation from Hurricane Sandy.   
“The partial reopening of the WCS New York Aquarium in Coney Island will help one of our city’s hardest-hit areas continue its recovery from Hurricane Sandy,” said Cristian Samper, President and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation Society. “The aquarium serves as a critical economic driver in Brooklyn and inspires thousands of school-age children across New York City to better appreciate our oceans around the world.  All of us at WCS thank our partners in government at all levels for their commitment to help us rebuild.”

 The partial reopening includes:
Glover’s Reef (featuring the sea life found in Glover's Reef, Belize); Exhibits in Conservation Hall (Coral Triangle of Fiji, Great Lakes of East Africa, and the Flooded Forests of the Amazon;) Outdoor exhibits of Sea Cliffs (walrus, sea lions, harbor seals, sea otters, and penguins); and a fully re-modeled Aquatheater with a new sea lion demonstration. 

Education programs have resumed on a limited basis at the aquarium. These include the teen docent program, summer camp for students, and training for educators. In addition, aquarium staff will continue to work closely with the WCS Global Marine Program on the New York Seascape initiative to conduct conservation research from Cape May to Montauk.

“We are grateful for the outpouring of support we’ve received from our Coney Island neighbors and community leaders including Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr., and Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz ,” said Jon Forrest Dohlin, WCS Vice President and Director of the New York Aquarium. “We still have a long road ahead of us, but opening our doors will help further the continuing recovery of the community. Everyone who visits us will support the rebuilding of the aquarium and the rest of Coney Island just by visiting and enjoying our exhibits.”

"As our community continues to rebuild, the reopening of this New York institution marks a welcome and important development in Coney Island’s comeback,” said City Council Member Domenic M. Recchia, Jr. “Families from all over the city will benefit from the return of our beloved aquarium, as will the local economy."
CONTACT:  
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Mary Dixon – 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org  


Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are May 25 – Sept. 2, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation. (Group rates and reservations are not available at this time, due to limited park capacity). The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com