Lion Cub Names to be Announced in The Daily News and bronxzoo.com on Sunday
		

		
				
Thousands Have Placed a Vote

		
		

		
 

Moxie, left, born in November 2008, joins her younger siblings in the African Plains exhibit at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.  Still a youngster herself, she enjoys playing with her two little sisters and brother. The new cubs were born in January and introduced to the public in April.  The whole family – now on exhibit for the first time – is getting along famously. They also have become famous as The Daily News asked New Yorkers to help name the cubs. Now that thousands of New Yorkers have voted, the names will be announced Sunday in The Daily News and at www.bronxzoo.com.

 

Everyone who participated in the vote at bronxzoo.com will be entered into a drawing to win a $100 gift card courtesy of the Belmont Business Improvement District (BBID). Gift cards can be redeemed at participating businesses within the BBID.
		
				Credit: Julie Larsen Maher ©WCS


		 


The Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com. 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.