CONTACT:   Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org; Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org; Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org WCS’s Queens Zoo Hosts Moo at the Zoo Weekend Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 3 and 4; 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Cows, sheep, and other farm animals are the stars of this event that celebrates farms and domestic animals Flushing, N.Y. – Sept. 28, 2015 – WCS’s (Wildlife Conservation Society) Queens Zoo will host Moo at the Zoo on Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 3 and 4, from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. The farm-themed event will celebrate domestic animals and things related to farm life.
 The Queens Zoo is home to many kinds of domestic animals. These include cows, Flemish giant rabbits, horses, chickens, and many different breeds of sheep and goats. Live cheese-making demonstrations, farm-themed games and crafts, and meet-and-greets with animals are among the highlights of the event. Moo at the Zoo weekend activities include: Cheese-Making Demos – A professional NYC-based cheese maker will demonstrate the art of making various cheeses. (TIMES: 12, 1 and 2 p.m. both days) Butter Making – Opportunities to churn real butter will available for visitors.  Animal Meet-and-Greets – The zoo’s farm animal keepers will answer questions about the domestic animals that live on the zoo’s sprawling farm. (TIMES: 12, 1:30 and 3 p.m.)  Crafts for Kids – Children will make and take home farm-focused crafts of cow masks and puppets. Farm Fun – Visitors will learn about farm life through various games and activities.   All activities take place on the zoo’s farm. More information about Moo at the Zoo can be found online at www.queenszoo.com. Media wanting to cover this event on Saturday, Oct. 3 must schedule an appointment with Barbara Russo at 718-265-3428 or brusso@wcs.org. The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.wcs.org.
 
 Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
 MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS;youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.
 
 Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.     ###