Special Debut of Two New Babydoll Sheep
				Help Choose Their Names
				Saturday and Sunday, May 8 - 9

Brooklyn, N.Y., April 28, 2010 – The
sheep and alpacas are looking quite fluffy at the Wildlife Conservation
Society’s (WCS) Prospect Park Zoo… but not for long.  On Saturday and Sunday, May 8 and 9 their thick wool coats
will be cast off at the zoo’s annual Fleece Festival in order to help these
wonderfully wooly animals stay cool all summer long.  It will be a fleece-filled weekend complete with
sheep-themed crafts, live music, and lots of soon-to-be-shorn sheep and
alpacas. 

Of course, the highlight of the weekend will be watching the shearers in
action. Zoo-goers will get a sheep’s-eye
view of the process as the zoo’s sheep and alpacas are helped out of their
winter wear by expert shearer Don Kading. As the
animals get their stylish new look, the professional shearers will guide
visitors step-by-step through the process while local artists discuss the many
uses of wool. 

As a special treat for this year’s festivities, WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo
will debut two eleven-month-old Babydoll sheep, and those on hand can vote on
what the new sheep should be named. 


Visitors can vote at the zoo’s Barn for the following pair of names:
Raggedy
Ann and AndyPeep
and BeauLucy
and RickyAmy
and CharlieGinger
and Fred











The Fleece Festival is free
with regular zoo admission.



Photo: Julie Larsen Maher ©
WCS. Two new babydoll sheep will make their public debut at WCS Prospect Park
Zoo’s annual Fleece Fest to be held on May 8 and 9.

Contact:
Fran Hacket: fhackett@wcs.org, 718-265-3428
Wildlife Conservation
Society Prospect Park Zoo – $7.00 for
adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3.00 for kids 3-12, free for children
under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays; 10am to 5:30pm weekends. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush
Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339
or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.



Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature
and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission
because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 




Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation