Resident otter, Ogie, meets his match: Dixie, a female North American river otter



View video at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTXicrMuT8w



New York, NY-August 17, 2010- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo has doubled the
fun on the Discovery trail with the addition of a young, female, North American
river otter - Dixie.  



Dixie, a one and a half-year-old female, was recently
introduced to her male companion, Ogie, who has been at the zoo for many
years. They are getting along well
and can be seen swimming and playing together in their exhibit.



Dixie spends her day diving in the water and crawling
through the bushes and grass. With their clawed, webbed feet, and powerful
tails, otters are equally at home in water as they are on land. They are skilled swimmers and can dive
up to 35 feet and hold their breath for up to 8 minutes.



“We are thrilled to welcome Dixie,” said Denise McClean,
director of WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo. “She adds some young energy to the exhibit and is a good playmate for
Ogie.”



Visitors can watch Dixie and Ogie’s antics on the zoo’s
Discovery Trail. There are a
variety of animals from around the world on the trail including rock wallabies,
red pandas, and tufted deer. The best time of day to catch Dixie diving and
playing is during the morning or late afternoon hours as she and Ogie often retreat
to their hollow log for midday naps.



North American river otters are found in freshwater
environments in most of Canada and along the eastern coast of the United
States.  



Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © WCS

Video Credit: Luke Groskin © WCS



Contact:
Sophie Bass: 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org
Max
Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve
Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for
senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm
weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November  through April. Tickets are
sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue.  For more information call 718-399-7339
or visit  www.prospectparkzoo.com.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.