Need a Last Minute Gift?
		
		

		
				
						
								
										
												
														

												
										
										
												
														 
														
														
												
										
								
						
				
		
		
				
						
								
										
 
								
								
										
										
								
						
						
								
										
												
														
																New York, N.Y.
														
														 – Fruit cake, ties and perfume may be OK for some folks, but if you really want to give a unique present this year, visit the Wildlife Conservation Society’s zoos and aquarium for some wild gift ideas – at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, Queens Zoo and New York Aquarium.


												
												
														 


												
												
														The gift of a Wildlife Conservation Society membership is sure to please any animal lover. A WCS membership gives families and individuals unlimited admittance at all 5 WCS facilities in New York plus other member benefits. More information can be found on the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Web site at www.wcs.org. 


												
												
														 


												
												
														WCS gift shops are another place to find unique gift ideas. There are no long lines or the usual holiday hustle and bustle. Gift shops are conveniently located throughout the city at the Bronx and Central Park Zoos and the New York Aquarium.  

 

The Zootique at the Central Park Zoo, which allows access from outside the zoo, is the perfect place to buy sophisticated presents for family and friends, such as sterling-silver jewelry, artfully decorated pottery, clothing, and accessories.  Gifts for kids include conservation themed toys and a wide selection of stuffed animals.  The world-famous Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium in Coney Island are ideal places to pick up t-shirts, sweatshirts or last minute toys.

 

Of course, just visiting the zoo is always an exciting experience—a gift in itself. There is an array of wonderful wildlife at each WCS facility. Visitors can escape the cold by warming up in the Central Park Zoo’s Rainforest, home to a beautiful, exotic collection of birds and reptiles, as well as a playful troupe of lemurs. Winter is also the perfect time to see the zoo’s new snow leopard exhibit and famous polar bears Gus and Ida.


												
												
														 


												
												
														At the Queens Zoo, enjoy an outdoor experience in a quaint, bucolic setting while watching animals like Andean bears, pumas, endangered thick-billed parrots, and other wildlife native to North and South America. 

 

At the Prospect Park Zoo, a holiday experience can be found at many exciting and exotic exhibits. The zoo is home to animals from around the world, including meerkats, baboons and Pallas cats. 


												
												
														 


												
												
														All four WCS zoos will be continuing its annual holiday event, “Presents to the Animals” on Saturday and Sunday, December 19 and 20, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., free with zoo admission. At the event zoo-goers can watch various zoo animals receive festively decorated gifts stuffed with all their favorite tasty treats.


												
												
														 


												
												
														The Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium are exciting places to visit during the holidays. There are many indoor exhibits where visitors can stay warm while experiencing beautiful wildlife from around the world. 
												
										
								
						
						
								
										
												
														
														
												
												
												
										
										
										
								
								
										
												
														
																Contact:
														
												
												
														
																
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 
												
										212-439-6527 

								
										

										
												
														
																 
														
												
										
								
						
						
								
										
												
														


										
								
								
										
												
														
														The Bronx Zoo
												
										
										, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and is closed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King Day.  Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. WCS’s Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.


										 


										
												
														Central Park Zoo
										
										, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue. Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Admission includes entry into the main zoo, and the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Fall and winter hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. daily. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park and is open 365 days a year. Fall/winter hours are 10am to 4:30 pm. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors, $3 for children ages 3-12, and free for children under 3. For general information, please call (718) 271-1500, or visit our web site at www.queenszoo.com


										
										
										
												


										
												
														Prospect Park Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April.  The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.


										
										
										
												


										
												
														New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
										
												
														


										
										
												


										
												
														The Wildlife Conservation Society
										
										 saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

						
				
		
		
				
				
		
		
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation