CALENDAR LISTING CONTACT:  Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org; Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org; Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org WCS’s New York Aquarium Hosts Ascarium Weekend to Celebrate Halloween Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 31 and Nov.1; 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. WCS Newsroom: http://newsroom.wcs.org/ @WCSNewsroom: https://twitter.com/WCSNewsroom Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 7, 2015– Halloween fun awaits at WCS’s (Wildlife Conservation Society) New York Aquarium Ascarium weekend, Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 31 and Nov. 1; 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Highlights are marine-themed magic shows, 3D pumpkin carvings, crafts, and more. Ascarium weekend activities include:  Thrilling Magic Shows – Magician Steve Rodman hosts the “Marine Mystery and Mischief Magic Show” that will show visitors how scientists go about discovering the amazing mysteries of animals, which include making observations, developing questions, and forming hypotheses. (Show times: 11:30 a.m., 1:30, and 4 p.m.) Wildlife Theater Presents: Under Sea Mysteries – Three short plays will reveal some of the fascinating mysteries of marine life. Puppets are the stars of these humorous and educational presentations. (Show times: 12:15, 2:15, 2:25, and 4:45 p.m.) 3D Pumpkin Carving: - Sand Sculpture USA will carve a giant pumpkin into a beautiful aquatic scene of New York’s coast, featuring whales, sharks, and other animals that live here. (Both days, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)  Sea Lion Celebration – The aquarium’s daily sea lion presentations will add in some Halloween-themed narration throughout the shows (11 a.m., 1 and 3:30 p.m.) Treat Stations – Treat stations stocked with all kinds of goodies will be located around the aquarium. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m., weather dependent) Spooky Crafts – Young artists will choose their favorite marine animal and make a mask for Halloween trick-or-treating or decoration. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)  Marine Animal Mystery and Mischief Stations – Aquarium volunteers will be available at exhibits to discuss the aquarium’s animals and answer visitor questions about marine wildlife. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)  Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Tickets are $11.95 per person (ages 3 & up), and include Aquarium admission plus one admission to the new 4-D Theater; children age 2 and under are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, Aquarium admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com. WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in nearly 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: newsroom.wcs.org Follow: @WCSNewsroom. For more information: 347-840-1242. Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.  ###