The great apes of western Africa face many threats, from habitat 
destruction to disease. But tucked within central Cameroon lies a 
relatively small pocket of forest, where gorillas can more or less just 
be gorillas: Deng Deng National Park. 

WCS scientists have been 
surveying the area since 2002, and a recent WCS census found a healthy 
population of 300 to 500 western lowland gorillas living within the 
reserve’s 224 square miles and in an adjacent logging concession. The 
group represents the world’s northernmost population of these gorillas. 

Despite
 living in relative harmony, the gorillas did not line up neatly to be 
counted. Instead, WCS researchers tallied up the apes’ nests to estimate
 their populations. The census found that the gorillas move freely 
between the park and the logging area, along with many of their 
neighbors—chimpanzees, forest elephants, buffaloes, and bongo.
Unfortunately, a road runs through the two areas, paving the way to poaching threats from outside. 

“Protecting
 this gorilla population, and guaranteeing its future,” said James 
Deutsch, director of WCS-Africa, “absolutely requires protecting the 
gorillas in the logging concession as well as in the park.” 

Cameroon
 created Deng Deng National Park in 2010. The density of gorillas found 
within the park rival those of Gabon's Lopé National Park and Congo's 
Nouabalé-Ndoki National Park, two places that are famous for their apes.
 Part of the reason Deng Deng is so special is that the gorillas that 
live there are isolated from others of their kind. This would help 
shield them in the event of an Ebola outbreak, which has occurred in 
other regions to the south.

“For a small area, this is an 
extremely important site for gorilla conservation,” said Roger Fotso, 
director of WCS-Cameroon. “It is also important because this is the 
northern-most population of western lowland gorillas, and because it is 
accessible to the capital Yaoundé and so a possible future site for 
tourism.”