Docents give tours, interpret exhibits, interact with the public, and narrate daily sea lion demos 

Applications and information available at www.wcs.org/volunteer

Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 31, 2014 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo is now accepting applications for its adult docent program.

The program is open to adults 18 years and older. Zoo docents are an important part of the day-to-day operation of the zoo. They work within the zoo’s education department to give tours, interpret exhibits, interact with visitors, and narrate the daily sea lion demonstrations. 

Those accepted into the program will attend a minimum of eight training sessions at the zoo. Topics include conservation, biology, and informal learning.   

The application deadline for this program is Monday, Dec. 29. Training begins on Jan. 18, 2015. 

Volunteer shifts are available every day of the week. Those interested in applying should call the zoo at 718-399-7339 x.325 or email ppzvolunteer@wcs.org. 

More information about this and other volunteer opportunities/programs at the Prospect Park Zoo can be found at www.wcs.org/volunteer. 

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) – MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.