An Educational Sea Lion Encounter Program Begins for the Season 

		

		
Brooklyn, NY (April 6, 2010) – Catch one of the daily Sea Lion Celebrations in the Aquatheater at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium. Afterwards, book a Sea Lion Encounter to ask questions and get up close with the personable sea lion celebrities.


Visitors who sign up for the encounter will receive a meet-and-greet session with one of the Aquarium’s California sea lions. Encounters occur every day after the Sea Lion Celebration show scheduled three times a day on weekdays and four times a day on weekends. Participants will learn about these magnificent animals, ask questions, and finally get a sea lion kiss.



Sea Lion Encounters cost $20 per participant. Aquarium admission is required and is not included in the price of the Encounter. Photos may be purchased for an additional fee. Participants must be at least 7 years old and those between the ages of 7 and 16 must be accompanied by an adult. Personal photography is not permitted.



The Wildlife Conservation Society works to save sea lions in the wild. WCS conservation work in South America has helped protect the California sea lion’s cousins – namely southern elephant seals, South American sea lions, and South American fur seals in coastal Argentina.
		
				Contact: 
Fran Hackett -  718-265-3428
Photos available upon request
                                                                       
                          

 

Wildlife Conservation Society New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

 
undefined