Name one of the Bronx Zoo’s Madagascar hissing cockroaches after your Valentine
		
				
						

				
		
		
				Nothing says “forever” like a cockroach from the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo
		
		
				
						

				
		
		
				Visit www.bronxzoo.com/roach   Bronx, NY – Feb. 1, 2013 – Birds do it; bees do it; even Madagascar hissing cockroaches do it. The Madagascar hissing cockroaches at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo have had a busy year breeding, and there are thousands of new bugs in need of names just in time for Valentine’s Day. Now in its third year, this light-hearted Valentine’s gift is the perfect way to make sure your loved one knows your feelings are forever – with a roach in their name.    Now a Valentine’s tradition, Name-A-Roach has attracted thousands of hopeless romantics from around the world who have named real live Madagascar hissing cockroaches at WCS’s Bronx Zoo after their loved ones, an “ex,” or their mother-in-law. Each gift comes with a colorful certificate emailed to your loved one announcing that a cockroach has been named in his or her honor.    Visit www.bronxzoo.com/roach place an order. Each name costs $10 and all proceeds will go to help the Wildlife Conservation Society save wildlife and wild places around the world.    The zoo has plenty of roaches to name with thousands of the super-sized bugs on exhibit in Madagascar!—an award-winning habitat for lemurs, crocodiles, and many other species from the African island nation.    Madagascar hissing cockroaches are the world’s largest roach species reaching nearly four-inches long. The namesake hissing noise is emitted as a defense mechanism. Like nearly every roach species, Madagascar hissing cockroaches are not considered pests and rarely enter homes.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on earth.