WCS Logo 1




 WCS Logo 1



 WCS Logo 1



					
					
						New York – Nov. 2, 2022 -- WCS has launched a new Supplier Diversity Program, an initiative that enables certified diverse vendors to gain access to procurement opportunities at WCS’s zoos and aquarium (Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, New York Aquarium).

Among the many categories of certified diverse vendors which the new program plans to engage: Minority and Women-owned Business Enterprises (M/WBEs), Veteran-owned Business Enterprises (VBEs), Service-Disabled Veteran-owned Business Enterprises (SDVBEs), Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender-owned Business Enterprises (LGBTBEs) and several others.

A certified diverse supplier is a vendor which can demonstrate that their business is at least 51% owned, operated, and managed by a diverse person or group of diverse members by presenting a certificate issued by an independent certifying government agency, quasi-government or non-governmental organization (NGO).

The program will offer workshops on “How to Do Business with WCS,” in order to provide business capacity building support and introduce a new class of vendors to WCS and its conservation mission. Vendors can register for the program HERE.

“Our new WCS Diversity Supplier Program and portal will allow us to engage with a wider pool of diverse suppliers in a more efficient and impactful way by helping WCS to address the disparity within the disparity that often affects Black and Hispanic businesses in the US and to promote economic development of other underutilized businesses,” said Kevin V.G. Wells, Chief Diversity Officer for WCS.

Said Robb Menzi, WCS Interim President and CEO: “We are committed to using certified diverse businesses and this pledge was enhanced when we awarded a certified minority firm to build our new supplier diversity portal. We are moving purposefully to merge DEI into our business operations and look forward to growing this effort.”

John Calvelli, Executive Vice President of WCS Public Affairs and co-chair of Ascend Anchor Council NYC: “We have long worked with our neighboring communities in New York City in vendor partnerships and our new WCS Supplier Diversity Program will ensure we have a program which is easily accessible and helps broaden our efforts.” Working with Ascend NY, WCS has been a part of efforts to grow businesses owned by people of color across New York City.

###