Presented by Delta Airlines
		
				
						

				
		
		
				Lifelike LEGO® wildlife sculptures on display at the Bronx Zoo with activities for all ages		   Professionally built sculptures include: zebra, tiger, gorillas, lemurs, giraffe, rhinoceros, flamingos, hornbills, and more   Activities include: LEGO® Master Builder demonstrations, interactive LEGO® Construction Zone, Wildlife Theater, Animal Activity Trail presented by Empire BlueCross BlueShield, and encore performances of Avenue Zoo   Saturday, July 7 through Monday, September 3Bronx, NY – July 3, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is taking visitors on a conservation journey through Wild Forest: A LEGO® Safari featuring incredible LEGO® wildlife sculptures and activities for the whole family.

LEGO® Master Builders have created a safari of LEGO® brick wildlife sculptures on display along a wooded path near Zoo Center. Visitors will see lemurs, a tiger, hornbills, rhinos, gorillas, flamingoes, a giraffe, and other exotic wildlife along their trek and can visit their real-life counterparts throughout the zoo.
 
The safari brings to life the challenges faced by wildlife due to habitat loss and real threats to their survival. The goal of the program is to connect young minds to nature and inspire visitors to help build a future for wildlife.  

At the LEGO® Construction Zone at the Dancing Crane pavilion, visitors will be able to construct LEGO® wildlife sculptures and take part in the construction of a mystery mural. Guests can work with LEGO® Master Builders one weekend a month on the Reptile House lawn. 

In addition to the LEGO® fun, the Wildlife Theater will perform for guests as along the safari path. Guests are also invited to create their own animal prints and puppets based on the zoo’s African animals with the help of artists from the Museum for African Art.  

Don’t miss the original production of Avenue ZOO – featuring a guest appearance by Kate Monster, the beloved puppet star of the Tony Award-winning musical AVENUE Q – on the stage at Asia Plaza. The popular musical has been extended with performances twice a day Thursday to Sunday through Sunday, September 9. A must-see original, Avenue ZOO tells a tale where Kate Monster meets exotic animals and discovers that though they may seem strange and different, they are not so scary after all.

Finally, visitors can find their inner animal on the Animal Activity Trail, presented by Empire BlueCross BlueShield. Learn to move like an animal while exploring the Bronx Zoo.  Everyone can run, jump, dance, and crawl as they visit some of their favorite wild animals throughout the park.
   A full listing of activities and exhibits included in WILD FOREST – A LEGO® Safari can be found at www.bronxzoo.com.   WILD FOREST – A LEGO® Safari  Saturday, July 7 through Monday, September 3   LEGO®  sculptures on display on the east side of Zoo Center.   Construction Zone Children and families can create their own sculptures of animals and help complete a LEGO mystery mural.  Schedule & Location:  Daily 11 a.m - 4 p.m. at Dancing Crane Plaza   LEGO® Master Builders Professionals will work with visitors on building LEGO wildlife sculptures. Schedule & Location:  10 a.m. – 5 p.m. on Saturday, July 21 at Reptile House lawn  10 a.m. – 5 p.m. on Saturday, August 11 at Reptile House lawn   Workshops with the Museum for African Art Participants can enjoy African arts and crafts.  Schedule & Location:  Learn to make African animal puppets
11 a.m. – 3 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday July 14 and 15 at Dancing Crane PavilionMake animal prints11 a.m. – 3 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday August 11 and 12 at Dancing Crane Pavilion   Wildlife Theater Shows  WCS’s outdoor Wildlife Theater shows incorporate conservation and nature lessons with puppets and music for audiences of all ages.

Schedule and Location (shows are weather dependant):
Thursday through Sunday, Saturday, July 7 through Sunday, September 3
Showtimes: 11:30 a.m.; 1:30; 2:30; 3:30 p.m.
Wednesday show times: 11, 11:30 a.m., 12, 1, 2, 2:30, 3, 3:30, 4 p.m.

A full listing of activities and exhibits included in WILD FOREST – A LEGO® Safari can be found at www.bronxzoo.com.   
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: wcs.org/donation.   LEGO, its logo and the brick and knob configurations are trademarks of The LEGO Group. © 2011 The LEGO Group. All rights reserved. Used with permission.