Animal_Planet_logo




 Animal_Planet_logo



 Animal_Planet_logo



					
					
						(New York, NY) – Animal Planet takes audiences on a first-ever, in-depth look behind the scenes at the Bronx Zoo, a New York institution and global leader in animal care and species conservation. With full access to the Bronx Zoo’s 265-acre campus, located a mere ten miles from New York’s Times Square, Animal Planet shines a light on a wondrous world of more than 6,000 animals and the 500-plus people dedicated to their care and well-being. THE ZOO premieres Saturday, February 18th at 10PM ET/PT.THE ZOO, filmed over an 8-month period, focuses on the stories of dozens of animals and experiences at the Bronx Zoo, and its critical mission to conserve wildlife around the globe. It also highlights the diverse community of people who work at the zoo, and how their expertise and varied skills come together to provide the highest quality care for the animals.In the premiere episode, Ntondo, a silverback gorilla is diagnosed with glaucoma and staff devise a strategy to keep him comfortable, two keeper-raised Malayan tiger cubs are prepared for their introduction to their exhibit at Tiger Mountain and a zookeeper methodically orchestrates the introduction of two endangered maleo birds to form a pair bond, breed - and eventually, produce a chick. Other storylines include how the Bronx and Toledo Zoos worked to prevent the extinction of the Kihansi spray toad; the rescue of an orphaned snow leopard cub from a remote region in Pakistan; and the history of the Bronx Zoo’s conservation efforts with the American bison."The Zoo is an inspiring and eye-opening first ever look at the diverse animals residing at the Bronx Zoo and the passionate caretakers working at the zoo. Our series gives amazing access for our viewers to get a first-hand look at the conservation efforts of the Wildlife Conservation Society," said Patrice Andrews, General Manager of Animal Planet.Jim Breheny, Director of the Bronx Zoo and WCS Executive Vice President of Zoos and Aquarium said, “THE ZOO highlights the role of how the Association of Zoos and Aquariums provide excellent care to individual animals and work to sustain species for the future. We are really happy to be sharing this series with the Animal Planet audience as the series emphasizes that today’s zoos must do more than exhibit animals; they must have a higher purpose and that purpose is conservation of species in the wild.”Added Pat Thomas, General Curator of the Bronx Zoo and WCS Vice President, who managed
the production for the zoo, “We gave Animal Planet total access so that viewers could see, feel
and be part of what we do every day at the Bronx Zoo.”THE ZOO is produced for Animal Planet by Left/Right Productions and Copper Pot. Ken
Druckerman and Banks Tarver are the executive producers for Left/Right Productions. David
LaMattina and Chad Walker are the executive producers for Copper Pot. Lisa Lucas is the
executive producer; Patrick Keegan is supervising producer for Animal Planet.

###