Score a home run
for the WCS New York AquariumBaseball and aquarium fans will enjoy
prizes and activities throughout the evening 
Saturday, June 25 at 6 p.m.
				
		





Brooklyn, N.Y. – June 21, 2011 – The Brooklyn
Cyclones have teamed up with the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York
Aquarium to host the first-ever New York Aquarium Night at MCU Park on
Saturday, June 25 to benefit the WCS. 


As the crowd cheers for Brooklyn’s heavy hitters, they
will enjoy an aquarium-themed night. Fans can meet-and-greet adorable costumed
characters, enter to win free aquarium tickets before the start of every
inning, and watch videos starring the New York Aquarium’s marine life on the
stadium jumbo-tron. There will be no shortage of fun for fans throughout the
game, which pits the Cyclones versus the Hudson Valley Renegades. 





The Cyclones won’t be the only ones at the game competing
for a big win. The aquarium’s own mascot, Squirt the Octopus, will square off
against the Cyclones’ Sandy the Seagull in an exhilarating race around the
bases 


All fans will have a chance to bring home a one-of-kind
souvenir – they Cyclones’ game-day jerseys will feature a commemorative
aquarium-themed design and will be auctioned off after the game. This teal
shirt features an impressive shark graphic and proceeds from the auction will
benefit the Wildlife Conservation Society.  



Before the first pitch, Cyclones fans are encouraged to
explore the marine wildlife at WCS’s New York Aquarium located just down the
Coney Island Boardwalk from the stadium. Visitors can enjoy exciting
Aquatheater shows with sea lions, visit the new Conservation Hall and Glover’s
Reef exhibits, and discover a wide variety of exotic aquatic wildlife. 



For more information about “New York Aquarium Night,” at
MCU Park, visit www.nyaquarium.com. 






Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org   
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

 






Wildlife Conservation
Society's New York Aquarium opens
every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is
$14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens
(65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. A limited-time
Thrills and Gills combo ticket can be purchased online at www.nyaquarium.com
or www.lunaparknyc.com, offering a combined 20 percent reduced admission
at both attractions; combo tickets can be purchased through July
31. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is
located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information
on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call
718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is
the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium,
Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of
New York.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



Special Note to the
Media: If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.