Julie Larsen Maher_3074_Linneauss Two-toed Sloth_BZ_01 12 23




 Julie Larsen Maher_3074_Linneauss Two-toed Sloth_BZ_01 12 23



 Julie Larsen Maher_3074_Linneauss Two-toed Sloth_BZ_01 12 23



					
					
						Bronx, NY – April 25, 2023 – The event that marks the official start of spring/summer in New York City is back! The 15th annual Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) Run for the Wild 5K run/3Kwalk at the Bronx Zoo returns on Saturday, April 29 at the Bronx Zoo.

The 5k race for individual runners will begin at 8:00am; casual runners and walkers can take part in the 3K Family Fun Run/Walk at 9:30am. Everyone planning to attend are encouraged to visit the Know Before You Go page for specific safety protocols. This page may be updated according to changing guidance by NYC, NY State, and the CDC.

More than 5,000 runners and walkers are expected to participate in this year's event. All runners and walkers are encouraged to stay at the Bronx Zoo for the day and take part in post-run activities and visit the resident wildlife at all of the Bronx Zoo exhibits.

Each year the WCS Run for the Wild is dedicated to an animal or family of animals in need of conservation support to raise awareness of threats they face. This year’s event is dedicated to sloths and will help raise important funds to further the WCS/Bronx Zoo mission of saving wildlife in New York and around the world.

All participants are eligible for a host of prizes based on individual fundraising success. Prizes include t-shirt, sloth plush, water bottle, tote bag cooler, blanket, socks, and Bronx Zoo tickets plus a VIP breakfast/meal voucher. 

WHAT:          15th Annual WCS Run for the Wild

WHERE:       Bronx Zoo

                        Media Parking, Check-in at Bronx River Parking Lot

                        (Exit 6, Bronx River Parkway)

WHEN:          Saturday, April 29

                        Media arrival and check-in: 7-7:30am

                        Event start: 8am

MEDIA NOTES: 


 Members of the media planning to cover the run and post event activities should contact Max Pulsinelli at mpulsinelli@wcs.org or 571-218-7601 so that parking and in-park transportation can be arranged.
 Media check-in and parking will be at the Bronx River Parking Lot near the start line. This lot is accessible from Exit 6 of the Bronx River Parkway.


WCS Run for the Wild is made possible by the generous support of:

Sponsor:     Montefiore Einstein