WCS's Bronx Zoo Offers New Yorkers a Break from the Heat with Climate-Controlled Exhibits, Shaded Pathways, and a Great Ticket Discount Throughout August
		

		
				

				
						

 


		
New York – July 28, 2010 – Temperatures have reached 90 degrees or higher 16 times in July, and New Yorkers are opting to stay indoors rather than taking advantage of the city’s most popular outdoor attractions.  

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo can offer New Yorkers a break from the heat with its climate-controlled exhibits, shaded pathways and a 20 percent discount with online purchases for its Total Experience tickets.

 

The 20 percent discount applies to all online purchases of the zoo’s Total Experience tickets from August 1 through August 31.  The Total Experience Ticket includes admission to the zoo as well as all rides and attractions including Congo Gorilla Forrest, Zoo Shuttle, Bug Carousel, Children’s Zoo, Butterfly Garden, Wild Asia Monorail, and the brand new Dora and Diego’s 4-D Adventure.

 

The July attendance numbers clearly show a correlation between attendance and the heat. As temperatures increase, attendance decreases. In July 2009, 400,518 guests visited the Bronx Zoo and the average high temperature for the month was 81.6 degrees.  In July 2010 the average high temperature has been 91.2 degrees and attendance is projected to dip to 275,000 visitors – a clear indicator of the misconception that there is nowhere to keep cool at the zoo.

 

“People sometimes forget that many of the most popular exhibits at the Bronx Zoo are indoors and climate controlled,” said Jim Breheny, WCS Sr. Vice President of Living Institutions and Director of the Bronx Zoo. “Congo Gorilla Forest, Jungle World, and Madagascar! are just a few visitor favorites and are all great places to keep cool on hot days.”

 

In addition to the indoor exhibits and the air conditioned, 4-D Theater Experience, WCS’s Bronx Zoo is built on 265 acres of wooded parkland that offers plenty of shade for those trying to escape the heat of the city.  The Children’s Zoo is completely drenched in shade and offers a beautiful respite for families with children of all ages.

 

WCS’s Bronx Zoo is also featuring the Zoofari Passport Adventure in August.  On weekends visitors can take their Zoofari Passport to five stamping stations located throughout the zoo.  At each of the five destinations, visitors will find stations where they can stamp their Zoofari passport to designate that stage of the Zoofari is complete.  In doing so, zoo-goers will learn fun facts about the continent, the animal, and the work WCS is doing to help save rare and endangered species in the wild.  

 

For more information or to purchase the Total Experience tickets at 20 percent off, visit www.bronxzoo.com 

		
				Contact: 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

 


		 


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.