First tweet will be Noon, Thursday, May 23, and will include photo of 650lb animal not yet on exhibit

Follow @JimBreheny to get first  look at the news and pictures about WCS zoos and aquarium, conservation around the world and all-things about animals
		

		New York, NY – May 23, 2013 – Jim Breheny, WCS Executive Vice President, General Director WCS Zoos and Aquarium, and Bronx Zoo Director, is starting a Twitter feed that will provide followers an exclusive inside look at the famed Bronx Zoo and its work to save animals in the wild. 
 
The first tweet from @jimbreheny will be issued noon on Thursday, May 23 and will feature a photo of a 650lb animal that has not yet made its public debut at the zoo.

Breheny has worked at the Bronx Zoo for over 40 years, he has held several different positions and 2005 he became director. In his twitter feed, he will send photos of what he sees day-to-day while on the job; highlight important conservation news from around the globe; and send news and insights on all-things “animal” from his unique perspective.
 
“Twitter is a great vehicle to give people an opportunity to learn more about the Bronx Zoo, our animals, and the conservation work we do here,” said Breheny. “Fans of the zoo and wildlife advocates will have the opportunity to see how the zoo and our staff work and some of the important conservation projects that may not be obvious to the everyday zoo visitor. I welcome all to follow us on this new Twitter account.”
 
Follow @JimBreheny on Twitter to become a Bronx Zoo insider.
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com   or call 718-367-1010.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.