Volunteer docents and guides enhance zoo-going experience


		
 

Brooklyn, NY – August 25, 2011 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo is currently accepting applications for its volunteer discovery guide and docent programs.

 

Prospect Park Zoo volunteers play a key role in enhancing the zoo-going experience by educating visitors about the zoo’s animals and WCS’s mission to save wildlife and wild places around the globe.

                                                                                             

Prospective volunteers must complete a basic volunteer training program. Training sessions will be held on Sundays, Sept. 25, Oct. 2, and Oct. 16.  

 

Once trained, guides will be able to answer questions about the zoo’s animals, present “biofacts” at Discovery Stations, assist in the interactive Discovery Center, work at special events, and teach visitors how to interact with alpacas, horses, and sheep in the barn area. 

 

Teen discovery guides are able to assist on group tours, birthday parties and educational programs, while enhancing their public speaking skills.

 

Adults who enroll in the program will have the opportunity to advance to the docent level by completing exhibit interpretation and animal handling courses. Docents help visitors by interpreting exhibits, leading group tours, and presenting live animal encounters, which include teaching children and families about wildlife from the zoo’s collection of education animals.

 

Application information can be found online at www.prospectparkzoo.com. Prospective volunteers are encouraged to submit their applications by September 8. 

 

For more information, call 718-399-7339 Ext. 325 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com and click on “Volunteers.” Admission to the program is competitive. Applications are currently being accepted. Participants must undergo an interview and be available to attend volunteer training if accepted.
		
				Contact: 
				


Sophie Bass 718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org


 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo, opens every day of the year at 10 a.m. with seasonal closing times. Admission is $8 for adults, and $5 for children ages 3-12 and $6 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11225. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Prospect Park Zoo information, call 718-399-7339 or visit our web site at http://www.prospectparkzoo.com           

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.                            

 

If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation