Vote for New York’s favorite dinosaur at http://www.bronxzoo.com/dinovote
		
				
						Dinosaur Safari opens at the Bronx Zoo on Saturday, May 25, Memorial Day Weekend
						
 
New York, NY – May. 7, 2013 – Dinosaur Safari is coming to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo beginning, Saturday, May 25, Memorial Day weekend. The new attraction will include a ride through the Cretaceous and Jurassic periods with more than two-dozen animatronic dinosaurs up to 40 feet long which move, snarl, roar and spit.   
 
In anticipation of the new exhibit, the Bronx Zoo is offering New Yorkers a chance to vote for their favorite dinosaur species at www.bronxzoo.com/dinovote    and win tickets to see the dinosaurs. Included in the vote: long-necked Brachiosaurus, the intimidating Tyrannosaurus rex, the gator-like Baryonyx, the massive Triceratops, or the flighted Quetzalcoatlus. Exclusive Bronx Zoo Dinosaur Safari stickers that can be used with a safari field guide will be given to those who vote. 
Dinosaur Safari will include a ride through a two-acre area of the zoo and will highlight the physical or behavioral adaptations many share with species that are alive today.  
 
This limited engagement will run from Saturday, May 25 through Sunday, September 8 and will be included in the Total Experience Ticket. 
 
A 20 percent discount is offered with online purchases for Monday and Tuesday visits.  Tickets can be purchased in advance at www.bronxzoo.com/dinovote  . 
				
						
								
										 
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com   or call 718-367-1010.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.