Julie Larsen Maher_3100_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ_11 14 22.jpeg




 Julie Larsen Maher_2731_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ_11 14 22.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_3100_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ_11 14 22.jpeg



 Julie Larsen Maher_2731_Holiday Lights Lanterns_BZ_11 14 22.jpeg
12


					
					
						Bronx, NY – December 12, 2022 – As the giant light switch is flipped to the ON position, the 2022 season of the Bronx Zoo’s Holiday Lights is officially underway. The family-favorite tradition is the unofficial start to the New York City holiday season and will run on select dates through Jan. 8.

Holiday Lights is a fully outdoor experience. The six lantern trails have been reimagined and more than 70 new lanterns/30 new species have been added for 2022. In all, there are more than 360 wildlife-themed lanterns representing 90 species spread across an expansive area of the zoo. Each of the lantern trails depict scenes from geographic regions and ecosystems around the world: North America, Latin America, Africa, Asia, oceans, and the Forest of Color which features larger-than-life representations of some of the lesser known but impressively colorful animals and plants vital to life on Earth. 

“Holiday Lights returned to the Bronx Zoo in 2019 and each year we have grown the event significantly” said Jim Breheny, Bronx Zoo Director. “Each year we add more animal lanterns and new experiences. Holiday Lights is now bigger than ever and gives everyone an exciting new way to learn about wildlife while experiencing the spirit of the season.”

The event includes massive light shows, synchronized to seasonal music, on historic Astor Court. Additional trees and features have been added making this the zoo’s biggest light show experience ever. Glowing animal-themed stilt walkers, train rides, Wildlife Theater shows, ice carving demonstrations, and seasonal treats including s’mores and hot chocolate make for a complete Holiday outing for the whole family.

“Holiday Lights at the Bronx Zoo is a beloved tradition for all New Yorkers. Again this year, thousands will be amazed by the lights, colors and excitement of the many animal displays,” said Hilary Ayala, Con Edison’s Director of Strategic Partnerships. “Con Edison is proud to again be the presenting sponsor of this celebration of the season with family and friends.”

Holiday Lights will operate on select dates from November 18 to January 8. Tickets for Holiday Lights must be purchased in advance and are date specific. Tickets are now available online. Visit the Know before You Go page for all details.

WCS members receive a 40-percent discount. Members at the Conservation Supporter level will receive free admission to Holiday Lights.

Bronx Zoo’s Holiday Lights is presented by Con Edison