Interactive family show is free with the price of zoo
admission
		
		




		
				Sunday, September 19, 2:00 p.m.
		
		






New York, NY: CAT: The
Opera Musical, an interactive, family-friendly performance, is coming to the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo at 2:00pm on Sunday, September 19.



CAT is an opera-musical about a
cat that becomes transfixed and transformed by the world of letters. Written by
author George Plimpton, composed by Kitty Brazelton, and directed by Grethe Barrett
Holb, the 45 minute opera engages the audience with singing and sound effects,
transforming the crowd into the show’s chorus and orchestra.



Full of humor and imagination,
this gentle tale set to uproarious music will inspire the young and the young
at heart to spread their wings and explore adventures in the world of letters.






Who: WCS’s Central Park Zoo and The
Family Opera Initiative What: C.A.T., The Musical-Opera







Where:  WCS’s
Central Park Zoo








When:  Sunday, September 19, 2010 at 2:00
pm
(Performance
begins immediately following the 2:00pm sea lion feeding)




Contacts:
Sophie Bass:  718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 



Family Opera Initiative is the premiere company in the United States creating
new, high-quality opera works for family audiences. The company was founded by
Grethe Barrett Holby, a
Southampton resident, to create a substantial new repertory for family
audiences, with the goal of bringing the opera experience to a widely diverse
audience, and the commitment to engage the community in the process and
performance of work - work that Enchants, Challenges and Inspires, with subject
matter that matters.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the
year. Admission is $12 for
adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children
under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am
– 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November
through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing.
The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further
information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together
these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine
wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.