Con Edison
Presents 
						
						
								the 2nd Annual
5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s Bronx Zoo 
						
				
				
						
								Former Pro Bowl running
back, Tiki Barber, returns as the Run for the Wild's official starter
						
				
				
						
								Registration is now open
at www.wcs.runforthewild.org
						
						
								
								
						
						

				
		
		
		
		


		
				
						April 24, 2010 - Race Day
						

						

				
		
		

Bronx, N.Y. – March 4, 2010 – Calling all
runners and athletic hopefuls. It’s time to lace up your running shoes to
prepare for New York City’s
wildest race: The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s second annual Run for the Wild at WCS’s
Bronx Zoo.  





This year’s 5K-run/walk takes
place on Saturday, April 24, 2010 and is dedicated to helping save tigers. 


Registration is now open and Run for the Wild participants can choose
from two different races. Individual runners can stampede to the zoo at 8:30 a.m. to begin a 5k race; more
casual runners and walkers can take part in the Family Fun Run/Walk at 9:00
a.m. 



While all runners/walkers will be championing
tiger conservation by participating in the race, they will also get a chance to
see first-hand New York’s newest symbol
of championship and athletic prowess: The New York Yankees’ 2009 World Series Championship
trophy, which will be on display from noon to 3pm in the Zoo Center.




The event promises a fun and exciting day for all who participate or
attend to support the cause. Everyone will receive a Run for the Wild T-shirt,
and there will be plenty of post-run festivities, including refreshments, live
music, children’s games and activities, and a meet-and-greet with former
Pro Bowl running back, Tiki Barber, who returns this year as the Run for the
Wild’s official starter. 

After the run,
participants are invited to enjoy the zoo for the rest of the day.
Complimentary parking and admission will be provided and they are encouraged to
swing by the famous Tiger
 Mountain to catch one of
four daily tiger enrichment sessions. 

There are many other
wonderful and exciting exhibits to visit also, including sea lions, the
magnificent Madagascar!
exhibit, and the Congo
 Gorilla Forest.


Online registration is $30 for adults. Those who are unable to
participate in the event can still help by making a donation online or
sponsoring a runner or a team. All pledges and donations provide much needed
support for WCS field staff working to ensure a future for these beautiful
endangered great cats. For more information, to register, or to sponsor a
runner, visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org. 

 

WCS’s Run for the Wild is made
possible by the following generous sponsors:  





Presented
by:                  
Con Edison 


Supported
by:                  
Aquafina, Benjamin Moore Paints, EDUN LIVE, 

                                        
Monroe College,
Montefiore Medical Center,
UBS





Media Partners:
              
Daily News, WABC, Z-100 


Promotional Partner:        New York Sports Clubs



In-Kind
Partner:               
D'Agostino

 


		
				
						Contact: 
				
		



Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org




The Wildlife Conservation Society Bronx Zoo is open daily from
10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and will be closed on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King
Day.  Adult admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children
under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for
buses. WCS’s Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train
via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11
Express Bus service (from Manhattan
that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and
wild places worldwide. We do so through
science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's
largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.
Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people
imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this
mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.