A rare species in U.S. zoos, Bronx Zoo’s World of Birds is home to three chicks
		 
		
				 
		 Bronx, NY – July 25, 2012 – Attached Photos: One of three recently hatched spur-winged lapwing chicks at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo explores its surroundings at the World of Birds.    The chicks hatched last month and can be found at the popular bee-eater exhibit. The species is rare in U.S. zoos; there are currently only 35 birds in 14 AZA-accredited facilities.    Spur-winged lapwings are a species of migratory shorebird found in sub-Saharan Africa during the winter and in the eastern Mediterranean during the warmer breeding season. Its name refers to a spur hidden in each of its wings which is used for defense from predators and protection of its young.    The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.