Flushing, N.Y. – The Queens Zoo is looking for a few good animal lovers to join its volunteer team. Becoming a volunteer with the zoo’s education department means teaching schoolchildren and other zoo visitors about animals through guided tours, assisting with special programs and events, speaking at narrated feedings, and leading arts and crafts activities. Queens Zoo volunteers also get the opportunity to get involved in a variety of special events that take place at the zoo, including the annual Boo at the Zoo and Presents to the Animals events. Most importantly, becoming a volunteer means discovering the world of wildlife, the environment, and having fun while doing it!Candidates must be at least 18 or older, available for a multi-week training program, and able to commit at least four hours every other week. For more information, visit www.queenszoo.com to download an application or call 718-271-1500 for more information.The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park and is open 365 days a year. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays; 10am to 5:30pm weekends. Admission is $7.00 for adults, $4.00 for seniors, $3.00 for children ages 3-12, and free for children under 3. For general information, please call (718) 271-1500, or visit our web site at www.queenszoo.comThe Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donationContact
Barbara Russo 212-439-6527