Dwarf and banded mongoose species exhibited
side-by-sideTropic Zone exhibit renovations just in time for
winter





View the videos:




Banded: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M8ZPwaaXLkQ
Dwarf: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWnjwZB6JdINew York, N.Y.- Oct. 27, 2010-Eight bundles of joy have arrived in the Tropic Zone at the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo – four dwarf and four banded mongoose
pups.



The two litters mark the first dwarf and banded mongoose
pups every born at WCS’s Central Park Zoo.



“We welcome these great additions to our mongoose families,”
said Jeff Sailer, WCS’s Director of City Zoos. “The exhibits give people
a chance to compare the dwarf and banded mongoose species next to each other,
and see how behaviors of animals from the same family can be very distinct.”



The three adult banded mongoose are larger than the dwarf
and have several bold, black stripes across their backs. The two adult dwarf
mongoose are smaller and have brown fur. As carnivores, they spend a
great deal of time searching for insects, bird eggs, and small reptiles to
eat.  



The two species are exhibited side-by-side on the mezzanine
level of the Tropic Zone exhibit where zoo-goers can observe how all members of
the mongoose social group help raise the young. Both dwarf and banded mongoose
are from Africa where they live in extended social groups.



In the wild, they form partnerships with birds such as
hornbills. The mongoose rely on the hornbills as an early warning system
for predators and the hornbills benefit from picking off the insects fleeing a
roving band of mongoose.



The mezzanine level of the Tropic Zone has undergone
renovations to house the mongoose as well as new mountain coatimundi, a long
tailed, raccoon-like animal native to South America. Always a balmy 80 degrees
Fahrenheit, it is the perfect place to escape the cold weather.  

Video Credit: Luke Groskin
© WCS






Contact:  
Sophie Bass:  718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli -
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild –
718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open
every day of the year. Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior
citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under  3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm
weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through
April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo
is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information,
please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.