WCS’s
Bronx Zoo Also Welcomes Kelly and Chica from The Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout® Special Appearance and Readings for Children by Author Peter Brown, The Curious Garden, and Illustrator Ed Young, Moon Bear







Bronx, N.Y. – May 18, 2010 – Barney™ the Dinosaur may not be your typical resident at the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo, but this weekend he will bring the
festivities to life as he entertains the masses from New York Life’s Main Stage
on Astor Court at the zoo’s “Animal Tales Extravaganza.”  The iconic purple dinosaur will be joined
by Kelly and Chica from the popular Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout,
the first 24-hour preschool destination available on TV, on demand, and online
for kids ages 2-5 and their parents and caregivers.  Barney will sing, dance, and interact with families as they participate
in the excitement of the weekend’s animal-themed entertainment. 



This weekend will also feature readings by the creators of
two highly acclaimed children’s books, Peter Brown, author of The Curious
Garden (Saturday, May 22) and Ed Young,
illustrator of Moon Bear (Sunday,
May 23).  Both will be keeping
their fans riveted as they read from their latest works from the stage at the
Bronx Zoo’s Asia Plaza. 



And what would an “Animal Tales Extravaganza” weekend at the
zoo be without a walk through the grounds of the nation’s largest urban zoo to
visit with the animals?  To the
delight of zoo-goers, this spring has brought some new additions to the Bronx
Zoo family.  Visitors will want to
be sure not to miss the zoo’s biggest celebrities – the three new African lion cubs
– which be scampering about the lion exhibit at African Plains.  Other animal babies introduced this
season include the mandrill in Congo Gorilla Forest; the Coquerel’s sifaka and
collared lemur in Madagascar!; the silver leafed langur in JungleWorld; and the
white-naped crane in the Northern Ponds.



Over the course of the 13-weekend extravaganza, renowned
children’s authors from notable publishers including HarperCollins, Little
Brown Books for Young Readers, Macmillan, Penguin Group (USA), Random House
Children’s Books, and Simon & Schuster will be hosting special story-time
readings of their books at the Asia Plaza Theater.  Families will be able
to meet their favorite children’s book authors and listen to them read their
new and classic works then head over to New York Life’s Main Stage on Astor
Court for live entertainment by some of the top-rated children’s entertainers.



Kids can walk through larger-than-life pages of real books
including The Very Hungry Caterpillar by
Eric Carle at the Butterfly Garden and Alphabet by Matthew Van Fleet at the Reptile House.  At
the Bear Overlook, walk through the new children’s book, Moon Bear, by Brenda Z. Guiberson and award-winning
illustrator, Ed Young and enjoy a wild ride with Wild About Books by Judy Sierra at Astor Court.  These
interactive, walk-through book experiences have been underwritten by the
publishers of the books featured; Penguin Group (USA), Simon & Schuster,
The Macmillan Children’s Publishing Group, and Random House Children’s Books.

 

The experience also includes an opportunity for children to
make their own “animal tale” book and “animal tail” bookmark based on Big
Babies, Little Babies, which is published
by DK Publishing, one of the event sponsors.  

 





This weekend’s line-up for the Animal Tales Extravaganza includes the following:**Saturday,
May 22

New
York Life’s Main Stage – Interactive Sing-Along

11:30am,
2pm

BarneyTM
the Dinosaur with Kelly and Chica from The Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout® – 

Everyone’s
favorite purple dinosaur Barney™, along with Kelly and Chica, hosts The
Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout, the
first 24-hour preschool destination available on TV, on demand and online for
kids ages 2-5 and their parents and caregivers, will entertain families live
from the main stage.  Kelly and Chica interact live with preschoolers and
their families across the country every day on The Sunny Side Up Show, as they share daily birthday greetings,
viewer-submitted crafts, fun facts and weekly themes ranging from colors,
numbers and letters to manners, gardening, and pets.



Wild
Asia Plaza – Author Appearance/Reading

11am,
1pm

The
Curious Garden, read by author
Peter Brown (Little, Brown)- This New
York Times bestselling book is an
enchanting tale with an environmental theme and breathtaking illustrations that
become more vibrant as the garden blooms. 
Red-headed Liam can also be spotted on every page, adding a clever
seek-and-find element to this captivating picture book.**Sunday,
May 23

New
York Life’s Main Stage

11:30am,
2pm

BarneyTM
the Dinosaur with Kelly and Chica from The Sunny Side Up Show on Sprout® –

(description above)




Wild
Asia Plaza – Illustrator Appearance/Reading

1pm,
3pm

Moon
Bear, read by illustrator Ed
Young (Macmillan) - Moon bears, or
Asiatic black bears, are so named because of the white moon-shaped blaze on
their chests. The moon bears are seldom seen but their footprints, claw marks,
hair, and bear nests high in the trees give us clues about how they live.  Sadly, there are now more moon bears in
captivity than in the wild, as these animals are being “farmed” for their
commercially valuable bile.  Brenda
Guiberson’s lyrical text and Ed Young’s stunning illustrations combine in a
winning tribute to this endangered species.  




Ed
Young is a Caldecott Medalist, a two-time Caldecott Honor Book artist, and has
been twice nominated for the Hans Christian Andersen Award. He has illustrated
many books for children, including Cat and Rat.




New York Life is the featured sponsor of the Animal Tales
Extravaganza and is hosting a Child ID
event every weekend during the festivities. The Child ID program provides peace of mind to
parents who are concerned about the safety of their children and want to take
action to protect them. A complimentary Identification Card, complete with the
child’s photograph and fingerprints will be given to the parents.

 

MEDIA NOTE(S): 

**Scheduled times and performers
subject to change without notice.

 



Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



New York Life Insurance
Company, a Fortune 100 company
founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the United
States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world.  New York Life
has the highest possible financial strength ratings from all four of the major
credit rating agencies.  Headquartered in New York City, New York Life’s
family of companies offers life insurance, retirement income, investments and
long-term care insurance.  New York Life Investments** provides
institutional asset management and retirement plan services. Other New York
Life affiliates provide an array of securities products and services, as well
as institutional and retail mutual funds.  Please visit New York Life’s
Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more
information.



*New York Life is the largest
mutual life insurance company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within
industries, Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune magazine, May 4,
2009. 



**New York Life Investments
is a service mark used by New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and
its subsidiary, New York Life Investment Management LLC.