Agreement to Include Support for WCS Zoos, Aquarium, and Global Conservation Programs
		

		

		 (BRONX, NEW YORK, Dec. 15, 2011) – The Wildlife Conservation Society announced today that it has awarded The Coca-Cola Company exclusive rights to sell non-alcoholic beverages in its five parks in New York City, including the Bronx Zoo, New York Aquarium, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, and Queens Zoo.
Beginning, Sunday, January 1, 2012, WCS parks will sell to their 4 million annual visitors a wide portfolio of Coca-Cola beverages, including Coke, Diet Coke, Coke Zero, Fanta, Sprite, vitaminwater, POWERADE, Gold Peak Tea, and Minute Maid juices.
The five-year agreement includes support by Coca-Cola for WCS parks and field programs, and in and out-of-park marketing to increase beverage sales, customer satisfaction, and zoo and aquarium attendance.

“We are pleased to enter into this agreement with The Coca-Cola Company, which has shown a commitment to conservation and to developing sustainable business practices,” said Steve Sanderson, President and CEO of the Wildlife Conservation Society. “The company has a track record of supporting important wildlife conservation projects across the globe and has the marketing engine to help us increase consumer awareness of the importance of conservation.”

Dana Barba, Vice President, Region Commercialization, Coca-Cola Refreshments, said, “We are thrilled to partner with the Wildlife Conservation Society who has harnessed the power of its zoos, aquarium, and global conservation program for over 116 years to save wildlife and wild places here in the United States and around world. In addition to collaborating on conservation initiatives with WCS, Coca-Cola will be showcasing innovative concepts to enhance the beverage experience, like our Freestyle machines, which allow consumers to customize their beverage in up to 125 flavors.”

Sustainable features that will be used in WCS parks include energy efficient vending machines to further reduce the carbon footprint; and coordinated product delivery with Coca-Cola’s fleet of hybrid trucks.

Proceeds from the sales at restaurants in WCS parks support the zoos, aquarium, and global conservation work in the United States, in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans.

Contact:
Mary Dixon: 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org
Maria Pignataro: mpignataro@coca-cola.com

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit www.wcs.org.

The Coca-Cola Company (NYSE: KO) is the world's largest beverage company, refreshing consumers with more than 500 sparkling and still brands. Led by Coca-Cola, the world's most valuable brand, our Company’s portfolio features 15 billion dollar brands including Diet Coke, Fanta, Sprite, Coca-Cola Zero, vitaminwater, Powerade, Minute Maid, Simply, Georgia and Del Valle. Globally, we are the No. 1 provider of sparkling beverages, ready-to-drink coffees, and juices and juice drinks. Through the world's largest beverage distribution system, consumers in more than 200 countries enjoy our beverages at a rate of 1.7 billion servings a day. With an enduring commitment to building sustainable communities, our Company is focused on initiatives that reduce our environmental footprint, support active, healthy living, create a safe, inclusive work environment for our associates, and enhance the economic development of the communities where we operate. Together with our bottling partners, we rank among the world’s top 10 private employers with more than 700,000 system employees. For more information, please visit www.thecoca-colacompany.com or follow us on Twitter at twitter.com/CocaColaCo.