Submit a name at: http://www.nyaquarium.com/fish-naming 
		

		Brooklyn, N.Y. – April 25, 2012 – A porcupine fish at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is in need of a name, and New Yorkers are being asked to weigh in with their suggestions at http://www.nyaquarium.com/fish-naming. 

To suggest a name for consideration, go to http://www.nyaquarium.com/fish-naming. Aquarium staff will choose from the pool of submissions. 

The porcupine fish sports black polka dots and orange spots, a body covered in needle-sharp scales, and has an unusual way to ward off predators. When threatened, it quickly gulps down water to puff up to two or three times its normal size. When puffed up, its spines stick straight out as a warning for predators to beware. 

Porcupine fish live in tropical oceans throughout the world, making their homes around coral reefs. At WCS’s New York Aquarium, visitors can see the porcupine fish in the Explore the Shore exhibit. 

Other aquatic species native to tropical regions can be found in the aquarium’s Conservation Hall, renovated last year as part of WCS’s A SEA CHANGE initiative, a 10-year plan to revitalize the aquarium and ignite the rebirth of Coney Island. An additional component to A SEA CHANGE includes construction of the Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit, scheduled to break ground later this year.
Contact:Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; 917-494-5493; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli: 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org    
Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.