Gala is Set for June 12 at WCS Central Park Zoo

New York, N.Y. – May 2, 2014– The Wildlife Conservation Society will host its annual gala and after-party at WCS’s Central Park Zoo on Thursday, June 12. Former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, Vice Chair of the Clinton Foundation Chelsea Clinton and WCS Board of Trustees Member Diane Christensen, will be honored for their commitment to conservation and protecting wildlife and wild places.

The gala, An Elephant’s Tale, will engage guests in WCS’s efforts to save the elephant populations struggling to survive within the forests and savannahs of Central Africa. The evening will serve as a reminder of the crisis elephants currently face in Africa and also as a celebration of these gentle giants who play a crucial ecological role in their habitats.

This year, WCS has the pleasure of honoring three esteemed women for their dynamic roles in bringing the WCS mission to realization. Their support and passion for wildlife is essential to the preservation of species and habitats worldwide. Through the Clinton Global Initiative and Clinton Foundation, Hillary Rodham Clinton and Chelsea Clinton have been tremendous allies in the fight to save the African elephant. They work tirelessly to build partnerships among businesses, NGOs, governments, and individuals to drive coordinated action to solve the poaching crisis in Africa.

Diane Christensen has supported the WCS mission for over 15 years as a member of the Board of Trustees and cares passionately about global conservation, the protection of wildlife and wild places, and long-term wildlife health and diversity around the globe. Her extraordinary dedication to the preservation of vital species and ecosystems has helped sustain WCS’s critical initiatives around the world.

The evening of the gala includes a reception, along with dinner.  An after-party will be held for the next generation of conservation supporters.

When:  Thursday, June 12, 2014; 6:30pm Reception; 8pm Dinner; 9pm After-Party
Where:  Central Park Zoo, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street
Honorary Chairs:  Antonia and George J. Grumbach, Jr.; Ward and Priscilla Woods
Décor:  David Stark
Catering: Creative Edge
After-Party with DJ Chelsea LeylandIndividual Tickets and Tables available. Contact:  The Event Shop Ltd.; wcs@eventshopltd.com; 973.433.7115

CONTACT:
Mary Dixon, mdixon@wcs.org ; (347) 840-1242
 Chelsea Connor, cconnor@mirramgroup.com ; (347) 866-6259Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.