The Wildlife
Conservation Society’s state-of-the-art hospital includes medical, surgical,
and pathology facilities for WCS’s Living Institution collectionsServes as
headquarters for WCS’s field veterinary program that monitors
wildlife health and potential pandemics around the world









NEW YORK (December 9, 2010)— The Wildlife Conservation Society celebrates today the
25th Anniversary of the Wildlife Health Center, a state-of-the-art
hospital and applied research facility.

Opened in 1985, the 26,000-square-foot facility houses
laboratories, conference rooms, a library, and specialized areas for surgery,
pathology, and medical imaging that ensure the health of the WCS collections. The
center is also the headquarters of WCS’s Global Health Program, which monitors
the health of wildlife populations worldwide and tracks the movements of
potential pandemics that could impact both wildlife and people.

“The Wildlife Health Center is a key component of the WCS’s
Bronx Zoo and our other Living Institution facilities,” said Dr. Robert Cook,
Executive Vice President, WCS Living Institutions. “The facility and the
exemplary staff that work here provide great care for animals in our
collections.” 

The center’s veterinarians, pathologists, technicians
and other staff work closely with keepers and curatorial staff to maintain the
health of more than 1,700 species in WCS’s Living Institutions, which include
the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Queens Zoo, and Prospect Park Zoo. 

The center also boasts the latest medical technology
for the care of WCS’s animal collections, from x-rays on tiny toads to
dentistry on snow leopards. The facility contains surgical rooms
and equipment for endoscopy, arthroscopy, laparoscopy, and ultrasound. 

In addition to providing care for Living Institution
collections, the Wildlife Health Center serves as the headquarters for the Global
Health Program, which coordinates the activities of more than 70 health
specialists in North America, Latin America, Africa, and Asia. The program
conducts wildlife health assessments on western lowland gorillas, African and
Asian elephants, Mongolian gazelles, Magellanic penguins, and other
populations. The program also works to broaden the public’s awareness of the
linkages between people, animals, and the environment. Specifically, the Global
Health Program focuses on the emergence and movement of diseases such as Ebola
and SARS, and works with other organizations to track the movement of avian
influenza in wild bird populations. 

“The health center helps us to coordinate our care for
WCS’s animals around the city and our investigations into wildlife health
issues and how animal and human health are sometimes interlinked,” said Dr.
Paul Calle, WCS’s Director for Zoological Health.  

Contact:
 John
Delaney – (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
Max
Pulsinelli – (718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org)



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and
holidays. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under
3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses.
The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by
train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or
BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To
plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.