SAVE THE DATE:
		 February 23-25, 2011
		

		
 


		Conference addresses management approaches to health risks to humans and animals

		

		Who:   
		

		Dr. Robert Cook, Executive Vice President and General Director of WCS’s Living Institutions. Dr. Cook will discuss the role of zoological conservation organizations in the health of wildlife. 

 

Dr. Alain Ondzie, Field Veterinarian, WCS-Global Health Program. Ondzie will discuss efforts to monitor and mitigate the threat of Ebola viruses to wildlife and humans in Central Africa. 

 

Dr. Marcela Uhart, Associate Director for Latin America, WCS-Global Health Program. Dr. Uhart will discuss the integration of  disease prevention methods for livestock, wildlife, and humans in Bolivia.

            

Where: 
Maison de la Chimie

 28 street Saint-Dominique

Paris, France 75007

        

When:  
23-25 February 2011

            

Dr. Uhart: Wednesday, February 23, 14:35

“Bolivia—Integrated disease prevention for livestock, people, and conservation.” 

 

Dr. Ondzie: Thursday, February 24, 11:50

“Wildlife and Human Risks Linked to Ebola Viruses.” 

 

Dr. Cook: Friday, February 25, 09:40

“The Health of Wildlife: The Role and Needs of Zoological Organizations.”

 

 

Contact: 
John Delaney:      (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org) 
 
		
				
						


		
		
				The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

		
				
						
								

						
				
				
						A unique international forum to explore the interplay between animal health, public health and the environment, including the protection of world biodiversity

				
				

				
The OIE Global Conference on Wildlife “Animal Health and Biodiversity – Preparing for the Future” will inform responsible parties and decision makers from both the public and private sectors, on the interactions between the health of wildlife, domestic animals as well as people and their relations with the environment.

 

The Conference will:

				
						
analyse the societal benefits, including public health and environment, to be drawn from protecting the health of wildlife,
						demonstrate the benefits and challenges in coordinating risk management approaches at the wildlife/domestic animal/human ecosystems interface, 

						address safety and challenges in international movements and trade.

				
				
 

A Press Conference will be held on Thursday 24 February at 10:30 am.

 

All sessions are opened to the press. You can get accreditation by sending an email to j.strat@oie.int stating your full name, press card number and name of organisation.

 

See the programme here.

				
						
The Conference is organised by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO).