It’s Time for an Egg-cellent Adventure…

 




Flushing, N.Y. – March 19, 2010 – Got some egg-stra energy from eating too many chocolate bunnies and jelly beans? If so, head to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo for its annual Egg–Stravaganza on Saturday and Sunday, April 3 and 4, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. to enjoy a day that’s a basket-full of amazing spring-themed games, crafts, egg hunts, and animals galore.

 

Although there are many fun activities planned, the weekend wouldn’t be complete without a meet-and-greet with the zoo’s very own Flemish giant rabbit. Weighing in at almost 20 lbs., Herman is one of the largest bunnies you’ll ever see. 

 

More Egg-stravagant activities include:

Egg Quests – Many colorful eggs will be scattered around the zoo by our crafty keepers, ready to be found by zoo visitors of all ages. (Hunts will take place at various times throughout the day.)

 

Photo Hop-portunities – Capture the day by taking a picture with the Easter Bunny, who will be available all day. 

 

Egg Jeopardy – Learn about the diversity of animal eggs, their shapes, colors, and sizes. Then, visitors will egg-knowledge what they’ve learned at the zoo’s very own Egg Jeopardy game. 

 

Egg-citing Arts-and-Crafts – Kids will make beautifully decorated spring-themed magnets that will be symbolic of the season.Contact:
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 212-439-6527


 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April.  The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com .

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation