Visitors can suggest names for the newborn as part of a Queens Zoo naming contest
 
 View footage of the calf at: http://www.queenszoo.com/cattle-call/
Flushing, N.Y. – July 11, 2012 – Attached photo: A new Texas longhorn calf born at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo stands close to her mother on the zoo’s farm. 
The female calf was born in May to Joan, a 7-year-old cow. The calf was 60 pounds at birth and is growing quickly. There are three Texas longhorns at the Queens Zoo including the calf. 
Longhorn calves do not reach maturity until they are 8 years old. The new calf is active and energetic. As an adult, her horns could grow to up to six feet from tip to tip. 
Texas longhorns are a domestic breed of cattle that developed as a result of cross breeding between feral and domestic cattle. The Texas longhorn is an animal that has long been known for its beauty, stature, and intelligence. The longhorn remains a popular symbol of the American Southwest. 
The Queens Zoo is asking the public to suggest a name for the calf. Visitors to the zoo’s Web site can drop by “The Cattle Call: Name our Calf” page at www.queenszoo.com to submit a name for the new longhorn. 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.
Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.