Forgot to Get a Valentine's Day Gift? Fell in
Love During the Weekend?You Can Still Give a Gift That Lasts Forever 
Name a Roach In Honor of Your ValentineOffer Expires 6AM. EST, Tuesday, Feb. 15

Bronx, NY – Feb. 13, 2011

Roses: $200

Chocolates: $50

Roach: $10



The Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo can rescue you during these few
remaining hours if you have forgotten your Valentine.



If you need a last minute gift, go to www.bronxzoo.com
and name a Madagascar hissing cockroach after your loved one. Your $10 donation
will help WCS save wildlife and wild places around the globe.



Each gift comes with a colorful e-card sent to your loved one announcing that a
V-Roach has been named in his or her honor. 



It is not too late to tell someone you love them with a V-Roach, but this
opportunity will end 6 a.m. EST on Tuesday, Feb. 15.



“Your love may last forever but the opportunity to name a
roach for them ends today,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of
Public Affairs.



The Bronx Zoo has plenty roaches to name with thousands of the super-sized bugs
on exhibit in Madagascar!—an award-winning habitat for lemurs, crocodiles, and
many other unique species.  



Madagascar hissing cockroaches are the world’s largest roach species reaching
nearly four-inches long. The namesake hissing noise is emitted as a
defense mechanism. Like nearly every roach species, Madagascar hissing
cockroaches are not considered pests and rarely enter homes.

Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © WCS







Contact:
Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 
Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards
nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is
committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on
Earth.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.



If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.