Bronx, NY – Feb. 2, 2024 – The WCS 8th Annual Youth JIVE event is geared towards youth ages 14-26 and encourages local youth to attend and learn more about employment and volunteer opportunities across the WCS Zoos and Aquarium in New York City. The 8th Annual Youth JIVE returns on Saturday, February 3, 2024, and it will take place in Schiff Family Great Hall at the Bronx Zoo.

The event will run from 11:00am to 1:00pm for those ages 16-26, where they will meet with hiring managers to get information about jobs, internships, and volunteer opportunities available across the WCS Zoos and Aquarium. For those 14-15 years of age, the event will resume at 1:30pm-3:30pm, where younger youth can learn more about volunteer opportunities and how they can turn into paid positions down the line. Everyone planning to attend must register ahead of the event and registration includes admission to the Bronx Zoo.

WHAT: 8th Annual WCS Youth JIVE

WHERE: Bronx Zoo (Media Parking in Southern Boulevard); in Schiff Family Great Hall

WHEN: Saturday, February 3, 2024; Event starts: 11am

Said Speaker of the New York City Council, Adrienne Adams, 28th District in Queens: “The Wildlife Conservation Society’s 8th annual Youth Jobs, Internships, and Volunteer Expo is an important opportunity for young people to learn about ways to get involved at their local zoo or aquarium,” said Speaker Adrienne Adams. “The Council is proud to fund this expo and expand workforce development for our city’s youth. By providing jobs and volunteer opportunities, WCS is preparing the next generation of New Yorkers for careers in this critical field. I encourage all young people to attend the upcoming expo on Saturday, February 3rd!”



New York City Council Majority Leader Amanda Farías said: "I am excited to see the 8th annual Wildlife Conservation Society’s Youth JIVE (Jobs, Internship, & Volunteer) Expo held at the Bronx Zoo. JIVE engages young people across the Bronx to take advantage of the many opportunities WCS has to offer. The Bronx Zoo continues to be the largest employer of youth in the Bronx and has remained committed to inspiring a diverse and inclusive class of conservationists and STEM professionals. As Chair of the Committee on Economic Development and a lifelong Bronxite, I am proud to support this program and hope more of our community institutions citywide create youth workforce pipelines that echo that of the Wildlife Conservation Society."

"The Wildlife Conservation Society doesn't just care for the animals at the Bronx Zoo, it cares for an entire community, providing education and employment to countless New Yorkers," said Shekar Krishnan, Council Member and Chair of the Committee on Parks & Recreation. "Programs like the 8th Annual Youth JIVE event, which invites youth to learn about volunteer and job opportunities at the zoo, exemplify WCS's dedication to the Bronx and New York City, and I'm proud to support them.”

Said New York City Council Member and Chair of the Youth Services Committee​​​​​​,​ Althea Stevens, 16th District in the Bronx: "It is crucial to ensure that young people have access to a diverse range of opportunities as it enables them to explore unique career paths. I would like to express my gratitude to the Bronx Zoo and the JIVE program for their continuous support in promoting youth education and professional development." 

Said New York City Council Member, Lynn Schulman, 29th District in Queens: "The WCS JIVE program is a wonderful opportunity for young New Yorkers to become involved with the WCS Zoos and Aquariums,” said Council Member Lynn Schulman, Chair of the Health Committee. “I encourage all young people to attend a session to learn about WCS, explore employment possibilities and take advantage of one of the most vibrant cultural institutions New York City has to offer.”



New York City Council Member, Rafael Salamanca Jr., 17th District in the Bronx, said: “For too long, Bronx youth have faced inequitable investment in their future, making programs like WCS’s Annual Youth JIVE event all the more important. Encouraging local youth to take an interest in employment and volunteer opportunities across the WCS Zoos and Aquarium in New York City finally provides them a fair chance to accomplish their dreams, while having a healthy introduction and advancement into the workforce.”



Said New York City Council Member, Oswald Feliz, 15th District in the Bronx: “I am excited for the Bronx Zoo to open its doors to the youth during the upcoming 8th annual Wildlife Conservation Society’s Youth JIVE Expo. The interactive workshops offered at the expo will give the youth an opportunity to connect with resources for professional development, which is vital to provide them with the tools necessary for economic success which will benefit the community as a whole.”



To learn more about how WCS supports young people using a three-pronged approach see the Interim Lattice Report 2023 (wcs.org).

Said John Calvelli, EVP of Public Affairs at the Wildlife Conservation Society: “JIVE is an entry point for local youth to engage in the many opportunities WCS has to offer. In addition to meeting with hiring managers, attendees can join workshops on STEM careers, resume development, and financial literacy. After years of being remote, WCS welcomes this opportunity back to the Bronx Zoo and looks forward to launching career opportunities for hundreds of local New Yorkers. WCS thanks the ongoing and generous support of the NYC Council and Speaker Adams for their support of the WCS Career Lattice and JIVE.”

The Bronx Zoo is the largest employer of youth in the Bronx. WCS Education is committed to inspiring a diverse and inclusive movement of conservation advocates and STEM professionals. Our work with youth is a centerpiece of this mission. Each year, over 1,800 youth ages 14 to 26 years old participate in enrichment, volunteer, internship, and employment opportunities across our five parks. 

Admission to JIVE is free, but registration is required for entry. For 14-15 year olds, register here, and for 16-26 year olds, register here. For those who cannot attend in-person, self-guided virtual resources are available.

MEDIA NOTES: 

■      Members of the media planning to cover the run and post event activities should contact Mary Dixon at mdixon@wcs.org or (347) 840-1242 so that parking and in-park transportation can be arranged.



###