NEWS RELEASE: CONTACT:     Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; 917-494-5493; brusso@wcs.org  Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; 571-218-7601; mpulsinelli@wcs.org WCS’s New York Aquarium Unveils New Educational Offerings for Spring/Summer 2016 The New York Seascape and local marine diversity are top themes for the New York Aquarium’s new array of education programming The new BlueYork Diversity program highlights the work of WCS’s BlueYork Campaign New York Aquarium welcomes new education manager, Dean Watanabe More information and registration available at www.nyaquarium.com Pre-registration is required for all programs WCS Newsroom: http://newsroom.wcs.org/ @WCSNewsroom: https://twitter.com/WCSNewsroomBrooklyn, N.Y. – Jan. 28, 2016 – WCS’s (Wildlife Conservation Society) New York Aquarium has announced a new line-up of educational programs for the spring/summer season.  The new offerings are a part of the ongoing transformation of the New York Aquarium and the future opening of Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit.  Many of the aquarium’s new education programs will incorporate themes relating to local marine conservation issues, sharks, and other animals that will live in the aquarium’s future Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit that is now under construction. Ocean Wonders: Sharks! will be a 57,000-square-foot building featuring sharks, rays, sea turtles, and thousands of schooling fish. It will hold more than 500,000 gallons of water in fully immersive and interactive exhibits, forging connections between people and wildlife while highlighting the need for conservation of delicate marine ecosystems. Programs include age-appropriate hands-on science activities, animal encounters, exhibit visits, and arts-and-crafts. Early registration is recommended as space is limited and programs are expected to sell out. New this year for the summer camp, the New York Aquarium will offer two different camps on alternating weeks so children can attend more than one session. The different themed camps are designed to complement and build upon each other. The aquarium is also offering an extended-day camp that runs until 5:30 each day ($125 per week). The aquarium’s education department is led by Dean Watanabe who recently joined WCS as Manager of Education for the New York Aquarium.  Dean has a strong background in zoo education with a focus on youth and family programs, accessibility programs, and creating innovative teen conservation opportunities. His primary role will be to lead the education department through a transition to increase educational offerings for aquarium visitors and develop an education plan for the expanded resources being built into Ocean Wonders: Sharks! I’m delighted to be part of the WCS and the New York Aquarium team,” said Watanabe. “Coming on board during this expansion provides the opportunity to build new educational offerings and expand our programs as we watch Ocean Wonders: Sharks! rise out of the sand.” Visit www.nyaquarium.com for a full list of available sessions and themes. The WCS New York Aquarium’s spring/summer 2016 programs include: Breakfast with the Animals:  Participants will enjoy a light breakfast along with child-focused activities that incorporate movement, discovery, and crafts. Education instructors will help facilitate an engaging experience for all, including live animal encounters. There is a different topic every month. Fee: $55 / $50 for members   Keeper for a Day: Children will experience what it’s like to be an animal keeper. Experiences will demonstrate what it’s like to care for the animals that call the New York Aquarium home. $55 / $50 for members.    Summer Camp Programs   Tidal Tykes Ages: PreK or K Days & Time: Monday to Friday, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Fee: $375 non-members; $350 members   Aquatic Adventurers Ages: Entering First to Second Grade Days & Time: Monday to Friday, 9 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Fee per session: $375 non-members; $350 members   Marine Explorers Ages: Third to Fifth Grade Days & Time: Monday to Friday, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Fee per session: $375 non-members; $350 members   Junior Oceanographers Ages: Entering Sixth to Eighth Grade Days & Time: Monday to Friday, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Fee: $405 non-members; $380 members   Extended Care   Ages: All Ages Days & Time: Monday to Friday, 3 to 5:30 p.m. Fee: $125 (must pay for the full week, single day options are not available) Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Tickets are $11.95 per person (ages 3 & up), and include Aquarium admission plus one admission to the new 4-D Theater; children age 2 and under are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, Aquarium admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation. Last entry is one hour before closing. The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com. WCS (Wildlife Conservation Society) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in nearly 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: newsroom.wcs.org Follow: @WCSNewsroom. For more information: 347-840-1242. ###