Honoring WCS Chair Ward Woods

Thursday, June 6, 2013, Central Park Zoo, New York City
		

		

		New York, N.Y. – March 19, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society will host its annual gala and after-party at WCS’s Central Park Zoo on Thursday, June 6, in celebration of the Wonders of Southeast Asia. WCS Chair of the Board Ward Woods will be honored for his commitment to conservation.

This year’s event will highlight WCS’s work to protect wildlife and their habitats throughout the region of Thailand, Laos, Myanmar and Cambodia. 

The honoree of the gala, WCS Chair of the Board Ward Woods has supported environmental and conservation programs across the globe, serving on the boards of The Nature Conservancy, The National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, and Stanford University, where his contributions advanced the creation of the Stanford Woods Institute for the Environment. During his 13-year tenure on the WCS Board and his work as chair since 2007, Woods has shown a dedication to saving wildlife and wild places around the world.  His commitment to these important causes has enabled WCS to succeed in meeting the challenges facing wild nature and humanity and to continue the organization’s advances toward fulfilling its mission.

This marks the first annual WCS gala for Dr. Cristián Samper, who joined WCS as its President and CEO on August 1, 2012.  Samper, a scientist and international authority on conservation biology and environmental policy, came to WCS after serving as Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of Natural History in Washington, D.C. 

The evening of the gala includes a reception near the sea lion pool with up-close views of the zoo’s animals, along with dinner and dancing.  An after-party will be held for the next generation of conservation supporters. 

	When:		Thursday, June 6, 2013
			6:30 P.M. Reception
			8:00 P.M. Dinner and dancing
			9:00 P.M. After-Party

	Where:	Central Park Zoo, Fifth Avenue at 64th Street 
	
	Honorary Chairs:	Amie and Tony James
			Lisa and David T Schiff
			Mary and Howard Phipps, Jr.

	Décor:		Preston Bailey
	
	Catering:	Creative Edge

CONTACT:     
Mary Dixon – 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org
Jackie Kane – 347-922-2481; jackie@jackiekanecommunications.com
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  General Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children younger than 3. Total Experience Admission is $18.00 for adults, $15.00 for senior citizens, and $13.00 for children 3 to 12.  4-D theater admission is $4.00 for members and $7.00 for non-members. Zoo hours are 10am to 5:30 pm, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.