Photo Credit: Julie Larsen Maher © Wildlife Conservation Society

		

		
 

New York, NY-December 21, 2010- Meet Spot, the newest member of the herd in the Tisch Children’s Zoo at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo.  Named for the white spot on his head, the mini-Nubian goat is just two weeks old and can be seen running around the petting yard and greeting visitors with tiny bleating sounds. 

 

Spot, with his parents, and other members of the goat family can be seen in the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Other animals in the Tisch Children’s Zoo include alpacas, sheep, a cow, and a variety of other domestic animals. 

 

Mini Nubian goats are a cross between Nigerian dwarf and full-sized Nubian goats. They have long floppy ears and coats that can be many different colors. Mini-Nubian goats have playful personalities and calm demeanors that make them an instant favorite among zoo visitors of all ages.



In the field, WCS conservationists are working to protect wild goats and sheep including the spectacular Marco Polo sheep, which is restricted to mountainous regions in central Asia.  Its horns can span an impressive six feet.
		
				Contact:

Sophie Bass – 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year. Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under  3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

		
				
						

				The Wildlife Conservation Society

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.