From WCS Chile: Karukinka Natural Park has been preserved by WCS Chile for 15 years, with great achievements such as the conservation of extensive areas of woods and wetlands that store hundreds of millions of tons of CO2, the largest populations of fueguino foxes, condors, guanacos, rare colonies of elephant seals, and black-browed albatrosses. In order to plan for such a task, WCS Chile is launching its first membership campaign in the hope of establishing a network of 5.000 people committed to this challenge in the next years. Nowadays, we discuss the role of nature with regards to adaptation and mitigation of climate change effects, however in order to do so we need to preserve it. Chile is one of the 10 countries that least invests in the conservation of its natural settings, in this context the role of Karukinka Park in Tierra del Fuego is crucial. Karukinka Park, managed and preserved by the NGO Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS Chile) since 2014, protects almost 130.000 acres of old-growth woods with trees that are up to 300 years old and 70.000 acres of boglands. These are the biggest terrestrial carbon sinks that exist at this latitude in the world, they absorb between 200 and 300 million tons of CO2 thus helping relieve the climate impact. Karukinka Park is the biggest protected area of the Tierra del Fuego island and it is home to the main populations of Chilean emblematic animal species such as the guanaco, the condor, and the fueguino fox. On its coast, there are two fragile and ecologically important reproductive colonies of elephant seals and black-browed albatrosses, which WCS monitors and protects systematically since they are affected by tons of garbage, that the wind blows to these untouched bays, and by invading species that have been introduced.  WCS is an international scientific organization with almost 125 years of experience in preserving wildlife and the most invaluable ecosystems of the planet, among which Patagonia as well. WCS Chile has been operating for 15 years with the utmost competence, knowledge, and commitment, with a comprehensive focus on conservation rooted in science and education, based on collaboration and with a strong local component recognized by the Magallanes Region and the Chilean Antarctica.  In order to keep on preserving this wilderness, which provides welfare and benefits on a global level, WCS Chile is looking for your support, with the aim of building a network of 5.000 members in the next years. The kickoff is the campaign #KARUKINKAPROTEGE which was launched on August 7th www.karukinkaprotege.cl “Chilean people are inherently caring, and our Nature now requires our care. In the woods of Tierra del Fuego, we are planting a stronghold against climate change,” states Dr. Barbara Saavedra, Director of WCS Chile. Help us keep on protecting one of the last wilderness sites of the planet.