Only 42 source sites scattered over Asia represent
last hope for world’s biggest catsAn additional $35 million in global conservation
efforts would enable tigers to bounce backWildlife Conservation Society, IUCN, Global
Environment Facility, Panthera, World Bank, and others co-authored
peer-reviewed study 















NEW YORK— A new peer-reviewed paper by
the Wildlife Conservation Society and other groups reveals an ominous finding:
most of the world’s last remaining tigers—long decimated by overhunting,
logging, and wildlife trade—are now clustered in just six percent of their
available habitat. The paper
identifies 42 ‘source sites’ scattered across Asia that are now the last hope
and greatest priority for the conservation and recovery of the world’s largest
cat.

The securing of
the tiger’s remaining source sites is the most effective and efficient way of
not only preventing extinction but seeding a recovery of the wild tiger, the
study’s authors say. The researchers also assert that effective conservation
efforts focused on these sites are both possible and economically feasible,
requiring an additional $35 million a year for increased monitoring and
enforcement to enable tiger numbers to double in these last strongholds. 



The
study—published online by PLoS Biology—is
authored by:  Wildlife Conservation
Society researchers Joe Walston, John Robinson, Elizabeth Bennett, John
Goodrich, Melvin Gumal, Arlyne Johnson, Ullas Karanth, Dale Miquelle, Anak
Pattanavibool, Colin Poole, Emma Stokes, Chanthavy Vongkhamheng, and Hariyo
Wibisono; Urs Breitenmoser of the IUCN/SSC Cat Specialist Group; Gustavo
Fonseca of the Global Environment Facility (GEF); Luke Hunter and Alan
Rabinowitz of Panthera; Nigel Leader-Williams of the University of Cambridge;
Kathy MacKinnon of the World Bank; Dave Smith of the University of Minnesota;
and Simon Stuart, Chair of the IUCN’s Species Survival Commission.
 
“While the scale
of the challenge is enormous, the complexity of effective implementation is not,”
said Joe Walston, Director of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Asia Program
and lead author of the study. “In the past, overly ambitious and complicated
conservation efforts have failed to do the basics: prevent the hunting of
tigers and their prey. With 70 percent of the world’s wild tigers in just 6
percent of their current range, efforts need to focus on securing these sites
as the number one priority for the species.”



According to the
paper, fewer than 3,500 tigers remain in the wild, of which only about 1,000
are breeding females. Walston and
his co-authors identified 42 tiger source sites, which were defined as sites
that contain breeding populations of tigers and have the potential to seed the
recovery of tigers across wider landscapes.



India was
identified as the most important country for the species with 18 source sites.
Sumatra contains eight source sites, and the Russian Far East contains six. 



The authors
calculate the total required annual cost of effectively managing source sites
to be $82 million, which includes the cost of law enforcement, wildlife
monitoring, community involvement, and other factors. However, much of that is
already being provided by range state governments themselves, supplemented by
international support. The shortfall—$35 million—is needed to intensify proven
methods of protection and monitoring on the ground. 



“The tiger is facing its last stand as a
species,” said Dr. John Robinson, Executive Vice President of Conservation and
Science for the Wildlife Conservation Society. “As dire as the situation is for
tigers, the Wildlife Conservation Society is confident that the world community
will come together to save these iconic big cats from the brink for future
generations.  This study gives us a
roadmap to make that happen.”

 Dr. Gustavo Fonseca, team leader of natural resources
at the Global Environment Facility, said: “A key goal for us is to help
identify the most efficient path forward so countries can achieve their global
biodiversity conservation objectives. The GEF is pleased to have been able to contribute to this initial
assessment focusing on the highest priority sites for the future of this
magnificent species.”



Alan Rabinowitz,
President and CEO of Panthera, said: “We know how to save tigers. We have
the knowledge and the tools to get the job done. What we are lacking is
political will and financial support. The price tag to save one of
the planet's great iconic species is not a high one.”



The authors say
that in spite of decades of effort by conservationists, tigers continue to be
threatened by overhunting of both tigers and their prey, and by loss and
fragmentation of habitat. Much of the decline is being driven by the demand for
tiger body parts used in traditional medicines.

Contact: 
John Delaney (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
Stephen Sautner (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
Maureen Lorenzetti (1-202 473 8131); mlorenzetti@thegef.org)




The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

Special Note to Media: If you
would like to guide your readers or viewers to join the effort to save tigers,
they can visit: http://www.wcs.org/tigers or call 718-741-1825