Flushing, N.Y. – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo is pleased to announce the arrival of several new bobwhite quails, a type of bird related to turkeys and pheasants, native to North America. These beautiful birds, which are the first of its kind to live at the Queens Zoo, can be found in the zoo’s historic geodesic-domed aviary.   Bobwhite quails have a natural woodland-hued plumage that helps keep them hidden from predators. Their bodies are brown with speckles of black, dark brown or white appearing in certain areas. Just as characteristic as their appearance is their call. A very vocal species, the bobwhite’s song is a clear whistle, mostly given by males during breeding season. They also sound-off in other vocalizations, which include a range of high-pitched whistles   Zookeepers report that these new feathered friends are adjusting very nicely to their new home in Queens. Found throughout the aviary, the quails share space with a variety of amazing avian animals, including cattle egrets, turkeys, turkey vultures and an array of ducks.   This popular game bird has disappeared in certain locations across North America due to over-hunting. Its grassland habitats also face serious environmental threats. WCS has many ongoing field projects throughout the continent to help preserve threatened or endangered species and preserve habitats that are susceptible to destruction.   The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park and is open 365 days a year. Autumn/winter hours are 10am to 4:30 pm daily. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors, $3 for children ages 3-12, and free for children under 3. For general information, please call (718) 271-1500, or visit our web site at www.queenszoo.comContact:

Barbara Russo, 212-439-6527 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.  Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation