New plan will increase long term survival of Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzeeWCS developed plan with government officials, other conservation groups, and scientists

		 
		 NEW YORK (June 27, 2011) – The world’s most endangered subspecies of chimpanzee got a much needed shot in the arm today when government officials, conservation groups, and scientists released an action plan to bolster numbers of this critically endangered great ape.
 
 Known as the as the Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzee, the subspecies, first identified in 1997, is restricted to pockets of forested habitat in both nations. Between 3,500 and 9,000 remain in the wild clinging to a region of high human population density and subject to habitat destruction, fragmentation, and poaching. These factors have led to the extinction of the chimp across much of its former range.
 
 The plan, endorsed by the governments of both nations, is co-authored by 20 primate experts and conservationists representing 17 organizations. It calls for region-wide actions including: improving transboundary collaboration and law enforcement, conservation research, participation and support of local people, recruitment and training of rangers, and improving community livelihoods.
 “This plan is a roadmap to the future of the critically endangered Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzee,” said James Deutsch, WCS Director for Africa Programs. “We commend the governments of Nigeria and Cameroon for their leadership in pledging to save this living example of their natural heritage.”
 Implementation of the priority conservation actions proposed in the plan would protect over 95 percent of the remaining Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzees over the next five years. The estimated cost of implementing the plan is $14.6 million.
 
 Protecting the Nigeria-Cameroon chimpanzee would also safeguard other primate species including the critically endangered Cross River gorilla, drill, Preuss’s monkey, and Preuss’s red colobus, which share the same habitat.
 
 The plan was generously supported by the Great Ape Conservation Fund of the USFWS and the Arcus Foundation.
 
 Copies of the plan can be downloaded at www.ellioti.org.
		
				Contact:
				
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
 John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)
 
		   
  The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes toward nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 
   Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.