The New York Life Main Stage at the Grizzly Goodies picnic area comes to life weekends from April 16 through June 25Meet Marvel Super Heroes Spider-Man, Captain America, and Iron ManPerformances by Angelina Ballerina and the Animal Tales PlayersChildren’s book readings and author Michelle KnudsenEnjoy arts, crafts, character parades, and Little Flower Yoga on Astor Court
   Bronx, NY – March 14, 2011 – Animal Tales Extravaganza at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is roaring into its second year with a spectacular line-up of family-friendly entertainment every weekend from April 16 through June 25.    Weekends include an amazing array of top-rated children's entertainment with New York Life Main Stage performances at the Grizzly Goodies picnic area. Marvel Super Heroes: Operation Green brings together Spider-Man, Captain America, Iron Man, and even the Green Goblin in a live performance that will highlight the importance of green living and protecting the environment. Children’s favorite Angelina Ballerina, an imaginative little mouse that inspires through dance, performs for zoo-goers. The Children’s Theatre Company at Lehman presents the Animal Tale Players’ live theatrical performance of “I’ll Huff and I’ll Quack and I’ll Blow Down Your Porridge.”    On Sunday, April 24, two cast members from the hit Broadway production “The Addams Family” will be at the zoo. In the spirit of the Addams Family show, there will be a “rotten” Easter egg hunt and for each rotten egg found, children will receive a prize.    Zoo-goers can “get lost in a book” as everyone's favorite animal books come to life. Weekends will include the chance to meet authors and celebrities at special readings on the Wild Asia Plaza. On Saturday, April 23 families can join Michelle Knudsen at the Bronx Zoo’s Asia Plaza where she will read from her book Library Lion.    Performing their original show “If Your Really Loved Polar Bears…” on the Wild Asia Plaza, Making Books Sing will entertain and empower children through music, theater, puppetry, and physical comedy.   Kids can walk through larger-than-life pages of some of the most popular children's stories as the zoo transforms new and classic tales into unforgettable interactive experiences including Penguin Group USA’s The Very Hungry Caterpillar, by Eric Carle; Simon & Schuster’s Alphabet by Matthew Van Fleet; Macmillan’s Moon Bear, by Brenda Z. Guiberson; and Random House’s Wild About Books, by Judy Sierra.    Little Flower Yoga will lead families in animal-themed yoga sessions on Astor Court and the Animal Tales Players will lead a daily costume character parade starting at the arts and crafts area at the Dancing Crane Pavilion. Guests can visit New York Life's Child ID booths in Astor Court. All children who stop by will receive a complimentary Identification Card, complete with photograph and fingerprints. New York Life's Child ID program provides peace of mind to parents who are concerned about the safety of their children and want to take action to protect their children.    

Animal Tales Extravaganza
 FULL SCHEDULE (All events subject to change without notice)          Little Flower Yoga  
Animal-themed yoga sessions 
 Three times a day on Astor Court  
Weekends April 16 – June 12 1:00pm, 2:00pm, 3:00pm   Making Books Sing
  Performances two times a day at Asia Plaza 
Weekends April 16 – June 25 12:30pm, 2:30pm   Character Parade  
Three times a day on dates indicated
 Parades will go from the Dancing Crane Pavilion to the New York Life Main Stage  
Led by performers from the Animal Tales Players 11:15am, 1:15pm, 2:45pm   

Arts and Crafts
Available throughout the course of the day at the Dancing Crane Pavilion 
11:00am – 4:00pm
  Contact:
Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org















The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old)
$12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars
and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call
718-367-1010.

 

If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation. 

 

New York
Life Insurance Company, a Fortune 100
company founded in 1845, is the largest mutual life insurance company in the United
States* and one of the largest life insurers in the world.  New York Life has the highest possible
financial strength ratings from all four of the major credit rating agencies.  Headquartered in New York City, New
York Life's family of companies offers life insurance, retirement income,
investments and long-term care insurance. 
New York Life Investments** provides institutional asset management and
retirement plan services. Other New York Life affiliates provide an array of
securities products and services, as well as institutional and retail mutual
funds.  Please visit New York
Life's Web site at www.newyorklife.com for more information.

 

*New York Life is the largest mutual life insurance
company based on the Fortune 500, ranked within industries, Insurance:  Life, Health (Mutual), Fortune
magazine, May 4, 2009. 

**New York Life Investments is a service mark used by
New York Life Investment Management Holdings LLC and its subsidiary, New York
Life Investment Management LLC.