Puppet stars Trekkie Monster, Princeton, Mrs. T, Lucy and their human counterparts visit the Bronx Zoo to support wildlife conservation and fellow cast member Kate Monster
		
				
						

				
				
						DOWNLOAD B-ROLL OF THE GREEN CARPET EVENT: DV Avenue Q visits Avenue Zoo B-Roll Release.mov
				
				
						
						
				
				
						Bronx, NY – July 12, 2012 – Attached photos and video: Stars of the long-running musical Tony Award-winning musical AVENUE Q -- including the beloved puppets Trekkie Monster, Princeton, Mrs. T, Lucy, and their fellow human actors – came from Broadway to the Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo in support of Wildlife Conservation.    The actors attended a performance of the zoo musical AVENUE ZOO in which AVENUE Q star Kate Monster is making a special appearance this summer at the Bronx Zoo.    AVENUE ZOO runs Thursdays through Sundays, two shows a day (12:30 and 2:30 pm) through Labor Day on the Bronx Zoo's Asia Plaza Stage. AVENUE ZOO is an educational musical tale in which Kate Monster meets exotic animals -- lions, pythons and vultures -- and discovers that they though they may seem strange and different, they are not so scary if you take the time to understand them.    AVENUE Q is the Tony Award-winning musical about 20-somethings fresh out of college -- people and puppets alike -- who live as neighbors in an outer-borough in NYC, trying to find their way in the big city and discover their purpose in life. The musical is in its 10th year in New York, playing at New World Stages in midtown.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult general admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.