Yowie Tribe




 Yowie Tribe



 Yowie Tribe



					
					
						NEW YORK (January 18, 2017)  -- Yowie Group LTD. (Yowie) and the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) announced today a partnership focused on wildlife conservation and saving the natural world. WCS's mission is to save wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. Directly in line with this mission, Yowie's purpose is to educate children and adults about ecology and endangered species through fun animal replicas packaged inside chocolate and through Yowieworld.com a play and learn web App. This partnership will allow both groups to further their joint mission to promote wildlife conservation.

As a result of the new partnership, Yowie will support WCS's field conservation work around the world while WCS will enrich Yowie's educational materials.  

"On behalf of all of us at Yowie, we are thrilled to be forming a partnership with WCS that furthers our Mission to Save The Natural World in a very demonstrable way," said Bert Alfonso, CEO Yowie Group. "Both Yowie and WCS share a deep passion for conservation, saving endangered species and educating our youth regarding social responsibility. WCS's long history of accomplishments and dedication to conservation make them a perfect partner for Yowie. Our aim is that together, we will make a positive difference for Planet Earth."

Said Joe Walston, WCS Vice President for Global Conservation: "We are delighted to collaborate with Yowie on something that is extremely important to WCS's mission: empowering the public to both understand more about conservation and how they can make a difference.  The animal replicas are a fun entryway to inspire people to care about their real-life wild counterparts – many of which are in danger of extinction."  

Yowie is a brand that appeals to all ages with a core brand message of 'saving the natural world'. Yowie is not just another toy or collectible, it is a brand built around an extensive collection of limited-edition replicas of wild animals – many under the real threat of extinction – with the purpose of educating children and adults about ecology and the environment. They have been designed to foster a sense of wonder in the diversity and beauty of our natural world and to encourage learning through play.

Headquartered at the Bronx Zoo, the WCS works to conserve more than two million square miles of wild places around the world. To achieve their mission, WCS harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in nearly 60 nations and in all the world's oceans as well as its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, wildlife health, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission.

More information on Yowie can be found at www.yowieworld.com

More information on Wildlife Conservation Society can be found at www.wcs.org