Official unveiling of the Flooded Forest Exhibit


		
 


		
				
Monday, Oct. 4, 2010
				, 8:30 a.m.
				

 

		

		
New York, NY – Thursday, September 30, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo is hosting a breakfast to celebrate community partnerships.

 

These community collaborations have helped make WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo an important cultural partner in the borough of Brooklyn and a valued institution for the community. As a member of the Heart of Brooklyn cultural consortium, WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo has revitalized both the Vanderbilt Avenue and Washington Avenue districts which are important corridors for the zoo.  

 

The event includes the official unveiling of the Flooded Forest Exhibit, the last in a series of important capital projects that have helped revitalize WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo. The 6,000-gallon tank features red and orange bellied piranha and is representative of the flooded forest of the Amazon.

 

The program will conclude with the release of the Hamadryas baboons – including the two-month old infants Jabari and Azizi – into their exhibit area. Special treats will be scattered throughout the exhibit which will create a spectacle not to be missed. 

 

Who:    
Denise McClean, Director, WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo

NYC Department of Parks and Recreation First Deputy Commissioner Liam Kavanaugh

New York State Assembly Member Karim Camara  

Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce President & CEO Carl Hum

Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz- Invited

NYC Council Member Letitia James- Invited

NYC Council Member Brad Lander- Invited

New York State Assembly Member James F. Brennan- Invited

Representatives from local Community Boards and Heart of Brooklyn 

                                       

What:     
Breakfast celebrating community partnerships and official unveiling of Flooded Forest Exhibit

 

Where:   
WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo

450 Flatbush Avenue

Brooklyn, NY  11225

               

When:    
Monday, Oct. 4, 2010

 8:30- 9:30 a.m.

 
Members of the media interested in attending should contact Sophie Bass at sbass@wcs.org 

or 718-265-3428.
		
				Contact:  
				

Sophie Bass:  718-265-3428; sbass@wcs.org

Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 

		
 


 
The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo - Open every day of the year.  Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue. For more information call 718-399-7339 or visit  www.prospectparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

 

Heart of Brooklyn (HOB) is a partnership of the leading cultural institutions located near Grand Army Plaza in central Brooklyn: Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Brooklyn Children’s Museum, Brooklyn Museum, Brooklyn Public Library, Prospect Park, and Prospect Park Zoo. www.heartofbrooklyn.org