Video: “Parrots Make Bad Secretaries: Save New York Jobs”When you hurt our state’s zoos, botanical gardens and
aquariums, you hurt New York
 State’s communities
and familiesAnyone remember Wednesday, the Porcupine? 










New York – February 17, 2010 – Today,
the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) released a home-made video to inspire
New Yorkers to send a message to Albany to
reject Governor Paterson’s proposal to cut by nearly 50 percent the
funding for New York
 State’s 80 zoos,
botanical gardens, and aquariums.



“This proposed 50 percent cut to our state’s zoo, botanical
gardens and aquariums comes right when New
  York communities and families need these parks the
most,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public
Affairs. Our communities rely on these parks to bring business to local
merchants and to vendors; and our families rely on these institutions for jobs
and as inexpensive respites during bad times.” 



“We hope thousands of New Yorkers join us in this effort to
petition Albany and to also thank the lawmakers who are championing our cause:
Assembly Member Robert K. Sweeney, Chair, Committee on Environmental Conservation;
Senator Jose Serrano, Chair, Cultural Affairs,
Tourism, Parks and Recreation; Senator Antoine Thompson, Chair, Environmental
Conservation; and Assembly Member Steven Englebright, Chair, Committee on
Tourism, Parks, Arts and Sports.”



“Together, our 80 living institutions throughout New York State
are fighting for this vital funding because we know when we keep our zoos,
botanical gardens and aquariums strong we are also helping to keep our local
communities strong, said Lois Carswell, Chairman of Coalition of Living
Museums.  “We are thankful to all the New Yorkers joining this cause
because we will not be successful without their voices. We also thank our
champions in the Assembly and Senate for understanding the importance of living
institutions to all New Yorkers.”





The video released
today, “Parrots Make Bad Secretaries: Save New York Jobs,” directly
addresses the economic repercussions if the Governor’s proposed cut of
almost 50 percent becomes reality. While the video is humorous, the results of
cutting these living institutions further during these difficult economic times
will be serious. The video shows a zoo having to hire its animals to do office
work because the state funding cuts have forced the lay offs of the human
staff. 


View the full video at: www.wcs.org

 





“The video is
intended to inspire New Yorkers to contact Albany to help save these
institutions,” said Calvelli. “All of the 80 institutions which
make up our state’s Coalition of Living Museums are in communities where
families rely on them for jobs and where merchants rely on them to drive
tourism and business. We faced a similar situation last year and because New
Yorkers spoke up, our legislative champions responded and restored our Fiscal
Year 2010 budget. Now, we have a whole new fight on our hands with cuts to the
Fiscal Year 2011 budget being threatened by the governor.” 


The release of the video
comes as WCS and the Coalition of Living Museums (CLM) continue to generate
support from the community through a petition drive and letter-writing campaign
to fully restore funding the Zoos, Botanical Gardens and Aquariums (ZBGA) state
budget line.





The campaign is aimed to
garner messages from thousands of New Yorkers demanding Albany to reject a proposed $4 million cut to
the $9 million ZBGA budget line.

 

“When you cut zoos, botanical gardens and aquariums – important
economic drivers in communities across our state – you are hurting New
Yorkers and New York,
especially during a time of high unemployment in our state,” added
Calvelli.
 

WCS zoos and its aquarium alone pump more than $400 million into the
state’s economy annually. In addition, these institutions, the WCS
Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium, provide a much needed educational resource for
children.



As Albany lawmakers and the governor negotiate
the state budget proposal, the Coalition asks New Yorkers to go to www.wcs.org
to sign a petition telling Albany
to fully restore ZBGA. Petition signatures are also being taken on-site at
WCS’s Bronx Zoo and New York Aquarium.  

  

For more than 30 years, ZBGA has proven its economic benefits to the entire
state. Living museums generate millions of dollars each year for the
state in tourism and economic development. Businesses depend on the money
spent by ZBGA funded institutions and they depend on the income generated by
tourists patronizing them. Money spent supporting the 80 living museums
across New York State is money spent building and stabilizing the economy
through jobs, education, and support for industries that depend on their
existence. 



ZBGA institutions are an
integral part of the Environmental Protection Fund (EPF) and are critical to
the goals of the EPF. During the last seven years, more than $500 million
of dedicated environmental funding has been transferred from the EPF and spent
on other non-environmental programs. 



Today New York State
is struggling to honor its existing obligations based on the nearly half
billion dollars that has been transferred from the EPF for general budget
relief. Without properly addressing repayment of previously diverted EPF funds,
the State runs the risk of exhausting future appropriations on previous
commitments, risking progress on new projects.  



Calvelli said: “Slashing funds to these institutions is
shortsighted. It will have a snowball effect on employment, commerce, and
education in communities across the entire state.”







Contact:
Max Pulsinelli –
718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
Mary Dixon – 347-840-1242 mdixon@wcs.org


The
Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.