Scientists Honored by Society
for Conservation Biology at 2009 Annual Meeting 
		















NEW YORK (AUGUST 6, 2009) Three Wildlife
Conservation Society scientists were honored during the 23rd Annual Meeting of
the Society for Conservation Biology(SCB), in Beijing, China held from July 11-16,
2009. The SCB is an international professional organization with over 12,000
members dedicated to advancing the science and practice of conserving the
Earth's biological diversity. Each year, the SCB presents distinguished awards
in recognition of outstanding individual achievement in the conservation field.

The Edward
T. LaRoe III Memorial Award is given to an individual who has been a
leader in translating principles of conservation biology into real-world
conservation practice. This year, Dr. Joel Berger of WCS was presented with the
award for his extraordinary leadership working in conservation of migration
corridors and in the study of predator-prey dynamics in Africa, Asia and North America.



The Distinguished Service Award
is presented to individuals, groups, or institutions whose work has furthered
the mission of the SCB. This year, WCS Senior Conservation Scientist Dr. George
Schaller was presented with this award for his extraordinary contributions to
the conservation of many of the world's most iconic and endangered species
through his leadership in field research and applied conservation.

Dr. Aili Kang of WCS in China,
was presented the award for Early Career
Conservationist. Dr. Kang’s work focuses on medium to large
sized mammals, primarily in the Chinese and Tibetan steppe, such as Marco Polo
sheep, yak, saiga, and Przewalski's gazelle. Her work has already had a
significant positive impact on the conservation of these and other species.

In response to the honors bestowed upon
the scientists, WCS’s Executive Vice President of Conservation and
Science Dr. John Robinson said, “WCS couldn’t be prouder of the
dedication and accomplishments of these fine scientists and we’re
grateful to the Society for Conservation Biology for calling attention to their
efforts. It’s a real compliment to our organization and to the
awardees.” 



Contact:  


Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
Scott Smith:
(1-718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org)





The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places
worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and
the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by
the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes
towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation