Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 4 and 5

Giant rabbits, cows, sheep, and other farm animals are the stars of this event that celebrates farms and domestic animals

Moo at the Zoo is presented by Organic Valley

Flushing, N.Y. – Oct. 2, 2014 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo, home to a sprawling farmyard where rabbits, cows, sheep, alpaca, and other domestic animals live, will host Moo at the Zoo on Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 4 and 5,  from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. The farm-themed event will celebrate domestic animals and things related to farm life. 

The event is presented by Organic Valley. Live cheese-making demonstrations, hands-on cheese making, and meet-and-greets with animals, are among the highlights of the event. 

Moo at the Zoo weekend activities include: 
Cow-milking Simulator – A cow-milking simulator will show visitors how milk is collected from cows.Cheese-Making Demos – Visitors will join a NYC-based cheese maker as she demonstrates the art of making ricotta cheese.Keeper Chats – The zoo’s farm animal keepers will discuss and answer questions about the domestic animals that live at the zoo.Crafts for Kids – Children will make and take home farm-focused crafts. Composting Demos – The zoo will demonstrate how its new composting station works to turn organic material into fertilizer or soil. Organic Valley Samples & Giveaways –Organic Valley representatives will be on site offering samples of their products, as well as coupons and other giveaways. All activities take place on the zoo’s farm. More information about Moo at the Zoo can be found online at www.queenszoo.com.

CONTACT:Barbara Russo: 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.wcs.org.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS;youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.

Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.