Saturday and Sunday, March 30 and 31; 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.  				Flushing, N.Y. - March 21, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo will hold its annual Egg–stravaganza event on Saturday and Sunday, March 30 and 31 from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Activities include spring-themed games, egg hunts, and real rabbit encounters on the zoo’s farm. 
 
 The stars of Egg-stravaganza are the zoo’s Flemish giant rabbits, Olivia, Flip and Blue, a new “blue-coated” male who will make his official Egg-stravaganza debut this weekend. Visitors will have an opportunity to see these large and likeable lagomorphs close up. Weighing an average of 20 pounds, the Flemish giant is the largest and one of the most docile breeds of domestic rabbits. 
 
 Additional Egg-stravaganza activities include:
 
 Egg Safari – Kids will be given a special “passport” as they begin their adventure throughout the zoo to spot colorful wooden eggs placed outside several exhibits. Safari-goers will get their passport stamped at each egg sighting as they discover fun facts about the animals that live at the zoo. At the end of their search, kids will trade in their passports for spring-y surprises. Egg quests will take place at various times throughout the weekend, while supplies last. 
 
 The Easter Bunny – Visitors will meet the Easter Bunny, who will make his rounds throughout the zoo both days. 
 
 Crafts – Kids will celebrate spring by making beautifully decorated bunny masks and ears that will be symbolic of the season.
 
 More information about the Queens Zoo’s Egg-stravaganza and other events can be found online at www.queenszoo.com.
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
 
 The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.
 
 Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.Contact: 
 Barbara Russo 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
 Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org