Take the Bronx Zoo's courtship quiz: www.bronxzoo.com  

		
 

New York, NY – Feb. 9, 2011 – The Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo has developed a Valentine's Day quiz that determines which member of the animal kingdom shares your courtship style.

 

Are you like a tiger, or are you a softie like a titi monkey? Perhaps, you are a romantic like the white naped crane.  By answering eight questions about what kind of partner you are, the Bronx Zoo's courtship quiz lets you find out which animal you most emulate.

 

"This quiz is a fun way for you to find out what kind of animal - whether it's a tiger or a monkey - you will be having dinner with on Valentine's Day," said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. "I hope I'm having dinner with a romantic white naped crane."

 

Visit www.bronxzoo.com to take the quiz.
		
				CONTACT: 

Max Pulsinelli: (o) 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org

Steve Fairchild: (o) 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 
		
				

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 
		
		

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 

If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation