Discover the world of wildlife and help prepare animal snacks at the zoo’s annual Animal Antics Weekend
		
 
Flushing Meadows, N.Y. – Ever wonder how far a puma can jump? Or how high a bear can climb? Maybe you’ve been curious about some of the world’s fastest animals? Queens Zoo visitors can discover these and other amazing animal facts through games, crafts and more at the zoo’s Animal Antics event, Saturday and Sunday, July 11 and 12, from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.  
 
The exciting line-up of activities includes:
Cool Crafts The fun begins for kids inside the zoo’s interactive Discovery Center. Through hands-on activities, games and crafts, young zoogoers will learn about the zoo’s animals and their amazing habitats.Snack Attack! No action-packed weekend would be complete without food to fuel those strong animal bodies! Throughout the weekend, zoo-goers of all ages can help keepers prepare delicious enrichment snacks for the zoo’s animals. These items include treat balls for endangered thick-billed parrots and stuffed watermelons for pumas. Visitors can watch as the animals devour these freshly prepared tasty treats! (Enrichment times: Pigs, 11 a.m.;  Thick-billed parrots, 1:30; Andean Bears, 2:30; Puma, 3:00) Story time Get lost in animal tales with storyteller LuAnn Adams. (Story times: 12, 2:45 and 3:30) New Lambs! Don’t forget to swing by the farm and say hello to the zoo’s two new adorable Jacob’s four-horn lambs: Oliver and Willow! This breed is currently listed as threatened by the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy. To help increase the Jacob’s sheep’s population, zoo officials acquired this breed earlier this year as part of a cooperative breeding program designed to help increase awareness of this rare domestic breed. 
Zoo-goers can also check out the daily sea lion feeds this weekend, held at 11:15, 2 and 4 p.m., both days. All Animal Antics activities are free with regular zoo admission. 

Contact: Barbara Russo, 212-439-6527 
 
The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park and is open 365 days a year. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays; 10am to 5:30pm weekends. Admission is $7.00 for adults, $4.00 for seniors, $3.00 for children ages 3-12, and free for children under 3. For general information, please call (718) 271-1500, or visit our web site at www.queenszoo.com
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation