Exciting Education Adventures also Available this Spring


 


Brooklyn, N.Y. – Visitors to the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Prospect Park Zoo can get up close and personal to Flemish giant rabbit, Herbie, every weekend as he welcomes the lovely spring weather. Herbie is three years old, weighs eighteen pounds, eats kale and pellets, and greets all visitors each weekend.

 

Zoo-goers can greet Herbie and touch other animals at the Live Animal Encounters program held every Saturday and Sunday at 12:30, 1:00, 2:30, 3:00 pm.  At the same time, visitors can check out some of the newest residents at WCS’s Prospect Park Zoo – animals that spend their waking hours at night in the Amazing Animals nocturnal exhibit. Learn how they survive in the dark and how the zoo cares for these special creatures.

 

The Flemish giant rabbit was imported from England and Belgium in the early 1890s. It received no special attention until about 1910 when it started appearing at small livestock shows throughout the country. Today, it is one of the more popular breeds at rabbit shows because of its enormous size and its many colors.

The body of a Flemish giant rabbit is long and powerful with good muscular development and relatively broad hindquarters. Bucks have a massive head in comparison to their female counterparts. Does can have a large, full, evenly carried dewlap (the fold of skin under their chins). The fur of the Flemish giant is glossy and dense, and it is not unusual fir this species to reach 22 pounds. Specimens weighing up to 28 pounds have been reported.



Flemish giants have a placid demeanor and are tolerant of handling, but they can become fearful if handled incorrectly or irresponsibly. For this reason it is generally recommended that handling occur under the care of an experienced professional.



Exciting educational adventures await you and your family this Spring featuring animals in art. Meet some of the incredible creatures, including Herbie. Programs are $20 non-members, $15 members which includes one child, one adult and zoo admission. To make a reservation, please call 718-399-7339 ext. 326.




Animal Art Studio I

Goat van Goghs, meerkat Monets, and Pallas cat Picassos. Young artists will join us for a session of creativity and learning how to make art pieces featuring their favorite Prospect Park Zoo animals. These budding artists will get a chance to meet some live animal inspiration and bring their masterpieces home to show off to friends and family. 

 

Ages: 4 – 7 yrs

Date: Sunday April 11, 2010

Time: 10:30 – 11:30

 


Animal Art Studio II

In this studio session young artists will get a chance to hone their skills while observing live animals and creating works of art that will hang in the Animals in Art gallery at the Prospect Park Zoo. 

 

Ages: 8 - 11 yrs

Date: Sunday April 11, 2010

Time: 1 – 2


 

Contact:
Fran Hackett, 718-265-3428

                                                                                                                                                    
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $7.00 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3.00 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays; 10am to 5:30pm weekends. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. 

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation