Register online at: www.nyaquarium.com

 Brooklyn, N.Y. –– March X, 2014 -- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium has announced registration for its spring minicamp, “Tales of the Seven Seas,” Thursday and Friday, April 17 & 18. 

 The program is geared toward children ages 6 to 8. Activities planned include sea-themed storytelling, aquatic animal exhibit visits, crafts, and other hands-on activities. Children will have opportunities to get up close with some of the aquarium’s animals.  

 Dates: Thursday and Friday, April 17 & 18

Time: 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.

Fee for both days: $125 WCS members; $150 nonmembers

 For more information or to apply, visit www.nyaquarium.com  or call 718-265-3457. 

 The Wildlife Conservation Society’s other facilities – the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, Prospect Park Zoo, and Queens Zoo–  have a variety of programs lined up for the 2014 spring and summer season.  More information can be found at www.wcs.org . 

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com . Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information.www.nyaquarium.com.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.

  Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.