Three October
Weekends 15-16, 22-23, 29-30
*Children
in costume receive free admission





Brooklyn, N.Y. – Sept.
26, 2011 – Frightening fun awaits this Halloween season at the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium as Ascarium
weekends return October 15-16, 22-23, and 29-30 from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.  


Halloween-themed activities are planned for aquarium-goers
of all ages. Visitors will get in the spirit of the season as the aquarium will
be decorated with corn stalks, hay bales, pumpkins, and all things autumn. A
haunted Sea-fari Adventure, spooky storytelling, musical performances, and
magic shows are among the activities that will make Ascarium the destination for a safe, fun Halloween this season.





The line-up of Ascarium activities
includes: 


Haunted Sea-fari – Visitors will
     have the adventure of a lifetime at the Haunted Sea-fari, where they will
     board a sunken ship and meet the surly Captain Looter and his devilish
     crew. Located in the aquarium’s Explore the Shore exhibit, visitors will
     travel deep under the ocean to discover the creepy S.S. Garbagio, a ship
     that once pursued endangered dolphins. Explorers will enter the haunted
     Captain’s Quarters, head into the Briny Brig where the devilish crew hangs
     out, walk the plank, face sharks, and enter the belly of the octopus
     before they arrive on shore where they can help save the beach and oceans
     from pollution. Everyone will leave with a better understanding of how to
     protect marine life, habitats, and our fragile seashore.
     (Each Ascarium day, 11 a.m. to
     4:30 p.m.) 



Dress to Impress – Each child in
     costume (age 12 and under) will receive a free child’s general admission
     ticket with the purchase of one full-priced adult ticket. Note: Limit two
     per family; cannot be combined with any other offer. 




Thrilling Magic Shows –
     Family-friendly, aquatic-themed magic shows will delight visitors with
     illusions and magnificent magic tricks. Located in the Seaside Café Tent.
     (Each Ascarium day, 11 a.m., 1
     and 3 p.m.)



Spooky Storytelling – Let the
     terrifying tales be told. Master storyteller LuAnn Adams uses puppetry to
     bring animal- and Halloween-themed stories to life. Located in Explore the
     Shore Plaza Tent. (Each Ascarium
     day, 12, 2 and 4 p.m.) 




Terrifying Tunes – Animal- and
     Halloween-themed musical performances will take place on all Ascarium weekends.  Located in the Seafood Café Tent. 





Saturday, October 15 – Alastair Moock will mesmerize
audiences with his award winning children’s tunes combining folk music and
adventurous song writing as he creates goofy lyrics for popular children’s
songs. (1:30 and 3:30 p.m.) 


Saturdays and Sundays, October 16, 22, 23, 29, 30 – SweetBeatz
will keep the place rocking with energetic, original tunes. (1:30 and 3:30
p.m.)



Arts and Crafts – Kids will be able
     to create their own spooky Halloween mask creation representing favorite
     aquarium animals. Located under the Seaside Café tent. (Each Ascarium day, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)Trick-or-Treat – Children are
     invited to stop by various carts, exhibits, and other locations throughout
     the aquarium to participate in safe trick-or-treating fun. (Each Ascarium day, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)
 




Ascarium is presented by Pepsi.





Contact:    
Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 



Wildlife
Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary
seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and
$11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are
admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The
Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and
other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at
http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support
for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a
beloved part of the City of New York.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities
change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans
living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to
the integrity of life on Earth.



Special
Note to the Media: If you would like
to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to
wcs.org.