Holiday 4-D Experience to Begin November 7, 2011



 New York, NY – Oct. 31, 2011 –
The Polar Express™ 4-D Experience will be making stops at the
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo, and New York
Aquarium for the holiday season. The experience will play at the Bronx Zoo and
New York Aquarium from Monday, Nov. 7, 2011 through Monday, Jan. 2, 2012, and at
the Central Park Zoo from Monday, Nov. 7, 2011 through Tuesday, Jan. 31, 2012. 



 The Polar Express™ 4-D
Experience is based on the film from Warner Bros. Pictures and Shangri-La
Entertainment and inspired by the beloved Caldecott Medal children’s book by
Chris Van Allsburg.  It combines the visual drama of a 3-D film with a
variety of 4-D sensory effects that are built into the seats and theater
environment, bringing the on-screen images to life.



 Viewers are immersed in the
experience as they follow a doubting young boy as he takes an extraordinary
train ride to the North Pole.  He embarks on an epic journey of
self-discovery that shows him that the wonder of life never fades for those who
believe. 



 Tickets for The Polar Express™
4-D Experience are available for $5 per person or are included in the
attractions benefits of a WCS Membership at the Bronx Zoo and New York
Aquarium. Tickets at the Central Park Zoo are available for $4 for members, $7
for non-members, or are included in the $18 total experience package.



 The Polar Express™ 4-D
Experience is distributed by SimEx-Iwerks, through a license agreement with
Warner Bros. Consumer Products. 
SimEx-Iwerks is the leading innovator of immersive 3-D and 4-D attractions
and the exclusive distributor of the industry’s best selling film titles. The
company supports over 300 family-friendly attractions in more than 40
countries.



Mark Cornell, SimEx-Iwerks Vice
President, Attraction Development proclaims, “The Polar Express is by far the finest magical cinematic
experience of our lifetime.”  



This iconic film is brought to
life with the perfected use of SimEx-Iwerks 4-D Special FX technology, creating
an unforgettable multi-sensory adventure.  As the Polar Express arrives at
the North Pole, it actually begins to snow inside the 4-D Special FX Theater;
when the conductor sings “Hot Chocolate” and the dancing waiters begin to pour,
the audience can smell the delightful aroma of every cocoa cup.  



The state-of-the-art 3-D Digital
projection system makes images virtually leap off the screen, and when combined
with 4-D Special FX, a blend of realism and fantasy unlike anything seen before
is impeccably delivered.  

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s
Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00
a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12,
children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and
$16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River
Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19,
#22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just
outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New
York Aquarium is open daily from
10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  Adult
General Admission is $13, children (3-12 years old) $9, children under 3 are
free, seniors (65+) are $10. Parking is $13. To plan your trip, visit www.nyaquarium.com or call 718-367-1010.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open
every day of the year.  General Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for
senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children younger than 3.
Total Experience Admission is $18.00 for adults, $15.00 for senior citizens,
and $13.00 for children 3 to 12.  4-D theater admission is $4.00 for
members and $7.00 for non-members. Zoo hours are 10am
to 5:30 pm, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through
April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo
is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information,
please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do
so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the
world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx
Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help
people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to
this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

About Warner Bros. Consumer Products 

Warner Bros. Consumer Products, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company, is one of
the leading licensing and retail merchandising organizations in the world.

 

About The Polar Express 

Castle Rock Entertainment Presents, in Association with Shangri-La
Entertainment, a Playtone / ImageMovers / Golden Mean Production of a Robert
Zemeckis Film: Tom Hanks in The Polar Express. Directed by Robert Zemeckis from
a screenplay by Zemeckis & William Broyles, Jr., the film is produced by
Steve Starkey, Robert Zemeckis, Gary Goetzman and William Teitler and is based
on the book by Chris Van Allsburg. Tom Hanks, Jack Rapke and Chris Van Allsburg
are the executive producers. The production team includes directors of
photography Don Burgess, A.S.C. and Robert Presley; production designers Rick
Carter and Doug Chiang; and editors Jeremiah O’Driscoll & R. Orlando
Duenas. Senior visual effects supervisors are Ken Ralston and Jerome Chen.
Co-producer is Steven Boyd. Music score is by Alan Silvestri, and original
songs by Glen Ballard and Alan Silvestri. The Polar Express is distributed
worldwide by Warner Bros. Pictures, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company.
Soundtrack album on Warner Sunset/Reprise Records. This film is rated G by the
MPAA. For more information, please visit www.polarexpressmovie.com.

 

THE POLAR EXPRESS and all related characters and
elements are trademarks of and © Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.

Based on THE POLAR EXPRESS book and characters Ô
& © 1985 by Chris Van Allsburg. Used by permission of Houghton Mifflin
Company. All rights reserved.

(s11)