In March 2024, WCS trained 30 scientists from across the Coral Triangle in simple field methods to measure coral bleaching and identify climate resilient coral reefs.
Working together, scientists can improve forecasts of climate resilient coral reefs that are critical to global conservation efforts such as protecting 30% of the world’s oceans by 2030. Credit: Emily Darling / WCS




In March 2024, WCS trained 30 scientists from across the Coral Triangle in simple field methods to measure coral bleaching and identify climate resilient coral reefs.
Working together, scientists can improve forecasts of climate resilient coral reefs that are critical to global conservation efforts such as protecting 30% of the world’s oceans by 2030. Credit: Emily Darling / WCS



In March 2024, WCS trained 30 scientists from across the Coral Triangle in simple field methods to measure coral bleaching and identify climate resilient coral reefs.
Working together, scientists can improve forecasts of climate resilient coral reefs that are critical to global conservation efforts such as protecting 30% of the world’s oceans by 2030. Credit: Emily Darling / WCS



					
					
						New York, April 15, 2024 -- News released today by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and International Coral Reef Initiative (ICRI)

confirms what WCS scientists have been observing in the field for months: The world is experiencing its fourth global coral bleaching event, the second in the last 10 years.

Read the NOAA/ICRI news release here.

Bleaching-level heat stress, caused by prolonged increases in superheated ocean temperatures, is predicted to be extensive across the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans over the next 12 months and has already been recorded in 54 countries. This year’s event has the potential to be the largest coral bleaching event on record for the planet, jeopardizing coral reef ecosystems with an estimated economic value of $2.7 trillion annually that nearly 1 billion people rely on for livelihoods, food security and coastal protection. 

This official announcement makes WCS’s work #ForCoral more urgent than ever: To find and protect the world’s most climate-resilient coral reefs in partnership with coastal communities, national governments, and global collaborations of scientists. Climate-resilient coral reefs are examples of areas of high ecological integrity that are prioritized by WCS’s global conservation actions around the world. 

Said Dr. Stacy Jupiter, Executive Director of the WCS Marine Conservation: “Saving coral reefs requires a global collaborative effort. Now more than ever before we need donors, governments, researchers, civil society and the people most dependent on reef systems for their food and livelihoods to come together with the resources, policies, knowledge and tools to coordinate action in places where reefs are most likely to persist into the future.”

“Temperatures are off the charts,” says Dr. Emily Darling, Director of Coral Reefs at the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS). “While many corals are suffering from extreme heat stress and bleaching, some locations and species show different types of natural resilience. Finding and conserving these priority coral reefs are critical to any global strategy to safeguard the planet’s oceans and blue economies.”

Last year, new science led by WCS shows us that there are three types of climate-resilient coral reefs that can defy the odds and resist bleaching, even during mass bleaching events:

·       Avoidance reefs are located in rare underwater ‘cool spots’ and have been able to mostly avoid the impacts of warm water events.

·        Resistance reefs have evolved adaptations that allow their corals to take warm water events in stride, defying bleaching and other impacts.

·        Recovery reefs may bleach during warm water events or be damaged by storms, but they are able to rapidly recover - growing back in record time.

Last month, WCS trained more than 30 scientists from across the Coral Triangle to record coral bleaching with underwater surveys and help identify these three types of climate resilient reefs.

By championing the use of shared methods and data platforms, such as the WCS-led global platform MERMAID (https://datamermaid.org/), the latest evidence can help identify the locations of climate resilient coral reefs that must be cornerstones in national biodiversity action plans.  

“The announcement of the 4th global bleaching event is an urgent call to do two things: reduce greenhouse gas emissions and work together to prioritize resilient coral reefs for conservation,” says Dr. Darling. 

To learn more about WCS’s coral reef conservation work, and how you can get involved, check these resources:

·        wcs.org/coral

·        There is still hope for coral reefs, if we act soon

·        hopeunderwater.com/

###