New York, N.Y. – August 8, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society will host the first-ever Sip for the Sea, a benefit for WCS’s New York Aquarium, at WCS’s Central Park Zoo on Thursday, Sept. 12, 2013. All proceeds go to support the aquarium as it recovers from Hurricane Sandy. 

The event will feature pairings of sustainable wines from The Hess Collection, a Napa Valley wine producer, with sustainable seafood and other special offerings. Twenty of NYC’s top restaurants will participate, including Oceana, Blue Ribbon Sushi, and BLT Fish. 

Sip for the Sea will be a win for conservation, too. With many fish species facing serious threats such as over-fishing, sustainable seafood options help ensure the longevity of diverse and healthy ocean ecosystems around the world. 
 
 Attendees will have an opportunity to learn about marine conservation in the waters around New York and see some of the Central Park Zoo’s amazing animals, including California sea lions. 
 
 The New York Aquarium was devastated by Hurricane Sandy just days before it was to break ground for the new Ocean Wonders: Sharks! exhibit. Since that time plans to expand the aquarium through a partnership with the City of New York have become a joint commitment to rebuild and transform the aquarium’s exhibits, programming and campus. The aquarium opened on a partial basis in May and hopes to be fully reopened by spring 2016. 

For more information or to purchase tickets, visit http://www.wcs.org/sipforthesea/. 

What: Sip for the Sea to benefit the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium 
 When: Thursday, Sept. 12, 2013
 6 p.m. VIP Admission
 7 p.m. General Admission
 
 Where: Central Park Zoo, 830 Fifth Avenue at 64th Street 

Food & Wine: The Hess Collection; Several of NYC’s top restaurants

Media Partners: Edible Manhattan 
 
 Participating Restaurants: 
 Almond, Asellina, Beauty & Essex, BLT Fish, Blue Ribbon Sushi, Blue Water Grill, Casa Mono, The Cleaver Co. & The Green Table, Cookshop, Del Posto, Fred's at Barneys, Fresh Hamptons, Hotel Chantelle, The Lambs Club, Oceana, Parlor Steakhouse, Rouge Tomate, Tocqueville, Tolani, Union Square Events 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.