Majestic eagle owl, Flaco, makes his public debut
		
 

New York, N.Y. Nov. 10, 2010 – He has large talons, an
intense stare, and is the biggest and newest addition to the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo – an eagle owl named Flaco.




This beautiful bird has visitors
pausing at his exhibit in amazement. His large eyes emit an intense stare as he
turns his head like only an owl can do.  Zookeepers say Flaco is adjusting
very well to his new home at the zoo and is a truly awe-inspiring sight.



Most of Flaco’s time is
spent perching on branches and trees within his exhibit located in the
zoo’s Temperate Territory section, which is also home to snow leopards,
snow monkeys, and red pandas. 



Eagle owls are one of the
largest owl species. They are powerful birds that can have a wingspan of up to
79 inches. Mostly nocturnal, eagle owls live in mountainous forest regions of
Europe and Asia. They often nest on cliffs and eat small mammals in the wild. 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society works in more than 60 countries to save wildlife like eagle owls and
other species around the world.







Contact:
Sophie Bass: 212-439-6527; sbass@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli: 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org





The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the
year.  Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for
children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo
hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through
October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets
are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue
and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500
or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org


Special
Note to the Media: If you would like
to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in
support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation