(Big Sky, MT – December 18, 2014) –Santa’s helpers are making early deliveries to the Big Sky community, and Big Sky’s bears will wake to find it’s time to adapt to a new diet—namely the berries, grasses, and insects they find in the wild.



As part of an effort by Bear Smart Big Sky , a project coordinated by the Wildlife Conservation Society to reduce human-bear conflicts, deliveries of bear-resistant trash cans were initiated this week and will continue into the new year. The new containers feature a latching mechanism that can be opened automatically by sanitation vehicles or manually by residents throwing out their trash. Bears, though, are out of luck. 



The switch was facilitated by Big Sky homeowner associations, property managers, and its waste management company, Republic Services. With trash being the number one source of accessible human-related food and a favorite among bears, the hope is that the new containers will help keep bears wild, and bears and people safer. 



"We live and work here. We know firsthand the reward and the challenge of coexisting with wildlife," said Kirk Treece, general manager for Republic's Montana operations. "As residents of Montana, we appreciate the level of partnership with these organizations and actively work to be part of the solution."



Other benefits of the new receptacles? “Cleaner streets and neighborhoods, and reducing the likelihood of relocating or even destroying bears that are habituated to human foods,” said Wildlife Conservation Scientist Kris Inman. “It’s a win-win for both bears and people, and a progressive move that other communities can look to as an example and follow suit.”



CONTACT:

Scott Smith – 718-220-3698; ssmith@wcs.org 

Stephen Sautner – 718-220-3682; ssmith@wcs.org 
Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org <http:> ; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS <http:> ; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia <http:>   Follow: @thewcs.</http:></http:></http:>