MEDIA ADVISORY
				
		
		


		


		
				
						SAVE THE DATE: Tuesday, September 21, 2010
				
		

Actor Edward Norton and UN
Delegates to attend Central Park Zoo event In advance of United Nations Special
Meeting













Who: 
 Dr. Steven
Sanderson, President & CEO, Wildlife Conservation Society;
Edward Norton, Actor and UN
Goodwill Ambassador for Biodiversity;
Ahmed Djoghlaf, Secretary,
Convention on Biological Diversity
Dr. Eric Chivian, Center for Health and the Global Environment, Harvard
Medical School;
Dr. Thomas
Lovejoy, Chief
Biodiversity Adviser to the President of the World Bank, Senior Adviser to the
President of the United Nations Foundation; Sakihito
Ozawa, Japanese Minister for Environment  



What: The Wildlife Conservation Society
will host a celebration of the International Year of Biodiversity at the
Central Park Zoo. The event will be attended by WCS’s senior staff and UN
delegates and precedes the United Nations Special Meeting on Biodiversity. 



Activities will
include: 

Comments
by Dr. Steven Sanderson, Edward Norton, and othersA
cocktail and hor d’oeuvres reception











Where:

Central Park Zoo
Fifth Avenue and 64th
Street
(Enter
at Fifth Avenue Entrance) 


When:
   
Tuesday,
September 21, 6:15—8 p.m. 






Contact: 
Stephen Sautner: 1-718-220-3682;
ssautner@wcs.org
John Delaney: 1-718-220-3275;
jdelaney@wcs.org

            



MEDIA
NOTE(S): Members
of the media who wish to attend are asked to call ahead so that interview
access can be arranged. WCS President and CEO Steve Sanderson is available for
interviews on this topic. 


The
Wildlife Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest
system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together
these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine
wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission
because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.