Triplets are the second litter born in a year; previous litter was 32 years agoThe First Day the Cubs Can be Seen: Friday, April 30See the video at www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bp4vhO-vcNc



















Bronx, N.Y. – April 30, 2010 – Today, the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo
debuts the new pride of the zoo – three lion cubs.  





The triplet African lions are the second litter born at
WCS’s Bronx Zoo in a year – after more than three decades. They can be spotted
with their mother, Sukari, and father, M’wasi, at the zoo’s African Plains
habitat, from 10am to 1pm daily. undefined

The cubs were born at about five pounds each.  They now
weigh in at about 25 pounds and have yet to be named.  Born, Jan. 27, they
are very active, curious, and playing as hard as they can. 





“Our new cubs are a wonder to observe,” said Jim Breheny,
WCS Senior Vice President of Living Institutions and Director of the Bronx
Zoo.  “After a visit with these cubs, you can’t leave without appreciating
the wonders of wildlife even more. Our lions live in the zoo’s African Plains
habitat, which is a naturalistic representation of the African Savannah. Most
of us will never take a visit to Africa. This exhibit will take you there
figuratively, and we hope all will leave wanting to get more involved in WCS’s
efforts to save wildlife and wild places around the globe.” undefined

Sukari has been an extremely attentive mother, keeping the
cubs in line as they explore their habitat. M’wasi has proven to be a patient and
tolerant father even as his tail and mane have become prime targets of playful
attack by the cubs.  



This is Sukari and M’wasi’s second litter.  Their first
cub, Moxie, was born in November, 2008, and was the first African lion cub born
at WCS’s Bronx Zoo in 31 years.  Moxie got her name from her bold
temperament while she was still a very small cub.  



Lions live in grasslands and open woodlands across much of
sub-Sahara Africa.  One of the most popular exhibits at the zoo, African
Plains opened in 1941 to record crowds and is still an emblematic home for this
icon species. This zoo habitat was the first to showcase African wildlife in a
predator-prey setting separated by a series of moats. 



WCS in the Field

Across Africa, lions and other great
predators are disappearing.  Until
recently scientists believed there were 100-200,000 lions living in Africa, but
a recent survey has found that the number has dropped dramatically to
approximately 29,000 (IUCN 2006) and most of these are living in protected National
Parks and reserves. Outside of these protected areas lions are being
slaughtered at an alarming rate by people who kill them to protect their
livestock. Ever-expanding human populations push people and livestock into the
remaining lion range.  The result is habitat destruction and bushmeat
poaching which decimates wild prey and forces lions to depend on livestock for
food. Unless urgent action is taken, lions may be completely wiped out from
these unprotected areas.   WCS conservation field staff is on the ground
working to protect wildlife and these wild lands in Africa and around the
world. 



WCS’s African Carnivore Conservation programs conserve
imperiled populations of large cats – including lions, leopards, cheetahs, and
golden cats – in critical landscapes in Africa, ensuring their unique role in
the landscape as large predators. WCS works where African cats are commonly
challenged – in fragmented landscapes, and where there is human/wildlife
conflict.  Key program activities include: building corridors to ensure
free movement of populations; monitoring disease spread between feral cats and
dogs and large carnivore populations to tackle disease outbreaks; and stemming
illegal killing of large predators by hunters. WCS collaborates with local governments,
NGOs, and local communities, building constituencies that will support large
predator conservation.








Contact: 
Mary Dixon (Best weekend Contact)
– 347-840-1242 (cell); mdixon@wcs.org  
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., 5:30 p.m. on weekends and holidays. Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo
is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the
#2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org/donation.