Recent expedition by WCS and partners found reef teeming with life
								
								
						
						
								WCS supports local communities in returning to a traditional ban on fishing
								

								
 

				
		
		

		
NEW YORK (June 8, 2011) – The Wildlife Conservation Society, Pacific Blue Foundation, Wetlands International, and the Waitt Institute announced today that the people of Fiji’s Totoya Island have declared part of their coral reefs sacred in honor of World Oceans Day. 

 

WCS Fiji Director, Dr. Stacy Jupiter and a coalition of partners spent the last eight days exploring Totoya Island. Accompanied by the island’s high chief, Roko Sau, the research team discovered not only a healthy coral reef system teeming with fish species, many of which are not found in other nearby areas, but  a rich culture, tradition, and livelihoods generated from these important resources. Dr. Jupiter has been chronicling her expedition online at www.wcs.org and NGS News Watch.

 

Traditionally, when people noticed declines in their resources, chiefs would impost a ban (or, tabu) on fishing. But Totoya’s previous high chief lifted the ban because of increased commercial value of fish stocks. The people of Totoya declared the reefs sacred today to ensure there are fish and food sources for future generations.

 

Totoya waters have enough fish to sustain both the vitality of the ecosystem and sustenance for the people, but opening up the reefs allows foreign trade that could in time deplete its resources. 

 

“Because the people have an abundance of fish stocks for food on healthy coral reefs, they are unlikely to impact the unique natural heritage of their reef system when fishing for their own subsistence,” Dr. Jupiter said. “However, the communities should take precaution to avoid the temptation to trade away their resources to outsiders.”

 

Because all of the people in Totoya live along the coast, fish of various kinds are valuable food sources and provide an income to local fishers.

 

“Conservation in this area is extremely important because it not only helps preserve the ecosystem and distinct fish species, but also the livelihoods and culture of those who live here,” said Caleb McClennen, Director of WCS’s Marine Program. “WCS supports the preservation of this reef and marine ecosystems around the world on World Oceans Day and every day.”

 

World Oceans Day, officially recognized by the United Nations since 2008, is a celebration of ocean conservation. It is an opportunity every year to honor the world’s oceans, celebrate the products it provides, and a time to appreciate the ocean’s own intrinsic value. 

 

WCS supports the reauthorization of the Coral Reef Conservation Program at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).  S. 46 and H.R. 738 would ensure that international coral reef conservation and partnerships are sustained into the future.

 

Those who want to experience Fiji for themselves can visit the new Conservation Hall and Glover’s Reef at WCS’s New York Aquarium. Here, visitors can visit the Pacific Ocean’s Coral Triangle exhibit, which is home to various fish and other sea life including beautiful corals, vibrant clownfish, and various anemones. 

 
		
				Contact:
				
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)

John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org) 


		
				
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org. 
 

		

		
		
				
 


				
WCS Digital Community:

 

Web Sites:

www.wcs.org  ● www.bronxzoo.com  ● www.centralparkzoo.com ● www.queenszoo.com > ● www.prospectparkzoo.com  ● www.nyaquarium.com


				
 


				
Facebook:

Wildlife Conservation Society http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS

Bronx Zoo www.facebook.com/bronxzoo <http://www.facebook.com/bronxzoo> 

Central Park Zoo http://www.facebook.com/centralparkzoo

Queens Zoo http://www.facebook.com/queenszoo

Prospect Park Zoo http://www.facebook.com/prospectparkzoo

New York Aquarium http://www.facebook.com/nyaquarium


				
 


				
WCS Youtube:

http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia



Twitter: 

@TheBronxZoo

@NewYorkAquarium