Second Annual “Run for the Wild” 





5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s Bronx Zoo Presented by Con EdisonCourse takes runners from
continent-to-continent past some of the world’s most exotic and endangered
species – without leaving New YorkThis year’s “Run for the Wild” is dedicated to helping save tigers in the wildRegistration is now open at www.wcsrunforthewild.orgEvent Date: Saturday, April 24, 2010























Bronx, N.Y. – April 19, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) is offering runners and
walkers a chance to travel around the world – without leaving New York City. On Saturday, April 24, the Wildlife
Conservation Society’s “Run for the Wild” returns as the Bronx Zoo is
transformed into a one-of-a-kind 5k course that takes runners and walkers to
Asia, Africa, the Americas, and beyond. 




At 265 acres, WCS’s Bronx Zoo is the largest urban zoo in
North America.  “Run for the Wild”
participants will not only be helping save endangered tigers, they will have
the rare opportunity to see the beautiful park and the naturalistic animal
habitats before the gates open to the public.  “Con Edison, this year’s Presenting Sponsor of ‘Run for the
Wild,’ is a long-time supporter of WCS and is continuing its charitable legacy
through funding and community-based volunteerism,” said John F. Calvelli, WCS’s
Executive Vice President of Public Affairs.  “The company’s support for this year’s “Run for the Wild” is
a clear example of their commitment to both community and global conservation.”  



In addition to Con Edison’s corporate support, the company
has created two running teams for the event – both of which have been actively
fundraising and seeking donations and sponsorships.  Con Edison employees have also volunteered to staff the
event to make sure everything runs smoothly. 



“Con Edison is proud to partner with the Wildlife
Conservation Society to make sure that tigers and their natural
habitat endure forever,” said Frances A. Resheske, Con Edison Senior Vice President
of Public Affairs. “The ‘Run for
the Wild’ is a perfect opportunity for New Yorkers to have a global impact in
this very important endeavor.”



Tigers
are in a fight for their very existence.
A century ago, about 100,000 of these icons of the wild roamed across
Asia. Today, having lost much of their habitat to human expansion and
development, tigers occupy only seven percent of their historical range.
Habitat loss and fragmentation continue to threaten the world’s remaining
tigers, as do conflict with humans and poaching. They are killed for their
beautiful pelts and for their body parts which are used in traditional Chinese
medicines. Their prey is depleted in much of their range due to over-hunting.
As a result of the many pressures they face, there may be as few as 3,000
tigers left in the wild today, with roughly half of those living in India. Even
more troubling, perhaps only 1,000 of these wild cats are breeding females. 



There
is hope for the future, however. WCS has long-standing conservation programs in
nine countries where wild tigers still exist in the wild (Cambodia, China,
India, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Russia, and Thailand).



Participating individuals and teams are encouraged to seek
donations and in doing so, will be eligible for unique fundraising prizes and
VIP animal experiences at WCS’s Bronx Zoo.  Additionally, “Run for the Wild” supporters will be on-site through
the day to inform participants and supporters about the great conservation work
they are doing.  Receive sample
products and information from companies like Au’Some, Inc., Benjamin Moore, Con
Edison, J&R, Monroe College, Montefiore Medical Center, and others. 



Once runners and walkers complete the five-kilometer journey
around the world, they are encouraged to enjoy the day’s line-up of
family-oriented entertainment as the zoo’s 13-weekend Animal Tales
Extravaganza continues.  Listen to
Jeff Corwin from Animal Planet
read from his children’s book, Your Backyard is Wild from Penguin Group USA; and head to New York Life’s
Main Stage on Astor Court for high-energy fun for kids and families with Radio Disney
1560 AM Road Crew. 



Finally, don’t forget to stop by Astor Court to take a
picture with the New York Yankee’s 2009 World Series trophy which will be on
display from 9am to noon.



Online registration is $30 for adults and includes complimentary
parking and general admission to the Zoo so you can stay all day. Those who are unable to participate in
the event can still help by making a donation online or sponsoring a runner or
a team.  For more information, to register, or to sponsor a runner, visit www.wcsrunforthewild.org.WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following
generous sponsors:  



Presented by:             Con
Edison



Supported by:             Aerosoles,
Aquafina, Benjamin Moore Paints, EDUN LIVE, Monroe College, Montefiore Medical
Center, UBS



Media Partners:          Daily
News, WABC, Z-100



Promotional Partner:  New
York Sports Clubs



In-Kind Partner:          D'Agostino





Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation
Society Bronx Zoo is
open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and will be closed on Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King Day.  Adult admission
is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+)
are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. WCS’s Bronx Zoo is
conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2
or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus
service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip,
visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. 



RULES: RUN FOR THE WILD
2010 FUNDRAISING CONTEST

The decisions of the Wildlife Conservation Society (“WCS”) are final in all
matters relating to this contest, and the declaration of winners shall be at
WCS’s sole discretion. Employees, officers, trustees and agents of WCS and the
immediate families and those living in the same household of any of the above
are not eligible. Winners will be required to execute a liability and publicity
release. Prizes are not transferable or redeemable for cash. Prizes will be
redeemed at a date to be determined. At WCS’s sole discretion, a prize of equal
or greater value may be substituted for any prize that becomes unavailable for
any reason. WCS reserves the right, in it sole discretion, to cancel or modify
the contest for any reason or no reason. False, fraudulent or deceptive entries
will be disqualified. WCS is not responsible for any incorrect or inaccurate
entry information; human errors; technical malfunctions; theft, tampering,
destruction, or alteration of, or unauthorized access to, entries;
typographical, printing or other errors; or any combination thereof. This
contest shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the
State of New York.