More Than 10 Million Sold Since September Debut
 
Stamps May Be Purchased at Post Offices Nationwide and USPS.com 
 
Fiscally Responsible Bill Supported by Senate International Conservation Caucus Co-Chairs  
WASHINGTON, D.C. (May 21, 2011) – The Wildlife Conservation Society applauded today’s Senate introduction of a bill to reauthorize the Save Vanishing Species postage stamp.

The stamp features an illustration of a tiger cub and supports efforts to save species like elephants, tigers, and great apes at no cost to taxpayers. 

Sens. Rob Portman (R-OH) and Tom Udall (D-NM) introduced the legislation, which would extend the lifespan of the stamp by four years. The Senate bill is also supported by fellow International Conservation Caucus co-chairs Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI) and Sen. Olympia Snowe (R-ME). A House version of the bill is sponsored by Reps. Michael Grimm (R-NY) and Rep. Pedro Pierluisi (D-PR) and is supported by a bipartisan group of 90 co-sponsors.

The Save Vanishing Species stamps went on sale in September 2011 and more than 10.7 million have been sold since then. The stamps are now available at Post Office locations nationwide and online at shop.usps.com/. They cost 10 cents greater than a First Class Mail stamp — 55 cents — and $11 for a sheet of 20. Also available is a special commemorative notecard set featuring the stamp’s image. 

“The tiger stamp allows Americans to help save wildlife around the world as simply as sending a birthday card or paying bills,” said John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We’ve seen, through the success of the stamp since last fall, that the American public is making a statement that international wildlife conservation is important to them. We must continue this momentum by extending the stamp for another four years. I thank Sen. Rob Portman and Sen. Tom Udall for championing this cause.”

Sen. Rob Portman said, “This is a great opportunity to support valuable conservation efforts at no cost to taxpayers. Just a simple, every day purchase such as a stamp is an easy way to protect wildlife. I’m glad it has broad, bipartisan support and hope it will be taken up by Congress soon.”

Sen. Tom Udall said, “Since September, the tiger stamp has raised $1.15 million from 10.7 million stamps sold. The postage stamp is a symbol of who we are as Americans, and the popularity of the tiger stamp is another example of our commitment to preserving wildlife.”

The Save Vanishing Species stamps will contribute funding for projects supported by the Multinational Species Conservation Funds   (MSCF), which are administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to conserve tigers, rhinos, great apes, marine turtles, African elephants and Asian elephants. 

Contact:Chip Weiskotten: 202-624-8172; cweiskotten@wcs.org
                                Mary Dixon: 347-840-1242; mdixon@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.