Participants Include Dr. Daniel Wani, Southern Sudan Undersecretary for Wildlife, Conservation and TourismNational Geographic Channel’s “Great Migrations” Captures the Mass Movement of Southern Sudan’s White-Eared Kob
** Speakers are available for media interviews **

		
				

Washington, D.C. –– The Wildlife Conservation Society is hosting a briefing event on the economic and environmental future of the newly independent Southern Sudan, featuring a screening of cuts from National Geographic Channel’s “Great Migrations” series.  

 

The film demonstrates the tremendous wildlife resources that still exist in this war-torn region. 

 

Speakers will discuss efforts to conserve this phenomenal natural environment as a new nation emerges and highlight the connection between economic growth through sustainable resource management and eco-friendly tourism. 


		
				When: Tuesday, March 29, 2011
		
		
Who:   
Dr. Paul Elkan, WCS’s Southern Sudan Program Director

Dr. Daniel Wani, Southern Sudan Undersecretary for Wildlife, Conservation and Tourism 
Rep. Donald Payne (D-NJ), Congressional Sudan Caucus

David Hamlin, National Geographic Television

John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs


What:       
Southern Sudan Capitol Hill Briefing

 “Great Migrations” Screening


		
				Where:   
Capitol Visitor Center – North Orientation Theater 

East Capitol Street Northeast & 1st St NE

Washington, D.C. 


When:     
Tuesday, March 29, 2009

6:00 pm – 7:30 pm

 

 

Special Note to Reporters:  Please Arrive by 5:45 PM for check in. Also, please call in advance if you would like pre-event interviews.
 


		
				Contact: 
				

Chip Weiskotten: (o) 202-624-8172 (m) 518-669-3936; cweiskotten@wcs.org

 
		
				

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.