NEW YORK (November 7,																																		 2012)—The Conservation Leadership Programme (CLP) is currently soliciting applications for 2013 Conservation Awards, according to the Wildlife Conservation Society and other CLP partners. The application deadline is November 9th, 2012; awards will be announced in April 2013.										
								 				CLP invites applications from early-career conservationists living and working in Africa, Asia, East/South-East Europe, the Middle East, the Paciﬁc, Latin America and the Caribbean. Countries designated by the World Bank as high-income economies are not eligible for CLP support. Exceptions to these criteria include high-income economies located in tropical areas of high biological diversity, including Paciﬁc and Caribbean Islands and the Middle East.										
								 				The awards are aimed at early-career conservationists with less than 5 years professional experience in the conservation sector. Successful applicants will: 1.) develop the knowledge, skills and abilities of team members; 2.) implement a focused, high-priority conservation project combining research and action; and 3.) contribute to the long-term success of local conservation efforts.				There are three tiers of CLP support. New teams will apply for a Future Conservationist Award.										
								• Future Conservationist Awards: Approximately 20 awards of up to $15,000 each
• Conservation Follow-up Awards: Approximately 6 awards of up to $25,000 each (available only to previous CLP award winners)
• Conservation Leadership Awards: 1 award of $50,000 each (available only to previous CLP award winners)										
								Please visit the CLP website, www.ConservationLeadershipProgramme.org, for detailed eligibility criteria, guidelines and an application form.										
								Applicants are strongly encouraged to contact a member of the CLP team well before the application deadline for advice on project eligibility, methods and project activities. Those applicants who meet the eligibility criteria will receive feedback on their proposals from expert reviewers.										
														The Conservation Leadership Programme (CLP) is a partnership initiative that includes 														BirdLife International												, 														Conservation International												, 														Fauna & Flora International												, the 														Wildlife Conservation Society												 and 														BP plc												. The CLP mission is to promote the development of future conservation leaders and provide them with the capacity to address the most significant conservation issues of our time. The CLP currently works toward this aim by offering awards, training, mentoring and networking opportunities. The CLP has been helping young conservationists throughout the world to achieve their goals for over 25 years. By working in partnership, the program partners can achieve far more than any one organization could achieve independently.																						
														If you have any questions or comments about this process, please email Christina Imrich, the CLP Program Officer at WCS (cimrich@wcs.org).																		
																				The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit www.wcs.org. 																		CONTACT: JOHN DELANEY: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)STEPHEN SAUTNER: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)