NEW YORK (September 19, 2014) – Kim Simplis Barrow, wife of Belize’s Prime Minister Dean Barrow and the Special Envoy for Women and Children, recently visited the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) Research Station on Middle Caye, Glover’s Reef Atoll on what could only be described as a picture perfect day. 

 During the visit she was given a glimpse into the world of marine conservation with presentations on the almost two decades of support that WCS has provided to the Glover’s Reef Marine Reserve. In addition, she learned about support to the Belize Fisheries Department in rights-based fisheries management and the national expansion of fully protected areas, and the use of technological innovations (e.g. drones) by government reserve rangers to improve protection of valuable marine resources. 

 Other highlights included an overview of the history and status of marine protected areas in the wider Belize Barrier Reef complex as well as a guided tour of the station, including solar and wind energy production facilities, and a short walk along the caye’s nature trail while a resident osprey soared overhead. Along with WCS staff, representatives from the Oak Belize Foundation, the Bertarelli Foundation, the Healthy Reefs Initiative, and the Environmental Defense Fund participated in the visit. This trip has inspired the Bertarelli Foundation to make a contribution to WCS for tagging equipment.

 Mrs. Barrow, who was very appreciative of her visit to the station, said: “Thank you all so much for such an incredible experience. I wish more Belizeans were able to do the visit I did and learn more about the amazing work you all do! Many congrats!!!” 

CONTACT:
Stephen Sautner: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org)
John Delaney: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org ; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS ; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.

The Bertarelli Foundation
MISSION: The Bertarelli Foundation develops partnerships with scientists, NGOs and governments to offer practical solutions to the issues affecting the world’s oceans. To achieve our mission, The Bertarelli Foundation has helped to established Marine Protected Areas around the Chagos Archipelago in the British Indian Ocean Territory and around the Turneffe Atoll in Belize.  The Foundation is working with others to help establish additional MPAs in other parts of the world.  The Foundation supports scientific research to establish how these reserves provide protection to the animals and plants that live within them and learn more about the wider health of the ocean Visit: www.bertarelli-foundation.org ;