In 1962, the New York Zoological Society (now WCS) employed its first “personnel manager,” John McKew. The need was emphasized by an AFSCME strike in 1961. John, a lawyer by training, had worked at the National Labor Conference Board; and in his choice, we had gotten lucky. John retired from WCS in 1999 as vice president of Administrative Services.

 John became exceptionally important in NYZS development, a part of the core administrative team and my go-to person on non-animal matters. Besides, he soon grew beyond NYZS to fulfill an advisory role for many New York quasi-public cultural institutions. As labor and personnel relationships changed, it became evident that the cultural institutions and their non-traditional relationships with city support of personnel was evolving. John played an advisory role with both the institutions and the city officials. After John convinced me to add Tim O'Sullivan to our team, we frequently found ourselves in an intermediary fix-it position.

 Shrewd, careful and devoted to keeping copious notes, John proved the perfect back-up in my almost constant negotiations with city and other officials. I asked him to help me with negotiations in Trinidad regarding the Beebe Station; to go with Jim Doherty to arrange our giant panda loan; and, when a staff gap occurred in guest services leadership, I asked him to help there until we could fill it. For four long years, John backed me up at the negotiating table with three separate park commissioners and their counselors as we successfully effected the annexation of the City Zoos. 

 At the same time, John took on the task of initiating salary and personnel surveys and practices for the AZA, gradually bringing more order and professionalism to conditions of employment in the zoo and aquarium profession. He is one of several outstanding colleagues who played a key role in the development of almost every aspect of WCS. 

 John relished his Irish ancestry and spoke more than a bit of Gaelic. Regularly visiting his relatives in the "Old Country," he would return each time with a new batch of stories, usually sorted to highlight their humor and Irishness. For those of us who grew to know him, he became not only an esteemed colleague but a close and affectionately treasured friend. 
William Conway, May 21, 2014
Funeral Arrangements

 Wake
Wednesday, May 21, 2014 from 5-9 pm
Riverdale on Hudson Funeral Home
6110 Riverdale Ave., Bronx, NY

Funeral Mass
Thursday, May 22, 2014 9:45 am
St. Margaret of Cortona Church
6000 Riverdale Ave., Bronx, NY

.Private Burial after mass, St. Raymond Cemetery, Bronx

Reception
Thursday, May 22, 2014 from 2-5 pm
Kelly Ryan's Restaurant
5790 Mosholu Ave, Bronx, NY

The family is accepting flowers, or donations in memory of John J. McKew to St. Barnabas Hospital, SBH Development Fund, 4451 3rd Ave., Bronx, NY 10457.