More Than 5,200 Dash Through WCS’s Bronx Zoo to Save Lions and Other Wildlife
 
Fiona Bayly from Manhattan – First woman to cross the finish line (17:40)
Chris Johnstone from Brooklyn – First man to cross the finish line (16:20)
 
Alex Carr of Staten Island earns top fundraiser honors with $7,200
 
Elvis Duran Z100 Morning Show matches top fundraiser 
 
VIP attendees include Congressman José E. Serrano, Congressman Joseph Crowley, Elvis Duran and Greg T from Elvis Duran Z100 Morning Show, and Jill Nicolini from Good Day New York
				
 
Bronx, N.Y. – April 28, 2012 – More than 5,200 ran, jogged, and walked through the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo in support of lion conservation, at the fourth annual WCS Run for the Wild – a 5K event to raise money to save lions, their habitats, and other wildlife. 
 
The first in the pride to cross the finish line was Chris Johnstone of Brooklyn, NY who finished with a time of 16:20.  The top three men and top three women finishers were:
 
Women:
Fiona Bayly from Manhattan – 17:40
Laura Rodriguez from The Bronx
Melissa Weiner from Manhattan
 
Men:
Chris Johnstone from Brooklyn – 16:20
Stefan Judex from Port Jefferson
Graham Treece from Brooklyn 
 
This year’s top fundraiser was Alex Carr from Staten Island who raised more than $7,200 which was matched by a donation from The Elvis Duran Z100 Morning Show on. Elvis Duran’s co-host Greg T was allowed to feed the Bronx Zoo’s California sea lions in front of the crowd on Astor Court in appreciation for the show’s generosity.
 
Participants were encouraged to seek donations and received prizes for their efforts. For $30 in pledges, runners earned a WCS Run for the Wild T-shirt; $60 earned a plush lion; $125 earned a water bottle; $275 earned a Jackrabbit Sports gift card and a New York Yankees cap; $600 earned a gym bag; $1500 earned a breakfast and a special Bronx Zoo animal experience. 
 
“The WCS Run for the Wild has become a favorite of New Yorkers, and many have been participating annually since the beginning,” said John F. Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “We are excited by another tremendous turn-out of runners, walkers, families, and wildlife enthusiasts – all of which are doing their part to help save lions and other wildlife.”
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society works across Africa and in the native range of lions in places such as Queen Elizabeth National Park, Uganda, and Nigeria’s Yankari National Park. Of the 30,000 lions remaining in Africa, nearly half of them are in Tanzania and only 2,000 lions remain in Kenya. Kenya is losing 100 lions – 5 percent of the population – every year due to habitat loss and human conflict. WCS educates local people about how to live with lions and teaches ranchers techniques that keep cattle and lions away from each other.
 
Upon finishing the run, participants enjoyed a beautiful day at the zoo. Post-race activities included the zoo’s Animal Tales Extravaganza, which is already in full-swing with live performances of Avenue Zoo at the Asia Plaza, creature parades, costume character meet and greets, and more.  Animal Tales Extravaganza runs each weekend through Sunday, June 30.
 
On Saturday, October 6, 2012, WCS will bring the WCS Run for the Wild to the New York Aquarium in Coney Island for the second year. The second annual 5k run/walk on the famous Coney Island boardwalk will be dedicated to helping WCS save walruses. Visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org/nyaquarium   for more information. 
 
WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following generous sponsors: 
 
Presenting Sponsor:               Con Edison
 
Featured Sponsors:               Monroe College, Montefiore
 
Supporting Sponsors:            Anvil, Benjamin Moore, Hard Rock Cafe, Stevia In The Raw, UBS
 
Media Partner:                     ABC7, Daily News, Z-100
 
Promotional Partner:             JackRabbit Sports
 

Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 
		
				
						
								
						
				
		
		
				
						The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com   or call 718-367-1010.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.