3rd annual Animal Tales Extravaganza is underway

Avenue ZOO: A family-friendly production featuring Kate Monster from the Tony Award-winning musical Avenue Q

Spring events include special story book reading with actor LeVar Burton of Reading Rainbow and appearance by Academy Award winner Alan Menken 

Visit www.bronxzoo.com for a detailed schedule of showtimes and appearances

Empire BlueCross BlueShield presents the Animal Activity Trail

Each weekend through Sunday, June 30
		

		Bronx, N.Y. – May 4, 2012 – Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is bringing Nickelodeon’s Dora and Diego to life at Animal Tales Extravaganza over Cinco de Mayo weekend. Visitors will enjoy meeting the costume characters at the main stage on Saturday, May 5 and Sunday, May 6.

New this year to the zoo’s spring programming is the not-to-be-missed production of – Avenue ZOO – featuring a guest appearance by Kate Monster, the beloved puppet star of the Tony Award-winning musical AVENUE Q.  

Running each weekend on the zoo’s Asia Plaza Stage, Avenue ZOO highlights the importance of wildlife conservation in a fun, entertaining way. It is a musical tale in which Kate Monster meets exotic animals and discovers that though they may seem strange and different, they are not so scary after all. Avenue ZOO performances will be at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m. each weekend through Sunday, Sept. 9. 

Each weekend of Animal Tales Extravaganza includes an array of activities for families and children. The zoo’s Dancing Crane Pavilion will be transformed into an intimate story time corner, presented by Plum Organics. Zoo-goers can take a break and read from a wide variety of animal-themed books from Simon & Schuster, Candlewick Press, and Hyperion. Children can then stage their own animal tale with a puppet they create at the Bright Horizons Early Education & Preschools crafts area. 

The main stage has something for everyone throughout the spring season. Highlights of this season’s main stage entertainment include: 
May 5 and 6 – Nickelodeon’s Dora and Diego: We Did It! May 12 and 13 – Sportacus from Sprout’s LazytownMay 19 and 20 – Disney’s Choo-Choo Soul with GenevieveJune 2 and 3 - Ferdinand the BullJune 9 and 10 - Barney™ Sing-AlongJune 16 and 17 - Super Sprowtz™June 30 – Spider-Man takes over the zooChildren will enjoy meeting some of their favorite personalities at the Dancing Crane Pavilion.  Meet-and-greets are scheduled with top children’s entertainment characters including Yo Gabba Gabba; Marvel’s Avengers; Nickelodeon’s Dora and Diego, Sportacus from Sprout’s Lazytown; Mo Willems’ Elephant and Piggie; Buddy the T-Rex from Dinosaur Train; Maisy Mouse; Olivia™, and more. 

Eight-time Academy Award-winning composer Alan Menken will present favorite songs from his collection along with Music Unites Youth Choir of Women's Academy of Excellence on Saturday, June 2. 

Actor LeVar Burton, host of the Peabody award-winning series Reading Rainbow will make an appearance on Saturday and Sunday, June 16 and 17 for a special storybook reading. LeVar will share his favorite tips and techniques to encourage young readers and host a special preview of the new Reading Rainbow iPad book discovery and reading application.

Finally, visitors can find their inner animal on the Animal Activity Trail, presented by Empire BlueCross BlueShield. Learn to move like an animal while exploring the Bronx Zoo.  Everyone can run, jump, dance, and crawl as they visit some of their favorite wild animals throughout the park.

A full listing of Animal Tales Extravaganza dates and times is available at www.bronxzoo.com. 

The Wildlife Conservation Society would like to thank the following companies for their help in making Animal Tales Extravaganza at the Bronx Zoo possible – Babies“R”Us; Bright Horizons Early Education & Preschools; Candlewick Press; Hyperion; Nickelodeon; Plum Organics; Simon & Schuster; Sprout; Toys“R”Us.

Contact:     
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220- 5182; Cell 571-218-7601; mpulsinelli@wcs.org 
Steve Fairchild – 718- 220- 5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 
AVENUE Q – now in its 10th year in New York – is the winner of three Tony Awards, including Best Musical, and has been produced in countries around the world. For performance and ticket information to AVENUE Q call Tele-charge at 212-239-6200 or visit www.avenueq.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.
 
The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.