Children from PS 205 to make donation of the first toy
of the seasonWCS expands toy and food collection to all five WCS
zoos and aquariumToy and food donors will receive a free ticket to the Bronx Zoo or New York AquariumWednesday, November 16, 2011















Bronx, NY – Nov. 14,
2011 – On Wednesday, November 16, Deputy Bronx Borough President Aurelia
Greene will join officials from the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo
and children from PS 205 at the Bronx Zoo’s Dancing Crane Café to kick-off
Borough President Ruben Diaz, Jr.’s holiday toy drive. 


In honor of the start of the holiday season, school children
from PS 205 will be on hand to donate the first toys of the year. 







Who:             
Deputy
Bronx Borough President Aurelia Greene
John
Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs
School children
from PS205



What:             
Kick-off
event for the Borough President’s Annual Toy Drive







Where:            
WCS’s
Bronx Zoo
2300
Southern Blvd.
Bronx,
NY 





When:            
Wednesday,
November 16, 2011
10:30
am – 11:30 am



The partnership between the Bronx Zoo and the Borough
President on the toy drive has become an annual tradition. The Bronx Zoo will
serve as a collection point for new, unwrapped toys donated by members of the
community. Toys will be collected through the end of December and will be distributed
by the Borough President’s office to underprivileged members of the community. 



WCS is partnering with City Harvest to collect food for
underprivileged New Yorkers. Food collected from food drive helps provide
nutritious meals every day to people in New York City who turn to food
assistance programs. City Harvest needs a variety of canned, packaged and
nonperishable foods to feed people in need. Some of the most-needed foods
include canned fruit, canned vegetables, peanut butter (plastic jars), macaroni
and cheese (packaged), hot and cold cereal (packaged, family-size).*





In appreciation for their generosity, those who make a
qualifying donation of a new, unwrapped toy and/or ten food items at the Bronx
Zoo between Saturday, Nov. 19 and Saturday, Dec. 31 will receive a free ticket
to the Bronx Zoo. 




From Saturday, November 19 through Saturday December 31, the
zoos will collect toys for underprivileged children. Visitors can bring their
new, unwrapped toys to designated drop-off points at each of the WCS parks for
distribution by the Borough President’s office. 


The Wildlife Conservation Society would like to thank the
Bronx Chamber of Commerce, Bronx Toys for their generosity and support of the
toy and food drives.



MEDIA NOTE(S):
Media who wish to attend the event should contact Max Pulsinelli 718-220-5182 or Steve Fairchild 718-220-5189
so that parking and park transportation can be arranged.



*City Harvest cannot accept:
unlabeled or dented cans, any open packaging, products that need to be
refrigerated, homemade foods, or expired products.



** Disclaimer: One general
admission ticket to the Bronx Zoo will be provided for a donation of one new,
unwrapped toy OR for every 10 food items at the Bronx Zoo, Central Park Zoo,
Prospect Park Zoo or Queens Zoo. Food items must be canned, packaged and/or
nonperishable foods — perishable items are not permitted. All WCS decisions
final. For details on donation food items go to wcs.org/foodtoydrive. Promotion
available from 11/19/11–12/31/11. May not be combined with any other offer.

Contact:
Max
Pulsinelli:  (o) 718-220-5182 (m) 571-218-7601; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: (o)
718-220-5189 (m) 914-263-8179; sfairchild@wcs.org



 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature
and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission
because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org. 



Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to
a web link where they can support these projects, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.