Ascarium at the New York Aquarium and Boo at the Zoo at the Queens and Prospect Park Zoos: Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 26 & 27

Bronx, N.Y. – Oct. 4, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society's Bronx Zoo, New York Aquarium, Prospect Park Zoo and Queens Zoo have events this month celebrating Halloween.



At the WCS Bronx Zoo:

Boo at the Zoo activities include:

The Museum of UnNatural Mysteries
This Museum, created by Dr. B. Zarre, houses a remarkable collection of mysterious creatures, evidence of how the dinosaurs were destroyed, and anomalies collected from earth and space. Dr. B. Zarre has amassed this through years of exploration and adventure and brought this fascinating “believe it or not” collection as a special exhibition exclusive to the Bronx Zoo.
Location: By Somba Village
Time: 11:00am- 5:00pm

Dinosaur Safari
Extended by popular demand, the exhibit includes more than 20 life-like animatronic dinosaurs that are up to 40 feet long which snarl, roar and spit. The narrated ride runs through a two-acre area of the zoo and highlights some of the similar physical and behavioral adaptations many prehistoric species share with modern-day wildlife. A guide helps identify the dinosaurs and explains how animals at the Bronx Zoo use similar adaptations to survive in the wild.
Location: Boarding at Fordham Parking
Time: 10:00am - 5:00pm

3-D Pumpkin Carving Demonstrations
Professional pumpkin carvers from Sand Sculpture USA will be demonstrating their skill and displaying intricate pumpkin carvings that cannot be missed.
Location: Dancing Crane Plaza
Time: 11am-5pm

Costume Parade
Visitors can join the enchantment of a Halloween Parade. Hand-made puppets and props built by master costumers will be part of the fun as participants march through the zoo alongside an array of characters from the Alice Farley Dance Company.
Location: Starts at Zoo Center
Time: 12:00pm and 2:00pm.
Photos will be available at the end of each performance.

Musical Theater: Beasts of the Magical World
This puppetry musical tells stories of owls and sorcerers, snakes, komodo dragons and frogs and magic. It was created by acclaimed puppeteer Noel MacNeal of Sesame Street, Bear in the Big Blue House, and numerous Nickelodeon TV series. Puppets were created by Puppet Kitchen of NYC. Music by Jim Camacho.
Location: Asia Plaza Theater 
Timing: 12:30pm, 1:30pm, 2:30pm

Hay Maze
 Let yourself get lost at the zoo with a Halloween maze filled with sudden starts, stops and lots of adventure.
Location: Butterfly Patio
Time: 11:00 a.m.– 5 p.m.

Live Music
Gigi and the Lend me a Hand Band will lead zoo audiences on a musical adventure with the Gigi’s Dino-mite Prehistoric Party. Audiences will be invited to participate in animal-themed musical performances, songs and dances, and games.
Location: Tent by bear exhibit
Time: 11:30am, 1:00 pm, 3:00pm

Animal Themed Magic Shows
Enjoy a Boo at the Zoo family tradition with remarkable slight-of-hand and optical illusions from magic man David Levitan.
Location: Tent by bear exhibit 
Time: 12:00pm, 2:00pm, 4:00pm

Treat Stations
Special locations around the park will help sweeten your visit.
Time: 11:00 a.m.–5:00 p.m. 

Crafts Workshop
Make a one-of-a-kind komodo dragon puppet.
Location: Dancing Crane Plaza
Time: 11:00 a.m.–4:00 p.m.

Extinct Animal Graveyard
Learn about endangered and extinct animals at this spooky display.
Location: Mouse House lawn.

Creature Chats
Bronx Zoo animal experts celebrate wildlife iconic to Halloween season.
Location: visit www.bronxzoo.com for full schedule.

Boo at the Zoo is made possible by the generosity of these corporate partners:
SUPPORTING SPONSORS:
IKEA; The Children’s Hospitals of NewYork-Presbyterian
ACTIVITY PARTNERS:
DNAinfo; Family Circle and partners Amazon Kindle, New York Life and PBS’s Curious George



At the WCS New York Aquarium:

Ascarium activities include:

Water Wizardry – Noted actor and children’s theater performer David Engel will present an exciting and educational show about the importance of water. Light effects, music and magic tricks will be used to show kids and their families how they can help protect the Earth. (Show times at 11:30 a.m., 1:30 and 2:30 p.m., both days) 

Wildlife Theater Presents: The Sea Witch Spooky Show – The aquarium’s Wildlife Theater will introduce Nettie the Sea Witch, who learns throughout the show that sharks, jellyfish and corals are amazing animals that help make the ocean a wonderful place. Audience members will have a chance to touch real ocean artifacts. (Show times at 12, 2, and 4 p.m., both days). 

Pumpkin Patch at the Aquarium – Visitors will explore a pumpkin patch, located on the aquarium’s scenic Oceanview Deck. They can pick their own pumpkin to paint at a craft station overlooking the majestic Atlantic Ocean. (11:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., both days)

Terrific Tunes – Performances by Barry G and Ramblin’ Davey of the children’s band Dream Jam Band have developed a special show that celebrates sea life and Halloween that will be both educational and fun. (Show times at 12:30 and 3 p.m., both days)

Trick-or-Treat – Children are invited to participate in safe trick-or-treating fun throughout the aquarium. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m., both days)

Visitors can also see the aquarium’s daily Sea Lion Celebration, happening at 11 a.m., 1 and 3 p.m. This weekend, some Halloween fun will be incorporated into each show. The New York Aquarium was devastated by Hurricane Sandy last year. It opened on a partial basis in May and hopes to fully reopen by spring 2016. Visit www.nyaquarium.com to learn how you can help the aquarium rebuild. 



At the WCS Queens Zoo:

Boo at the Zoo Activities at the Queens Zoo Include:

Haunted Habitat – Visitors can head over to the Haunted Habitat located in the zoo’s Wild Room, which will be decorated for Halloween. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)

Spooky Animal Presentations – The zoo’s farm is the place to check out presentations featuring snakes and other animals (1:30 and 3 p.m. Also Oct. 31, same times.)

Pick a Perfect Pumpkin – The early bird gets the pumpkin. The first 200 zoo-goers on Saturday and Sunday will pick and decorate their own pumpkin on the Zoo’s own farm.

Face Painting – Be a lion, puma, or bear for Halloween this year. Zoo-goers can get in the spirit of the holiday with colorful face painting. (Noon to 3 p.m.)

Pumpkin Enrichment – Pumas and bears will tear into treat-filled pumpkins. (Pumas at 1 p.m. and Andean bears at 2:30 p.m., both days.)

Trick or Treating – Treat stations, stocked with all kinds of goodies, will be located around the zoo. (Also Oct. 31.)

Crafts for Kids – Kids can make and take home a festive Halloween craft. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Also Oct. 31, same time.)

Dress to Impress – Children 12 and under in costume accompanied by an adult will receive free admission. (Also Oct. 31.)



At WCS Prospect Park Zoo:

Boo at the Zoo Activities at the Prospect Park Zoo Include:

Discovery Center – The zoo’s interactive play center will be open both days with games and crafts, all decorated for Halloween. (11 a.m. to 4 p.m.)

Bat Chats – Visitors can learn all about Rodriguez fruit bats in the nocturnal area. (11 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.)

Pumpkins for Baboons – The zoo’s baboon troupe will get tasty treat-filled pumpkins. (2:30 p.m.)

Face Painting – Zoo-goers will get in the spirit of the holiday with colorful face painting. (Noon to 3 p.m.)

Costume Parade and Dance Party – Children will participate in a fun costume parade and party in the Sea Lion Court. (Parade Time: 3:45 meet at barn; Dance Party: following the zoo’s 4 p.m. sea lion feed)

Costumed Character Scavenger Hunt – Visitors will have the opportunity to take photos with the zoo’s costumed characters. Those who meet all of them will complete a scavenger hunt and collect a prize. (11 a.m to 4 p.m.)

Spooky Barn – The barn area will be transformed into a haunted habitat, decorated festively for Halloween. (Please note: This activity is for older children. Noon to 3:30 p.m.)

Wildlife Witch Shows – Visitors will enjoy an educational play about creepy creatures and a witch’s potion. Live animal encounters are part of the fun. (Show times are 12:30, 1:30, 2, 3:15, 3:45 and 4 p.m. in the Zoo Theater.)

More information about these events can be found online at www.bronxzoo.com, www.nyaquarium.com, www.queenszoo.com, and www.prospectparkzoo.com

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Admission is $9.95 per person; children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation.  The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island.  For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.