Wildlife Conservation Society commends village of Nidugumba for demonstrating a “model response” to injured big cat 												
												Tiger is currently being treated at Mysore Zoo 														
												NEW YORK (December 12, 2012) — The Wildlife Conservation Society commends the village of Nidugumba in Karnataka State in southwest India for its swift action to save an injured tiger that had become caught in a barbed wire fence last week. 						
				The female adult tiger was discovered on a coffee plantation on Dec. 4 with its left paw entangled. The coffee planter and other community members quickly called authorities while preventing the tiger from being harassed.  Big cats, when caught in snares or fences, struggle fiercely and often further injure themselves. 						
				A team of forest rangers and veterinarians arrived and tranquilized the cat and untangled it from the fence.  The tigress is now undergoing a close examination at the Mysore Zoo to assess her injuries, age, and health status so that an informed decision can be made about her future. 						
				“WCS India applauds the village of Nidugumba for their exemplary restraint and positive conservation attitude, and compliments the staff and officers of the Karnataka Forest Department for their model handling of a situation that could easily have turned into a tragedy for the tiger as well as humans,” said Dr. Ullas Karanth, WCS Director for Science - Asia. “Too often, in situations involving a large predator that is accidentally cornered in human-dominated landscapes, people can swiftly form mobs and attack the animal as well as impede forest officials handling the situation. This often ends tragically with the death of the big cat and sometimes injuries to people and forest staff.” 						
				Just two days before on Dec. 2, a cornered tiger near Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary in Kerala State, which is in south of Nagarahole National Park, was shot dead by officials amid chaos created by a mob. 						
				Nidugumba is about 1.2 kilometers (0.75 miles) away from the edge of Nagarahole National Park, known to hold high densities of tigers (10-12 animals per 100 km2/38.6 square miles).  WCS long-term studies show that, beyond a certain density, tigers disperse outside the park into other areas.  While this is potentially positive for tiger conservation, it increases the chances of tigers coming into contact with humans. The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit www.wcs.org.### Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.
CONTACT: STEPHEN SAUTNER: (1-718-220-3682; ssautner@wcs.org) JOHN DELANEY: (1-718-220-3275; jdelaney@wcs.org)