Bring the Kids to See THIS Kid
		
		

		

		
New York, NY, Jan. 13, 2010– He’s cute, cuddly, and the newest kid on the block at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo. He’s a baby mini-Nubian goat, born just last week at the zoo. This yet unnamed kid is awing zoo-goers of all ages with his fluffy coat, gangly legs and soft little calls of bleeeaaat! 

 

Zookeepers say the baby is adjusting very well to his home at the zoo. He is very much attached to his mother, Angel, and follows her around their exhibit. Angel is a great mother, and makes sure her little one gets milk and warm hay to lie on. The two look strikingly different: Angel white and coffee-colored, while her new son has a dark coat with just a few patches of white. He also has the most adorable floppy ears, adding to his undeniable cuteness! 

 

Angel and her baby share an exhibit in the zoo’s Tisch Children’s Zoo with other mini Nubian goats Ace, Monique and Spirit. All came to the zoo just late last year. They live alongside pygmy goats and the zoo’s famous full-sized Nubian, Newman. Other animals in the Tisch Children’s Zoo include alpacas, sheep and a variety of domestic animals. 

 

Mini Nubians are a cross between Nigerian dwarf and full-sized Nubian goats. The minis look very similar to the larger breed, with long floppy ears and coats that can be many different colors. The only major difference is that they are much smaller. They have playful personalities and calm demeanors that make them an instant delight among zoo visitors of all ages!

 

In the field, WCS conservationists are working to protect wild goats and sheep including the spectacular Marco Polo sheep, which is restricted to mountainous regions in central Asia.  Its horns can span an impressive six feet.
		
				
						
								Contact: 
								
Barbara Russo - brusso@wcs.org, 212-439-6527
				 

		 


The Central Park Zoo, a Wildlife Conservation Society park, is located at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue. Admission is $10 for adults, $7 for senior citizens, $5 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Admission includes entry into the main Zoo and the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Zoo hours are 10am to 4:30 pm daily. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com 

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation