A new tiger “report card”
released by the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) reveals how the
iconic big cats are faring in eight key landscapes spanning nine Asian
countries.

The
report shows that while tigers are in dire trouble in some areas, they
are still hanging on in others. Meanwhile, opportunities to grow tiger
populations in landscapes where conservation efforts are beginning to
take hold. The report card is a result of “Tigers Forever,” a
collaborative initiative between WCS and Panthera, a wild cat
conservation group.The report card looks
at key threats to tigers and monitors success in the priority
landscapes where WCS and Panthera work to save them: India's Western
Ghats, Thailand's Western Forest Complex, the transboundary region
between Russia and China, Indonesia's Gunung Leuser landscape,
Myanmar's Hukaung Valley, Malaysia's Endau-Rompin Landscape, Laos's Nam
Et-Phou Louey, and Cambodia's Eastern Plains. These
habitats represent a sample of major ecological types across the
tiger's range and were chosen based on scientific assessment of tiger
ecology, levels of threat, opportunity for recovery, and long-term
security of tiger populations. “In
this Year of the Tiger, the best way we can celebrate these iconic big
cats is by giving them a future,” said WCS President and CEO Steven E.
Sanderson. “Each landscape where WCS works presents a unique set of
challenges for conservationists, but all are bound by a common vision:
to restore tiger numbers wherever possible throughout their range.”
The
report gives each of the landscapes a color rating. Green means the
prospect for tigers is good with populations stable or increasing and
conservation efforts succeeding. Yellow means prospects for tigers are
fair with numbers stable but increasingly threatened by significant
conservation challenges. Red means tiger numbers are in decline with
major threats growing.
Dr.
Alan Rabinowitz, President and CEO of Panthera, said, “While the
situation with wild tigers is dire, the good news is that we know what
is needed to reverse it. Tigers Forever is an effective model that
shows us that we can bring tigers back – and we already are at specific
sites across the tiger’s range.”

The
world's remaining tigers are threatened by poaching, habitat loss and
fragmentation, and conflict with humans. There may be as few as 3,000
wild tigers left in the world today, with roughly half of those living
in India. 
WCS's
Tiger Program and activities at WCS tiger sites are made possible by
contributions from numerous supporters but particularly: 21st Century
Tiger; the Blue Moon Fund; E. Lisk Wyckoff, Jr. and the Homeland
Foundation; the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation; the Liz
Claiborne and Art Ortenberg Foundation; Panthera; the Rhino Tiger
Conservation Fund of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service; U.S.
Forest Service International Program-Russian Far East Conservation, the
Patuxent Center of the U.S. Geological Survey the Robertson Foundation;
Save The Tiger Fund, a partnership of the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation and the ExxonMobil Foundation; and the World Bank GEF Tiger
Futures project.
Download the tiger report card.