Discovery Guides answer visitor questions and help with special events and activities for the public

 Project TRUE is an urban environmental education program that gives students hands-on experience in urban ecology

 Applications and information available at wcs.org/volunteer  

 Brooklyn, N.Y. – Aug. 27, 2014 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo is accepting applications for its Teen Discovery Guide and Project TRUE programs.

Discovery Guides work on the zoo’s trail and inside exhibit buildings to help answer visitor questions about animals. They also help with zoo special events, interact with families in the Discovery Center, and conduct craft sessions with visitors in Animals in Art. 

 The application deadline for this program is Wednesday, Sept. 10. Training begins Sunday, Sept. 21. 

 Teens can also register for the zoo’s Project TRUE (Teen Research in Urban Ecology) program. Project TRUE is an urban environmental education program that gives students hands-on experience in urban ecology. 

 During the semester-long internship, high school students participate in a research project that introduces them to fundamental concepts in urban ecology, scientific design, ecological methods, mapping, digital media publishing, and scientific writing. Students learn the importance of scientific research in policy making and skills needed to effectively present their scientific findings to an audience. Opportunities are available to meet with visiting WCS scientists and learn about their research.

 Project TRUE is supported through a grant from the National Center for Civic Engagement. 

 The application deadline for Project TRUE is Thursday, Sept. 25.

 More information about both of these opportunities can be found at www.prospectparkzoo.com . 

CONTACT:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visitwww.prospectparkzoo.com.

Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) – MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs.

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.