Credit: ©WCS




 Credit: ©WCS



 Credit: ©WCS



					
					
						BRONX, N.Y. — June 7, 2024 — The Bronx Zoo is celebrating the 25th anniversary of its award-winning Congo Gorilla Forest. Since its opening in June 1999, more than 15 million people have visited the exhibit, learning about the urgency of conservation and leaving inspired to save wildlife and the places where they live.

Bronx Zoo guests, during June 8-9 (Saturday and Sunday) and June 15-16 (Saturday and Sunday), can join in activities celebrating the renowned Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit, including Congolese dance performances by the Harambee Dancers and storytelling of traditional African folk tales by Harambee Storytellers at Grizzly Corner. There will be parades with wildlife characters and performers, Wildlife Theater, and crafts & activities for guests to participate in and enjoy. The Congo Gorilla Forest was built as a groundbreaking, participatory exhibit, connecting conservation fieldwork to the work happening at the Bronx Zoo.

The 6.5-acre Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit remains one of the most popular experiences at the Bronx Zoo, focusing on the Central African rainforest and featuring western lowland gorillas, okapis, mandrills, red river hogs, Wolf’s guenons and more. This year, guests can also expect to see a new mandrill born last year. Whether watching the animals on exhibit or participating in an education class in the unique program space, the Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit has inspired countless visitors over the past 25 years.

Awards Recognizing Congo Gorilla Forest:

The Congo Gorilla Forest exhibit has been recognized many times throughout its history, including winning the American Association of Museums’ Exhibition Excellence Award; the American Zoo and Aquarium Association’s Exhibit Award (now the Association of Zoos & Aquariums); and the Association of Zoological Horticulture’s Conservation Award.

Also at the Bronx Zoo:

This year marks the Bronx Zoo’s 125th anniversary. Guests can experience a new temporary exhibit, Animal Chronicles, a quarter-mile walking trail featuring 68 immersive eco-sculptures that highlight achievements in the Bronx Zoo’s history of saving animal species and connecting New Yorkers to wildlife.

###