Bronx, NY – Aug. 7, 2014 – A baby male Angolan colobus monkey (Colobus angolensis) was born in the Congo Gorilla Forest at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.

With the addition of the baby, there are five colobus monkeys in the troop; one adult male, two adult females, one juvenile female and the newborn. 

The species is native to northern Angola and parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, with a second population found in Tanzania and Kenya. They are arboreal and live in thick jungle ecosystems. Their slim bodies and long tails help them balance while moving through treetops in search of leaves, fruits and seeds to eat.

These African primates typically live in family groups of no more than 15 individuals. One dominant male will lead the troop and mate with all of the adult females.  The young are born completely white and begin changing to their adult coloration when about three months of age. The offspring are cared for by all the females in the troop.

Although their population is classified as “Least Concern” by the The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Angolan colobus monkeys are threatened by habitat loss from deforestation and agriculture. The Wildlife Conservation Society works throughout Africa and within the colobus money’s range to save wildlife and their habitats. 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $12.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $15 for cars and $18 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

CONTACT:
Max Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgWildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; facebook.com/TheWCS; youtube.com/user/WCSMedia; follow: @theWCS.