Do you enjoy learning about wildlife?
Would you enjoy sharing what you learn with others?
		

		

		
				Brooklyn, NY – The Prospect Park Zoo
is welcoming applications for its Docent Program.  
		

After completing an intensive training
course, Prospect Park Zoo docents are able to lead group tours, interpret
exhibits, present biofacts and other touchables at Discovery Stations, assist
in our interactive Discovery
 Center, work at zoo
special events, and teach visitors
how to interact with alpacas and sheep at our barn area. Docents who
successfully complete Live Animal Handling Training are also eligible to
present short Live Animal Encounters to the public, teaching children and
families about animals from the zoo’s collection of education animals. 

As a Prospect Park Zoo docent, you will
have the opportunity to meet individuals from around the world, work with
others who enjoy sharing their knowledge, and aid the Wildlife Conservation
Society in their mission to save wildlife and wild places. 

Click here for more information, or give us a
call at 718-399-7324. You must be
18 years or older to apply. Admission to the program is competitive. Applications
are currently being accepted for the fall. Participants must undergo an interview
and be available to attend a ten session training course if accepted.

Contact: Fran Hackett - 718-265-3428,
fhackett@wcs.org



Prospect Park Zoo – Open every
day of the year. Admission is $7 for adults, $4 for seniors 65 and older, $3
for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays,
and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am –
4:30pm daily, November through April.  The Prospect Park Zoo is located at
450 Flatbush Avenue
in Prospect Park,
Brooklyn. For further information, call
718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves
wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global
conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of
urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth.