BRONX, NEW YORK (October 9, 2009) -- Recently
Madagascar’s transitional government issued two contradictory decrees:
first, the exploitation of all precious woods was made illegal, but then a
second allowed the export of hundreds of shipping containers packed with this
illegally harvested wood. Madagascar’s forests have long suffered from
the abusive exploitation of precious woods, most particularly rosewoods and
ebonies, but the country’s recent political problems have resulted in a
dramatic increase in their exploitation. This activity now represents a serious
threat to those who rely on the forest for goods and services and for the
country’s rich, unique and highly endangered flora and fauna. Precious
woods are being extracted from forests by roving and sometimes violent gangs of
lumbermen and sold to a few powerful businessmen for export. Madagascar has 47 species
of rosewood and over 100 ebony species that occur nowhere else, and their exploitation
is pushing some to the brink of extinction. Those exploiting the trees are also
trapping endangered lemurs for food, and the forests themselves are being
degraded as trees are felled, processed and dragged to adjacent rivers or roads
for transport to the coast. No forest that contains precious woods is safe, and
the country’s most prestigious nature reserves and favored tourist
destinations, such as the Marojejy and Masoala World  Heritage Sites and the
Mananara Biosphere Reserve, have been the focus of intensive exploitation.
Currently thousands of rosewood and ebony logs, none of them legally exploited,
are stored in Madagascar’s east coast ports, Vohémar, Antalaha, and Toamasina.
The most recent decree will allow their export and surely encourage a further
wave of environmental pillaging.

Malagasy
civil society, conservation and development organizations and the international
community are united in lamenting the issue of the most recent decree, in
fearing its consequences and in questioning its legitimacy. Consumers of
rosewood and ebony products are asked to check their origin, and boycott those
made of Malagasy wood.Contact:
Stephen Sautner - ssautner@wcs.org, 718-220-3682
John Delaney - jdelaney@wcs.org, 718-220-3275
This press release was issued by the following groups:
CAS California Academy of Science

CI Conservation International

DWCT Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust

EAZA European Association of Zoos and Aquaria

ICTE Institute for the Conservation of
Tropical Environments

MBG Missouri Botanical Garden

MFG Madagascar Fauna Group

The
Field Museum, Chicago

Dr
Claire Kremen,
University of California, Berkeley

Dean
Keith Gilless,
University of California, Berkeley

Robert
Douglas Stone,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa

WASA World Association of Zoos and Aquariums

WCS Wildlife Conservation Society

WWF World Wide Fund for Nature

Zoo Zürich

The Wildlife
Conservation Society
saves wildlife and wild places worldwide.  We do so through science,
global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system
of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo.  Together these
activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and
humans living in harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is
essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit: www.wcs.org

Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide
your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support
of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation