CONTACT:      Barbara Russo - 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.orgMax Pulsinelli - 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org WCS's New York Aquarium Hosts All About Otter Moms: A Mother’s Day Family Program Participants will discover how otter mothers protect their youngBrooklyn, N.Y. – May 8, 2015 – WCS’s (Wildlife Conservation Society) New York Aquarium will host a Mother’s Day family program called “All About Otter Moms” on Sunday, May 10 at 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., and from 2 to 3 p.m. The program is free with aquarium admission. “All About Otter Moms” is geared toward children and families. Participants will learn about otter mother-pup bonds, make kelp-inspired crafts, and meet sea urchins, round spiny invertebrates that live in the ocean with sea otters.   Otter moms spend a lot of time grooming and feeding their pups. They stay close together except when mom has to hunt for food. When she does go in search of food, an otter mother will wrap her pup in kelp to keep it anchored and safe in one place until she returns. More information about “All About Otter Moms” and other New York Aquarium programs is available at www.nyaquarium.com. Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium is open every day of the year. Summer hours are 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Fall/winter/spring hours are 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., daily. Tickets are $11.95 per person (ages 3 & up), and include Aquarium admission plus one admission to the new 4-D Theater; children age 2 and under are admitted free. Fridays after 4 p.m. in the summer and after 3 p.m. in the fall, Aquarium admission is by pay-what-you-wish donation. The aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. The New York Aquarium is located on property owned by the City of New York, and its operation is made possible in part by public funds provided through the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the WCS New York Aquarium, a beloved part of Brooklyn and all of the City of New York. Due to Hurricane Sandy we are partially opened. Check our website for more information. www.nyaquarium.com. Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)  MISSION: WCS saves wildlife and wild places worldwide through science, conservation action, education, and inspiring people to value nature. VISION: WCS envisions a world where wildlife thrives in healthy lands and seas, valued by societies that embrace and benefit from the diversity and integrity of life on earth. To achieve our mission, WCS, based at the Bronx Zoo, harnesses the power of its Global Conservation Program in more than 60 nations and in all the world’s oceans and its five wildlife parks in New York City, visited by 4 million people annually. WCS combines its expertise in the field, zoos, and aquarium to achieve its conservation mission. Visit: www.wcs.org; http://www.facebook.com/TheWCS; http://www.youtube.com/user/WCSMedia  Follow: @thewcs. Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to wcs.org.  ###