Second Annual “Run for the Wild” 5k and Family Fun Run at WCS’s Bronx Zoo, Presented by Con EdisonTop individual and team fundraisers can win VIP animal encountersAll participants invited to meet-and-greet with former Pro Bowl running back, Tiki BarberGet a photo with the New York Yankee’s 2009 World
Series trophy









Registration is now open at www.wcs.runforthewild.org



Event Date: Saturday, April 24, 2010



Bronx, N.Y. – March 23, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s second annual “Run for the Wild,” on
Saturday, April 24 at the Bronx Zoo, is right around the corner and the stakes
just got a little higher:  Special
prizes for those individuals and teams that raise the most money.



This year’s “Run for the Wild” 5k and family fun run through
WCS’s Bronx Zoo is dedicated to helping save tigers.  Participants that raise the most money can win VIP animal
encounters including: 



For the top individual fundraiser:



Tiger Breakfast:  Get a closer look at the big cats when your
party of 10 gets a personalized tour of Tiger Mountain. You’ll meet a tiger
expert and discover how training, toys, and foraging games help the big cats
stay fit and stimulated. Your visit includes breakfast and VIP passes to enjoy
a full day at the zoo.




For the top team
fundraisers:



First Prize – Giraffe
Breakfast:  Step right up to our
20-foot tall feeding station where you’ll be on eye-level with the zoo’s
tallest residents. Enjoy a catered breakfast while you take turns feeding the
giraffes their morning meal of leaves. This experience is limited to 10 people
and includes VIP passes to enjoy a full day at the zoo.

undefined undefined

Second Prize – Animal
Meet-and-Greet:  Get up-close and
personal with animal ambassadors from the zoo’s education collection. Your
morning meeting may include a fennec fox, a tortoise, a hornbill, or a
porcupine. Don’t forget the camera. This experience is limited to 10 people and
includes VIP passes to enjoy a full day at the zoo.

After the run, all participants are invited to enjoy the zoo
for the rest of the day.  Stop and visit with the official “Run for the
Wild” starter, former Pro Bowl running back Tiki Barber.



Additionally, as a special treat for this year’s runners, the
New York Yankees’ 2009 World Series Championship trophy will be on display from
noon to 3pm in Zoo Center. 



Online registration is $30 for adults.  Complimentary
parking and admission will be provided. Those who are unable to participate in
the event can still help by making a donation online or sponsoring a runner or
a team.  All pledges and donations provide much needed support for WCS
field staff working to ensure a future for these beautiful endangered great
cats. 



For more information, to register, or to sponsor a runner,
visit www.wcs.runforthewild.org 



WCS’s Run for the Wild is made possible by the following
generous sponsors:  



Presented by:  Con
Edison



Supported by:  Aquafina,
Benjamin Moore Paints, EDUN LIVE, Monroe College, Montefiore Medical Center,
UBS



Media Partners:  Daily
News, WABC, Z-100



Promotional Partner:  New
York Sports Clubs



In-Kind Partner:  D'Agostino




Contact: 
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org
The Wildlife Conservation
Society Bronx Zoo is
open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., and will be closed on Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Day, New Year's Day, and Martin Luther King Day.  Adult
admission is $15, children (3-12 years old) $11, children under 3 are free,
seniors (65+) are $13. Parking is $12 for cars and $16 for buses. WCS’s Bronx
Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via
the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express
Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your
trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com
or call 718-367-1010.



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. 




RULES: RUN FOR THE WILD
2010 FUNDRAISING CONTEST

The decisions of the Wildlife Conservation Society (“WCS”) are final in all
matters relating to this contest, and the declaration of winners shall be at
WCS’s sole discretion. Employees, officers, trustees and agents of WCS and the
immediate families and those living in the same household of any of the above
are not eligible. Winners will be required to execute a liability and publicity
release. Prizes are not transferable or redeemable for cash. Prizes will be
redeemed at a date to be determined. At WCS’s sole discretion, a prize of equal
or greater value may be substituted for any prize that becomes unavailable for
any reason. WCS reserves the right, in it sole discretion, to cancel or modify
the contest for any reason or no reason. False, fraudulent or deceptive entries
will be disqualified. WCS is not responsible for any incorrect or inaccurate
entry information; human errors; technical malfunctions; theft, tampering,
destruction, or alteration of, or unauthorized access to, entries;
typographical, printing or other errors; or any combination thereof. This
contest shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the
State of New York.