Become a “Friend of the Zoo”Help save wildlife by educating zoo visitors

 


Bronx, NY – Dec. 8, 2010 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is currently accepting applications to join its award-winning education department as a member of the zoo’s volunteer corps – the “Friends of the Zoo.”



 Friends of the Zoo are valued ambassadors to the zoo’s more than two million annual visitors. They are at the front line of the guest experience – leading guided tours for adults and school children, giving interpretive talks about wildlife, and answering questions about exhibits. Each year, about 30 candidates are chosen to participate in the training program. 



 On January 8th, interested applicants can meet current volunteers, learn about their duties and training program, and sign up for the 2011 season.



All docents will be required to complete a 3-month training course led by Bronx Zoo professionals to familiarize them with the zoo and its animal residents and to learn how to educate zoo-goers about exhibits and animal conservation.  The training course will begin on February 27th.

 

Applicants must be at least 18 years old and should be prepared to commit to a minimum of two years of service. Weekend docents are asked to participate on alternate weekends; weekday docents participate weekly. 



Anyone living within the tri-state area is eligible and can apply by visiting www.bronxzoo.com/help-wildlife/volunteer.aspx. The deadline to register for the informational session is January 5th.  



Media Contacts: 

Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org


The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

 

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult admission is $16, children (3-12 years old) $12, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14. Parking is $13 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit www.bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

 

If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.