Groundbreaking 
						
								for The LaMattina Wildlife Ambassador
Center
						
						
						 and the Special Care Unit of the Global Center for Wildlife
Health
				
						
								Both facilities are part of the 
								C.V. Starr Science Campus at the Bronx
Zoo
						
				
		
		
		
		


		
				Wednesday, October 6th, 10 a.m
		
		., 
		Media Arrival: 9:30 a.m.
		


		


		
				
						

				
		
		


		
				Bronx, NY – Tuesday, Oct.
5, 2010 –
		
		 The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is breaking ground on the LaMattina
Wildlife Ambassador Center and a Special Care Unit of the Global Center
for Wildlife Health – two facilities that will help WCS continue its long
tradition of connecting people to nature and ensuring exemplary care for
animals.



The LaMattina
Wildlife Ambassador Center will be a 10,000
square-foot, state-of-the-art building that will
house the zoo’s tractable animal collection. These animals are used in
education classes and tours to give course participants and special guests
personalized and intimate encounters with wildlife.  



The Special Care
Unit of the Global Center for Wildlife Health will be a technologically
advanced animal holding facility specifically designed to meet exacting
environmental needs of the animals. It will be used to initially house
and care for animal acquisitions and other animals in the collection in need of
specialized care.  Who:      
Dr. Steve Sanderson , WCS President and CEO 
John
Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs 
Dr.
Robert Cook, WCS Executive Vice President and General Director of Living
Institutions 
Jim
Breheny, WCS Sr. Vice President of Living Institutions and Bronx Zoo Director 
Susan
Chin, WCS Vice President of Planning and Design, Chief Architect 
NY
State Senator Ruth Hassell-Thompson
 NY
State Senator Jeff Klein
NY
City Council Majority Leader Joel Rivera
NY
City Councilwoman Annabel Palma
John
and Mary LaMattina What:  
Groundbreaking ceremony 
LaMattina
Wildlife Ambassador Center and
Special Care Unit of the Global Center for Wildlife Health









Where:     
WCS’s Bronx Zoo
2300
Southern Blvd, Bronx,
NY                                  
       




When:             
Wednesday, October 6, 2010, 10:00
a.m.



WCS is grateful for the generous support of those who made
these projects possible:











LaMattina Wildlife Ambassador Center
John and Mary LaMattina 
The Bodman Foundation 
New York State Senate
New York City Council
The Starr Foundation 











Special Care Unit of the Global Center for Wildlife Health 
New
York State Senate
The
Honorable Michael R. Bloomberg, Mayor of the City of New York
New
York City Council
The
Starr Foundation 



The LaMattina
Wildlife Ambassador Center and the Special Care Unit of the Global Center for
Wildlife Health are part of the C.V. Starr Science Campus, made possible through the support of
The Starr Foundation and the City of New York.



Special media note:  Members of the media who wish to attend, please RSVP
to Max Pulsinelli at mpulsinelli@wcs.org or 718-220-5182.
Media should arrive at 9:30 a.m.

Contact:
Max Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society saves wildlife and wild
places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony.  WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth.