Morris
Park, NY August, 2009- The Morris Park Community Association salutes Italian
Heritage Month with the 33rd Annual Bronx Columbus Day Parade and
Concert on Sunday, October 11, 2009 in Morris Park.  The Bronx Columbus
Day Parade Committee is honoring John F. Calvelli, Executive Vice President for
Public Affairs of the Bronx Zoo-based Wildlife Conservation Society, as the
Grand Marshal.

Tony
Signorile, Chairman of The Bronx Columbus Day Parade commented, “As
always, I look forward to this wonderful parade celebrating Italian culture,
heritage and achievement.  It brings the whole community together and has
grown so much that people come from all over the city as well as Westchester and Rockland Counties to see it.  These
are people who have lived in the Bronx and
have grown up with the Bronx Parade. 

“We
are very proud to honor John F. Calvelli this year. John is probably best
remembered as the Chief of Staff in Washington,
 DC for Congressman Eliot Engel
(D-Bronx) but his public service has spanned two decades and includes work in
the Office of then U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani and as Associate Counsel to
the New York State Assembly. His current position at the Wildlife Conservation
Society builds upon his government work. WCS, headquartered here at the Bronx
Zoo, is a global organization committed to saving wildlife and wild places.
John’s role as Executive Vice President for Public Affairs keeps him busy
but he has never forgotten his roots. He recently returned from Italy where he has spearheaded a public-private
partnership between the Italian American community and the U.S. State
Department to direct our nation’s response to the L’Aquila earthquake disaster. His years
of government and community service coupled with a deep commitment to his
Italian heritage make him a natural choice.”

The
Bronx Columbus Day Parade is celebrated in the grand tradition of New York
Parades and is the largest Columbus Day Parade in the borough as well as the
second largest in New York City and possibly, New York State.

Mr.
Signorile concluded, ”I am very excited about this year’s event, as
we have a spectacular line up in store for the parade.  It means so much
to carry on a tradition that so many Italian Immigrants in the area grew up
with.  There is also going to be an exciting concert which will be held in
Loreto Park after the parade. We are very
proud to bring this celebration of Italian pride to everyone in the
region.”Contact:  Mary Dixon, mdixon@wcs.org, 718-220-3711