Wildlife Conservation Society and Morgan Stanley Graduate First-Ever Class of “Future Leaders” From Innovative Program Providing Job Training and Opportunity 						For Underserved Youth at the Bronx Zoo				 				 Bronx, NY – June 26, 2012 – Some of the graduating participants of the Future Leaders program are joined by representatives of the Wildlife Conservation Society, Morgan Stanley, and The Pinkerton Foundation. Pictured from left to right: Laurie Dien, The Pinkerton Foundation; Andrew Moultrie, Future Leaders graduate; Alexandria Hamilton, Future Leaders graduate; Herman D. Smith, WCS Vice President of Human Resources; Jenny Correa, The Pinkerton Foundation; Susan Chin, WCS Vice President of Planning and Design and Chief Architect; James Michie, Future Leaders graduate; Audrey Choi, WCS Trustee and Morgan Stanley Managing Director; John Calvelli, WCS Executive Vice President of Public Affairs; Chelsea Banks, Future Leaders graduate.
 
 The Future Leaders program was launched by the Wildlife Conservation Society in partnership with Morgan Stanley, which has served as the sole funder for the first two years of the program, including its pilot phase and launch. The two-year program offers meaningful career options for young adults who have been identified as not on track to graduate high school or earn a General Educational Development (GED) certificate. The Pinkerton Foundation has recently joined as an additional supporter.
 
 The purpose of Future Leaders is to provide opportunities to young men and women in underserved communities by teaching basic skills needed to increase employability and improve high school graduation and college matriculation rates among participants. The program integrates employment, training, contextual workplace learning, career mentoring, exposure to a global non-profit organization, and family engagement. It provides job-skills training to youth from some of New York City's most underserved communities by drawing on the decades of experience WCS has working with young adults as seasonal employees in its four zoos and aquarium. 
 
 Community partners include FEGS Health and Human Services System, Urban Assembly School for Wildlife Conservation, Grace Dodge Career & Technical High School, Good Shepherd Services, Wildcat Service Corporation, a division of Fedcap Rehabilitation Services and International YMCA.
 
 About the Wildlife Conservation Society
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth. Visit www.wcs.org.
  
 About Morgan Stanley
 Morgan Stanley (NYSE: MS) is a leading global financial services firm providing a wide range of investment banking, securities, investment management and wealth management services. The Firm's employees serve clients worldwide including corporations, governments, institutions and individuals from more than 1,300 offices in 43 countries. Since 2006, Morgan Stanley has executed more than $5 billion in loans and investments to strengthen underserved communities. For further information about Morgan Stanley, please visit www.morganstanley.com.