“Fish Tales Extravaganza” Presented by PepsiEvery weekend in June will be filled with family-friendly entertainmentHeadliners the weekend of June 12 & 13 include Courtney DiGiovanni from Disney, Alice Farley Dance Theater, and Author Edel RodriguezLive music, interactive attractions, author appearances and readings, crafts, and more
Connect to the wonderful world of marine life at “Fish Tales Extravaganza”

 


Brooklyn, NY – June 9, 2010 – Swim into beach season with the month-long Fish Tales Extravaganza at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s (WCS) New York Aquarium every weekend in June. 


Summer will be a celebration of children’s books this year at the WCS New York Aquarium. Visitors will be treated with a line-up of special events and performances. 

Aquarium visitors can give new meaning to the phrase “dive into a book” as WCS’s New York Aquarium brings everyone's favorite marine animal books to life.  Select weekends will include the chance to meet celebrity authors at special readings and book signings by such authors as Seymour Simon, Edel Rodriguez, and Susan Ring on the Explore the Shore Plaza. 


The Fish Tales Extravaganza will bring a full schedule of live family entertainment to WCS’s New York Aquarium.  Weekends include an amazing array of top-rated children's entertainment. Don’t miss the Alice Farley Dance Theater, a theatrical performance of One Fish, Two Fish by Dr. Suess by Manhattan Children’s Theater in celebration of World Ocean’s Day, a special reading of The Little Mermaid in celebration of the Coney Island Mermaid Parade, Disney’s Pixar Pictures featuring a reading of Finding Nemo, Denisha and her puppets from the Sprout Channel, and many more on the Explore the Shore Plaza. Children will also be able to make their own “Fish Tale” book adventure each weekend in the Pavilion Tent from 11am to 4 pm each weekend. After your visit, join in the new exciting happenings in Coney Island and the Aquarium is part of it all, visit ConeyIslandFunGuide.com for more information.


Fish Tales Extravaganza

June 12 & 13 line-up


Saturday, June 12 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Reading and giveaways
11am, 1pm, 3pm


Finding Nemo, (Disney) - read by Courtney DiGiovanni from Disney, – This Disney*Pixar celebration at the aquarium will include three readings of Finding Nemo and Toy Story. There will also be tons of handouts for aquarium visitors, including Finding Nemo toys, activity sheets, posters, and a chance to win tickets to the advance screening of Toy Story 3. 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Alice Farley Dance Theater - Story and Musical Performance (performing The Girl from the Sea, an original story with music and dance)

12:15pm, 2:30pm

You’ll see the mysterious creatures of the sea come alive through fantastic sculptural puppets, circus arts and dance. In a story written by Alice and Tuli Farley, you follow a young girl’s adventures as she travels from sea to river to the shores of the city. Haunting music by Peter Garland together with texts from Walt Whitman and St. Jean Perse make real the magical dreams of the sea.


Alice Farley Dance Theater – This award winning company specializes in creating imaginary landscapes for public spaces and has performed throughout the world (Shanghai, Bangkok, Aruba Dance Festival, Quebec Festival D’Ete, Smithsonian, Andy Warhol and Whitney Museums.) The River to River Festival will present their production, HellGate Love Letter in Manhattan this July.

Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts, 11am to 4pm

Sunday, June 13 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Author appearance and reading

11am, 1pm, 3pm


Sergio Makes a Splash, read by author Edel Rodriguez – (Hachette), - Sergio is a penguin. He loves fish, soccer, and water. He loves drinking water, bathing in water, spraying water, just about anything with water. But he has one big problem; he can’t swim. So when his class takes a field trip to the ocean, Sergio must decide whether he should face his fear or avoid something he loves. 


Edel Rodriguez was born in Havana, Cuba. He left for America on a boat with his parents and sister when he was 8 years old. His drawings and illustrations have appeared in four picture books, including Float Like a Butterfly and Oye, Celia!, on stamps for the U.S. Postal Service, The New Yorker, and posters for Broadway shows. Edel has also been an art director at TIME Magazine for over a decade. His first book with Little, Brown was Sergio Makes a Splash. 

Explore the Shore Plaza – Musical performance

12:15pm, 2:30pm


Alice Farley Dance Theater (description above)
Pavilion Tent – Arts & Crafts, 11am to 4pm
Contact:  Fran Hackett: 718-265-3428, 718-399-7339; fhackett@wcs.org

The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.

Wildlife Conservation Society New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $13.00 for adults, $9.00 for children ages 3-12 and $10.00 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at http://www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn’s most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.