Pronghorn antelope are
the second-fasted land animal in the worldDownload video of the
pronghorn: https://rcpt.yousendit.com/1156446089/8b11ad11b715de7fd5ee62bd0c9a6b2b









Flushing, N.Y- June 27, 2011 - The
Wildlife Conservation Society’s
Queens Zoo is happy to announce the birth of four pronghorn antelope fawns born
at the zoo. 



The
pronghorn antelope is the lone member of the family Antilocapridae. They are
true American natives that do not occur anywhere else in the world and are the
second-fastest land animal in the world – second only to the cheetah. 



The
four fawns were born to two different mothers a week apart, one delivering two
females and the other having a male and a female. Each tiny fawn has a coat of
beautiful soft-brown fur and enormous dark-brown eyes. They are already starting
to run and prance on their signature long legs which give the species its
incredible speed. 





Two
of the babies can be seen on the zoo’s farm. Zoo-goers can watch as zookeepers
bottle-feed a nutrient-rich formula to these young animals several times a day.
The two younger fawns remain in the pronghorn exhibit on the wild side of the
zoo.   




The
new fawns bring the zoo’s pronghorn herd up to eight. A species known for
taking long trips in the wild, adult pronghorns at the zoo spend much of their
time running through their large, open exhibit space. The exhibit is a naturalistic
design resembling their native North American plains. Pronghorns are second
only to Arctic caribou for long distance migration in the Western Hemisphere. 


The pronghorns
live alongside the zoo’s bison herd –
two species that share the same landscape in nature, making this exhibit an
authentic experience for both the animals and visitors.



In the wild, pronghorn populations are threatened by new
roads, fences, development, and resource extraction activities that are
increasingly encroaching upon, and restricting, access to suitable habitat.
WCS’s North America Program scientists are currently in the field tracking the
migration of pronghorn along corridors, including Wyoming’s Path of the
Pronghorn. This research will provide the information needed to understand and
protect these animals and enable them to continue to wander over great open
spaces. 

Video Credit: Luke Groskin © WCS





Contact:
Barbara
Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Max
Pulsinelli – 718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve
Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org


 



The Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission
is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for
children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm
weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through
April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona
Park in Queens. For further
information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.



The Wildlife
Conservation Society saves wildlife
and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation,
education and the management of the world's largest system of urban wildlife
parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change
attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in
harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the
integrity of life on Earth. www.wcs.org
Special Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers
to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife
and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation