Entire gibbon family is on exhibit in JungleWorld
		
				
						

				
		
		
				White-cheeked gibbons are a critically endangered species
		
		
				
						

				
		
		
				B-roll video available here: http://youtu.be/mY1yfTRofv8   Bronx, NY – Jan. 16, 2013 – A white-cheeked gibbon (Nomascus leucogenys) pair watches over their new baby as they hang from the trees in JungleWorld at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo.    This is the first gibbon born at the Bronx Zoo since 2000. The infant was born to mother, Christine (or “Kicks”), and father, Milton. For 15-year-old Milton, this is his first offspring. Thirty-five-year-old Kicks is an experienced mother and this is her 11th baby.    The Bronx Zoo has a successful history breeding gibbons as part of the Species Survival Plan, a cooperative breeding program designed to enhance the genetic viability of animal populations in zoos accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums.    Adult gibbon females are a buff color with a black crown while males are black white light-colored cheeks. All newborns are born with a buff coat that turns black over their first two years. Once they reach sexual maturity, males remain black and females change back to their lighter color. Keepers have not yet determined the gender of the infant.    Kicks, Milton and their new baby live in JungleWorld, a spectacular indoor Asian rainforest habitat that features several multi-species exhibits. The naturalistic habitats create a total immersion experience for guests and are home to animals found in the jungles of Asia including the white-cheeked gibbons, ebony and silvery langurs, Malay tapirs, Asian small-clawed otters, as well as many different species of reptiles, birds, and fish.    White-cheeked gibbons are a critically endangered species native to parts of Vietnam, Lao PDR, and China. The species is threatened by deforestation and hunting. The Wildlife Conservation Society works throughout Asia and in the white-cheeked gibbon’s native range to save wildlife and wild places.   The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.   Contact:  Max Pulsinelli (718) 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org  Steve Fairchild (718) 220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org