Baby Patagonian cavies; mini Nubian goat kids; new Demoiselle cranes delight visitors of all ages						
										 New York, NY – Sept. 6, 2012 – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo today announced new additions to the Tisch Children’s Zoo – two baby Patagonian cavies; two mini Nubian goat kids; and three Demoiselle cranes.   Patagonian cavies are rodents native to South America. The two new babies were born to mother Mara and father Max the last week of August. Though they look like rabbits, cavies are rodents whose closest relatives are guinea pigs. They are found on the Patagonian steppes of Argentina and other areas of South America. Cavies are the world’s fourth largest rodent, reaching about 18 inches in height.    Two mini Nubian goat kids were born at the zoo two weeks ago and are already delighting children and families in the children’s zoo. Mini Nubian goats are a cross between Nigerian dwarf and full-sized Nubian goats. They have long floppy ears and coats that can be many different colors. Mini Nubian goats have playful personalities and calm demeanors that make them an instant favorite among zoo visitors of all ages.   Finally, three beautiful male Demoiselle cranes have joined the other animals in the Tisch Children’s Zoo. Demoiselle cranes are a Eurasian species found in more than 47 countries worldwide. It is the smallest and second most abundant crane in the world.    The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Central Park Zoo - Open every day of the year. Admission is $12 for adults, $9 for senior citizens, $7 for children 3 to 12, and free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. Tickets are sold until one half-hour before closing. The zoo is located at Fifth Avenue and 64th Street. For further information, please call 212-439-6500 or visit www.centralparkzoo.com.    The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.Contact:Max Pulsinelli (718) 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org Steve Fairchild (718) 220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org