Prepare to toe tap right into adventure with the Happy Feet 4-D Experience, opening March 5, 2011   Brooklyn, N.Y. - (March 1, 2011) –On March 5, 2011, the Happy Feet 4-D Experience will open at the Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium.   This 15-minute movie is based on George Miller’s Academy Award®-winning film Happy Feet, from Warner Bros. Pictures and Village Roadshow Pictures. Combining the excitement of digital 3-D projection with 4-D multi-sensory effects, the Happy Feet 4-D Experience brings a young penguin’s adventure to life, including snow, wind, bubbles, scents and more.  In this unforgettable 4-D adventure, aquarium visitors will be transported into the icy Antarctic world where they will meet Mumble, a heartwarming, tap-dancing penguin. Initially an outcast, Mumble soon realizes that his dancing talent isn’t a burden but a gift to be treasured—and that his dancing feet may ultimately save his endangered colony.  Featuring the voices of Elijah Wood, Robin Williams, Hugh Jackman and Nicole Kidman, the Happy Feet 4-D Experience is an immersive event for the whole family to enjoy. Combine your 4-D Theater adventure with a trip inside WCS’s New York Aquarium to visit with marine animals including black-footed penguins at the Sea Cliffs exhibit. Tickets to the 4-D Theater are included with Total Experience Tickets: $17 for adults, $13 for children aged 3-12, and $14 for seniors age 65 and over. Theater-only tickets are also available for $6 per person. Total Experience tickets can be purchased on-site or online at www.nyaquarium.com. 
 Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Adult General Admission is $13, children (3-12 years old) $9, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $10. Parking is $13. To plan your trip, visit www.nyaquarium.com or call 718-367-1010.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   About SimEx-Iwerks SimEx-Iwerks is the leading innovator of immersive 3-D and 4-D Attractions and the exclusive distributor of the industry’s best selling film titles. The company supports over 150 family-friendly attractions in more than 30 countries. Our attractions entertain and educate over 100 million people every year— bringing a whole new dimension to the guest experience.   About Warner Bros. Consumer Products Warner Bros. Consumer Products, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company, is one of the leading licensing and retail merchandising organizations in the world.   HAPPY FEET and all related characters and elements are trademarks of and © Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.