Even though school’s out, there is still much to learn at the Queens Zoo    
Saturday, Feb. 19 to Sunday, Feb. 27, 12 to 4 p.m.   Flushing, N.Y. – The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo is offering extended winter hours at the zoo’s interactive Discovery Center so that families can take a break from the cold and learn about wildlife during winter break.   Although school may be out of session, opportunities to learn about wildlife continue at WCS’s Queens Zoo. The Discovery Center will stay open every day, Saturday, Feb. 19 to Sunday, Feb. 27 from 12 to 4 p.m.    Kids can participate in a variety of animal-themed activities, including live animal demos, arts and crafts, games, and reading about their favorite animals from the zoo library. On weekends, puppet shows and other fun activities are planned.    Outside the Discovery Center there are plenty of animals to see, including playful Andean bears, graceful pronghorn, majestic American bison, and many more. For more information about the zoo or Discovery Center, visit www.queenszoo.com.     Contact:
Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild – 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.org The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Queens Zoo – Open every day of the year. Admission is $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10am to 5pm weekdays, and 10am – 5:30pm weekends, April through October, and 10am – 4:30pm daily, November through April. The Queens Zoo is located at 53-51 111th Street in Flushing Meadow’s Corona Park in Queens. For further information, call 718-271-1500 or visit www.queenszoo.com.   The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.   If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to: www.wcs.org/donation.