Saturday & Sunday, Oct. 13 -14  												Brooklyn, N.Y. – Oct. 12, 2012- The Wildlife Conservation Society’s New York Aquarium is hosting a full line-up of educational activities to celebrate African Penguin Awareness Weekend on Saturday and Sunday, Oct. 13 and 14. The goal of the weekend is to help raise awareness about the African black-footed penguin, an endangered species native to the southern tip of Africa. 
 
 Activities include:
  
 Touch Station – Visitors will see and feel penguin bio-fact materials including real feathers and eggs. Education docents will be available to teach visitors about these flightless sea birds. 
 
 Games and Crafts – Children will have opportunities to make their own penguin bookmarks and participate in fun penguin-themed games. 
 
 Storytelling – Children will listen to exciting stories about penguins. Adults are invited to gather around, too. 
 
 Visitors are encouraged to visit Anna, the aquarium’s newest addition to the African black-footed penguin colony in Sea Cliffs. Having arrived earlier this year, Anna was the first penguin chick to hatch at the aquarium in 15 years. 
 
 WCS is working in the field to help save penguins. In Latin America, WCS works to safeguard several species of penguin in coastal Argentina and Chile, and has helped establish marine protected areas in both countries.
 
 More information about African Penguin Awareness Week can be found at www.nyaquarium.com. Wildlife Conservation Society's New York Aquarium opens every day of the year at 10am, and closing times vary seasonally. Admission is $14.95 for adults, $10.95 for children ages 3-12 and $11.95 for senior citizens (65 and older); children under 3 years of age are admitted free. Fridays after 3pm, admission is by suggested donation. The Aquarium is located on Surf Avenue at West 8th Street in Coney Island. For directions, information on public events and programs, and other Aquarium information, call 718-265-FISH or visit our web site at www.nyaquarium.com. Now is the perfect time to visit and show support for the New York Aquarium, Brooklyn's most heavily attended attraction and a beloved part of the City of New York.
  
 The Wildlife Conservation Society saves wildlife and wild places worldwide. We do so through science, global conservation, education and the management of the world’s largest system of urban wildlife parks, led by the flagship Bronx Zoo. Together these activities change attitudes towards nature and help people imagine wildlife and humans living in harmony. WCS is committed to this mission because it is essential to the integrity of life on Earth.CONTACT: 
 Barbara Russo – 718-265-3428; brusso@wcs.org
 Max Pulsinelli – 718- 220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org