Courses delivered by WCS and Project Dragonfly, “Advanced Inquiry Program” is housed at Miami University (OH)

Offerings include Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) in the Biological Sciences and Master of Arts (MA)  in Biology

Applications accepted until Feb. 28 for enrollment in summer 2014

More information at: www.wcs.org/AIP

New York – Dec. 16, 2013 – The Wildlife Conservation Society and Project Dragonfly at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, are partnering to bring a groundbreaking new master's degree program to the New York metropolitan area. 

The Advanced Inquiry Program (AIP) is an inquiry-driven learning experience allowing participants to take classes in person from WCS faculty at the Bronx Zoo and other WCS facilities and in web-based learning communities from Miami University’s Project Dragonfly. 

Degree offerings include a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) in the Biological Sciences and a Master of Arts (MA) in Biology. Some of the courses offered include, Foundations of Inquiry, Environmental Stewardship in My Community, Ecosystems of the Northeast, Zoo Expeditions, and Global Biomes. AIP master's candidates may also choose to integrate a professional development experience abroad for credit by choosing from Earth Expeditions field courses in Africa, Asia, Australia, or the Americas. 

“AIP offers an advanced approach to exploring some of the most pressing conservation issues of our time,” said Don Lisowy, Director of Education, WCS Zoos and Aquarium.   “The program allows students the chance to use our zoos and aquarium as their campus; creating meaningful learning experiences they can take back to their communities. We’re delighted to be partnering with Project Dragonfly on this cutting-edge program.”

The AIP is based on the principle that education should extend beyond the classroom, and that students should make a difference as a basic function of education itself. AIP Master's students practice the skills of investigation, critical reflection, leadership, and collaboration required to effectively address the vital issues of our time.

Project Dragonfly reaches millions of people each year through inquiry-driven learning media, public exhibits, and graduate programs worldwide. AIP graduate students join a growing alliance of education, environmental, and community leaders. The AIP is a one-of-a-kind graduate degree co-delivered by major community institutions committed to local, national, and global change. 

Project Dragonfly is located in the Department of Biology at Miami University, a state university in Oxford, Ohio, established in 1809. Miami, listed as one of the eight original Public Ivies, has a long and distinguished record of excellence in research and teaching in science and education.

Applications are being accepted until Feb. 28 for enrollment in summer 2014. Enrollment is open to applicants who hold a bachelor’s degree – regardless of academic major or profession.  

For more information and to see the full line-up of WCS’s educational offerings, visit www.wcs.org. 

CONTACT:
Max Pulsinelli:  718-220-5182; mpulsinelli@wcs.org
Steve Fairchild: 718-220-5189; sfairchild@wcs.orgThe Wildlife Conservation Society’s Bronx Zoo is open daily from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, 5:30 p.m. weekends from April to October; 10:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m November to March. Adult admission is $16.95, children (3-12 years old) $11.95, children under 3 are free, seniors (65+) are $14.95. Parking is $14 for cars and $16 for buses. The Bronx Zoo is conveniently located off the Bronx River Parkway at Exit 6; by train via the #2 or #5 or by bus via the #9, #12, #19, #22, MetroNorth, or BxM11 Express Bus service (from Manhattan that stops just outside the gate.) To plan your trip, visit bronxzoo.com or call 718-367-1010.

The Wildlife Conservation Society’s Prospect Park Zoo – $8 for adults, $6 for seniors 65 and older, $5 for kids 3-12, free for children under 3. Zoo hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. weekdays, and to 5:30 P.M. on weekends and holidays, April through October. 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. November through March. The Prospect Park Zoo is located at 450 Flatbush Avenue in Prospect Park, Brooklyn. For further information, call 718-399-7339 or visit www.prospectparkzoo.com.

 Note to the Media: If you would like to guide your readers or viewers to a Web link where they can make donations in support of helping save wildlife and wild places, please direct them to www.wcs.org.