amur_tiger_stamp.1_330-300x300





					
					
						WASHINGTON, D.C. (March 7, 2017) – House and Senate conservation champions reintroduced bipartisan legislation to extend for four more years the enormously popular Save Vanishing Species postage stamp, also known as the Tiger Stamp, which raises funds for conservation. The House legislation also calls for the addition of a new African elephant stamp. The Tiger Stamp costs 60 cents, 11 cents more than a regular first-class stamp. The extra 11 cents from the sale of every stamp goes directly to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Multinational Species Conservation Funds (MSCF), which support conservation programs to save African and Asian elephants, great apes, rhinos, tigers and marine turtles. Since the stamp first went on sale in 2011, more than 35,600,000 have been sold, raising at least $3.76 million for international conservation efforts at no cost to US taxpayers.  The Save Vanishing Species stamp has been hailed as a cost-effective way to raise funds for international conservation at no taxpayer expense and to involve the American public in saving wildlife and wild places. The legislation to extend the printing of the stamp for four more years was championed by Sen. Rob Portman (R-OH), Sen. Tom Udall (D-NM), Rep. Dan Donovan (R-NY), and Rep. William Lacy Clay (D-MO). The Senate bill is S.480 and the House bill is H.R.1247. “The Save Vanishing Species stamp makes the act of conserving wildlife as easy as mailing a letter,” said John Calvelli, Wildlife Conservation Society’s Executive Vice President of Public Affairs. “Over the past six years, we’ve seen that this is a win-win as we have increased the financial support for conserving some of our most iconic, endangered species and engaged everyday Americans in the cause. I thank our Congressional champions for continuing this bipartisan, fiscally responsible way to help wildlife.” About the MSCF Semipostal Stamp Under the law, the price of semipostal stamps marginally exceeds the cost of first class postage. The U.S. Postal Service retains the full first class value of the stamp, with the additional funding raised being transferred to the MSCF, where it has played a critical role in saving wild populations of the world’s most iconic species by controlling poaching, reducing human-wildlife conflict, and protecting essential habitat. Since 1989, the Multinational Species Conservation Fund has awarded over 2,300 grants in 54 countries through all its grant programs for international wildlife conservation, targeting key species and regions in coordination with non- governmental organizations, government and community leaders, and private businesses to ensure the protection of some of the world’s most endangered and charismatic animals. The program has consistently proven to be highly efficient, as low administrative costs ensure that 97% of appropriated funds are distributed through grants. Additionally, MSCF investments consistently leverage 2-3 times as much from partner governments, local NGOs, international conservation organizations and private businesses. MSCF enjoys the support of a broad coalition including conservation organizations, zoos, aquariums, circuses, sportsmen, veterinarians and animal rights groups. In its first three years of sales, the Tiger Stamp has funded 61 projects in 31 countries. The money raised by the stamp was matched by almost $11 million in additional leveraged funds. These projects include:  Training and deploying dogs to track and capture elephant poachers in Virunga National Park, the oldest national park in Africa and one that has been hard hit by wildlife traffickers in recent years. Reintroduction of endangered orangutans into the landscape on the island of Borneo in Indonesia with the support of local communities and stakeholders. Training and equipping special operations teams to protect tigers in India, and working with local NGOs and communities to monitor the remaining tiger populations. Find more information about the Save Vanishing Species stamp at: www.tigerstamp.com                                                                      ###