Important wildlife convictions & arrest of a tiger poacher

WPSI

June 11, 2014 



In the last four days there have been two important convictions in
wildlife cases in Uttarakhand - both cases were WPSI assisted seizures
- and one important arrest.

The first case involved the seizure
of a tiger skin and a full tiger skeleton, one otter skin, a turtle
carapace and a steel trap on 30 January 2009 in Fatehpur Range of
Ramnagar Forest Division, which adjoins Corbett Tiger Reserve in the
nothern state of Uttarakhand. The tiger was killed by a gang of
professional poachers to fulfill an order from trader Narayan Chand,
the younger brother of Sansar Chand, who has earlier been convicted in
a Sariska poaching case. The Forest Department, who carried out the
seizure and arrest, registered cases against ten people, including
Narayan. During the trial, one of the accused died, and the case
against him was dropped. One other accused absconded after getting
bail, and the case against him is still pending. The rest of the eight
accused men were convicted by the court of the Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate in Haldwani, Ms Deepali Sharma, on 7 June 2014.
They were each sentenced to a maximum period of seven years
imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 20,000.

The second case dates
back to 18 December 2011 when three leopard skins and two bear gall
bladders of a Himalayan black bear were seized by the Special
Operations Group of the Uttarakhand Police on 18 December 2011. Three
people were arrested with the assistance of WPSI. The trial was
concluded on 10 June 2014 in the court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate
in Pithoragarh, Ms Pratibha Tiwari. All three men were convicted and
the court sentenced them to three years imprisonment and a fine of Rs.
40,000 each.

In addition, a notorious tiger criminal called
Bhima Bawaria was arrested on 9 June 2014 by an enforcement team that
included the Landsdowne Forest Division and officers from the Wildlife
Crime Control Bureau. Bhima has been convicted in one case and is
absconding from a number of other important tiger poaching cases. He
was produced before the court in Kotdwar and remanded to 14 days
judicial custody.