The science of saving tigers

THE HINDU
OPINION » EDITORIAL
January 23, 2015


India
is unique in having a significant number of tigers in the wild, in
spite of growing population and resource extraction pressures on their
habitat. The latest estimate of tigers in various landscapes published
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests claims an appreciable rise
in numbers of the big cat. That there could be as many as 2,226 tigers
in the country — up from 1,706 four years ago — in nature reserves
ranging from the hills in the Northeast to central Indian forests and
the Western Ghats, besides the mangrove-rich Sundarbans delta, gives
India a special place on the global conservation map. Clearly, some
States deserve credit for strengthening the protection of wild tigers
since the notorious wipeout in Sariska a decade ago. Such conservation
measures, notably the extension of protected area boundaries, must
continue. Yet, as credentialed scientists are pointing out, the numbers
available from the latest count may merely indicate the presence of
tigers in a given area, rather than serve as the conclusions of a
definitive census. What they highlight is the need to improve those
aspects of the ecology that lead to a rise in numbers — voluntary
relocation of forest-dwellers from core forests, a severe crackdown on
the hunting of prey animals, improved patrols against poaching,
safeguards against harmful land-use changes and constant monitoring
using scientific methods.

The science of conserving tigers,
arguably the most charismatic animals on the planet, is increasingly
focussed on saving ‘source populations’ of the cat. These are defined
in the literature as sites where more than 25 breeding females can be
hosted, in turn embedded in a larger landscape that can potentially
have more than 50 female tigers and which enjoy protection. By some
accounts, 70 per cent of the world’s tigers are to be found in such
sites; in India, 90 per cent of the population is part of 30 or 40
major source populations.

read
more