Let's not play god to wild tigers
 

HINDUSTAN TIMES
February 19, 2014
Valmik Thapar

From
2006-2007 till today there has been a sharp increase in the human
interference with wild tigers especially by forest managers. At the
same time there has been a link with a corresponding increase in
man-tiger conflict, attacks on man and livestock and tigers both old
and young leaving the precincts of forests in search of food. We need
to carefully examine what is causing trauma and stress in wild tigers.

Forest
officers have indulged in excessive artificial baiting of wild tigers
either to increase their longevity, for watching and photographing
them, to aid their natural food supply in case of freshly introduced
tigers as done in Sariska, Panna and Nagzira, etc, artificial feeding
of orphaned cubs till adulthood and providing food to injured and
slightly injured tigers to aid recovery. Tens of lakhs of rupees have
been spent on live and dead bait. It is difficult to know under which
head of expenditure this has been done — science and research perhaps
even though no scientific reasoning is followed.

Tranquiliser
guns seem to have become a fashion and they are used to sedate slightly
injured or sick tigers and treat them with antibiotics before releasing
them. Many tigers have been tranquilised and relocated to new areas as
done in Ranthambhore, Panna, Sariska, Kanha, Pench, Bandhavgarh,
Nagzira, and several other locations. I believe at least 100-130 wild
tigers have been manhandled and subjected to traumas in the last eight
years.

The impact of all of this on the natural society of
tigers has been severe as dominant males and breeding females have
suddenly been lifted out and this has resulted in possible conflict
among tigers, male tigers and cubs and even among tigresses. Sadly the
negative impacts have not been addressed.

The scars of this kind
of severe interference are not only seen at the source level but also
in the new home. Relocated tigers are followed, chased, as attempts are
made by officials to confine them to specific forest areas and prevent
them from going where they want. In this exercise hundreds of people
are employed to force freshly released tigers to change direction by
using firecrackers, lighting fires, sounding drums, shouting and
behaving in much the same way as the hunters of the past did. Forest
managers have gone to the extent of using water tankers to pour water
to what they considered were thirsty tigers! The damage and disturbance
done to the tigers’ world in the last eight years is shocking.

read more