Tiger Bones and Claws Seized in Uttarakhand
 

17 January 2012

New
Delhi: The Special Operations Group (Kumaon Forest Range) assisted by
the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), seized 9 kg of tiger
bones, 18 tiger claws, three canines, and tiger's whiskers from the
Kotabagh area near Ramnagar in Uttarakhand on 11th January.

One
person was arrested and two kg of leopard bone was also later seized
from the accused during the joint operation led by Mr. Paramjit Singh,
Chief Conservator of Forests (Kumaon Range).

Earlier, on 9
January, seven steel jaw traps used for trapping leopards and other
wild animals were also seized from a village in Dauli Range near
Haldwani.

WPSI’s wildlife crime database has recorded the
poaching and seizure of the body parts of 43 tigers and 365 leopards in
the last two years. The state of Uttarakhand has emerged as a hotbed of
this wildlife crime activity and in 2011 accounted for more than 30% of
all tiger and leopard deaths recorded from across the country.

Both
Tigers and Leopards are listed in Schedule I of Wildlife Protection
Act. Any crime involving these species is punishable with imprisonment
for a term between three and seven years and a fine not less than Rs.
10,000. The poaching of tigers and leopards occurs primarily for their
body parts, skin and bones. The demand for their body parts exists
mainly outside the country and is a major threat to these species.

Fortunately,
Uttarakhand is also making a concerted effort to control wildlife crime
and in the past two weeks there have been some important convictions
under the Wild Life (Protection) Act.

On 4th January the
Judicial Magistrate of Ramnagar handed down a conviction of three years
rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000 to notorious tiger
poacher Dariya Bawaria. Dariya was arrested in 2008 when he was caught
with a steel tiger trap by the Corbett Tiger Reserve staff.

Similarly,
on 12th January the Judicial Magistrate of Purola in Uttarkashi, handed
out a punishment of three years rigorous imprisonment and Rs. 1,500
fine each to three men who had been found in possession of 20 ghoral,
barking deer and otter skins were in 2010. The seizure took place
during a joint operation by the Upper Yamuna Division forest staff and
WPSI on 4 June 2010. The three accused were also given six months
imprisonment and Rs. 500 fine each under Section 26 of the Forest Act.