Tiger corridors to face increased threat with proposed FRA dilution


Monday, 16 March 2015 | Agency: dna webdesk

The
ministry’s decision to ease forest clearances and to exempt linear
projects such as highways and railway lines from the ambit of forest
clearances will impact critical tiger habitats connecting major tiger
reserves.

With the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change (MoEF&CC) ready with a draft notification that will allow
forest clearance for infrastructure projects without consent from gram
sabhas of tribals, top-ranking officials from the National Tiger
Conservation Authority (NTCA) said that a rigorous regulatory process
has to be in place to curb fragmentation of tiger habitats outside
protected areas.

The ministry’s decision to ease forest
clearances and to exempt linear projects such as highways and railway
lines from the ambit of forest clearances will impact critical tiger
habitats connecting major tiger reserves. During the release of the
latest tiger population estimation report, NTCA had made it clear that
conservation of these critical habitat linkages will be at the heart of
sustaining the 30% rise in tiger population, that currently stands at
2,226.

“We cannot object directly to these projects unless our
expert opinion is sought by the forest advisory committees. But there
has to be a strong regulatory process that will see to it that projects
do not disturb key tiger habitats connecting protected areas,” a
top-ranking NTCA official told dna on the condition of anonymity. The
official went on to add, “Having said that, these habitats cannot
solely exist for movement of animals and hence projects cannot be
stopped on that basis.” NTCA and Wildlife Institute of India have
broadly identified the Shivalik hills and Gangetic plain landscape,
central India landscape and eastern ghats, Western Ghats landscape
complex, Sundarbans, north-east hills and Brahmaputra flood plains as
the major tiger habitats that comprise of several more corridors.
“Conservation efforts cannot be restricted only to protected areas as
tigersmove around a large landscape. For the tiger population to
sustain, conservation of key corridors has to be an imperative,” the
NTCA official added. 




read
more