Letter
to President Obama : Why Tigers Belong on the U.S.-China
Agenda 





20th September 2015

President Barack Obama

The White House

1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.

Washington, DC 20500

USA



Re: Why tigers belong on the U.S.-China agenda



Dear President Obama,



We, the undersigned, write to respectfully ask you to raise the issue
of tiger trade with  President Xi Jinping during his visit to
the United States in September 2015.



We congratulate you on your leadership in the global fight against the
poaching and  trafficking crisis that is sweeping across
Africa, threatening the survival of an estimated 420,000 elephants and
25,000 rhinos. Given that there are fewer than 3,200 wild tigers
remaining across Asia, we appeal to you to ensure that they too
urgently receive the highest levels of political and financial
investment to end the demand that is making them worth more dead than
alive. 



One of the most critical threats to the survival of wild tigers is
trade in their meat, skin and bones to satisfy demand driven by wealth,
rather than health − for high-status food, drink, home décor and even
investment assets. This demand is fuelled by a marked increase in tiger
farms in China, Laos, Vietnam and Thailand, where tigers are
intensively bred for trade in their parts and products. China alone
claims to house more than 5,000 tigers on farms.



China is the main consumer market for tiger parts and products, and
China’s State Forestry Administration has grown demand by supporting
the expansion of tiger farms, allowing legal trade in skins from farmed
tigers and approving farm wineries that make tiger-bone wine. Those
actions have stimulated consumer interest in tiger products from all
sources, undermining law enforcement, incentivizing poaching, and
facilitating trafficking by organized criminal networks. Tiger-farm
investors continue to push hard for full legalization of trade in tiger
bones – the very trade China banned in 

1993 because it threatened the survival of wild tigers. If trade were
legalized, it would  unleash a devastating demand that could
quickly wipe out the last wild tigers, as the bones of wild tigers are
far more valuable than those from captive tigers.
In
order to ensure that tiger conservation remains a priority for the
international community and to end tiger farming and tiger trade, we
appeal to you to raise these issues with President Xi when he is your
guest in Washington.



We also request the United States to take the following steps to compel
China to take vital action:



1. Destroy all stockpiles of tiger parts and products and ensure
deceased captive-bred tigers are incinerated so their parts cannot
enter the black market;



2. Review the current certification of China under the Pelly Amendment
to the Fisherman’s Act and urge China to phase out tiger farms, as per
Decision 14.69 of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES);



3. Encourage introduction and adoption of the Big Cats and Public
Safety Act, so that the keeping and breeding of the more than 5,000
captive tigers in the United States can be phased down to include only
the small number needed by legitimate zoos and conservation breeding
programs, to set an example of best practice;



4. Ask China and Laos to address the trafficking and sale of tiger
parts and products, ivory, rhino horn and other endangered species in
and through Laos by Chinese and Laotian nationals; and



5. Encourage adoption of legislation that increases the capacity of the
United States to assist in the international effort to combat illegal
wildlife trade, ensuring that tigers are emphasized, along with
elephants, rhinos and other species.



Zero poaching of tigers can only be achieved when there is zero demand.
Therefore, we ask you to continue your leadership in tackling illegal
wildlife trade by seeking an end to tiger farming in Asia and the
keeping of thousands of unregistered captive tigers in the United
States.



We thank you for your time and consideration.



Most respectfully,



Carole Baskin, Big Cat Rescue

Adam Roberts, Born Free USA and Born Free Foundation

Debi Goenka, Conservation Action Trust

Kedar Gore, The Corbett Foundation

Sally Case, David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation

Debbie Banks, Environmental Investigation Agency

Iris Ho, Humane Society International / The Humane Society of the
United States

Sean Carnell, National Tigers For Tigers Coalition

Kishore Rithe, Satpuda Foundation

Simon Clinton, Save Wild Tigers

Harshwardhan Dhanwatey, Tiger Research and Conservation Trust

Vicky Flynn, TigerTime

Belinda Wright, Wildlife Protection Society of India

Biswajit Mohanty, Wildlife Society of Orissa
______________________________________ Read related BUSINESS STANDARD

Obama
asked to raise issue of tiger trade with China

Press Trust of India | Washington 

September 25, 2015

 



More
than a dozen leading NGO's including those from India today exhorted US
President Barack Obama to raise the issue of trade in tiger organs in
China when he meets his Chinese counterpart.



In a joint letter
to the US President, NGOs urged Obama to impress upon China the vital
need to take immediate action to protect the fewer than 3,200 wild
tigers remaining across Asia. 



"One of the most critical
threats to the survival of wild tigers is trade in their meat, skin and
bones to satisfy demand driven by wealth, rather than health - for
high-status food, drink, home decor and even investment assets," the
letter said.



"This demand is fuelled by a marked increase in
tiger farms in China, Laos, Vietnam and Thailand, where tigers are
intensively bred for trade in their parts and products. China alone
claims to house more than 5,000 tigers on farms," the NGOs said.

Read
more