51 tigers died in 2011: Report

 




THE TIMES OF INDIA
Avijit Ghosh & Vijay Pinjarkar, TNN
Dec 7, 2011


NEW
DELHI: Fifty-one tigers have died in different states of India between
January and December 5, 2011, according to statistics collated by a
prominent wildlife NGO. A tigress shot dead outside Kaziranga Park in
Assam on Monday is the latest in that list.

Figures provided by
Wildlife Protection Society of India show that 14 tigers perished in
Uttarakhand, the highest in a single state. Karnataka takes the second
place with six deaths while Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh account for
five each.

Poaching, road accident, infighting and fight with
other animals are some of the reasons for the deaths. Some tigers died
of natural causes and diseases too. A few were killed by villagers,
police and the forest department.

"Tiger poachers are still
active. On Dec 2, forest department officials recovered a tiger trap
placed by poachers in the Nagarjunasagar Srisailam tiger reserve of
Andhra Pradesh," says Tito Joseph, programme manager, WPSI.

Skins,
bones, skulls and claws of the royal big cat have also been seized in
Manipur, Orissa, Maharashtra and Uttarakhand this year.

A
tigress was found dead without claws, canines and whiskers in
Chhattisgarh's Bhoramdeo Wildlife Sanctuary on Nov 15. "A labourer
engaged in patrolling had committed the act. He has been arrested and
jailed. He confessed that he had poisoned a cow killed by the tigress.
The big cat came back for the kill and died of poisoning. He then took
out the claws and other parts of its body," Ram Prakash, principal
chief conservator of forests, Chhattisgarh told TOI over phone.

There
were three more tiger deaths in November. On Nov 3, a tigress was
accidentally electrocuted by a cable connection connected to an
electric motor pump in vihirgaon village in Maharashtra's Chandrapur
district. In another case on Nov 20, tiger died after getting trapped
in a wire set up by villagers near Tipeswar Wildlife Sanctuary,
Yavatmal, Mahrashtra.


read more