A new conservationist website hopes to make a big difference
 
Tiger, tiger online

ANUSHA PARTHASARATHY

The Hindu, June 12, 2012 

Against
a backdrop of big cat pictures, conservationist and wildlife filmmaker
Shekar Dattatri talks about Conservation India, a one-of-its-kind
non-profit and non-commercial portal. The website, with its prowling
tiger logo, was recently launched with wildlife photographer and
entrepreneur Ramki Sreenivasan.

Conservation India aims to
become a one-stop shop for anyone interested in conservation. “This
isn’t just a collection of articles on wildlife. If you’re interested
in conservation and asking yourself what you can do to help, this site
is for you,” says Shekar. “Our motto is ‘enabling conservation action’
and we focus on empowering people with knowledge.” Many people want to
help with conservation but typically, they confuse animal welfare with
conservation. Also, enthusiasts need to be sensitised to the many
wildlife laws that are in place in order to react adequately. This is
what the website seeks to do.

After two years of research and
preparation, the site went live a few months ago. “Often, people think
wildlife conservation is all about getting into a jeep and roaring off
into the jungle,” says Shekar, “but it also involves boring things like
paperwork.”

A wildlife enthusiast and photographer for many
years, Ramki was disillusioned by what he saw. “As a photographer or
tourist, you are just a mute spectator,” he says. The team realised
that the best way to get conservation practices across is to codify
best practices on a public domain. “It becomes accessible and becomes
repeatable. We opted for a website that is minimalist and to the point.”

The
website has an exhaustive array of articles, essays and interviews.
“We’re looking at experts in every domain. For example, if it’s a case
study about someone who has fought against roads running through
national parks, we will bring them on board to write about it,” says
Shekar. Contributors include Dr. Ullas Karanth, Belinda Wright and
Praveen Bhargav. “The portal will be a repository of information,” says
Shekar, with static content as well as dynamic content like news and
pictures.

more details