Revive forester-cop network: WPSI
 

TNN Sep 29, 2013, 02.18AM IST

Kolhapur:
The Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) has suggested that the
Maharashtra forest department work out a better plan of communication
between the police and forest guards in order to receive timely and
accurate information about poacher gangs in the region.

Effective
tracking of visitors to a village was earlier done through the 'police
Patil' - essentially a state revenue auditor who would keep track of
land-records, minor disputes and other information relevant to at the
village level. Each 'police Patil' would also track every visitor to a
village through a 'musafir diary' or traveller's diary and share
information on outsiders with forest officers.

"The system is
now broken; the link between forest department officials and the police
Patils has been somewhat lost over time. We have suggested that the
forest department revive this system, it will definitely curb the entry
of poachers into protected areas," said Nitin Desai, director, WPSI,
central India.

The WPSI's wildlife crime database has recorded
around 20,000 cases of poaching since its inception in 1994. These
involve over 400 species that are targeted by poachers and wildlife
traders. "Tiger poachers rarely go to the Western Ghats, since there's
a lower density of tigers in these areas than the Vidarbha region.
Forests in Kolhapur and Satara are dense and spread across hilly
terrain, making it difficult to hunt animals. Poachers from Madhya
Pradesh, especially from the Katni district, visit the area for the
wild boar, because the animal's meat is popular in the region. These
poachers from Katni are experts in traditional hunting methods," Desai
said.

Two women members of a gang from Katni were caught in the
Radhanagari Wildlife Sanctuary on September 17. A man who accompanied
the duo is on the run. Sixty-two baited explosives were recovered from
the women, of which 11 were planted inside the sanctuary, allegedly to
hunt wild animals. The women are in judicial custody. Kolhapur Forest
officials are working over information shared by the duo to nab the
suspected man.
read more