CITES Secretariat welcomes President Obama’s Executive Order on Combating Wildlife Trafficking
 
Geneva,
2 July 2013 – The Secretariat of the Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) welcomes them
Executive Order on Combating Wildlife Trafficking issued by the
President of the United States, Barack Obama, on 1 July 2013. The
Executive Order addresses both its domestic and international response
to the current surge in wildlife trafficking.

The Executive
Order establishes a Presidential Task Force on Wildlife Trafficking, to
be co-chaired by the Secretary of State, Secretary of the Interior, and
the Attorney General (Co-Chairs), or their designees, who shall report
to the President through the National Security Advisor, with certain
tasks assigned to it.

"This Executive Order sends a very
powerful message both domestically and internationally on the need to
treat wildlife crime as a serious crime on a par with narcotics and
arms trafficking. The offer of financial and technical assistance to
affected range States to tighten laws and strengthen capacity to combat
wildlife trafficking, including the targeted training of front-line
enforcement officers, is much needed" said Mr John E. Scanlon, CITES
Secretary-General.

The United States is also working with the
International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime (ICCWC) and other
interested partners to support the creation of a global network of
regional and national Wildlife Enforcement Networks to improve
communication and strengthen response actions across enforcement
agencies globally. ICCWC convened the world's Wildlife Enforcement
Networks for the first time in the margins of CITES CoP16, with the
report being released this week.

Background and key excerpts from the Executive Order

The
Executive Order builds upon the decisions and resolutions taken on
wildlife crime by APEC, the UN Conference on the Sustainable
Development, the CITES Conference of the Parties, the UN Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and the G8 Summit, as well as
the UN Secretary General's report to the Security Council on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas.

The Executive Order notes that:

"Poaching
operations have expanded beyond small-scale, opportunistic actions to
coordinated slaughter commissioned by armed and organized criminal
syndicates. The survival of protected wildlife species such as
elephants, rhinos, great apes, tigers, sharks, tuna, and turtles has
beneficial economic, social, and environmental impacts that are
important to all nations".

 
read more