Cameras capture 17 tigers outside Sunderbans reserve area

 

Krishnendu Mukherjee, TNN | Mar 20, 2012

KOLKATA:
The first ever camera trap exercise done in the South 24 Parganas
forest division has found presence of over 15 tigers. 

The
exercise, done jointly by WWF-India and the state forest department has
photo captured 8 individual tigers in the Ramganga range and 9 in the
Raidighi range. Sources said tiger presence was found in Dhulibhashani
and Chulkathi compartments in Ramganga, while Ajmalmari and Herobhanga
compartments in Raidighi range also reported good tiger density. 

It
may be noted that over 462 square kilometres in this part of the
mangrove forests will be developed as West Sunderbans Wildlife
Sanctuary. 

According to sources, the entire South 24 Parganas
forest division was divided into 4 square kilometres grid to locate
tiger pugmarks and scats. "Later, based on pugmarks and scat presence,
20 heat motion sensitive cameras were laid in the Ramganga range
covering an area of over 184 square kilometres and 21 trap camera
stations were set up in the Raidighi range covering almost 216 square
kilometres ," said sources. The exercise for Ramganga was done between
January 23 and February 21, while trap cameras were laid and taken out
in Raidighi between February 11 and March 12. 

"While 8 tigers
were found in the Ramganga range with a density of 5.24 tigers per 100
square kilometres , Raidighi has recorded presence of 9 tigers till
March 12 with a density of over 4 tigers per 100 square kilometres.
Total 44 images were captured in Raidighi," said sources, adding that
rare leopard cats, jungle cats and fishing cats too were photo
captured. 

The project will also cover Herobhanga under South
24 Parganas forest division and Sajnekhali Wildlife Sanctuary under
Sunderbans Tiger Reserve (STR). The officials of WWF-India are meeting
state forest minister Hiten Burman and senior officials in the
department today to brief them about the updated figures of the big
cats photo captured between March 12 and March 19. 


more details