Saving tigers caught in the headlights


THE HINDU
NEHA SINHA

Any decision to expand roadways must take into account the shrinking wildlife spaces.

On
April 6, a unique State Environment and Forest Ministers’ conference
took place in New Delhi, the first of its kind under the Narendra Modi
government. The Prime Minister, Ministers of State for environment and
forests and other officialsdiscussed agenda items related to the
environment, and worked towards finalising proposed changes to India’s
environmental laws. These agenda items, in the Ministry’s terms,
included clearances, ease of doing business, and development.

While
there has been a lot of rhetoric in the past few months over
‘balancing’ environment and development, the acid test for this complex
issue is still in the making. Perhaps one of the most classic trials is
unfolding in the backyard of Kanha National Park in Madhya Pradesh: the
playground for Rudyard Kipling’s man-cub Mowgli, the site for one of
India’s most impressive tiger landscapes in India, and the location for
the proposed expansion of a newer, wider, National Highway (NH). The
question is: who gets to cross the road: a truck, a tourist car, or a
tiger?

The National Highways Authority of India wants to widen
NH 7 into a four-lane highway in areas where it passes through the
Pench Tiger Reserve, and in the living corridor between the Pench and
Kanha Tiger Reserves. With sal forest cover packed with tigers and
their prey, this dense and enigmatic forest complex is one of the most
well-known in the country. It is widely reported that the Minister for
Road Transport and Highways, Nitin Gadkari, has placed tactical
pressure on the Environment Ministry to agree to NH 7’s expansion,
which would entail cutting thousands of trees on forest land, and
cutting off wild animal movement. Further, taking suo moto note of the
poor condition of the road, the Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court
ordered tree-felling for expanding and widening (not just repairing)
the highway, for which many trees have been cut. And this was done
without even requisite clearances.





read
more