Support Greenpeace campaign; say 'No' to coal mining in tiger habitat 

 

1 December 2011 

The
proposed mining of coal near Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and other
forests in central India poses a huge threat to the survival of tigers
and other wildlife. Greenpeace India is carrying on a sustained and
innovative campaign against the granting of clearances to mine coal
from these areas.

On Wednesday, 30 November 2011, Greenpeace
activists dressed as tigers blocked the gates of the building housing
the Coal Ministry in the capital New Delhi and demanded that the
forests of central India be saved from the menace of coal mining. The
activists met with the Coal Minister Mr Sriprakash Jaiswal, and handed
over a petition signed by over 112,000 people opposing the coal
ministries insistence for more forestland.
Greenpeace ‘tigers’ demonstrate outside the Coal Ministry at Shastri Bhavan, in New Delhi, 30 November 2011

Around
54% of India’s current power generating capacity is coal-based. Apart
from the fact that the sector is India’s largest generator of carbon
emissions, most coal mining sites have now been declared critically
polluted areas by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Coal is a
finite resource, and investment in coal-based energy is thought to be a
shortsighted approach towards securing the country’s energy
requirements. 

The Coal Ministry would have us believe that the
environmental clearance process is a roadblock to meeting India’s
energy requirements. The truth is exactly the opposite. Environmental
clearances for coal mines and thermal power plants have been granted at
unprecedented rates over the last four years (far in excess of the
projected requirements for the 11th Five Year Plan), and in the case of
thermal power plants, far more than the rate of actual installation.

More details on this can be found on the Greenpeace India website  and the Down to Earth website 

So
if you care about the fate of our forests and tigers, lend your voice
to the Greenpeace campaign and say ‘No’ to coal mining in the forests
of central India.