Two tigers caught in poachers' traps near Chandrapur
 
WPSI, 27 April 2012

Two
tigers were caught in steel traps set by professional tiger poachers in
a heart-rending incident that took place yesterday in Palasgaon Range
near Chandrapur in Maharashtra. One tiger died and the other has been
rescued by the Forest Department with serious injuries.

The
scene of the crime was a small pond in scrub forest, only 2.5 km from
the nearest village Gondmohadi which also has a forest chowki. The
Forest Department had been setting up camera traps there to monitor a
tigress with her two cubs. On Thursday evening the guards noticed a
young male tiger lying by the pool. It later transpired that it was
caught in a trap and it appears that it was clubbed to death by the
poachers. The guards then noticed a second tiger, presumed to be the
mother, caught in a trap on the opposite side of the bund. One of the
guards got his foot caught in a third steel trap but managed to get out
of the device by removing his shoe. The poachers had ringed the
waterhole with the tiger traps. More forest staff soon arrived but they
could do little to help. A third tiger which was lurking in the
vicinity, menacingly snarled and charged at the rescue party in the
fast fading light. 

Senior forest officers and two WPSI
personnel rushed to the spot. Finally, at 3:15 am, nearly 8 hours after
the trapped tigers were first seen, the forest officers managed to dart
the trapped tiger that was still alive. To everyone's surprise it
turned out to be a large male tiger. The tiger was badly injured; three
of the toes on its front leg had been torn off and its foot was
fractured.

WPSI is now pulling out all stops to assist the
Forest Department in its investigation to nab the culprits. Coming only
a few days before the First Stocktaking Conference to review
implementation of The Global Tiger Recovery Program in New Delhi from
15-17 May, this distressing incident illustrates that tiger poaching
continues to be a major threat to the future of wild tigers.