Central India loses four tigers, including the legendary B2

 

21 November 2011

The
male tiger "B2", who became a legend in Bandhavgarh National Park, died
yesterday after a territorial fight with another tiger some distance
away from the Park. He had not been seen in Bandhavgarh for the past
eight months. 

B2 was the son of the tigress known as "Sita"
who was one of the most photographed wild tigers in the world. B2 is
believed to be the offspring of "Charger", another celebrated male
tiger of Bandhavgarh.  At the grand old age of 14 years (he would
have completed 15 years in March 2012), B2 was rescued yesterday, on 20
November, by a team from Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve near Chouri village
in Shahdol District of Madhya Pradesh. He was found with multiple
injuries on his body and legs, apparently after a territorial fight
with another tiger. B2 died after being transported to Shahdol. A
villager was injured by a tiger in the same area on 18 November.

Central India has tragically lost four adult wild tigers in the past two and a half weeks, two at the hands of poachers.

Yesterday,
on 20 November, another four to five year old male tiger was trapped
and killed in a wire snare in Patanbori Range of Pandharkawda
Territorial Division in Yeotmal District in Maharashtra. The tiger
appears to have died in a series of wire snares that had been set up by
local poachers to kill herbivores, just 500 feet from the border of the
Tipeshwar Wildlife Sanctuary.

On 15 November, a tigress was
found dead near Jamunapani village in Bhoramdeo Wildlife Sanctuary (a
part of the Kanha Tiger Reserve landscape) in Kawardha District of
Chhattisgarh.  Poisoning is suspected to be the cause of death and
visceral samples have been sent for forensic examination. A hole was
also found on one flank and a broken rib, leading sources in the Forest
Department to believe that this could be an injury from a spear. The
tigress' canines and claws were allegedly recovered from two villagers
and three Forest Department chowkidars (temporary guards), who are now
being questioned by the Department.

On 3 November, another
tigress who is believed to be about six years old was found dead in a
farm on the banks of the Wainganga River in Saoli Range of Brahmapuri
Territorial Division in Maharashtra. The tigress had died of
electrocution after she chewed at an electric cable supplying power to
a water pump.