Illegal
Tiger Trade: Why Tigers Are Walking Gold

 




NATIONAL
GEOGRAPHIC

Cat Watch 



Posted by Sharon Guynup

February 12, 2014

Talking Tigers: Part 2 of a 12-part series



In
December 2013 at the Tadoba Tiger Reserve in India, we finally got the
word: Three confiscated steel-jawed poacher’s traps would be brought to
the Forest Department office at one o’clock, and we’d been granted
permission to film them. We grabbed our equipment and jumped in the
car. The rutted, mostly-dirt roads were so bad that it would take 45
minutes to drive some seven miles to get there.
National Geographic photographer Steve Winter and I had come to Central
India to shoot the short video above, Battling India’s Illegal Tiger
Trade, on one of the most devastating threats facing the world’s last
3,000 wild tigers: poaching.

Tigers are walking gold, worth a fortune on the black market. The
demand is huge and prices continue to skyrocket. The cats are being
slaughtered across India and their entire range, mostly for their bones
and their magnificent pelts. (Related: “‘Cyberpoaching’ Feared as New
Threat to Rare Wildlife“)

The bones are smuggled almost exclusively to China, used in tiger bone
wine—a pricey traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) tonic thought to
impart the tiger’s great strength and vigor. But almost every part of
the tiger is valued in TCM. Most of the skins end up in China, too,
used for high-end tiger skin furniture and other luxury décor.
It’s rarely poor locals that are poaching tigers—it’s organized gangs.
Tigers are part of a massive wildlife trade that’s run by sophisticated
international crime syndicates, the same trade that’s wiping out
elephants, rhinos and so many other species. It’s a 19 billion dollar a
year business.

We were working in India with two of the world’s foremost experts on
the topic, Belinda Wright and Nitin Desai. In 1994, Wright heard rumors
that outsiders were targeting big cats in Kanha Tiger Reserve, near
where she lived. Tigers she’d spent years filming for her Emmy
award-winning National Geographic documentary, ‘Land of the Tiger’ were
suddenly disappearing. 
She figured out what was happening when a shop owner approached her in
a nearby town one day. “I’ve got four fresh tiger skins. Do you know
anyone who wants to buy them?” he whispered. She orchestrated a sting
operation. Five people were arrested, uncovering a tiger-smuggling
operation.

Later that summer, she and a friend traveled throughout the state to
gauge the situation. “To my horror,” she said, “we were offered the
skins and bones of 39 dead tigers, with offers in practically every
city and town we investigated.” They identified 42 cat poachers and 32
dealers.

Wright abandoned her filmmaking career and founded the Wildlife
Protection Society of India(WPSI), an organization she’s led ever
since. Their focus: to gather information on wildlife crime—especially
involving tigers—and assist enforcement authorities in arresting
alleged criminals and curbing wildlife crime. (Related: “Tiger Poachers
Get Stiff Sentences“) 

Desai signed on in 1998. He now directs WPSI’s anti-poaching activities
here in what is known as the “Central Indian Tiger Landscape.” About a
quarter of the country’s 1,800 remaining Bengal tigers live here in
India’s heartland, protected within a string of 13 tiger reserves.
Tadoba-Andhari reserve, where we’re headed, is one of those tiger
havens.


read
more