Conservationists welcome CITES support to end tiger farming
 
Johannesburg, 29 September 2016

During
discussions at the 17th Conference of the Parties (CoP) to the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), India,
Nepal, the USA, EU and Lao PDR overuled a proposal from China to delete
a Decision to end tiger farming. China was alone in suggesting that the
Decision, which states that “tigers should not be bred for trade in
their parts and derivatives”, should be “retired”.
 
There
are fewer than 4,000 wild tigers remaining, with populations
functionally extinct in some range States. The conservation of wild
tigers requires action to end all trade in tiger parts and derivatives,
and reduce and eventually eliminate demand for these products. Trade in
parts and derivatives of captive bred tigers continues to be a threat,
perpetuating the desirability of tiger products and stimulating
poaching of wild tigers and other Asian big cats. Undeniably, wild
tigers are doing best in range States where they are not considered a
commodity and where they are not bred for trade in their parts and
derivatives.

Following on from a Ministerial annoucement last
Friday, the delegation from Lao PDR elaborated on the government’s
intention to work with technical experts to phase out tiger farms. Lao
PDR is the first of the tiger-farming countries to declare their
intention to finally implement Decision 14.69. While welcoming this
announcement, we recognise that Lao PDR is home to transnational
organised criminal networks that are exploiting weak legislation and
enforcement. A signifcant investment of political and financial
commitment to root out corruption and complacency is essential to turn
words in to action.Also
approved today were a suite of Decisions that will continue a thorough
review of efforts to improve legislation and enforcment, and will put
facilities that keep and breed tigers and other Asian big cats for
commercial purposes under greater scrutiny. Additionally, there was
support in principle for a proposal from India which encourages
countries that make seizures of tiger skins to share photos of these
with range states, to facilitate investigations into the origin of the
skins. 

Avinash Basker of the Wildlife Protection Society of India said “The
fact that there was no support for the proposal to delete Decision
14.69 is a really encouraging sign. It shows that almost all Parties
are convinced that the breeding of tigers for their parts and
derivatives is a serious conservation threat to wild tigers.”