NGOs
release call for action to end tiger farming and trade




On
15th January, 18 organisations - including WPSI - released the
collective letter at the 66th meeting of the CITES Standing Committee
calling for urgent action to end tiger farming and
trade. Avinash Basker who heads WPSI's Legal Programme, was
there at the meeting in Geneva and helped with the drafting of the
letter.

15
January 2016



We
the undersigned believe that a Zero
Demand approach to trade in tiger parts and derivatives is
essential to achieve Zero
Poaching. This means an end to tiger farming and all
domestic and international trade in parts and derivatives of tigers
from captive facilities. That is precisely what the international
community called for in 2007; however China, Lao PDR, Thailand and
Vietnam continue to keep and breed tigers for trade in their parts and
products.



Many facilities that keep tigers are engaged in legal and illegal
domestic and international trade in parts and derivatives of tigers
that have been bred in captivity, and in some cases in laundering
illegally acquired tigers in to the trade. There are an estimated 7,000
tigers in captivity in South-East Asia and China, and no signs that
so-called tiger ‘farms’ are being phased out.



The Government of China has authorised a domestic trade in the skins of
captive-bred tigers for use as luxury home décor and for taxidermy.
This stimulates demand for the world’s remaining 3,200 wild tigers
instead of reducing it. How can we expect demand reduction campaigns to
work in China if the Government itself tells consumers that it is
acceptable to buy tiger skins?



Tigers in India, Nepal, Bangladesh and the Russian Far East are still
being targeted for markets in China and among Chinese consumers in
Myanmar and Lao PDR. There is also a thriving market in Vietnam and
Indonesia. Tigers are not just killed for their skins; their bones are
used to brew “tiger bone wine”, their meat is sold as a delicacy, and
their teeth and claws are sold as charms.



As reflected by seizures, these end markets are sourced from both wild
and captive tigers. So long as legal and illegal trade in tigers from
captive facilities continues, demand reduction and enforcement efforts
are undermined, wild tigers everywhere are at risk and the chances of
recovery of wild tiger populations in China and South-East Asia are
minimal.



In 2007, in recognition of the risk posed by tiger ‘farming’ to wild
populations, the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) decided that “tigers
should not be bred in captivity for trade in their parts and
derivatives”. Countries with tiger farms – e.g. China, Lao PDR,
Thailand and Vietnam – have failed to implement this decision. Even
South Africa has engaged in this lucrative business and is exporting
captive tiger body parts to markets in Asia and elsewhere.



Not enough has been done to investigate the facilities involved, amend
laws to end ‘farming’, destroy stocks of tiger parts and derivatives
and, ultimately, end demand. A comprehensive assessment of the trade in
tigers and other Asian big cats was prepared for the CITES Parties by
the IUCN in June 2014. The review highlighted examples of good practice
from India, where there are no tiger ‘farms’ and where over two-thirds
of the world’s remaining wild tigers survive.



Tiger ‘farming’ has been allowed to drag on for too long. It is time
for more decisive action towards achieving Zero Demand and to
hold to account those countries that are implicated in tiger ‘farming’
and trade in captive tiger parts and products.



The recent deliberations at the 66th Meeting of the CITES Standing
Committee confirm that Parties still want to see an end to trade in
tiger parts and derivatives from both wild and captive sources.
Recommendations from this meeting encourage Parties to make better use
of forensic technology to investigate the origin of tigers in trade,
take effective action against online trade and undertake targeted
demand reduction campaigns.



Draft decisions have also been prepared for consideration by the 17th
Meeting of the Conference of the Parties that, if adopted, would
require Parties to undertake time-bound country-specific actions to
implement CITES resolutions and associated decisions, including the
decision on tiger ‘farming’.


We
urge countries with facilities that keep or breed tigers for domestic
or international trade in their parts and derivatives to demonstrate
real commitment to tiger conservation by:





improving enforcement against
captive facilities engaged in illegal trade in tiger parts and
derivatives;
amending legislation to prohibit
legal domestic trade in tiger parts and derivatives from captive
facilities;
preparing plans to phase out tiger
‘farms’;
destroying stockpiles of tiger
parts and derivatives.



The
international community must ensure that CITES takes strong action
against Parties that do not show meaningful progress in ending tiger
‘farming’.





Annamiticus

Born Free Foundation

Born Free USA

Conservation Action Trust

David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation

Environmental Investigation Agency

Sanctuary Nature Foundation

Satpuda Foundation

Save Wild Tigers

Species Survival Network

The Corbett Foundation

Tiger Awareness

Travel Operators for Tigers

TigerTime

Wildlife Friends International

Wildlife Friends Foundation Thailand

Wildlife Protection Society of India

Wildlife SOS





NGO
Statement Tigers CITES 2016