Tiger finally captured, relocated to Dudhwa
 
By Ratan Mani Lal

A
wild tiger that had strayed from the Terai forests to the vicinity of
Lucknow, was captured after sustained efforts by a team of forest  
department
officials on Wednesday morning. The tiger was later taken to the Dudhwa
Tiger Reserve and released there. The tiger had been first noticed in
the first week of January by villagers in the thick forests of Rehman
Kheda, a hamlet northwest of Lucknow beyond the mango orchards of the
Central Institute of Sub-tropical Horticulture (CISH) a Central
government institute engaged in research on mango and other fruit
species.

The tiger, nicknamed ‘Badshah’ by forest employees had
been involved in a game of hide-and-seek for more 100 days and had
survived on killing bluebulls (nilgai) and the animals tied as bait to
capture it. However, it had not attacked any human so far and kept away
from  human settlements. Still, residents of the entire region had
been having sleepless nights in the fear that the big cat might attack
 their huts. After a series of experiments that included tying
goats as bait near a cage, digging a pit and chasing it by elephants
 failed, the tiger was finally shot with a tranquilizer gun early
on the morning of April 25 by Dr Utkarsh Shukla, the Lucknow Zoo
 veterinarian, and then kept in a cage before finally being driven
to Dudhwa.

But
there were a few uneasy moments for wildlife experts as a section of
officials felt the animals should have been kept in the Lucknow zoo as
a prize display. Although it would certainly have attracted massive
footfalls to the zoo, but one glorious animal would have been
 reduced to being a dull and pale shadow of its natural self.
Luckily, good sense prevailed and the animal was shifted to Dudhwa. The
tiger thus became the first stray tiger in Uttar Pradesh to be
successfully captured and relocated in a jungle.

Mounted on
elephants, three teams of experts were tracking the beast for the past
four months, including a two-member team from  the Wildlife Trust
of India. In order to localise the tiger in the area, the forest
department had been tying baits. The tiger was tranquilized as it came
to eat a buffalo it had killed the previous day, according to the chief
conservator of forests C.P. Goel. It was reported that Shukla had shot
two darts from a distance of approximately 10 metres, and while one
missed the target, the  other hit the tiger on its side. Then it
was put in a cage, which was covered in order to prevent the tiger from
seeing anything and becoming aggressive. It was given an antidote
within fifteen minutes of capture. Once conscious, it would have tried
to attack whatever it saw, and in the process, it would have hurt
itself. In order to beat the heat, the cage was drenched in water.

At 10.30 am, the tiger began its journey to Dudhwa along with a team of
forest guards. The tiger was reported to be perfectly healthy and was
released in the Dudhwa Tiger Reserve with a radio collar around its
neck. Applauding the efforts of the forest department, Rahul Shukla,
member of Tiger and Terrain, an NGO working for tiger conservation,
said: “The tiger has been rehabilitated in South Sonaripur area of
Dudhwa reserve, which does not have a dominant male tiger. This will
help the young tiger make its own territory.” The tiger is supposed to
have strayed to Lucknow from the southern Kheri jungles in the last
week of December. Experts believe the juvenile male was in search of
its own territory but because of the dense sugarcane crop and cold
weather, it strayed.

Shukla felt the Rehman Kheda tiger must
have started his journey soon after monsoons were over. Covering some
150 odd miles it landed near Lucknow in early January. It stayed here
since then, moving through tall cover, never making itself visible yet
feeding properly of regular kills. This shows that this animal had the
ability to survive in human dominated landscape.

“This
perfectly normal, no-problem tiger had understood the nuances of living
in farmland and near villages. These learnt traits emerge in big cats
when their coexistence with humans becomes a compulsion,” says Shukla
who has done pioneering research and field work among sugarcane tigers
in the Terai region.

Regarding the Lucknow incident, he said
since reports of tigers and leopards straying into human settlements
had been coming in frequently from places such as Mumbai, Siliguri,
Guwahati, Odisha and now Lucknow, it was important that a manual about
how to capture such animals was prepared. “By indulging in experiments,
we endanger not only the life of the animal but also of humans living
in and around the area.” He also said the idea floated by some
officials that if the tiger could not be captured then a tiger safari
be created around it, was ridiculous. “If such incidents keep happening
in many cities, will we keep on creating safaris everywhere?” he asked.


(Ratan
Mani Lal is a journalist, having been editor of Hindustan Times, The
Times of India at Lucknow, and Dainik Bhaskar in Madhya
Pradesh/Chhattisgarh)