Ominous onset of new year for big cats


THE TIMES OF INDIA
15 January 2010


Manjari Mishra, TNN 

LUCKNOW:
With three tiger deaths reported from UP and Uttarakhand over the past
ten days, new year has started on an ominous note for the big cat. Even
as investigations into the cause of death are still under way and
officials predictably rule out foul play in at least two cases, experts
feel that warning sounded off by the minister for forest and
environment Jairam Ramesh could be coming true sooner than expected.

The
minister had recently expressed concern at the dwindling number of
tigers in India particularly in view of 2010 being declared as the year
of tiger by China. At least 60% of tiger parts - bones, nails, claws,
skin etc are said to be finding its way into Chinese market and other
south Asian countries - Nepal, Singapore, Indonesia, Myanmar, Thailand
the most conspicuous among the group. What spells doom for the desi
species is wide margin of profit which makes the deal extremely
attractive to both parties. UP with its boarders opening into Nepal has
over the years become a thriving conduit for the flourishing racket. 

To
Chinese it is pure and simple good economics. "Life of a captive tiger,
like those reared in the Chinese tiger farms, is reported to be 20
years. Expense incurred for its upkeep is 1,000 dollars per annum which
works out to be 20,000 dollars during its total life span. As against
it a carcass procured from the Indian poacher/ smuggler could cost a
sum as paltry as 200 dollars sometimes, claimed Sujoy Bannerji, deputy
conservator in the ministry of environment and forest. Even during
normal times the trade was brisk, but this year it could touch a new
high, he feared. 

Specially as apart from making the right
noise, the government is doing precious little for the survival of the
big cat. The issue of a special tiger force has been hanging fire for
over one year and none of the states have been able to show any results
so far, said CCF, Awadh, CP Goyal. Though UP, he said, could spring a
surprise by taking a lead, he added.

One positive factor that
could go a long way in tackling the cross-boarder smuggling is the
compilation of an all-India data bank of suspected poaching and
smuggling network by the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI),
said chief conservator of forest UP BK Patnaik. The information gleaned
from different states and coordination will be a huge relief to zero in
on and track down the offenders, he claimed.

This specially as
the offenders have long arms. According to records with the Karnataka
forest department, poachers caught in Rajiv Gandhi National Park which
incidentally has the highest tiger density, are known to come from
places as far as Madhya Pradesh, claimed BK Dixit, conservator of
forest research, Karnataka. The exercise could come as a life saver to
the species.

The importance of intelligence collection cannot be
over-emphasised. We are not interested in counting the dead tigers,
reiterates Belinda Wright, head of WPSI. Each tiger death needs to be
properly investigated and must not be relegated to an official blame
game. With so few tigers left here, each life she added, is precious
and the clock is ticking.


newslink