EU, China and India thrash out deal on tigers

 
Doha, Qatar: 21st March 2010

An
agreement reached at a UN meeting on wildlife trade in Doha could see
countries treating illegal trade in tiger parts as seriously as arms
and drug trafficking, but campaigners have cautioned that words must be
turned into action.
 
The UK-brokered deal, which was the
result of lengthy negotiations between the EU and the tiger range
countries, should see increased intelligence sharing against the
criminal networks behind the trade, and will build on recent training
provided by INTERPOL.
 
Parties to the UN Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), agreed to develop a
database to monitor the illegal trade in tiger, leopard and snow
leopard parts.
 
Securing the involvement of the
professional enforcement community is essential to protecting Asia’s
big cats, which are poached for their skins, bones and body parts.
CITES called for an urgent meeting of senior police and customs
officers before a Head of State tiger summit to be held in Russia later
this year.
 
The news came as welcome relief for
conservationists in a week that has so far seen attempts to protect
bluefin tuna, polar bears and coral defeated.
 
Alongside
enforcement measures, countries supported an existing decision to
ensure that tiger farms did not supply the illegal market for big cat
products.
 
“There have been many promises this week, but
getting countries to actually use these new enforcement tactics will be
the real test of the commitment to ending tiger trade, and saving the
species”, said Debbie Banks, Senior Campaigner at the Environmental
Investigation Agency, and Chair of the Species Survival Network’s Big
Cat Working Group.
 
“Time is running out for tigers and
other big cats. Tiger range countries and consumer nations need to work
together to reduce demand for their parts and stamp out the illegal
tiger trade”, said Avinash Basker, Legal Consultant to the Wildlife
Protection Society of India.