Tiger Estimates: Try This Number
 
by N.S. Ramnath
Forbes - India

A new, more refined method adopted by the NTCA to estimate India’s tiger population is bringing cheer to conservationists

In
the world of conservation, bigger fights have been fought around
measurements and estimates than around intent and policies. Reports and
data on environment issues often span decades, even centuries,
capturing long-term trends. Its acceptance depends on faith in
scientific methods—and even a small dent there could provoke deep
emotions.  

By comparison, knowing the number of tigers
that go around our forests would seem relatively easy. But it is not.
Any amateur photographer on a tiger safari knows how difficult it's
even to spot a tiger. In India, for a long time, forest officials have
been using a proxy—pugmarks. But that was unreliable and prone to
manipulation. In 2004, in Sariska, officials said there were 24 tigers
based on pugmarks. It turned out there was not a single tiger. A year
later, India discarded the pugmark technique, and started following a
more refined system, one that relied on strategically-placed,
automatically-triggered cameras. The stripes on the tigers are as
unique as finger prints, so photos help in better estimates. 

Still,
the system followed by National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA)
suffers from a few drawbacks. The first is that the scientific survey
happens only once in four years; and in a fragile system that is a long
gap. Secondly, it's not really a census because the output is just an
estimate. 

When Jayaram Ramesh, then the environment minister,
released the tiger population number last year, it was accompanied by a
sense of triumph and it was followed by a series of optimistic
headlines (Tiger population up by 20 percent to 1,706). However, many
missed the fine print. The number 1,706 is an estimate, an average of
1,571 and 1,875—the lower and upper limits. The lower limit in 2010 was
actually smaller than the upper limit four years back, which means
there is a chance that tiger population could have actually gone down.
Besides, Sunderbans was not assessed during the previous estimate, and
that contributed to additional 90 tigers (average, again). Most
importantly, the number of individual tigers that were actually
captured by camera was a mere 550. The number—1,706—is a result of
sampling, regression and averages. Much of the cheer that followed the
announcement might have been misplaced. 

more details