Dasara, known as Dussehra in the Northern parts of the country, is a festival that denotes the victory of truth or good over evil. The Mysuru Dasara, which is known as ‘Naada Habba’ is the ‘state festival of Karnataka’ has gained immense popularity over the years, especially with its royal celebrations, grand lightings, cultural events, and of course, the vibrant Dasara procession.
However, many communities, especially in fringe forest areas, still celebrate by resorting to the hunting of wild animals. In earlier times, hunting was considered a plausible means of sustenance and survival. However over time, and with the growth of commercialisation and habitat destruction, such traditions have become unsustainable. Though illegal and banned under the law, hunting animals for bushmeat consumption continues unabashedly, thus evident in the high demand for wild meat during this time, which has become a serious threat to the conservation efforts in this region.
Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has been assisting Karnataka Forest Department in the prevention of wildlife crime for a decade in this landscape.  During such festivals, the Karnataka Forest Department and WTI team are on high alert to intercept any such information and take action on it. This year, the team along with the frontline staff conducted night patrols in the sensitive areas of the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
Joint patrolling by WTI and forest Department team
On the 7th Day of the festival, information intercepted by the WTI team indicated the presence of a group of poachers who had planned to enter the Tiger Reserve for hunting. After discussing the same with the Forest Department, a crew of forest guards was immediately dispatched, with the WTI team, to prevent such an incident.  With eyes glued to every corner of the silent forest, the team was on high alert and spent the entire night patrolling the Tiger Reserve. Every creak, sound and movement was carefully tracked, and the teams’ presence resulted in successfully averting a poaching incident.
Signifying the victory of good over bad, truth over evil, the soiled efforts of hunting wild animals for the festival has been a victory in a battle, but the war rages forth. Each day, across the world, countless animals are maimed, injured, tortured, harassed and ruthlessly murdered to satiate the demand for traditional medicine, superstitious beliefs, etc.
If you ever witness a wild animal being targeted for any reason, report the same to us through the C-HAWK Mobile Application. This project is supported by Fondation Segré.