This must-read series by Wildlife Trust of India features 10 eminent wildlife experts who share their list of top 20 wildlife titles. This time we have Ananda Banerjee, award winning wildlife journalist.

Ananda Banerjee is a multi-award-winning journalist/columnist, author and visual artist. He has been able to straddle diverse organizations across his long career, bringing to each his deep knowledge of environmental issues. Banerjee has been part of several leading media institutions, national and international non-profit organizations, corporates and government bodies to give a voice to important environmental and development trends, through his research, writing, and artwork. His interest lies in ornithology, environmental economics, human-wildlife conflict mitigation, and ecological restorations. He is the recipient of – the Earth Heroes Award (2015). Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), Environmental Journalist of the Year, Asian Environmental Journalist Awards (Singapore Environment Council, 2014), and the Ramnath Goenka Award for Excellence in Journalism (2013).
Here’s his list of top 10 titles about wildlife in India and another 10 on global wildlife topics.


His pick of the top reads on wildlife of India:

Deer & the tiger by G Schaller
Butterflies on the roof of the world by Peter Smetacek
From Soup to Superstar by K Shanker
Running away from Elephants by Rauf Ali
Crooked Cats by Nayanika Mathur
Indira – Life in Nature by Jairam Ramesh
The Story of Asia’s Lions by Divyanhanusinh
Elephant Days & Nights by R Sukumar
A view from the Machan by U Karanth
On the Brink by Vivek Menon

His pick of the top reads on global wildlife topics:


Cry of the Kalahari by Mark & Delia Owens
Snow Leopard by Peter Matthiessen (+ all his other books)
The Adventures of Alexander Von Humboldt by Andrea Wulf
Secret Life of Plants by Peter Tomkimson and Christopher Bird
The Sound of a Wild Snail Eating by Elisabeth Tova Bailey
Shadow Of The Thylacine by Col Bailey
The Forest Unseen by David George Haskell
The Signature of all things by Elizabeth Gilbert (fiction and a must-read)
Song of the Dodo by David Quammen (+ all his other books)
Between The Lizard King by Bryan Christy and The Feather Thief by Kirk W. Johnson (on wildlife trade)

*Disclaimer – the list doesn’t include edited works and is subject to change with Goodreads in the future
Also read the curated list by:
M K Ranjitsinh
Aasheesh Pittie
Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan
Tara Gandhi
Neha Sinha