Sondlagondi, September 21: A team of 20 members comprising officials of Gujarat State Biodiversity Board (SBB) and Biodiversity Management Committee (BMC) from various districts of Gujarat visited Gondia during their seven days study tour to Maharashtra under the guidance of Maharashtra SBB on September 21, 2015.
The team on their study tour to Maharashtra visited Sondlagondi village of Murdholli Gram Panchayat under Goregaon taluka to interact with the villagers and technical experts on the preparation of People’s Biodiversity Register (PBR). The Murdholli GP BMC had prepared the first PBR in 2014 under the technical guidance of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and other subject experts from Gondia. WTI had also provided guidance and support in forming of the first BMC of Gondia district under Murdholli GP and the tenth district level BMC at Gondia.
“The team interacted with the villagers and technical support group who had contributed in preparation of PBR. The team was also told about the various eco-development activities undertaken by WTI in Sondlagondi village and a visit was organised for the same,” said Anil K Nair, Project Lead, WTI. During the teams’ visit, the guests were welcomed by Shashendra Bhagat, President of Murdholli BMC, Sondlagondi; Babulal Farde, JFMC President; Anil K Nair, WTI’s Project Lead; and JS Jadav, Pindkepar RO.
The visiting team was lead by Dr Vegada, Technical Advisor to Gujarat SBB and Vivek, Consultant for MSBB. The visiting guests were served local Maharashtrian food by the villagers. WTI team, Murdholi BMC, Sondlagondi JFMC and Nagzira SHG group contributed to the success of the programme.
WTI along with its partners the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) Ecosystem Alliance and Japan Tiger and Elephant Fund (JTEF) has been working with the communities and State Forest Department for the conservation of the corridor between Nagzira and Nawegaon Tiger Reserves in the state. WTI started its intervention in the conservation of the corridor in 2011 after the corridor occupancy survey was completed on the presence of wild animals. The survey revealed that the dependence of communities on the corridor forests for fuelwood, grazing, besides collection of minor forest products was posing a major threat to the long-term sustainability of the corridor.
To make people aware of the importance of the natural resources, WTI initiated the formation of BMC at Gram Panchayat Murdholi in Gondia (first in the district) as per the guidelines and rules of Biological Diversities Act 2002.