Mithapur, Gujarat, July 12, 2019:  Often called as rainforest of the sea, although coral reefs cover meagre 1% of the ocean floor, have a huge effect on the health of the rest of the world. Healthy corals equate to a healthy ocean. But for these corals to replenish and flourish well, it needs clean, clear water to survive.

All over the world marine and coastal ecosystems are under tremendous pressure arising from natural as well as anthropogenic sources, causing considerable loss of biodiversity. Irresponsible dumping of solid waste along the shore is one such pollution causing behaviour that can be contained with proper awareness among the masses. Participatory awareness generating events had been immensely effective in driving the message of conservation into public.

The reef of Mithapur is home to about 250 diverse marine organisms. Around 350 families earn their livelihoods from direct and indirect dependence on the resources of the reef of Mithapur. The reef of Mithapur also attracts pods of Indian ocean hump-backed dolphins during the colder months every year. The coast of Mithapur is also a nesting site for green sea turtles.
The coast of Mithapur attracts people round the year seeking recreation and livelihoods alike. This coast also attracts people during certain seasons to perform certain religious rituals such as immersion of Ganesh idols. These activities cumulatively account to littering along the coast, often with plastic waste. Ghost nets are also a problem along this coast. Taking the fragile ecosystems of Mithapur such as coral reefs and sand dunes, it is imperative to educate people from coastal communities on the threats posed by plastic pollution on local biodiversity and ultimately effecting the livelihoods of people dependent on these ecosystems.

As an effort to commemorate the World Ocean Day on 8th June, 2019, coastal cleanup activities were conducted with the participation of students from TCL DAV Public School and Mithapur High School on 28th June, 2019 an 6th July, 2019 respectively. Students of these schools come from various walks of life but yet are connected to each other through their relationship with the coast. In view of their connection with the coast through various activities, it is important to impart conservation awareness into the families of these coastal dwellers. Both the events consisted of a small seminar where talks were delivered by Mr. Farukhkha Bloch, Sociologist of WTI and Mr. Satish Trivedi, Asst. Manager of TCSRD, TCL. Field sessions were held during the early hours of the day following the seminar.

Students were briefed about the precautions to be taken while on field and were divided onto groups of 3 students each. The groups of students were then asked to walk in a straight line parallel to the shore so that garbage can be collected in maximum transects, minimizing the chance of missing anything.

50 students from TCDAV Public School and 110 students from Mithapur High School had participated in these events and collected 200 and 300 kg of plastic waste respectively. Each participant was given a participation certificate so as to boost their morale.