Dispur (Assam): Honouring a forest guard who lost his life fighting rhino poachers in Rajiv Gandhi Orang National Park in Assam, the state Forest Minister, Rockybul Hussain today handed over the terminal benefit of one lakh rupees to the deceased’s family, facilitated through Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)’s Van Rakshak Project (VRP) that runs an umbrella insurance scheme for frontline staff across the country.
Mohd Hasen Ali, employed as forest guard at Panchnoi Camp no. 1 was shot during patrolling duty at around 2:30 am on June 12 this year. He was rushed to a nearby hospital by his colleagues but was declared dead on arrival.
Ali is survived by his wife Rabia Khatun, his aged parents and six children (two daughters and four sons). He was the only earning member in the family.
An event was organised today at the office of the Forest Minister in Dispur, to handover the insurance cheque to Khatun. The event was attended by Suresh Chand, PCCF (Wildlife), VK Bishnoi, PCCF (General) and Sushil Kumar Daila, DFO, Rajiv Gandhi Orang NP, as well as WTI representatives Dr Rathin Barman and Sashanka Barbaruah, among others.
Handing over the cheque, the Forest Minister said, “We thank WTI for this help to the family of the deceased. It is definitely a significant support for our staff. We need such organisations to help us and we are thankful that WTI always works in collaboration with the Forest Department.”
“Wildlife in Assam is safe and sound because of dedicated officers like Hasen Ali. They have devoted their whole lives to protect the wildlife heritage, biodiversity and habitats and the supreme sacrifice of these people should be recognised, respected and compensated. This will encourage them to work with the same kind of dedication and commitment, and the future of our wildlife will be safe,” said Suresh Chand, PCCF (Wildlife).
“The WTI family extends its deepest condolences to Ali’s family,” said Dr Barman, Coordinator, WTI. “This incident exemplifies the adversities that our forest guards face and the sacrifices they make to protect the country’s natural heritage. It is people like Ali who give us hope that our wildlife and our heritage still have a chance.”
Ali was among the 17,000 frontline staff across the country covered under the unique NGO Accident Insurance Scheme run by WTI’s VRP. Families of 56 frontline staff across the country including nine in Assam have availed of this insurance so far.
VRP also trains and equips frontline staff across the country. More than 8,600 frontline staff members from over 100 protected areas and more than 25 other wildlife areas have been trained under this project.
 


Learn More About
Van Rakshak Project