Kaziranga (Assam): A displaced two-month old Asiatic black bear cub has been admitted to the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) near Kaziranga National Park for hand-raising and eventual rehabilitation back in the wild.
The cub was brought to CWRC from the house of local person near Langtpingmupa Reserve Forest under Hati Khati Range, Haflong, North Cachar Hills Division in Assam, by the Forest Department officials on Sunday.
“The cub was apparently being chased by a dog. One of the locals ‘rescued’ it and kept it with him for about a week. When the Forest Department authorities got the information, they, along with some local NGO personnel, convinced the person to hand over the cub,” said Dr Phulmoni Gogoi, CWRC veterinarian who is currently taking care of the bear cub.
“The cub is healthy and has no abnormality,” she added.
The bear cub will soon be transferred to the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) in Pakke Tiger Reserve, Arunachal Pradesh. At CBRC, it will join two other cubs for a long-term rehabilitation programme that includes a brief period of hand-raising, and then relocation to a release site for a prolonged acclimatisation and eventual release in the wild.
CWRC and CBRC are joint ventures of the Forest Departments of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh respectively, and International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI). CWRC deals with rescue and rehabilitation of all displaced/distressed wild animals, while rehabilitation of Asiatic black bears are managed under CBRC.
Till date, 10 orphan Asiatic black bear cubs have been successfully hand-raised and rehabilitated in the wild in Pakke Tiger Reserve in Arunachal Pradesh and Manas National Park in Assam, by the state Forest Departments and IFAW-WTI. Three additional bear cubs are currently being acclimatised near Doigurung in Pakke TR.


 
Learn more about Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation
Learn more about Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation