Bihar, January 6, 2009: Sloth bear conservation in Bihar received a shot in the arm with a ‘refresher’ training on forest protection for frontline field staff of various Protected Areas in the state. 
The training was organised last month by the Van Rakshak Project (VRP) of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), in collaboration with the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) and the Bihar Forest Department. Nearly 200 frontline field staff including range officers and forest guards, from Bhimbandh, Kanwarjheel, Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin, Nagi Dam, Nakti Dam, Pant, Salim Ali Barela, Gautam Buddha, and Kaimur Wildlife Sanctuaries participated in the two-day training.
The refresher training targeted staff of protected areas where the first phase of the VRP training was held in May 2007. It was a part of WTI and WSPA’s holistic efforts at conservation of sloth bears in India through their Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project (SBCWP).
Describing the concept of VRP’s refresher trainings, Dr Rakesh Kumar Singh, Coordinator, WTI, said, “Most of the field staff do not have access to information on the developments in general wildlife scenarios and laws in the country. The training we organised in May 2007 was perhaps the first focussed and intensive one for these forest staff. Through these refresher trainings we try and update their understanding, going a notch higher in terms of depth of information imparted (as compared to the first training) while also updating them on new developments that have come up within the gap period.”
The training covered issues ranging from the basic understanding of the importance of wildlife and Indian wildlife laws to an overview of the wildlife crime scenario in the country, with special reference to sloth bears. It also included training in field craft such as identification of indirect evidence of animals, effective patrolling as well as crime investigation and prevention techniques.
Dr Singh said, “There were about 50 new faces among the participants. They were working in non-protected areas during the first training in May 2007.”
In addition to training and equipping forest guards in sloth bear range areas, SBCWP also rehabilitates Kalandars (or sloth bear performers) who have voluntarily surrendered their bears to the Forest Department. Six Kalandars from Nalanda, Nawada and Kharagpur districts in Bihar have been provided funds and are being helped stabilise their alternative livelihood. SBCWP also includes undercover operations against poachers and traders, rehabilitation of confiscated sloth bear cubs as well as a campaign against bear hunting and illegal trade.
 
Learn more about Van Rakshak Project