Srirampur, February 17, 2015: International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) – Wildlife Trust of India’s (WTI) Van Rakshak Project (VRP) is organising training programme for the frontline staff of the Greater Manas landscape in Assam from February 14, 2015. During the course of the Wildlife Crime Prevention Training (Module-E), 90 frontline forest staff from the Greater Manas Areas (covering Kachugaon, Haltugaon and Chirang Divisions) will be trained and equipped in three batches each. IFAW-WTI is also organizing Wildlife Crime Prevention Refresher Training (Module E) in Manas National Park in March 2015 wherein a total of 60 forest personnel will be participating in two batches each.


Trainees conducting a mock raid.

The first leg of training finished on February 16, 2015, wherein 32 participants from Kachugaon Forest Division, covering all seven ranges, participated. The training was held at Srirampur on the Assam-West Bengal border. The Kachugaon Forest Division is the Western-most part of Greater Manas which includes the Ripu Reserve Forest. This is the area where IFAW-WTI rehabilitated four clouded leopards and six Asiatic black bears in the recent past. Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head, IFAW-WTI, facilitated the training while Mr. Bhupen Talukdar (DCF, Assam Forest Department Retired) and Mr Ritesh C. Bhattacharya (CF, AFD retired) were the trainers cum mentors for the programme.
The training mostly focused on changing the mind-set of the front-line staff of the territorial forest division in recording wildlife and illegal forest produce offences. The territorial forest staff normally uses the archaic Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, to book perpetrators whereas being in a tiger reserve they can book them under Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972, which is far more stringent.


Trainees participating in a field exercise

During the course of the training, the participants would be given VRP’s Module E training (Fresher and Refresher) which has been especially developed by VRP mentor, Bhupen Talukdar, in consultation with Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head, IFAW-WTI. This module intensively focuses on Wildlife Laws (Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972 and Assam Forest Regulation 1891), crime scene investigation and offence report writing.
Module E comprises — two days of class-room sessions and one and half day of practical session on crime scene investigation and offence report writing. The theory includes important sections of Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972 amended up to date, relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Assam Forest (Protection) Rules 1997; and the Arms Act, 1959.
“After the theory classes, the participants were divided into six groups and given a particular field case to investigate, collect evidence, prepare the preliminary and final offence report. The most critical parts of this exercise were crime scene investigation, forensic evidence collection, preparing seizure list and recording statements of the accused,” said Bhaskar Choudhury.


Trainees attending a class on Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972. 

On the last day of the training, a critical analysis on the offence reports prepared by the participants was done which was followed by prizes for two best offence reports. This was followed by the valedictory function and kit distribution in presence of the Divisional Forest Officer. Later, the trainees gave feedback on the training module which was followed by a discussion on ‘how the training will change my recording of offence in future’.
The next training session would be held at Soraikhola, Kokrajhar for Haltugaon Forest Division from February 25- 28, 2015, followed by refresher course from March 2-5, 2015, at Bansbari, Manas NP.
Assam possesses rich biodiversity that includes many endangered animals including the tiger, rhino, elephant, leopard, eastern swamp deer, etc, which are an essential part of the state’s diverse ecosystem. “To fight wildlife crimes, the forest staff needs to be trained in handling crime scenes and have a knowhow of every minute detail of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, so that no criminal gets away easily. We are thankful to IFAW-WTI for holding such training programmes in Manas TR, BTC, to ensure that the Forest Department is equipped to break the backbone of organised poaching network in the state,” said A Sworgowari, CCF and Council Head, Forest and Environment, Bodoland Territorial Council.