New Delhi: In a move boosting whale shark conservation in India, the Ministry of Environment and Forests has formally sanctioned permit to satellite tag individuals of the species and collect tissue samples for genetic analysis. An Indian delegation journeyed to Australia earlier this month to observe whale shark satellite tagging as well as whale shark tourism in the country to help kickstart the process at home.

The visit was funded by the Australia-India Council (AIC) to aid the Whale Shark Conservation Project, a joint venture of the Gujarat Forest Department, Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), as part of the council’s commitment to add value to Australia-India relations.
Dhiresh Joshi, Coordinator, WTI travelled to Hobart, Australia in March this year to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and was trained on deployment, configuration and data handling techniques of acoustic, visual and satellite tags.
“We are grateful to AIC for their support, as we got an opportunity to understand the way to take this project forward as sanctioned by the MoEF. We are in the process of procuring satellite tags and will soon be initiating genetic analysis of individual whale sharks as well. This is a completely new exercise for the species in India. Hopefully, in a few years, through extensive studies, we will be able to shed more light on this gentle giant of the deep seas,” said Joshi.
Later in June 13, a three-member delegation comprising of Pradeep Khanna, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Gujarat; RD Khamboj, Director, Marine National Park, Gujarat and Dr Rahul Kaul, Senior Director, WTI were received by the Department of Environment and Conservation (DEC), Western Australia and CSIRO. The delegates were exposed to various aspects of professionally run whale shark tours in the country. They were also taken out to swim with the whale shark to allow them a first-hand experience of whale shark tourism practices of the country.
“In addition to carrying out scientific studies on the whale shark, we have been exploring possibilities of whale shark tourism in Gujarat, as the state has a relatively high frequency of sightings of the species as compared to other range states in India. We will have to work out a lot of details to ensure that tourism doesn’t impact the habitat of the whale shark. Whale shark tourism practices in Australia is considered among the best, so this visit and assurances of help from the DEC and CSIRO have made us more optimistic. It (whale shark tourism) can be done in Gujarat,” said Khanna. “An Australian expert has expressed interest to prepare a feasibility report on whale shark tourism in India. We are thankful to AIC for facilitating this exchange.”
AIC had, last November, supported visit of Australian marine experts – members of the project’s Scientific Advisory Council (SAC) – to India, to discuss the project implementation. The SAC members had presented their ideas and suggestions to the project’s Governing Council comprising officials of the Gujarat state government, to help develop the implementation plan.
The whale shark is listed under Schedule I of Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. Previously hunted in hundreds for their liver oil and meat, today a successful campaign which first took root in 2004 has elevated the whale shark as a symbol of conservation success in India through sound scientific principles and community awareness. The satellite tagging procedure will help ascertain the species’ migratory routes through the vast oceans.
 
Related stories:
India begins contributing to global whale shark research: first individual identified in Gujarat 
Whale shark underwater photography initiated in Gujarat
The whale shark has its day in Dwarka