Imagine being in the middle of a forest, with a raging river in front cutting across your path. The tumbling white waters drown even the faintest of mumbles and cries. Feeling helpless you realize that you are lost in the wild and have no one to call for help. Now, imagine being a newborn bear cub left all alone to die a confusing and painful death. For his mother had been brutally killed by poachers for illegal wildlife trade.
At this tender age, the cub has not even started taking in first sights, sounds, and smells, and least to mention, learning to explore the world through the senses learned from the mother.
A bear cub called Siyang
Newborn Siyang (A Himalayan Black Bear named after the river it was found in Eastern Arunachal Pradesh) was lucky. While on a routine field patrol, volunteers of Yinking-based Epum Sirum Welfare Society and Arunachal Explore Nature Group stumbled on this shriveling and possibly dehydrated tiny cub.  Had it not been for the shrill cries, it was easy to overlook the tiny ball of fur in the wilderness. Understanding the urgency, the cub was immediately brought to the DCF office in Itanagar. As it was being handed over to Mr. Millo Tasser (DCF Wildlife), Siyang had already curled up to the legs of one of its rescuers.

 Asiatic black bear cub Siyang – Pic Credits: DoEFCC, Arunachal Pradesh
A second chance at life
Mr. Tasser called up Wildlife Trust of India’s Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) to take in the orphan bear cub under its care. CBRC is a specialized facility that deals with the rescue and rehabilitation of Asiatic black bears (Ursus thibetanus) in and around Arunachal Pradesh, the centre has put back more than 40 bear cubs back in the wild. When Siyang finally made the journey to his new home, he was no longer alone. In CBRC there was Devi, another bear cub (not much older than Siyang himself), who had faced a similar fate a month ago, but was lucky enough to be picked up by the range forest officer at Kebuk Lego. Both Siyang and Devi now have each other’s company to grow up in CBRC before they are released back in their natural habitat.

Siyang under care at CBRC, Pakke TR – Pic Credits: Asish Immanuel Baglary
Soon enough, another bear cub would be joining these siblings by fate. Bhaluk is currently under care at the Centre for Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation (CWRC) in Kaziranga Assam. Rescued from Karbi Anglong District of Assam under similar circumstances, it will be transferred to CBRC in the coming weeks.

Siyang at rescue in Ngaring Village – Pic Credits: Dr. Panjit Basumantary
According to Dr. Panjit Basumantary, head veterinarian and manager at CBRC, “It’s tough to see so many bear cubs getting orphaned for the sake of facilitating the illegal trade in bear. It cannot be human to kill a mother and leave a cub dying”. Over the years, CBRC has also taken up the cause of awareness building to counter illegal wildlife trade. Taking care of a newborn is a huge responsibility. “While we have been successful in rehabilitation more than 40 bear cubs, back in the wild, it is not the same as them growing up naturally in the wild, learning the life skills from its mother”, Dr. Basumantary adds.

Devi at CBRC enclosure – Pic Credits: Dr. Panjit Basumantary
CBRC is run in collaboration with the DoEFCC, Arunachal Pradesh and supported by IFAW and Kirloskar Ebara Pumps Ltd. (KEPL). To contribute to the centre, please click here.