New Delhi: Monkeys lurking along the Haridwar-Dehradun highway in the Northern Indian state of Uttaranchal are being fatally injured every alternate day by speeding vehicles, and the situation could become worse if urgent action is not taken, said conservationists.
Expressing their angst at the callous attitude of people, who encourage these animals to come out on the highway by dumping garbage or by distributing food is actually serving as deathtraps.
Nearly a kilometer of the highway, which also passes through the Chilla-Motichur wildlife corridor in Rajaji National Park, is also a major threat to other wild animals.
“Following every two days we see one or two dead monkeys on the highway. The drivers do not seem to care about them.” A tea vendor in Motichur said.
“At some places monkeys can be seen 24 hours on the roadside not because there is lack of food in the forest, but because they get easy food from passers-by. People even stop their cars to feed them,” said Anil Kumar Singh, of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
“Vehicles run over them when monkeys try to block them for food. It is very unfortunate, but we ourselves are to be blamed for their behaviour, we changed their habit by giving them food.” said Khalid Mahboob of WTI.
“The forest here is predominantly “Sal” which is not favoured by animals whose food constitutes 80% fruits; this could also be one of the reasons for them to come out on the road,” said Bipul Chakraborty of WTI.
“In dry season, wild animals which come out of forest in search of water are also at high risk of accidents.” Singh said.
Wild animals, such as elephant, sambar, chital, wild pig, langur, nilgai etc. uses the road for moving between Motichur forests on the west bank to Gohri forest in Chilla Wildlife Sanctuary on the east bank.
The forest department has put up sign boards on the highway to alert people against feeding monkeys, but little seemed to work.
“Besides speed breakers on the highway, fine should be imposed on people who give food to the monkeys or litter,” said khan.
“Mass awareness is important to deal with such situations, since the problem is more and more seen across the country,” said Irina Ningthoujam of WTI.