Kaziranga (Assam): An adult male tiger is being moved from the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) in Assam where it was hand-raised, to near-wild environment at the Van Vihar National Park in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh.
The tiger, Vivek, was rescued from a tea estate by the Assam Forest Department and IFAW-WTI veterinarians in December 2007. Barely six-month old then, the cub was found poisoned and in critical condition. Its female sibling was found dead nearby and the mother could not be located.
Under intensive care of the CWRC staff, the tiger gradually recovered, but was confined to life in captivity.
“CWRC’s priority while attending to any animal is to rehabilitate it in the wild. However, rehabilitation protocol for hand-raised big cats like the tiger has not yet been formalized,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). “Since Van Vihar National Park is a CZA-recognised breeding centre for tigers, it was decided that Vivek could contribute to the gene pool there.”
Van Vihar National Park is a notified protected area, which is also a CZA (Central Zoo Authority)-recognized modern zoo hosting animals in near natural conditions. Spread over 445 hectares, Van Vihar boasts of the biggest large mammal enclosures among the zoos in the country.
The 2012 km journey from CWRC to Van Vihar that began this evening will be completed in four days. The tiger has been confined in a specially-designed crate loaded on to a truck for the journey by road.  Two veterinarians and two animal keepers will be traveling alongside to ensure the safety of the tiger.
“This is the first time that a tiger is being moved from CWRC outside Assam. The team has made all necessary arrangements to ensure that the stress on the tiger is minimal, and it reaches Van Vihar safe and sound. I wish them luck,” said Surajit Dutta, Director – Kaziranga National Park, and Project Leader of CWRC.
Overseeing the move, CWRC In-Charge and WTI Coordinator Dr Rathin Barman, said that the journey will be covered mostly at night, resting at pre-determined stops during the day. The truck has been insulated to facilitate moderation of temperature when required.
 

Read More
Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation
Related Story
Photographs confirm survival of rehabilitated tiger in Manas