Manas, Assam, 27 May 2020:A female bear cub rescued on 30 December 2019 went back to the wild on 15 May 2020, marking yet another rehabilitation success story for Asiatic black bears.
The female bear cub was rescued from Salbari Village under Amteka Range of Chirang Division. The cub was shifted to acclimatization site on 12th March 2020 after hand raising at the Wildlife Transit Home, run by WTI in partnership with IFAW and supported by Bodoloand Territorial Council at Charaikhola, Kokrajhar
 
[acx_slideshow name=”bear”]
 
The cub was hand reared for two months under supervision of veterinarian Dr Daoharu Baro, assisted by animal keeper Subiram Basumatary. A dummy radio collar was put on this cub during the nationwide lockdown and a suitable release site was surveyed and selected in Manas National Park by a joint WTI – Assam Forest Dept team.
With the site selection for release being chosen, the cub was shifted to an anti-poaching camp of the Assam Forest Department at Kheroni inside Manas National Park. Another two months of acclimatization was deemed necessary prior to release back to the wild for which a specially constructed cage was built with a self-release gate.
Finally on the 15th of May, the bear self-released itself from its cage, only to return momentarily the next day. A soft release like this helps the animal acclimatize to its surroundings and this approach was necessary for this young cub separated from its mother who would have in normal circumstances raised her in their natural habitat.
The bear was last seen around the cage on 17th of May when it ate the food provided before leaving through the tree canopy. Post release monitoring of the cub is being however continued as a standard practice by our biologist, Nazrul Islam.
“We wanted to put a radio collar for best post release monitoring data, however due to lockdown we couldn’t do so as the radio collar can’t get delivered in this lock down”, mentioned Daoharu.
WTI’s Rescue and Relief work in Western Assam is covered by its mobile veterinary service unit stationed in Kokrajhar, Assam.
You can help us save wildlife and ensure that they go back to the wild by contributing with a donation that will cover some costs of more rescued bears like this one that have arrived at our Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation in Pakke.
 
 
Click link to donate towards saving our natural heritage.