New Delhi: Nine individuals who were among the best, chosen for their contribution to wildlife conservation were honoured today at the ninth Venu Menon National Animal Awards function organized at the Stein Auditorium in India Habitat Center, New Delhi.
About 200 people, including awardees, jury members, guests and organizers participated.
Anita Nair, noted author who headed the seven-member jury said it was tough to decide on the winners, since all of them were equally qualified.
Parliamentarian, Nirmala Deshpande was the Chief Guest.
Maneka Gandhi, animal rights activist and parliamentarian, AJ Cady, Director, Animals in Crises and Distress, IFAW, and Vivek Menon, Executive Director of WTI also participated in the function.
The function started with an oddissi recital to call upon lord Ganesha’s blessings.
This year, the awards were given in nine categories.
The IFAW Young Achiever’s Awards – first and second prizes – were won by Dev Gurera and India Bisnoi respectively.
“I feel proud. It was a big competition but finally I have won. My friends and classmates have congratulated me on my achievement.” the first prize winner of the competition said.
Dev a class IX student in DAV Public School in Gurgaon wants to become a software engineer.
India Bisnoi is in class VI in Indian school, New Delhi, won the second prize.
“I feel very nice to have won this award. I do painting during my vacations,” she said, who wants to become an industrialist.
Both participated in the painting competition organized during the Animal Action Week (between October 1 and 7, 2006) by WTI and IFAW across the country.
Kampa Borgoyari, the Deputy Chief of the Bodo Territorial Council has won the Leadership in Conservation Award for his conservation efforts in Manas.
Venkata B. Nagamma won the Jury’s Special Award.
Saurabh and Gaurav Gupta won the Venu Menon Animal Allies Award. The Karuna Society for Animals and Nature won the Sofia House of Tourism Special Organization Award. Utpal Kumar Nag won the WTI Van Rakshak Award.
Cash prize, trophies and certificates were distributed.
Amala Akkineni, renowned film actress and social activists, Anandan Sivamani, celebrated percussionists, Ashoke Kumar, Lt. General (Retd.) and President of the Animal Welfare Board of India, Geeta Seshamani, Vice Chairman, Friendicoes, P. C. Bhattacharjee, Professor University and Trustee Wildlife Trust of India and K. B. Menon, Chairman, Venu Menon Animal Allies Foundation were among the other jury members.
AJ Cady of IFAW in his 9th Venu Menon Memorial Lecture narrated his experiences of the Harp seal campaign in Canada.  Maneka Gandhi and Nirmala Deshpande also spoke on the occasion.