NOIDA, Friday, May 2, 2014: In a tragic turn of events, noted herpetologist Dr Bhupathy Subramaniam, 51, passed away while on a field trip to the Agasthyamalai hills on April 28, 2014.


“Dr. Bhupathy was a quiet and down to earth individual with an innate urge to discourse on anything

relevant to the reptilian world”  |   Photo: Abhijit Das / WII

A Ph.D. in Zoology (Orinthology) from Rajasthan University, Jaipur, Dr Bhupathy was a Principal Scientist and Head of Conservation Ecology at the Salim Ali Centre for Orinthology and Natural History (SACON). He was heading a three-year study on the patterns of distribution of selected faunal groups on the Agasthyamalai hills and was there to check the progress of the research project.



Dr Bupathy was a well respected in the scientific community and was a member of many professional bodies including the Ethological Society of India, IUCN/SSC Indian Reptile and Amphibian Specialist Group, IUCN/SSC Tortoise and Freshwater Specialist Group, Bombay Natural History Society, IUCN/SSC Amphibian Specialist Group and the IUCN SSC Boas and Python Specialist Group.
 



Dr Bhupathy was heading a three-year study on the patterns of distribution of selected faunal

groups on the Agasthyamalai hills. Photo: Abhijit Das / WII


“Dr. Bhupathy was a quiet and down to earth individual with an innate urge to discourse on anything relevant to the reptilian world.
His tragic death is indeed a great loss to conservation. I hope his family members would soon overcome this tragic loss and cherish his dedication to the conservation of reptiles for years to come.”


Dr Ashraf, Chief Veterinary Officer and Chief of Rescue and Conflict Mitigation, Wildlife Trust of India


“It is difficult to visualise herpetological research in general and turtle research in particular in India without Dr Bhupathy’s guidance and advise. His pioneer work on assesing the status of freshwater turtles and land tortoises in India and recommendations for conservation in the early 90’s continues to be the  magnum opus and relevant for the region. For me it is a personal loss and tragedy.”


Dr B C Choudhury, Senior Advisor, Wildlife Trust of India; Wildlife Scientist, Conservation Planner and Former Professor, Wildlife Institute of India (WII)