Kaziranga National Park, 9th April, 2023: Gaj Utsav 2023 was recently held at Kaziranga National Park, Assam organized by the Govt. Of India to commemorate the 30 years of success of the Project Elephant in India. Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) took an active part in the event with a stall showcasing the work on “Right of Passage” for Elephants which aims at securing the safe passage for elephants through their 101 corridors identified across 11 states of India. The event was a 3-day celebration held between the 6th April 2023 and 8thApril 2023. inaugurated by Hon’ble President of India Smt. Draupadi Murmu, the event saw the participation of various forest and environment ministries, policy makers, stakeholders of both Govt. and non-Govt. organizations and locals.
WTI’s stall was visited by Shri. Ashwini Kumar Choubey (Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of Assam), Mr. Chandra Mohan Patowary (Forest Minister, Govt. of Assam), Shri Subodh Uniyal, Minister for Environment and Forests, Uttarakhand, CWLC of various States, and several other dignitaries and guests. The “Right of Passage: Elephant Corridors of India Edition II 2017” book which that outlines the functionality, feasibility for conservation action and four model approaches for securement of each of the 101 elephant corridors was also presented to Mr. Keshav Mahanta, Minister of Cabinet for Health, Family Welfare, Science and Technology and Information Technology, Govt. of Assam.

Honorable Minister of State, Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Shri Ashwini Kumar Choubey at WTI Stall at Gas Utsav 2023, Kaziranga National Park | Photography by WTI

We also witnessed active participations and engagement of student volunteers from schools and colleges from across Assam. Our representatives discussed the role played by ‘Green Corridor Champions (GCC)’ and their importance in protecting the national heritage animal of our country and securing elephant corridors, with young volunteers. Their role in helping mitigate human elephant negative interactions as well as providing safety to local communities for a win-win approach was also spoken about.
Our stall also showcased the work done by the Centre for Wildlife Rescue and Rehabilitation (CWRC) in Kaziranga National Park over the past 20+ years of its existence. CWRC is a one-of-a-kind facility for wildlife rescue and rehabilitation, that is run in collaboration with The Assam Forest Department and is supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and HCL Foundation.
Students volunteers at WTI Stall in GAs Utsav 2023, Kaziranga National Park | Photography by WTI

The Project Elephant, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also organised a workshop on 8th April during the Gaj Utsav on three broad aspects including ‘Human elephant conflict’, ‘Habitat, corridors and Connectivity’ and ‘Captive Elephant health and welfare’. Dr Sandeep Kr Tiwari, Director & Chief of Conservation, Wildlife Trust of India and member of Project Elephant Steering Committee presented on the successful models and examples of securing elephant corridors in India. The broad recommendation of the Working Groups were presented at the final session of the Gaj Utsav Celebration.