Gujarat: Initiating tagging of whale sharks in India for long term research, a female individual accidentally caught in a fishing net in Sutrapada in Gujarat was implanted with a visual marker on Wednesday. DNA sample was also collected while the team worked to release the fish.
The ‘visual tagging’ and DNA sampling are components of the Whale Shark Conservation Project – a joint venture of the Gujarat State Forest Department, the Tata Chemicals Limited and the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI). The project began with the widely-acclaimed Whale Shark Campaign in 2004, and now additionally undertakes scientific research which also includes photo-identification and proposes to satellite tag whale sharks.
The team involved in the operation included Forest Department officials, Manoj Matwal of WTI, Dr KV Kachot, government veterinary surgeon, as well as local fishermen. The tag was implanted and DNA samples collected while the fishermen disentangled the fish from the net.
“With the initiation of whale shark tagging and genetic studies, Gujarat has set another milestone in research and conservation of marine wildlife,” said Anita Karn, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Junagadh. “This will contribute in population estimation of whale shark as well as in understanding their migration and ecology.”
The visual marker is a tube with a unique ID number fitted on the dorsal fin base of whale sharks. “Unlike satellite tagging, visual tags do not ‘actively’ generate information on the whale shark’s whereabouts, but is a cheaper alternative that serves the basic purpose. These tags will help track the individual’s movement in cases of opportunistic sightings or interactions,” said Dhiresh Joshi, Coordinator, WTI.
The DNA sample collected will be analysed at the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Kochi, informed Joshi. “These analyses will help reveal whether the whale shark population of Gujarat is an isolated satellite population or interbreeds with other populations elsewhere.” The genetic studies are being carried out in collaboration with the University of Illinois, US, under the guidance of eminent whale shark geneticist Dr Jennifer Schmidt.