Dr PC Bhattacharjee, Vivek Menon and Peter Pueschel at the CBD BoP launch
Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), October 8, 2012: Delegates from 193 member countries began discussions on biodiversity conservation in Hyderabad today with the launch of the eleventh Conference of Parties of the Convention for Biological Diversity.
The CBD with its goals of biodiversity conservation, sustainable use and fair and equitable sharing of benefits provides an overarching global framework agreement for the conservation of the world’s natural resources. In recognition of the serious crises facing the world today due to rapid loss of biodiversity, the Parties, at the CoP 10 in Nagoya, Japan, had adopted the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 including 20 Aichi (global) biodiversity targets, which shall be incorporated into the respective national strategies and action plans.
Addressing the gathering during the launch, Jayanthi Natarajan, Hon’ble Minister of State for Environment and Forests, Government of India, stressed that the world now stands at a critical junction and sustained efforts must be collectively carried out by all stakeholders. “We do not want to repeat in 2020 what we already said in 2010, that the targets were not met” she said. “The real challenge now lies in implementation.”
The key issues to be discussed during the CoP 11 include biodiversity for ECOLOGICALLY sustainable development, livelihoods, public awareness, poverty reduction and food security, coastal and marine biodiversity and implementation of Nagoya Protocol on benefit sharing, etc which are relevant to achieve the 20 Aichi targets. The CoP will also evaluate resource mobilisation to facilitate implementation of the strategic plan.
“It is very important that biodiversity conservation is given highest priority for the welfare of animals and people,” said Peter Pueschel, Programme Director, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). “Necessary financial resources to reach the conservation targets will not be a problem if governments are serious about eliminating the so-called “perverse incentives”, which includes subsidies to activities destroying the environment. These must instead be shifted quickly to be invested for the good.”

The CBD BoP launch
The CoP-11 expects a participation of about 14000 delegates including senior government officials, diplomats, representatives of the UN, national and international NGOs and academia among others. About 400 side events on various aspects contributing to the Aichi targets will be organized at the CoP between October 8th and 19th. 
The International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) are hosting two side events. The first scheduled for October 12 deals with rescue and rehabilitation of wild animals as a tool for conservation, while the second on October 17 is on the role of wildlife corridors as the lifeline in conservation.
“The strategic plan and the Aichi targets of the CBD summarize the current minimum needs of the world today. These are important as they give direction as to what governments, NGOs and individuals could aim for. It provides us with a common ground to unite and work towards securing the natural heritage of the world,” said Vivek Menon, Executive Director, WTI. “However, setting targets is only the beginning. Effective implementation is what matters more.”