Pangti (Wokha, Nagaland), October 10, 2013: Thousands of migratory Amur falcons have flown in to Pangti village in Nagaland for roosting, even as the wildlife week was celebrated with awareness programmes including the Animal Action Education programme among school children. Unlike earlier seasons when they were hunted in large numbers, this year sees local protection groups in place enforcing resolutions by village councils to save these winter visitors. 
The falcons (Falco amurensis) traveling from Siberia are expected to roost in Nagaland for over a month, before carrying onwards to the African sub-continent. Last year, reports highlighted that the birds were hunted, prompting a Rapid Action Project by Natural Nagas and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)  to assist the state Forest Department in their protection.






Amur falcons arrive in droves around Doyang Reservoir.

Photo by Yuri Pator


The RAP, supported by CAF-India, ensured that the Village Councils of Ashaa, Pangti and Sungro in the Wokha district pass a resolution to ban hunting of these falcons. An Amur Falcon Protection Squad (AFPS) was also set up by the RAP. 
“The Amur Falcons have arrived and were sighted from the October 1. Initially, around 50-60 birds were sighted but the numbers have gone up to a couple of thousands now. More are expected to arrive. No hunting or trapping has been reported, indicating that our efforts are making an impact,” informed Steve Oduyo, Natural Nagas. 
He also added that other water birds, which are normally not seen, have been seen flying freely around the Doyang reservoir.  


WTI’s Yuri Pator, who is in Pangti to oversee the activities during the migration, said, “We have been preparing for this for so long now, and the falcons are finally here. Talking to the villagers and council members, I feel positive that this year the falcons will be safe and there is sufficient awareness in and around these three village to ensure they continue on their way to Africa.”
Over the past month, the Forest Department assisted by Natural Nagas and WTI have been conducting various activities in and around these three villages to spread awareness on the plight of the falcons, and many more are planned. Following a Memorandum of Understanding that was signed to ban killing falcons, the organisations have held several meetings with council members and villagers, put up signs and posters, in addition to direct protection by the Forest Department and the AFPS. 
 


WTI’s Regional Head Sunil Kyarong talks to villagers about wildlife

and the importance of protecting nature. Photo by Yuri Pator
Meanwhile, children in the 40-odd schools in the district are taking part for the first time in the IFAW Animal Action Education programme – the world’s largest animal focused education activity, with the theme ‘Elephants, Never Forget’. The AAE programme will make students aware of the problems facing elephants and conservation and welfare initiatives being undertaken around the world to save these majestic giants. 
 “Amur falcons were our priority under the RAP, but we are looking at overall wildlife awareness,” said Radhika Bhagat, Head – Wild Aid division of WTI that coordinates the RAPs. “We have also been supporting elephant conservation initiatives in the region, considering that human-elephant conflicts are seen here too as in other parts of India. Through the AAE we are trying to reach the message on our National Heritage Animal to the children here.” 
 


File photo of Doyang Reservoir where the falcons roost annually

Photo by Dilip Deori
As part of celebrations of wildlife week, a day-long awareness programme was also held on October 5, on ‘Conservation and Safe Passage for Amur Falcons’ by the Sungro Range Youth Welfare Organisation (SRYWO). During the programme WTI felicitated Mr W Oponthung Jami, Forester-1 from Forest Department of Nagaland, for his help and support. 
 


Mr W Oponthung Jami

Photo by Yuri Pator

Read Yuri Pator’s personal account of the preparation for the arrival of the falcons here.