Panna Tiger Reserve, March 14, 2014: This year’s Tiger Watch Programme, jointly organised by International Fund for Animal Welfare-Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) in collaboration with the Global Tiger Forum (GTF) ended on a positive note for parties of both countries, whose main aim was exchange of information on increasing prospects of tiger conservation globally. 
The programme, which is an annual affair (Read more here on last year’s programme), was held from February 24 to March 4, 2014, essentially involved a visit by a delegation from Russia. The latter included two Russian Wildlife Inspectors- Voloshin Andrei and Zavedeev Sergei , the Deputy Director of the Department of RosPirod, Nadzor Russia- Skripnik Tatiana , and IFAW-Russia Campaigner – Dr Anna Fillippova.
The team at Panna Tiger Reserve. Photo: Aniruddha Majumdar / IFAW-WTI
Skripnik Tatiana commenting on the programme said, “Tiger Watch programme is one of the best programs I’ve ever participated in. It imparts excellent education through sharing of experience with real demonstration of activities to be remembered for ever.”
The delegation was briefed by various members of the WTI staff on the various conservation activities being undertaken by WTI in India. Workshops were also held on some of the basic aspects of trade control which included identification of real and fake tiger skin by Nishant Varma, Regional Deputy Director, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau. He also briefed the guests on the diversity of wildlife crime, their causes and steps taken to combat these in India. The Delegated Secretary General of Global Tiger Forum and Deputy Inspector General of National Tiger Conservation Authority of India, Dr. S.P. Yadav gave the visiting team an overview of tiger conservation in India and the role of GTF in conserving tiger in its natural habitat in all tiger range countries.
To gain practical knowledge, the delegation was then taken to the Panna Tiger Reserve where they saw firsthand the different biological and sociological measures and impacts of tiger conservation in the area. Field Director of Panna, Rangaiah Sreenivasa Murthy also updated the visitors on the latest information on the tiger re-introduction in this reserve.
Voloshin Andrei highly impressed with the tiger conservation efforts of Panna TR remarked on the importance of a holistic approach to conservation saying, “Working with local villagers in Panna reserve is one of the very important initiatives for successful conservation of tigers and whole of the natural landscape. I will share the learning and experience to enrich management of natural habitats in my country.”
One of tigers seen by the team at Panna Tiger Reserve. Photo: Aniruddha Majumdar / IFAW-WTI
Dr Jagdish Kishwan Chief Advisor to the ED & CEO, and Head Policy, Wildlife Trust of India, appreciating the continuation of Indo-Russian field exchanges in tiger conservation commented, “For overall success and well-being of tiger globally, such inter-country exposure of field executives in latest tiger conservation policies, techniques and management practices are a must, and the same should be encouraged and organized more frequently.”
As a symbol of friendship between both the participating countries, all four participants from Russia jointly planted varieties of saplings with the forest staff of Panna Tiger Reserve in the Karnawati Forest Campus.