Shergaon, 24th June, 2023: Shergaon in Arunachal Pradesh hosts an extraordinary assemblage of biodiversity in the eastern Himalayan region. The lush forests, diverse wildlife, and stunning landscapes make it an invaluable ecological treasure. The flora of Shergaon is characterized by its incredible variety, with an abundance of plant species found throughout the region. The area is dominated by dense forests, consisting of both evergreen and deciduous trees. The forests house several mammalian species, such as the Red Panda (Ailurus fulgens), Takin (Budorcas taxicolor), Clouded Leopard (Neofelis nebulosa), Asiatic Black Bear (Ursus thibetanus), and Goral (Naemorhedus). Shergaon is also home to an endangered population of small cats such as the Marbled Cat (Pardofelis marmorata), Leopard Cat (Prionailurus bengalensis), Golden Cat (Catopuma temminckii), and Fishing Cat (Prionailurus viverrinus). These cats are important as they are indicators of a healthy ecosystem.
Handing over of desktop computer to Thukman school in Shergaon | Photograph by Aakash Bhushan/WTI
Situated amidst the beautiful valley of Shergaon, the Government Middle School – Thukman provides valuable education to the Shertukpen community’s children to further secure their future. As an attempt to equip the students with the much-needed technological skills and make them capable of competing with the rest of the world, Wildlife Trust of India, with the help of Garung Thuk, a local NGO working tirelessly for the betterment of Shergaon; provided the school with one desktop computer.
The event had presence of the around 45 school children from standard 1 to 8, the school headmaster, Garung Thuk Chairman, and other members, along with Mr Sunil Kayrong (Joint Director, WTI), Mr Aakash Bhushan (WTI’s Small Cat Biologist) and Mr Subhashish Arandhara (Field Officer at CBRC, Pakke).
Discussion with the school students I Thurman | Photograph by Aakash Bhushan/WTI
A post-event meeting with Garung Thuk (NGO) was also conducted to discuss the upcoming project of Small Cat Conservation in Shergaon. The cats are facing several threats including habitat destruction and loss of prey. This project to conserve these cats will require the community’s support and participation to mitigate the current conflict and for the future protection and management of the habitat. We also hope to enhance the knowledge of the community. With all these aspects, the community becomes an active stakeholder in preserving these elusive and vital members of the ecosystem.