New Delhi: The forest guards at Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary, who were trained by WTI’s Van Rakshak team with funds from the Japan Wildlife Conservation Society, could put the training to immediate use as they nabbed a gang of four timber thieves, and were able to charge them under various section of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
It was the night of October 12. Nine forest guards of Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary in the central Indian Maharashtra state, who had just completed their anti-poaching training conducted by WTI’s Van Rakshak Project, were on a jungle patrol. Suddenly, they stumble upon four persons who were stealing timber from the forest at night. Excited by their catch, the guards rushed to the Nagzira Forest Rest House, where the WTI’s Van Rakshak Training team was staying. They wanted to consult Dr RK Singh, programme officer, Van Rakshak, to clarify the charges under which these four persons could be charged.
Until the training had taken place, the forest guards had been unaware that they could charge a person for illegal felling of trees under the Wildlife (protection) Act, 1972. Dr Singh advised them that the offenders could even be charged for possession of an axe, which is described as a weapon under the Act. Along with Dr Singh, lawyer Prashant Sathianathan and Nagzira Range Officers MD Balapure and YS Patle, helped finalize the charges under which they could be charged and the forest guard team produced them before a magistrate and sent them to jail. WTI had organized an anti-poaching training and kit distribution at Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary, funded by the Japan Wildlife Conservation Society (JWCS).
The sanctuary is considered as a `green oasis’ in the eastern most part of the Maharashtra that is known as Vidarbha. Nagzira Wildlife Sanctuary was established in 1970-71. The sanctuary plays an important connecting link for the migration of tiger between Pench Tiger reserve (Maharashtra) and Indravati Tiger Reserve (Chattisgarh) and has been identified as a potential site for Project Tiger.
“The training programme was ideal for forest officials definitely assists us in wildlife poaching cases,” said Mr. DC Nagbhirey, assistant conservator of forests (ACF), Navgaon forest division. “Such programmes are necessary for field staff as basic crime investigation skill to control poaching are covered by the programme,” says Mr. Ajay Pillarset, ACF, Nagzira.
Nagzira is spread over 153.89 sq km and is home to many species, including 34 species of mammals, 166 species of birds including migratory and water birds, 36 species of reptiles, four species of amphibians and many species of fish. From the botanical point of view, Nagzira offers diverse vegetation ranging from dry, mixed forests to moist forests and can be classified as a “Southern Tropical Dry Deciduous Forest”.
WTI trained 51 staff on wildlife crime during the training programme in two batches. Intensive training on wildlife law was also conducted and was attended by 45 forest staff. A total of 44 staff was equipped with anti-poaching kit after the training by WTI. The anti-poaching kit includes a knapsack, jacket, rain suit, sleeping bag, cap, ground sheet, torch, water bottle and a pair of all-weather boots.