New Delhi:  The high profile case of Pataudi being embroiled in poaching a black buck continues to be in the limelight with varying versions of the story floating around. While waiting for the law to take its own course, the Wild Enforcement and Law programme of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) is doing its groundwork to ensure that violators of the law are brought to book.
The drama unfolded on Sunday morning, 5th June when WTI received a phone call from Jhajjar (Haryana) that despite the seizure having taken place on Friday night of 3rd June 2005, there is insufficient progress in the case and the carcass has been buried. A wildlife enthusiast of Jhajjar exhumed the carcass and brought it to Delhi Zoo.
Being Sunday evening, the veterinary doctor of Delhi Zoo was not available. WTI Trustee, Ashok Kumar took photographs of the carcass and purchased two slabs of ice so that the carcass would remain preserved overnight. On Monday morning, the carcass was examined  by the zoo veterinarian and Dr. N.V.K. Ashraf, Director of the  Wild Rescue programme of WTI.
The report clearly identified the carcass to be that of a female black buck. This scotched the rumors which had begun circulating that the carcass could be that of a nilgai, which is a Schedule IV animal in Wildlife (Protection) Act and can be condoned by a fine. Black buck is listed in Schedule I and a violation attracts the same penalty as that for poaching a tiger.
Later on Monday, the Jhajjar police also confirmed the identification and seized the Gypsy from the Delhi house of Pataudi. On Friday night, the dead animal and two hares were recovered from this Gypsy along with two weapons, searchlight etc. The police had registered a diary of the incident and had allowed the party of eight persons to leave Jhajjar in their vehicles. Barring a local villager, Madan Singh no one else has been arrested so far. His bail application was rejected today by a Jhajjar court.
WTI is concerned that a procedural mistake can weaken the case. Copies of basic documents have been obtained and these are being examined in the light of provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. A team of lawyers is at work and in contact with the relevant authorities to plug the loopholes that let poachers escape. Keep watching this space to trail the “Tiger’s case”.
WTI has today, sent a notice through its counsel under section 55 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, to the Chief Wildlife Warden of its intention to file a complaint in respect of the offence committed.