Kaziranga, October 31, 2013: Seven rare lesser adjutant stork (Leptoptilos javanicus) chicks that had suffered injuries, some severe, following a storm which hit Kaziranga last week, are currently being treated at the IFAW-WTI run CWRC (Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation).
 
A lesser adjutant stork chick, which had fallen from its nest

Photo by Anjan Talukdar/IFAW-WTI

The birds had fallen off their nests in Jorhat, Assam and were reported by Kushal Konwar Deka, Range Officer, Jorhat Forest Range. He promptly arranged transfer of the nine injured chicks to CWRC for care and management along with the seven carcasses of the dead birds for necropsy.
There are only around 4000-5000 mature individuals left of this species in the wild globally, as per the IUCN. Listed as vulnerable by the IUCN red list, the largest concentration of lesser adjutants is said to be in India with a substantial population in Assam with some important nesting colonies in Kaziranga and Dibru-Saikhowa National Parks. The species face threats including habitat degradation, hunting, drainage and conversion of wetland areas.
 
The chicks on their way to CWRC, where they are being treated

Photo by Anjan Talukdar/IFAW-WTI

“Lesser adjutant stork chicks are quite heavy to begin with and the nests they build aren’t always very sturdy. Being high up in the trees, unfortunately one does see the young chicks losing balance and falling a considerable height in case of heavy winds and storms,” said Dr Rathin Barman, Deputy Director of WTI.
Nine chicks were admitted with various degrees of trauma including multiple fractures of the legs and wings of which two succumbed to their injuries during the first 24 hours of observation and care.
“Necropsy of the dead storks brought to the centre had revealed extensive internal hemorrhage with multiple fractures of the limbs. From the remaining seven, including a 2-week old chick, three are fine with no obvious external injuries; however the other four do have extensive damage with multiple broken bones of the wings. They have been stabilized and started feeding well. Once the wounds heal up and the wings are repaired, we will initiate the outdoor rehabilitation procedure and observe their survival potential and ability to use their wings,” said Dr Anjan Talukdar, Centre Veterinarian, CWRC.
 
Nine chicks were admitted with various degrees of trauma

Photo by Anjan Talukdar/IFAW-WTI

Unfortunately, not all of these can be rehabilitated back in the wild, according to Dr Barman. “The chicks which have survived are lucky and now that they are here we’re going to do everything we can within our means to make sure they live. Hopefully, the three whose injuries aren’t that severe will eventually be rehabilitated to the wild. We have hand raised adjutant storks on previous occasions and are therefore familiar with the particulars of this species and resources required. However, we may have to shift four of them that suffer multiple broken bones of the wings for lifetime care.”