Diphu (Karbi Anglong): Three seizures were made by a well-motivated force of frontline Forest Department staff in Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council in northeast India, during a recent capacity building training conducted by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) supported by Japan Tiger & Elephant Fund (JTEF).
Teak wood planks, bushmeat and a wild animal trophy were seized in three separate instances during the course of the training held from February 8 to 13.  A total of 83 frontline staff of Karbi Anglong West Division, up to the level of forester, were trained on Indian wildlife laws and the power mandated to them. It also included identification of wildlife offences and appropriate and effective prosecution of offenders. The training was inaugurated by Abhijit Rabha, IFS, Conservator of Forests, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.
“The training was very good and very useful. It has definitely helped motivate our staff,” said GN Adhikari, Divisional Forest Officer, Karbi Anglong (West), who oversaw the organising of the training.
The training was organised under the aegis of WTI’s Van Rakshak Project (VRP), which has trained and equipped frontline staff in 106 protected areas and 21 other important wildlife areas across the country. About 8,600 individuals have been trained so far.Of the three seizures conducted by the trainees, the first took place on February 10, during a practical patrolling exercise. Several unclaimed wooden planks were seized in West Diphu.On February 12, two of the participants while on their way to the training, made the second seizure. They found locals selling meat of barking deer. The traders escaped but the meat was seized.That evening, Dr Rakesh Kumar Singh, Coordinator, WTI and resource person for the training, found a trophy made of swamp deer antlers displayed in a watch showroom in Diphu town. He discussed the issue with the DFO  to check for requisite documents of the trophy.The following day, the trainees were briefed on the issue of keeping wildlife trophies. They visited the showroom and inquired for relevant documents. The item was seized when the salesman failed to produce the documents. Further investigation is going on.“This VRP training was funded by JTEF as a token of its long-term commitment to help conserve the wildlife in Karbi Anglong. We are glad that our little contribution was appreciated. We will continue to assist the Forest authorities in every way we can to ensure that Karbi Anglong’s natural heritage is secure,” said Dr Ujjal Kumar Sarma, Manager, WTI.In addition to training and equipping frontline staff, the VRP also maintains a countrywide Protected Area Staff Status (PASS) database and runs the country’s only NGO accident insurance scheme for the frontline staff to benefit their families in case of accidents while on duty. Over 17,000 individuals are covered under these initiatives.
Learn more about Van Rakshak Project