Dhaka, September 16, 2014: For the conservation of the majestic tiger (Panthera tigris) which once existed across Asia and parts of Europe and is now found only in 13 countries, the Global Tiger Forum (GTF) held its sixth General Assembly Meeting and second Stocktaking Conference in the capital of Bangladesh, Dhaka to evaluate the implementation of Global Tiger Recovery Program (GTRP), which targets to double population (Tx2) of tigers by 2022.


The three day event from 14-16 September, was inaugurated by Her Excellency, Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister, People’s Republic of Bangladesh, and hosted by Bangladesh Forest Department, Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), Bangladesh. It was co-organized and co-sponsored by the Global Tiger Initiative (GTI), Global Tiger Forum (GTF), World Bank and United States Agency for International Development (USAID).



Sheikh Hasina, Hon’ble Prime Minister, People’s Republic of Bangladesh 

Senior officials from all 13 Tiger Range Countries, executives from various governmental, non-governmental and inter-governmental bodies participated in a number of sessions to deliberate on various issues related to implementation and monitoring of GTRP, as also activities undertaken by GTF since its last General Assembly Meeting in 2011.
 
Sheikh Hasina, Hon’ble Prime Minister, Bangladesh highlighting the cultural and national significance of tiger in many Asian countries said, “I hope this conference would play a significant role in increasing tiger population, and conserving and ensuring secured life of this beautiful culture.” She also hoped that the Conference would make significant stride towards the aim of doubling the population of wild tigers in all range countries as directed by the Thimphu Affirmative 9 Point Action Agenda. She concluded her speech stating, “I also hope that the tiger range countries would keep their continued efforts for protecting tigers. Let us join hands to save the tigers and save the nature”.


(L-R) Md. Nojibur Rahman, Forest Secretary, Bangladesh Forest, Abdullah Al Islam Jakob, Deputy Forest Minister- People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Jagdish Kiswan IFAW-WTI representative, Dr Rajesh Gopal, Secretary General GTF, Aniruddha Majumdar, Techncial Officer GTF and S P Yadav, Delegated Secretary General, GTF. Photo: Sarfaraz Rana/Bangladesh Forest Department

Mohd Yunus Ali, CCF, and Head of Bangladesh Forest Department, echoing the general sentiment of the event said, “World is united to conserve the tiger”. He also sounded a word of caution on the probable adverse impacts of climate change on Sunderbans, and said, “Constant monitoring of tiger habitat of Bangladesh Sunderbans was required to devise suitable mitigation and adaptation measures to ensure good population of tigers.”

Tapan Dey, CCF, Wildlife, Bangladesh, present at the event said, “It has been an honour and privilege for Bangladesh Forest Department to hold the two most important events related to protection and conservation of tiger in the wild across all its range states, i.e the second Stocktaking Conference to review implementation of GTRP, and sixth General Assembly of GTF. We are pleased with the outcome of the two events, and will always be ready to contribute our bit in ensuring survival of the majestic species not only in Bangladesh, but all across its habitat in other countries.”
 
The GTF Secretariat, in association with other institutions, scientists and experts introduced “Virtual Centre of Excellence (VCE)” for wildlife conservation with enhanced focus on tigers. The VCE is designed to fulfill crucial knowledge and information gaps in addressing regional threats to tiger conservation.
 
S P Yadav, DIG-NTCA and Delegated Secretary General, GTF shared his thoughts on the vitality of VCE stating that, “Useful exchange of views and thoughts on global conservation of tiger in the sixth General Assembly has encouraged us to continue with the good work being undertaken by GTF in collaboration with all tiger range countries to ensure conservation of species across the globe. VCE is another remarkable facility created in GTF to provide a quick and efficient interactive platform for tiger conservationists, experts, scientists and managers to share the latest practices and scientific advancements in the field of tiger conservation.”
                                                                                                                        
Dr Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor to ED & CEO and Chief Policy, Wildlife Trust of India, represented International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and its regional partner Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) at the Conference and General Assembly. He said “This conference has vast potential to play a key role in encouraging and supporting tiger conservation in all tiger range countries, and helping them to develop in-situ conservation strategies for the long term welfare and survival of tiger in its natural habitat”. He further added “the conference also provided a forum to share views and philosophy of IFAW-WTI on wildlife conservation in general and protection and management of tiger in particular, in addition to ways and means of strengthening the GTF”. 
 
IFAW-WTI in collaboration with GTF Secretariat compiled the National Tiger Action Plans (NTAPs) of all TRCs into a much awaited single volume ‘Action Tiger Third Edition’ which was also released during this General Assembly. This edition, inter alia, has updated version of action plans of India and Vietnam, and was warmly welcomed by all delegates. The General Assembly also approved continuation of IFAW as Category-C member of the Standing Committee of GTF, along with WWF as the new member of the Committee in this category.