Sirivilliputhur (Tamil Nadu) Increasing threats including habitat destruction and conflicts with humans have prompted conservationists to initiate a Rapid Action Project (RAP) to help protect the grizzled giant squirrel (Ratufa macroura) in Sirivilliputhur, Tamil Nadu.
The project, aimed mainly at mitigating human-grizzled giant squirrel conflicts, includes research on the species and their interrelation with humans near the Grizzled Giant Squirrel Wildlife Sanctuary in Sirivilliputhur – home to the largest population of this arboreal rodent.
Endemic to the Western Ghats in India, the grizzled giant squirrel is listed in Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. Despite the protection accorded by the law, the squirrels are persecuted by farmers irked by crop damage caused by the animals.
“The squirrels move out of the sanctuary in search of food like mangoes, jackfruits, tamarind and also coconuts. These trees are understandably more abundant in villages, and attract the squirrels,” said conservationist R Arumugham, who is implementing the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)-supported RAP along with the Wildlife Association of Rajapalayam (WAR). “This leads to conflicts, and farmers resort to retaliation, even poisoning.”
With funds provided by Asian Adventures, the project implementers studied the squirrels’ food habits, their distribution within the sanctuary and outside, and also evaluated the field conditions that propelled the conflicts.
“The sanctuary has no buffer area making conflicts close to inevitable. Through this RAP we are also trying to assess the feasibility of land acquisition/lease to facilitate creation of a buffer between the sanctuary and human habitation as well as to create corridors to provide a safe passage to the squirrels between patches of forests,” said Radhika Bhagat, Programme Officer, WTI.
The studies also revealed that the squirrels prefer to nest on trees at a height of 15 metres or more. Fruit trees found in the human settlements provide good cover from predators as well as food, making them a preferred nesting place for these squirrels.
In addition to studies on the squirrels, the RAP implementers carried out surveys to understand the attitude of the farmers towards the squirrels.
“The squirrels do cause losses to the farmers. However, these losses can be reduced by simple understanding of the squirrel behaviour. For example, when a squirrel feeds on a jackfruit, say, it will continue to feed on the same fruit if not removed. Only if the farmers pluck out the damaged fruit, the squirrels move on to a new fruit,” added Arumugam.
Accordingly, workshops and campaigns were also conducted to make the farmers aware of the plight of the grizzled giant squirrel.