Kokrajhar (Assam, Manas): Celebrating the World Wildlife Week, locals in Manas in the northeast Indian state of Assam joined the Bodoland Territorial Council, Assam Forest Department and IFAW-WTI in an urgent campaign to save the golden langur – an endangered primate found in forests along the Indo-Bhutan border in Assam.
Golden langur (Trachypithecus geei) is listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, granting it the highest level of protection in the country. Yet, vehicle hits, poaching, conflicts with people and habitat degradation continue to take a toll on the species in Bodoland.
Less than 2500 mature individuals of the golden langur are estimated to be found in the wild today. It is listed as ‘endangered’ by the IUCN Red List, owing to an estimated reduction in population by more than 50% in the past three decades.
“The species has suffered tremendously due to habitat degradation and fragmentation. Golden langur troops suffer from resource crunch which compels them to descend to the ground, making them vulnerable to accidental death while crossing the road through the forested areas. Poaching, and attacks by dogs are also on the rise. The campaign will serve to raise the appropriate awareness among local people on the plight of the species,” said Prof PC Bhattacharjee, Executive Trustee, WTI.
The campaign launch organised this week in Kokrajhar included a Golden Langur Football Tournament and a cycle rally, to draw focus on the species. Talks were organised to inspire locals to support its conservation.
Speaking at the launch, the Deputy Chief of the BTC Kampa Borgoyary said, “The way we Bodo people are fighting for our ethnic identity and land rights the golden langur is perhaps fighting for its forests too. We should protect our forests which are the habitats of the langurs. We should be proud that the golden langur is found only in this region and it is our responsibility to conserve it”.
The campaign is a component of the Manas Pride Campaign, a drive to encourage and promote community participation in conservation of the World Heritage site, which was recently rid of its ‘in danger’ tag by UNESCO.
Dr Panjit Basumatary, IFAW-WTI veterinarian said, “There are numerous dedicated community-based organisations that are working to preserve the natural heritage in Greater Manas, which includes Manas National Park and nearby forests. However, long-term conservation generically will require mass participation by public and that is what we are advocating with these campaigns.”
The campaign activities will also including putting up signage in corridors used by golden langurs. Students will be encouraged to understand the problems facing the species, and petition for its effective conservation.
Related story:
India gets back its pride: Manas no longer ‘in danger’ of losing World Heritage status