Panavally, June 02, 2017: We remember Lakshmy Awwa as she was seven years ago, preparing to leave her home in Kottapady for the last time. Slight and wizened, but carrying herself with an assurance unstooped by age. She cradled in the crook of her arm an idol of Ganesha, the elephant god, lord of beginnings and remover of obstacles. She’d had the idol for as long as she could remember. She would not let anyone else carry it as she moved to her new home outside the jungle.
The year was 2010. Awwa had lived in her hut in the forest village of Kottapady for 40 years, 17 of them completely alone after her husband Dasan Chetty passed away. She had previously been adamant about never leaving her land: her husband had died there and she liked her quiet life in the jungle.
“I see elephants, tigers and leopards here all the time” Awwa declared, “but I have never been afraid. Humans are more dangerous than animals anyway.”
Kottapady lay in a forested area in the Wayanad district of northern Kerala. The land was marshy in places and there was water all year round, which attracted animals, especially elephants. For Awwa though this was never an issue: “I see elephants, tigers and leopards here all the time” she declared, “but I have never been afraid. Humans are more dangerous than animals anyway.”
Every fortnight Awwa would walk through the jungle to buy provisions at a neighbouring village. In the last five years though, she had started to feel the slow creep of old age. “I began to think of an easier life outside the jungle”, she said. “I had heard about Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), which had relocated people from Thirulakunnu and Valiya Emmadi, and families from my village as well. I met some of the villagers at their new homes in Panavally and they told me that they were happy. They said they could grow their crops in peace and sleep without fear of elephants.”
“So I decided to relocate. I have now got dry, fertile land in Panavally and my new house is better constructed. I have received some money in my bank account for household expenditure. And my neighbours are all known to me, which is very important at my age. I had earlier refused to move from my land when people had asked to buy it for tourism or other reasons. But here they are buying land to save the elephants, which are like my children. It is a good reason to move. Lord Ganesha would be happy.”
The forest that was once the village of Kottapady is now part of the Thirunelli-Kudrakote elephant corridor, which links elephant habitats in the Brahmagiri Hills with those on the Coorg Plateau (both in Karnataka), through the north Wayanad region of Kerala. As such, it creates one of the most vital habitat contiguities in the Western Ghats. By refusing to sell her land for tourism, and then voluntarily relocating to help protect elephants, Lakshmy Awwa played a crucial part in securing the Thirunelli-Kudrakote corridor.
Awwa had been unwell for several months and passed away last night at the age of 76. We at the Wildlife Trust of India deeply mourn her passing.
Our condolences go out to her family.