Kuthori (Assam): An electric fence along the border of Kuthori Village in Assam has successfully reduced instances of crop raiding by wild animals from the adjacent Kaziranga National Park, allowing the villagers to resume cultivation after a hiatus of over three years. 
In 2003, cultivation was abandoned by the predominantly farming community of Kuthori after incurring heavy losses for six years due to crop destruction by wild animals. Crop damage was more intense during the dry seasons, when the resources, also spent on irrigation made the loss even dearer.
Two local organisations, Duarbagori Co-operative Society and Kuthori Krishi Unyaan Committee joined hands with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in a Rapid Action Project (RAP) in 2007 to install electrified fence to minimise human-wildlife conflict by preventing the entry of wild animals into the village.
Four lines of electrified wire were installed on bamboo poles placed six metres apart, along the 8 km stretch of Kuthori’s border towards the national park to provide protection to about 125 bighas of farmlands. Powered by solar energy, low voltage current (of about 9V-12V) was passed through the wires to scare away the animals. Energisers, batteries, a lightening diverter and insulating material for the power fence were provided by WTI. Four checkpoints were made and volunteers engaged to periodically monitor the functioning of the fence.
Of the proposed 125 bighas, timely installation of the fence could be done only to cover 65 bighas, following which, no raids were reported from there. Crop damage was high in the remaining 60 bighas where the fence could not be installed on time, but despite the loss, the farmers gained a net profit of over 25,000 rupees with a crop production of 112 quintals of mustard from 65 bighas as compared to 18.77 quintals from 96 bighas cultivated in 2003.
“The villagers were distraught because of their inability to farm and their declining economic condition. The success of the power fencing project gave them hope. After the success, we have been approached by the villagers for more projects of such sorts” said Ataur Rahman, Secretary, Duarbagori Co-operative Society, and the proponent of the project.
In addition to benefiting the farmers, the power fencing project also provided some intangible benefits to the wildlife of Kaziranga, believes Rahman. He said, “Wild animals cannot exit the park from this part of Kuthori and are thus less likely to be involved in conflicts or succumb to poaching.”
“The fencing has obviously helped the animals indirectly, as cases of conflicts arising from the animals trespassing the cultivation area have been reduced,” SN Buragohain, director, Kaziranga National Park concurred. “The project however was implemented mainly to protect the farmers’ crops from depredation by wild animals and it has served its purpose,” he added.