Poonch (J&K): Confirming the presence of a population of the endangered Kashmir markhor in Poonch, an ongoing survey has stressed on the urgency to protect this area for long-term conservation of this mountain goat.
Markhor (Capra falconeri), the world’s largest goat, is listed as ‘Endangered’ by IUCN and is a Schedule I species in the Indian Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 and the Wildlife Protection Act, J&K. With a global population of less than 2,500 mature individuals, it is found in India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. The Kashmir markhor (C. f. cashmiriensis), also known as flare-horned markhor, is present only in Jammu & Kashmir.
Researchers from the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) have been assisting the J&K Wildlife Department in the first ever comprehensive survey on the Kashmir markhor, since 2004, under its Schaller Conservation Surveys. The Schaller Conservation Surveys specifically researches on threatened species that are not in the limelight such as the markhor, to generate baseline information and help develop focussed conservation strategies.
The Markhor Survey Project, includes study of population and distribution of the Markhor supported by the Chester Zoo, UK and ecological studies like habitat use in summer and winter, assessment of anthropogenic pressures, impact of grazing and threats.
“The first phase of the survey carried out in 2004-05 had estimated the Kashmir markhor population to be about 300 individuals; we had direct evidence of its presence only on the northern slopes of Pir Panjal, but not along the southern slopes from where we only had indirect evidence,” says Riyaz Ahmed, Assistant Manager, WTI, who has been working on the species for the last five years.
Recommendations of the first phase of this survey, published in the WTI report ‘Goats on the Border’, had led to the notification of Kaj-i-nag National Park, comprising three critical markhor habitats – Lachipora and Limber Wildlife Sanctuaries and Naganari Conservation Area. Additionally, the survey had identified Hirpura Wildlife Sanctuary as the other site with best possibility of population recovery. Currently the project is focusing on the southern slopes comprising the Poonch area, adjoining Hirpura WLS.
“Poonch has historically been a very important area for wildlife,” says Dr Rahul Kaul, Chief Ecologist, WTI. “Our team has found confirming evidence to the presence of markhor here. This new development is very encouraging and we can expect more accurate estimates of the markhor in J&K, which will be very beneficial to develop the conservation strategy. As with Kaj-i-nag, this area must also be made a Protected Area (PA) for conservation of markhor.”
Poaching is one of the major threats to markhor as well as other wildlife including brown bear, musk deer, goral and rare pheasants like cheer encountered during the survey in Poonch.
Even as the survey continues, the J&K Wildlife Department has initiated implementing a recovery plan. The plan focuses on continued detailed research, awareness among locals, herders, army and police for keeping this area intact.
 

Read More
Schaller Conservation Surveys