WTI’s Dr. Rajendra Mishra conferred with Chhattisgarh State Biodiversity Award
Dr. Rajendra Prasad Mishra, WTI’s Regional facilitator for Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh received the State Biodiversity Award in Chhattisgarh from the Honb. Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh, Shri Bhupesh Baghel during the International Biodiversity Day event in the state capital on 22nd May, 2022.
Dr. Mishra, who did his PhD. in Wild Buffaloes of Central India, has been working with Wildlife Trust of India since 2006. Prior to his stint at WTI, he has been an independent researcher on the recovery of the species from 1997 to 2000. Working as a technical expert for the forest department, his work has been crucial in recovering the Central Indian sub-population of the wild buffalo, also the state animal of Chhattisgarh.

Dr. Rajendra Mishra collecting the State Biodiversity Award on the World Environment Day 2022
Dr. Mishra has been the first to come out with a conservation-breeding plan for wild buffaloes in the state of Chhattisgarh. Under his leadership, wild buffaloes were radio-collared for home range studies and regular monitoring of individuals. He also led his technical expertise to the first-ever long-distance translocation of the species from Manas National Park in Assam to Barnawapara Wildlife Sanctuary in Chhattisgarh, to support the population augmentation and conservation breeding of the species. Apart from his work on wild buffaloes, Dr. Mishra has also played a leading role in human-elephant conflict mitigation training and management across the state.
A doctorate from the Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal, Dr. Mishra has more than 40 publications, research papers, and books on wild buffaloes. “Dr. Mishra’s work has been crucial in the conservation and protection of wild buffaloes, elephants, sloth bears, leopards, and other wildlife in the state. He has been a key part of several wildlife management SOPs for the state and we look forward to his continued support, says Dr. S.K. Singh, PCCF (Wildlife), Chhattisgarh Forest Department.
This recognition from the state is a significant achievement, both for Dr. Mishra and Wildlife Trust of India, for the continued effort in bringing back one of the most enigmatic species in the landscape. Listed as endangered, the central Indian population of the wild buffalo faces threats in the form of habitat loss, policy inclusion, and awareness. You can read more about the Central India Wild Buffalo Recovery Project here.
 
World Biodiversity Day Awards by Bodoland Territorial Council
 
The Bodoland Green Awards are annual awards and a national initiative that recognizes the efforts of individuals and institutions across India who are working tirelessly to subvert climate change by conserving and preserving the rich biodiversity of the country for a better relationship between society and nature. This year, the Bodoland Territorial Council introduced the Bodoland Green Award which was conferred to sixteen individuals by Shri. Pramod Bodo, the chief of Bodoland Territorial Council. Two of the awardees were from WTI’s Greater Manas Recovery Project.
Dr. Daoharu Baro, Veterinarian
Dr, Daoharu Baro, WTI’s veterinarian with the Greater Manas Recovery Project received the “Bodoland Green Award” by the Bodoland Territorial Council, on World Environment Day, 2022.

Dr Daoharu Baro receiving the Bodoland Green Award , 2022 from the Hon’ble Chief of BTC Shri Pramod Boro; Photo: Gulzar Hussain
Daoharu, meaning “Warrior” in the Bodo language, has been working with WTI since 2015 and has been instrumental in the rescue and rehabilitation of several wildlife including the greater one-horned rhinoceros, Asian elephants, Bengal tigers, and leopards among others.
Mr. Tiken Chandra Ray, Baba Bondhu Member
A role model for the community living in the fringe villages of Manas National Park, Mr. Tiken Chandra Ray’s work has been critical to human-elephant conflict mitigation in the landscape.

Shri Tiken Ray while receving the Bodoland Green Award, 2022 from the Hon’ble Chief of BTC Shri Pramod Boro; Photo: Kaushik Deb
Mr. Tiken has been working with WTI as a community mobilizer and leads the Baba Bondhu (Elephant Watcher) groups that work on human-elephant conflict mitigation. He has helped both Wildlife Trust of India and Forest Department in the execution of conservation programs like community-managed solar powered fence, livelihood supports to critically forest-dependent households, peaceful chasing of stray wild elephants and a continued motivation and handholding of fence technicians.
His restless efforts, and devotion to help people around him should be appreciated and encouraged to build our next generation of ground heroes to fight for the nation and for the cause of conservation, says Shri. Pramod Bodo, the chief of Bodoland Territorial Council.
The Greater Manas Recovery Project is supported by IFAW, Chester Zoo, Assam Forest Department and Bodoland Territorial Council. Click here to know more about our work in the landscape.