The Nokoma inaugrating the hanging bridge in Jade Gindam village

A hanging bridge built by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)-World Land Trust (WLT) for the people of Jade Gindam Village was inaugurated by Smt. Hiramoni R Marak, the Nokma (Chief) of the village. The inauguration was attended by the residents of Jade Gindam that included people all age groups. The oldest man from the village appreciated the efforts of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)-World Land Trust (WLT) and said, “These people live and stay with us and understand our problems and I have never seen this kind of a helpful NGO before.”
Jade Gindam used to get cut off from other adjoining areas during the monsoons since the river at the entrance of the village swells up considerably. The only solution was to build a permanent hanging bridge. On request of the Nokma, villagers and Chairman, Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC), WTI-WLT agreed to construct a hanging bridge on the river to provide support to the community and encourage them for setting aside land for securing the Rewak-Emangre elephant corridor.


Children pose infront of the hanging bridge

Speaking at the event, the Nokma recalled the past and how people were so averse to WTI’s work and even protested against the wildlife conservation work in the region. Smt. Marak said, “Under such hostile circumstances, WTI could have given up but they never did and finally good has overcome the bad and the result is this Hanging Bridge which we have always dreamt of. We will no longer be cut off from the rest of the area during rains and would not lose our belongings while crossing the river. It was usual for people to lose their weekly ration and shoes while trying to cross the river.”
For around 15 years, people had to swim to cross the river and the worst affected were school children who had to skip school and even examinations which led to an increase in school dropout rate. The construction of the bridge has brought a relief and smiles on the faces of these villagers. “This year the rains started early and the villagers are happy that they no more need to think about storing basic food and other essential items during the rainy season. Even accessing healthcare facilities have become far easier since these villagers now have the bridge to commute between Jade Gindam, Siju and other parts of Garo Hills. This bridge has also brought a great relief for school children and elders. The parents are happy that their students will be able to go to school throughout the year which will improve prospects of better job opportunities,” said Sunil Kyrong, Regional Head, WTI.


Villagers offering prayers before the inaugration

The construction of the bridge started in 2014 and was finally completed in February 2015. Although a formal inauguration of the bridge was pending, the villagers had started using the same to commute. Mr. Bosnath N Marak, a local from Jade Gindam said, “This is not a bridge but a lifeline for the people of this village which gets cut off from the main town for almost 2-3 months during monsoons. We are grateful to WTI-WLT for this support”. Ms Elena Sangma, a young woman from the village said, “Malaria and other water borne diseases plague this region during monsoons and we are glad that this bridge will help us to get access to doctors and public healthcare clinic in Siju. A big thank you to the friends of Mongma (elephants) and we will do our best to provide unhindered movement of wild animals”.
Jade Gindam — a key village on the Rewak Emangre Elephant Corridor — was declared a Village Reserve Forest due to the conservation initiatives of WTI and WLT. This is a very innovative approach for conservation wherein community take onus of conservation efforts and more importantly where both the community and government have come forward for securing the corridors for wildlife movement.