Sundarbans, 14th February, 2023: The world’s largest contiguous mangrove forests, the Sundarbans, also hosts some most iconic wildlife species. At the apex of this ecosystem is the Bengal tiger (Listed as Endangered in the IUCN Red List of species) that has adapted to thrive in this unforgiving habitat, with 62 inhabited villages sharing their boundary with the forest.
Adapted to drinking saline water and hunt on mudflats, the tigers of Sundarbans are starkly different from other populations of tigers across the country. They not only rule the forests but are also widely known for frequently entering human habitation. Major sections of the Protected Areas (PAs) here share a boundary with human settlements and agricultural fields, making them ‘conflict hotspots’. There have been regular reports of negative human–wildlife interactions, often resulting threats of life to both human and wildlife. In 2022, there have been three such cases, two of which resulted in the death of individual villagers.
Crab Fishing in Sundarbans | Photograph by Madhumay Mallik/WTI
Economic security that boils down to livelihoods is a constant challenge for the resident human population of Sundarbans. There is a high dependency on forest resources and agricultural activities. Wild honey collection, fishing, crab collection, prawn farming and paddy farming is the way of life here. Locals also depend on the forests for firewood collection. Encountering a tiger is an occupational hazard they live with.
Conflict also occurs when tigers venture into forest fringes, as historical records as far back as the 18th century indicate. Tigers habitually swim across rivers or creeks in this delta to reach the villages in the fringe zone, for easy prey like cattle, under cover of darkness. With as many as 62 villages sharing their boundaries with Sundarban mangrove forest, this is something that WTI identified as a priority threat to address.
Locals installing nylon net fencing in village perimeter | Photograph by Samrat Paul/WTI
The solution was to install nylon net fencing along the village perimeter. With time, this method has proved to be aneffective mitigation tool against straying tigers. WTI, along with the West Bengal Forest Department has also come out with a protocol for maintenance of the nylon-net fencing. Involving local stakeholders like FPC/EDC members, along with forest staff, the 24 Pargana (South) Forest Division currently manages a 65 km area where nylon net fence has been erected.
Under Integrated Tiger Habitat Conservation Programme (ITHCP) -Phase II, WTI also supported the 24 Pargana (South) Forest Division with 5 km nylon net fencing in Raidighi Range. This stretch of fencing will protect Baikunthapur, Kishorimohonpur and Binodpur moujas of Maipith-Baikunthapur Gram Panchayat (Kultali block). Along with its installation, the Primary Response Team (PRT) members are also voluntarily involved with local forest department for fence patrolling and maintenance on a regular basis.
Nylon Net Fencing in Kultali, Sundarbans | Photograph by Samrat Paul/WTI
While conflict inside the forest is a result of illegal incursion into wild habitats, these fences work to keep tigers away from existing human settlements in Sundarbans. WTI is thankful to West Bengal Forest Department for their support in this effort. Know about the project here.
Disclaimer: This project is supported by IUCN’s Integrated Tiger Habitat Conservation Programme, funded by the German Cooperation via KfW Development Bank. The contents of this article are the sole responsibility of Wildlife Trust of India and do not necessarily reflect the views of IUCN, the German Cooperation or KfW.