This must-read series by Wildlife Trust of India features 10 eminent wildlife experts who share their list of top 20 wildlife titles. We start with Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan.

Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan is an environmental historian with a special interest in human-wildlife relations in colonial and contemporary India. He chaired the Elephant Task Force in 2010. He studied at the universities of Delhi and Oxford and formerly taught at the Universities of Cornell, Delhi and Jadavpur. He joins Ashoka University from 1 July 2022 as Professor of History and Environmental Studies.
He has been Director of the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library and also Vice Chancellor of Krea University, AP. He is author and editor of several books, from his 1996 work Fencing the Forest (1996) and the most recent At Nature’s Edge in 2018.
We asked Dr. Mahesh to list the top 20 books he would recommend for anyone interested. Here’s his list of top 10 titles about wildlife in India and another 10 on global topics.
His pick of the top reads on wildlife of India:

The Wildlife of India by EP Gee
The Jungle in sunlight and shadow by FW Champion
Wild animals in central India by Dunbar Brander
My India by Jim Corbett
Man eating wolves of Ashta by Ajay Singh Yadav
Jungle and Backyard by M Krishnan
Tigers: The Secret Life by Thapar and Fatheh Singh Rathore
Snake man by Zai Whitaker
End of a Trail: Cheetah in India by Divyabhanusinh
Illustrated Trees of Delhi by Pradeep Kishen

His pick of the top reads on global wildlife topics:

Never cry wolf by Farley Mowat
Year of the gorilla by George Schaller
Jaguar by Alan Rabinowtiz
Elephant Memories by Cynthia Moss
Encounters with animals by Gerald Durell
In the shadow of man by Jane Goodall
Almost Human by Shirley strum
In search of the red ape by Birure Galdikass
Way of the wolf by David Mech
A certain curve of horn: The Hundred-Year quest for the giant sable antelope of Angola by Campbell Walker

Also read the curated lists by:
Aasheesh Pittie
Dr. M K Ranjithsinh