Dudhwa Tiger Reserve: Preliminary satellite data has indicated ‘healthy’ movement of the Rahmankhera tiger in Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, where it was released on April 26. The tiger has so far explored an area of approximately 12 sq km.
The adult male tiger was captured from Rahmankhera on April 25, more than three months after it was first sighted in the human-dominated landscape. Believed to have originated from the Dudhwa landscape, it was satellite-collared and released in Dudhwa TR by a team of experts from the UP Forest Department, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Wildlife Institute of India, following its capture. The post-release monitoring is currently ongoing.
“At this moment, it is difficult to predict the animal’s movement,” says Dr Anil Kumar Singh, who heads WTI’s Conflict Mitigation operations. “Till the time it establishes its territory and settles in the release site, the team will be on alert, tracking the animal.”
This is the first case in Uttar Pradesh of a captured tiger being released back to the wild. The two tigers captured previously in joint efforts by the UP Forest Department and WTI were moved to captive facilities.
“Unlike the others, this tiger was never involved in any human conflict despite roaming in high human density areas. So sending it back to the wild was the obvious choice,” says JS Asthana, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), UP Forest Department. “This is an ideal tiger habitat with a decent prey-base, and the tiger should settle in naturally in the due course of time.”
“Conflict with humans is one of the major threats to the survival of tigers and other big cats,” says Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, WTI. “For mitigation efforts to be successful, it must have a holistic approach in dealing with the problem. Patrolling, awareness campaigns, well-trained and equipped Rapid Response Teams will help tackle situations when they arise.”
WTI has dealt with 13 cases of human-tiger conflicts across the country. Of these, five were returned to the wild, including one that had caused death of two people in northern Assam but was released in Manas as it was not a man-eater. Two died during conflict and the rest were cubs or man-eaters, sent to life-time care centres.



Related Stories:
Rahmankhera tiger captured; to be released in Dudhwa
Photographs confirm survival of rehabilitated tiger in Manas
Conflict Tiger Released In Manas
Conflict Tiger captured in upper Assam to be released in Manas