Roing (Arunachal Pradesh): In an aberration from their canopy dwelling nature, eastern Hoolock gibbons (Hoolock leuconedys) stranded in isolated clusters of trees near Roing in south-east Arunachal Pradesh have been observed descending towards nearby fields for food,  raising concerns on their safety and survival.
Highly specialised canopy-dwellers, Hoolock gibbons have long arms and short legs making their body suited for swinging in the tree tops and not for movement on the ground. Two species of this tailless primate are found in India – the eastern Hoolock gibbon and the western Hoolock gibbon (Hoolock hoolock). Listed under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, the Hoolock gibbon is threatened due to habitat fragmentation.
The distribution of eastern Hoolock gibbon in India is limited to four districts in Arunachal Pradesh. About 14 families are confined to clusters of trees in Dello and Injino villages near Roing, as an outcome of tree-felling. With the reduction in the number of trees in this cluster, the population of these gibbons has reached a critical minimum level.
“Hoolock gibbons are strictly canopy dwellers. They are extremely clumsy when on ground and can become easy targets of stray dogs or hunters,” explains Dr Prabal Sarkar, Primatologist, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). “Individuals from this particular population were observed raiding corn fields, by our field officer Jis Sebastian. This is alarming as it indicates the extent of habitat fragmentation and the desperation of this population due to insufficient food sources.”
To counter threats to this population, the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department assisted by WTI is assessing their behaviour and habitats to evaluate the feasibility of their translocation.
“There is no option but to relocate them to another area with better connectivity and sufficient food and cover,” says Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Operating Officer, WTI. “Through vegetation and behavioural studies we have identified the families which need to be shifted urgently. A suitable relocation site has been identified in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary and the movement process will be finalised soon.”
The Gibbon Translocation Project is a joint venture of the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department and WTI supported by the Noyen-Melendez Family Trust, IFAW, Serenity Trust, and philanthropists Himraj Dang Subhadra and Kannan Jayaraman.