Srinagar (Kashmir): Human-wildlife conflicts and wild animal displacements are on the rise with the increase in urbanisation and encroachment. In this situation, rehabilitation has emerged as a vital tool in wildlife conservation. While there is an upsurge in wildlife rescue and rehabilitation activities across India, wildlife rehabilitation as a science is  still  being established and there are only a few teams equipped to deal with this challenge. Many of the rescue responses across the country  offer critical support at the time of the emergency but are often carried out without necessary expertise.
To promote scientific and humane rehabilitation of displaced wild animals, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and its partner International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) initiated annual training programmes for amateur rehabilitators from across the country, in 2000. Over the years, more than 380 rehabilitators have been brought together under the IFAW-WTI Emergency Relief Network (ERN) and trained in these workshops. These rehabilitators include biologists, veterinarians and personnel from NGOs, forest and wildlife departments.
The 2009 workshop was based on the theme ‘Conflict animal management and rehabilitation’ with special focus on man-animal conflict situations in Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttarakhand. It was organised in collaboration with the Sher -e- Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Kashmir(SKUAST-K), Srinagar, on 25-27 February at the university premises. More than 70 individuals from various states were trained on conflict dynamics, conflict animal management and rehabilitation.
Prof Anwar Alam, vice-chancellor, SKUAST-K was the chief guest and AK Srivastava, Chief Wildlife Warden of Jammu and Kashmir was the guest of honour. In his inaugural address, Prof Alam stressed the need to “manage the conflict between wild animals and humans in a scientific manner so that the lives of the wild animals as well as the life and property of humans is saved.” The VC shared some experiences of animal-human conflicts, which confronted him during his career.
Prof GM Wani, director Extension Education SKUAST-K spoke on the genesis of man-animal conflict.“Human-animal conflict began with the discovery of fire and development of stone tools,” he said. “Today the human population has reached 7.5 billion. The increasing demand for food and other resources has compelled humans to convert large forest belts and other natural reserves into cultivation, causing conflicts with animals,” he added.
Dr NVK Ashraf, Director of Wild Rescue of WTI said, “This is the first time we are holding a regional workshop with the active collaboration of a local host. We hope that with the information shared here the participants will now be better positioned to deal with wildlife emergencies arising due to conflict with humans.”
Dr Rahul Kaul, Director, Wild Lands and Ashfaq Ahmed, Manager from WTI attended the event. IFAW was represented by Dr Anand Ramanathan.
Learn more about IFAW-WTI Emergency Relief Network (ERN)