Prize distribution at the inter-school wildlife awareness event held at Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV), Shahkote, Baramulla on June 21
Baramulla, Jammu & Kashmir, June 23, 2017: Working in collaboration with the Department of Wildlife Protection (J&K), Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) organised a day-long wildlife awareness event for schoolchildren from around Baramulla on June 21.
The event, which was held at the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) at Shahkote, was in sync with the 2017 World Environment Day theme of ‘Connecting People to Nature’. It was also the first event in what is planned to be an ongoing conservation awareness drive under which such programmes will be regularly organised by WTI and the Department of Wildlife Protection in Baramulla, Shopian and Poonch – the three districts in Jammu & Kashmir where the endangered markhor (Capra falconeri) is found.
The role of local communities in the nature conservation can never be undermined, for they are both the agents and the victims of environmental degradation.
A pre-campaign survey conducted for WTI’s Markhor Conservation Project in 2014 had revealed that only a shocking 5% of schoolchildren in Baramulla had a basic awareness of wildlife in general, never mind the endangered mountain goat. The ongoing awareness drive will aim to lay a strong foundation of wildlife knowledge among schoolchildren in the three targeted districts, sensitising them towards their responsibilities vis-à-vis the conservation of the nation’s rich biodiversity and ecology, and helping them appreciate the beauty and importance of nature.
The programme held at Shahkote took the form of an inter-school quiz and essay writing competition. WTI Field Officer Tahir Gazanaffar also elucidated the ‘how’ and ‘why’ of eco-tourism, including its essential components and how it could benefit both tourists as well as local communities. Speaking on the occasion, Sameer Khazir, an Assistant Field Officer with WTI said: “The role of local communities in the nature conservation can never be undermined, for they are both the agents and the victims of environmental degradation.”  He added that any policy aimed at conserving forests must perforce take into account the people who are reliant on natural resources.
Expressing his appreciation for the programme, Gh Nabi Baba, Block Officer at Limber Wildlife Sanctuary said: “Events of this nature will play a vital role in building awareness among the budding youth who have a duty to keep themselves updated about our rich wilderness areas.”