Kannur, June 5, 2023: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), in collaboration with SBI Foundation, Kerala Forest Department, and Payannur College celebrated World Environment Day.
World Environment Day is globally observed on the fifth day of June every year. The day provides a global platform to highlight and address environmental challenges and promote sustainable development. This year WTI’s ‘Kannur Kandal Project: Restoring Mangroves in Kerala’ observed World Environment Day with an aim to raise awareness of mangrove conservation and thereby encourage active participation in safeguarding and restoring these critical ecosystems.
Mangroves play a vital role in preserving coastal ecosystems and provide numerous ecological benefits. They act as natural buffers against erosion, storm surges, and sea-level rise, while also serving as crucial breeding grounds for various species of fish, birds, and other wildlife.
Inauguration 
Mr. M. Vijin, Hon’ble MLA, Kalliassery, inaugurating the World Environment Day Celebration at Payyanur College, Kannur, Kerala; Photo by Manoj Karthika
Chief Guest, Mr. M. Vijin, Hon’ble MLA, Kalliassery, Kerala inaugurated the event. Mr Lalit Mohan, President & Chief Operating Officer, SBI Foundation was the Guest of Honour. The event was also attended by Dr. Rahul Kaul, CEO, Wildlife Trust of India; Mr P. Karthick, IFS, Divisional Forest Officer, Kannur, Sajan John, Co-PI of WTI’s Marine projects, Mr. Sahil Choksi, Deputy Director and Head of Development at WTI and Dr Santhosh P, Principal Payyanur College addressed the gathering.
Mr. M. Vijin, in his inaugural address, recognized the policies and conservational efforts of Wildlife Trust of India and also extended his heartfelt support to the restoration projects which require interventions from his side.
Mr. Lalit Mohan, spoke about the mission and vision of SBI Foundation and how it spreads across the country and is keen on taking up initiatives having major socio-political and cultural values. He also expressed his happiness in collaborating with Wildlife Trust of India and Kannur Kandal Project’s Mangrove restoration programs.
Mr. Lalit Mohan in his address mentioned SBI Foundation’s vision and also the foundation’s interest in taking up initiatives having major socio-political and cultural values; Photo by Manoj Karthika
Dr. Rahul Kaul, in his talk, touched upon WTI’s projects that spread across the country. He also stressed the significance of Theme for the World Environment Day 2023 which is under the campaign #BeatPlasticPollution, ‘Ecosystem Restoration’. Mr. P Karthick highlighted the huge reduction in land naturally contained Mangroves in Kerala, especially in Kannur, also the negative impacts on the environment and how the Mangrove forest in private ownership faces more danger.
 
Appreciation, Collaboration and Technical Sessions
Mr Lalit Mohan, President & Chief Operating Officer, SBI Foundation (In centre) receiving the officially signed certificates of appreciation from the representatives of Narath, Eranholi and Azheekkode panchayats; Photo by Manoj Karthika
Representatives of Narath, Eranholi and Azheekkode panchayats handed over the officially signed certificates of appreciation to WTI and SBI Foundation. Mrs. Shyamala, Vice President, Narath Grama Panchayath shared her interest in this collaboration, and highlighted the role and importance of the local bodies and communities in conservation.
Representatives from Paayyanur College, Payyanur; Sri Syed College, Taliparamba; St. Joseph College, Irinjalakkuda and Christ College Irinjalakkuda also signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with WTI to work together on mangrove research and conservation in the landscape.
Dr. Sivakumar, Associate Professor, Centre of Advance Study in Marine Biology, Faculty of Marine Sciences, Annamalai University, presented about mangroves, plastic pollution and the threats of plastic pollution to the marine ecosystem. Dr. K M Khaleel Chovva, Former Course Director, Dept. of Environmental Studies, Kannur University said “If we change our approach of treating mangroves to another side, we will come to know the beauty and uses of mangroves”.
Awareness and Restoration
NSS Unit 10 of Payyanur College enacting a street play on mangrove conservation; Photo by Manoj Karthika
Lastly, NSS Unit 11 of Payyanur College, screened a documentary on plastic pollution, and NSS Unit 10 with the support of Kannur Kandal Project enacted a street play on mangrove conservation.
Dr. Rahul Kaul and Mr. Lalit Mohan inaugurating the mangrove nursery which is developing more than 5000 mangrove saplings, Photo by Sahil Choksi/WTI
As a part of the restoration activities, the Kannur Kandal project’s mangrove nursery in Kunhimangalam panchayat was jointly inaugurated by Dr. Rahul Kaul and Mr. Lalit Mohan. At present, the nursery is developing more than 5000 saplings of three mangrove species.