Bangalore, July 30, 2014: Well known international cricketer and wildlife lover Anil Kumble today joined hands with Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to support the cause of conservation at the book launch of WTI’s CEO and Executive Director Vivek Menon’s Indian Mammals- A Field Guide, in Bangalore. The book was launched by Kumble in the presence of dignitaries from the conservation, corporate and publishing sector at the event sponsored by Aircel.  
Covering the rich diversity of mammal species in India, from tigers, elephants, rhinos and whales to primates, rodents and bats, Indian Mammals is a comprehensive and field-ready illustrated guide, for use by all wildlifers, to more than 400 species of mammals found in India. 
 


Vivek Menon with Anil Kumble for the launch of Indian Mammals- A Field Guide. VishalSabarwal.com / WTI
 
“Wildlife conservation needs to be encouraged in India and a book like this is ideal for people from all walks of life to learn about the mammals of India. I am very happy to launch this meticulously researched field guide and feel that the fantastic wildlife photographs in the book will encourage many people to love and respect India’s mammals.” said Anil Kumble. The event saw the Kumble brothers join hands for the cause of conservation with Diinesh Kumble also participating in the panel discussion on India’s Conservation Story: Charismatic vs Non-Charismatic Mammals. 
Apart from Diinesh Kumble, other members of this esteemed panel were Vinay Luthra (PCCF and Chief Wildlife Warden, Karnataka), Anita Nair (Writer), Brinda Malhotra (CSR Head, Aircel), Vivek Menon with Prof Sukumar (Scientist CES and Trustee WTI) as the moderator. 
Vinay Luthra commended the effort by Vivek Menon saying, “It is indeed a momentous and difficult task carried out by Vivek Menon and I congratulate him on the book. Wildlife Trust of India for many years now has been an integral part of conservation in Karnataka, especially with their anti-snare and trade control activities Bandipur and we’re glad that his book has been launched in this state as well. It’s going to be quite handy not just for the numerous wildlife lovers but is also going to be a good reference for our forest department as well.” 
 


Shri Vinay Luthra, Vivek menon and Anil Kumble with the Book. Photo: VishalSabarwal.com / WTI
 
Accompanied by superb full-colour photographs and distribution maps and based upon impeccable scientific research reviewed by experts, the guide records details of virtually every mammal known to exist in India. 
Brinda Malhotra, the Head of CSR, Aircel said, “We initiated the ‘Save Our Tigers’ campaign in 2008, to create awareness about the need to conserve our national animal which was on the verge of extinction. Over the years, with the help of our conservation partners like WTI, we have been able to garner mass support and participation for the cause. A book like Indian Mammals is going to go a long way in helping the masses gain extensive knowledge about India’s mammals, many of whom need active protection, besides the tiger.  On behalf of the entire Aircel team I would like to congratulate Vivek on the launch of this book.” 
 


Panel at the book launch: (L to R) Dinesh Kumble, Anita Nair, Prof Sukumar, Vinay Luthra, Vivek Menon and Brinda Malhotra. VishalSabarwal.com / WTI




Vivek Menon, commented on publishing such a book, saying, “This book has been the culmination of many years of hard work and I am pleased at the result in shape of the book. My thanks to International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) for its support and also to the publishing house Hachette for this impressive product. “I’m happy that the book has been receiving such a tremendous response and am grateful to all supporters.”
 

Vivek Menon sharing his experience on writing the book Indian Mammals- A Field Guide. VishalSabarwal.com / WTI