Wildlife Trust of India v. State of Karnataka

The case challenged establishment of a paramilitary shooting range on the fringes of Bannerghata National Park, Karnataka. The Karnataka High Court ordered removal of CRPF from the shooting range. CRPF has carried out the order.



Ashok Kumar v. State of Bihar and others (Supreme Court)

A hearing took place on November 18, 2002 and a notice was issued to the states of Uttaranchal and three others as well as Union of India to reply to the petition. The emphasis of the petition has changed from seeking immediate relief for fund flow to a change in the fiscal system by which Central Government funds for tiger conservation are sent to state governments. WTI will ask for funds to be sent directly to the tiger reserves instead of routing them through the finance department at the state capital where these funds are diverted for other uses. WTI has learnt that the problem is not restricted to these four states alone but many others continued to divert funds in this manner. Assam and Orissa are also seriously at fault.



Ashok Kumar v. State of Jammu & Kashmir ( J & K High Court)

This is a contempt of court petition against the state of Jammu and Kashmir for not banning the manufacture and trade in shahtoosh shawls. After a number of hearings the state of Jammu and Kashmir has banned the manufacture and trade of shahtoosh shawls in the state.



Wildlife Trust of India v. National Capital Territory of Delhi & Others. (Delhi High Court)

This case related to dumping of municipal waste in Delhi Wildlife Sanctuary. As a result, the dumping did not take place.



Wildlife Trust of India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others (Allahabad High Court)

This case is related to the draining of wetlands in Western Uttar Pradesh that are home to the largest single population of sarus cranes in the world. A favorable judgment was delivered putting a stop to the draining of the wetlands and directing the state to create a protected area at this location.



Ashok Kumar Vs. S.P. Arya and others (Uttaranchal High Court)

This is a contempt of court petition asking the irrigation department to evict illegal encroacher on land of Corbett Tiger Reserve, and vacate surplus land in possession of the irrigation department itself.



WTI Vs. Union of India and others (Supreme Court)

The petition asks the Union of India and state governments to take possession of ivory in possession of erstwhile traders, and to take positive measures for protection of elephants. A listing is awaited.



WTI Vs. State of U.P. and others (Supreme Court through empowered committee)

The case calls for cancellation of a mining lease inside Hastinapur sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh.
A number of court cases are being pursued in trial courts relating to wildlife offences.