Ladakh: Jammu and Kashmir is on high alert following cases of the avian flu in Maharastra and Gujarat. The Wildlife Department of J & K sent a request to the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to train its officials on the preventive measures to be adopted, in case of a possible outbreak of the disease in the state.
The training was conducted at the Conference Hall of the Deputy Commissioner’s Office on February 27, in Leh. A group of 50 individuals from the Wildlife Department, Animal Husbandry Department, Forest Department, Indo-Tibetan Border Police, Legal experts, representatives of the Councilor’s office in Changthang and other allied departments participated in the training.
Technical education was imparted to the participants on Bird Flu emergency preparedness, preventive measures and crisis mitigating by Dr. Prajna Paramita Panda, Programme Officer of the Wild Rescue Programme of WTI.
Outbreak of the disease could mean crores of revenue loss, which the state generates every year from the inbound tourists. Some officials expressed concern that about forty thousand tourist that visit Ladakh during the tourist season, might keep away this year due to the bird flu scare. Chief Guest Tsering Nurboo, Executive Councilor of the Ladakh Autonomous Hill Development Council said that the prolonged threat of the disease could affect the tourism industry in Ladakh.
Tondup Nangyal, Tourist Officer in Leh said that 25000 foreign tourists visit Leh, Lasher, Changthang, Ramsar, and Kargil etc for different activities during the tourist season which starts from June to August. Ancient historical sites, monastic culture, horse riding, river rafting, trekking, and bird watching have been a major source of attraction for the visitors.
Protective gears were supplied by WTI to the frontline staff of the Wildlife Department for handling infected birds in case of an emergency. Other materials such as vials and polythene packets for collection of samples were also distributed.
Various species of migratory birds and poultry have been reportedly affected in many countries. In India, however, the disease has been confirmed only from the poultry. In the last fortnight, lakhs of infected poultry have been culled in Maharastra and Gujarat as part of the quarantine measure of the state governments. Meanwhile, several kilometers from the outbreak zone have been sealed to trace and destroy any contaminated birds left unattended. The animal husbandry departments have recommended six feet deep pits for the disposal of the contaminated birds.
This incidence has raised alarm all over India forcing the civil administration to take necessary precautions to prepare themselves to face an eventuality. This not only assumes a life threatening stance but also threatened the livelihoods of thousands associated with the poultry and other allied economic enterprises.