Thimphu (Bhutan), August 20, 2014: The smallest tiger range country, Bhutan, observed tiger day in the capital city last week, bringing together a wide range of stakeholders to celebrate the majestic wild cat. The event was chaired by Prime Minister His Excellency Lyonchhen Tshering Tobgay.
Supported by various NGOs, including the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI), the event saw participation of officials from different ministries, school children and teachers. It was held on Thursday, August 14, on the first day of the country’s first annual National Parks Conference.


His Excellency Lyonchhen Tshering Tobgay, Prime Minister of Bhutan (left) releasing tiger survey report. Photo- DoFPS, Bhutan

Tigers have a special significance for Bhutan. Culturally, the Bhutanese believe that Guru Rinpoche brought Buddhism to the country riding on a tigress’ back.
Although a small nation spread over less than 40,000 sq km, Bhutan holds about 28000 sq km of the world’s tiger habitat, almost as that of China.
It is estimated that the country has up to 150 tigers; a nation-wide tiger estimation survey was launched earlier this year to corroborate the figures.


Chief Guest with Participant and Thimphu Thromdey students.

Photo- DoFPS, Bhutan

The Tiger Day event saw release of preliminary report of the country’s nation-wide tiger estimation efforts, which revealed presence of 20 tigers in the southern region bordering India. The final report is expected to be released on the occasion of the 60th birth anniversary of His Majesty, the Fourth Druk Gyalpo, on 11th November next year.
“Bhutanese government has always been at the forefront of tiger conservation in a number of ways. Celebration of Tiger Day is just one example, with the government taking the initiative, uniting policy makers as well as civilians for the cause of the tiger. IFAW-WTI has been assisting the Bhutanese authorities in their conservation initiatives, and today, reasserts its commitment to its efforts at saving the tiger,” said Radhika Bhagat, IFAW-WTI Head of Wild Aid division that looks into its Bhutan project.