Paro (Bhutan): Initiating trans-border cooperation for conservation of wildlife in the subcontinent, a capacity building programme on wildlife rescue and rehabilitation was organised last week for 21 personnel from the Department of Forest and Park Services (DOFPS), Bhutan and two interns by a team of experts from the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI).
Speaking at the venue, Karma Dukpa, Director, DOFPS said, “The IFAW-WTI training is going to help our staff to deal with various wildlife emergencies such as rescue, human -wildlife conflict management & rehabilitation”.
Dr Ian Robinson, Dr NVK Ashraf and Jose Louies conducted this first of its kind two day training in Bhutan on July 7-8, 2011 which also included practical sessions on the use of syringe projectors for chemical immobilisation of wild animals. This workshop wil be followed by a four day programme on ‘Prevention of Illegal Wildlife Trade Training’ this week from July 11 to July 14, 2011.

The major problem Bhutan’s DOFPS face is that of human-wildlife conflict, with settlements surrounded with forests which occupy more than 60% of the land.
“Our priority is to minimise the crop and infrastructure damage so that people do not take up retaliatory measures like killing and poisoning of wildlife. We need to ensure the safety of humans and wildlife at the same time for long term success. Trainings like this will enable our frontline staff to deal with these situations effectively,” says Sonam Wangdi, Head, Human-Wildlife Conflict division.
DOFPS runs a wildlife rescue centre in Thimpu with three rescue officers stationed there. The unit does not have a wildlife veterinarian but an officer with basic veterinary training who looks after veterinary interventions during rescue. The team is not able to attend many rescue calls due to the terrain and shortage of trained manpower. The strategy is to build few regional teams who are trained to attend wildlife emergencies and provide them with basic equipment to handle wildlife in distress.
The trainers had an unexpected chance to join the local rescue team for the rescue of a sambar deer fawn, which had strayed into an army campus. They found the animal with visible bleeding wounds and non-reactive due to injuries and shock. It was moved to the rescue centre for stabilisation and treatment.
“Their facilities and expertise many not be the best in the field, but their personal commitment to rescue the animal was outstanding and commendable. With minimum equipments and infrastructure, they have done all what they could do to save the injured animal,” said Dr Ian, who was holding two bottles of IV fluids in both his hands at one point of the emergency treatment of the animal.

Note: Bhutan, a country located in a global biodiversity hotspot in the Eastern Himalayas, has received international acclaim for its commitment to conservation of its forests. The country that has managed to maintain at least 60% of its area under forest cover is now faced with the challenge of preserving its natural heritage whilst aiming for economic and social development.
Acknowledging the increasing threats to its wildlife and environment, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) Bhutan had various rounds of discussion with IFAW-WTI. An on-ground needs assessment was undertaken to focus the conservation initiatives in the right direction. An immediate need for enhancement of technical, training and enforcement capabilities within the government and other agencies was identified and implemented in a short span of time.
IFAW-WTI see a great opportunity to not only contribute to enhancing the capabilities for compliance, enforcement and protection to reduce illegal wildlife trade in the region, but to also address various other conservation needs of Bhutan in the long run.
 


Related Story
Four-day workshop on Prevention of Illegal Wildlife Trade Training (PIWTT) kicks off in Bhutan