New Delhi: In an attempt to involve local people in the protection and management of their surrounding forests the northeast Indian state of Sikkim has appointed 21 persons as Himal Rakshaks (Honorary mountain guards).
The Himal Rakshaks will help the forest department in looking after the fragile alpine habitat, that include the Kanchendzonga National Park among others.
60 percent of Sikkim’s  geographical area is classified as reserve forest and lies 3000 meters above sea level.
It is a bio-diversity hot-spot with rich flora and fauna and headwaters of perennial rivers in the state.
The famous Mt.Kanchendzonga (or Kanchenjunga) – the third highest peak of the world forms the western boundary of the Kanchendzonga National Park – home to rare species like Snow Leopard, Musk Deer and Black Necked Crane.
Due to lack of infrastructure and hostile terrain, protection of these areas has been inadequate.
“Patrolling is difficult and expensive. It requires hiring additional manpower to carry provisions for the staff and trekking could continue for months”,
T. R. Poudyal, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, said.
Unregulated grazing, hunting, trapping of wild animals and unplanned tourism are some of the threats to the eco-system.
The Himal Rakshaks are local inhabitants, familiar with the terrain and can help in keeping a watch against activities harmful to the environment Mr.Poudyal pointed out.
They collect food and other supplies from the mountains for living. The government has permitted them to use limited forest produce, provided they help in the conservation effort.
At lower elevations, areas are managed by Joint Forest Management Committees – village associations in partnership with the forest department.
Other important wildlife areas are Fambong Lho, Maenam, and Kyongnosla Wildlife Sanctuaries.
“Conservation of this eco-system is vital, since they support water requirement of thousands of households down stream, and the region’s vast flora and fauna”, Dr. Sandeep Kr. Tiwari, Asst. Manager of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) said.
WTI has supported the training programme and other assistance to the Himal Rakshaks, to help them perform their duties. Himal Rakshaks are assisting the forest department to undertake various conservation activities.