Dhareo Phanit is a traditional festival celebrated in Hunpung village, serving as a significant gathering point for the people of Ukhrul and Kamjong districts in Manipur, India. It is a festive celebration for the Tangkhul tribes from the Ukhrul and Kamjong districts and is marked by its occurrence in the month of October each year. In 2023, the festival was organised on the 21st and 28th of October.  
Dhareo Phanit has been a cherished practice passed down through generations, centered on celebrating the bountiful harvest from the paddy fields and signifies the culmination of a successful farming season. A symbol of communal unity and prosperity, the festival draws participation from various villages in the Ukhrul and Kamjong districts, making it a prominent and widely attended event.


Wild Meat in display at Dhareo Phanit Festival | Photograph by WTI


During the festival, villagers often bring their organically grown   goods and produce for display and sale. These typically include poultry, wild animal   meat, hornet hives and traditional rice cakes. One of the big attractions of the festival is the high-stakes betting that takes place during card games with participants wagering on items such as wild animal meat, poultry, and hornet hives
The local residents perceive the Dhareo Phanit festival as a valuable opportunity to showcase their products and generate income by selling live native species or products derived from them. However, what many of them may not be aware of is that these species are protected under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, amendment 2022.
This means that the festival inadvertently involves the exhibition and sale of protected wildlife, which is not only illegal but also poses a threat to the conservation of these species. It highlights the urgent need for awareness and community sensitisation on wildlife conservation and prevailing laws to safeguard protected wildlife species during these cultural celebrations and for the prevention of inadvertent participation of locals in such unlawful activities.
Dhareo Phanit Festival in Manipur | Photograph by WTI


Addressing the illegal trade of wildlife and its articles is a key aspect of one of the big ideas of ‘Enforcement and Law’ of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). Our Wildlife Crime Control Division (WCCD) has a dedicated team in Manipur to combat this illegal trade and educate the local communities and enforcement agencies about protected wildlife species and the laws that protect them. As a result of WTI-WCCD’s efforts in Manipur, a resolution was signed regarding pangolin hunting, imposing a fine of INR 20,000 for hunting or consumption of pangolins, by the headman of Ukhrul village authority (Hanphun, Manipur). Furthermore, the WTI-WCCD’s initiatives also include sensitisation of school students and conducting training for the enforcement agencies on wildlife crime prevention.