Jaipur, 10th January, 2023: People in western Indian states of Rajasthan and Gujarat traditionally celebrate the event by flying kites, that symbolize freedom, color and happiness. However, over the past years, this celebration has turned into a disaster due to the use of Chinese manjha (kite string) leaving thousands of birds dead or critically injured.
Traditional kite strings used during Makar Sankranti were handmade. Chinese manjhas gradually replaced these as they’re made from monofilament fishing lines and coated with glass. Strong enough to easily cut through traditionally made strings, they became a popular choice for kite flyers.
Pegion trapped in loose kite strings | Photo by Raksha, Jaipur
Besides the danger of strung kites, loose stings left across tree canopies and city wires entangle roosting and perching birds. Incidents of human casualties as a result of loose Chinese Manjha too aren’t uncommon during this time of festivity. The use of Chinese Manjha was formally banned by the National Green Tribunal (NGT) in 2017. But, the use still continues, especially in the states of Rajasthan and Gujarat.
To address avian emergencies caused by kite strings, WTI’s Emergency Relief Network (ERN) members (both individuals and NGOs) have been setting up temporary ‘Avian Treatment Camps’ every year, for more than 10 years now. Supported by volunteers from all walks of life, these camps admit injured birds, provide the necessary treatment, support their rehabilitation and release them back when they are ready to fly again.
IFAW-WTI Avian Treatment Workshop in Jaipur, Rajasthan | Photograph by Madhumay Mallik
Leading up to this year’s camps, WTI organized a hands-on workshop on the protocols of personnel safety for bird rescuers, understanding avian anatomy and captive management (including importance of record keeping, disease management and release considerations). Supported by International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), the two-day workshop saw more than 55 participants from different parts of the country who are prepping up for the Makar Sankranti week starting on the 14th of January, 2023.
According to Dr. Ushma Patel, veterinary surgeon from Sardar Patel Zoological Park, “with thousands of injured birds getting admitted every year during Makar Sankranti, it is of utmost importance that we have a collaborative team of rescuers, veterinarians, rehabbers and support staff. Understanding avian rescue protocols will certainly help volunteers give their best to the team and to the cause.”
Participants in the workshop | Photograph by Madhumay Mallik
For Dr. Joy Joseph Gardner, founder of Hope & Beyond, a local NGO based out of Jaipur, “every life is important and if we can bring our resources together to ensure that a fallen bird flies again, there’s no better celebration of freedom!”
ERN ‘Bird Treatment Camps’ are set up every year during Makar Sankranti or Uttaryan Festivals since 2013. Though the numbers of admission each year have reduced, it’s still a disaster that seeks to be addressed through a cultural shift.
Please remember that a kite can never replace a bird.