New Delhi: Two documentaries featuring Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) projects have been shortlisted for the prestigious Vatavaran Awards, and final screenings which began yesterday in the India Habitat Centre (IHC), New Delhi. The WTI films  – ‘On the Right Track’ and ‘A Shawl to Die for’ – were among the 106 nominated from 366 Indian as well as international entries. 
The first film – ‘On the Right Track’ documenting interventions that have ensured zero elephant deaths in train accidents in Rajaji National Park, Uttarakhand, since 2002 – will be screened today at 4:00 pm in the Stein Auditorium, IHC.
“A total of 18 km stretch of the Haridwar-Dehradun railway line passes through Rajaji. Between 1987 and March 2002, at least 20 elephants were killed in accidents in this track. A Rapid Action Project (RAP) conducted by WTI in 2001 with IFAW’s support had recommended a number of interventions to be carried out jointly by the Forest Department and Railways to reduce these preventable deaths. Acting as the connecting link between the two departments, WTI then ensured implementation of the recommendations, under its National Train Hits Mitigation Project. Due to this joint initiative of the Forest Department and Northern Railways facilitated by WTI, no elephants have been killed in railway accidents in Rajaji since,” said Dr Anil Kumar Singh, Coordinator, WTI.
The success of the National Train Hits Mitigation Project in Rajaji has triggered similar projects in other areas where elephants are falling victims to train accidents. The project is being replicated throughout Assam, and survey has also been initiated in Dudhwa National Park in Uttar Pradesh. With the support of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, WTI will also be initiating surveys in Jharkhand, West Bengal, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Kerala.
The second film ‘A Shawl to Die for’ will be screened on Friday at 6:00 pm. The film traces the ancient craft of Shahtoosh weaving in Kashmir, India and its links to the decline of the endangered Tibetan antelope found in the Tibetan plateau. It also explores the struggle of former shahtoosh workers displaced by the ban in Shahtoosh production, and interventions brought about by the Shahtoosh Workers’ Rehabilitation Project of WTI and IFAW, supported by the British High Commission.
“Wildlife across India face a number of threats. However, solutions to these threats can be found. Both these films ‘On the Right Track’ and ‘A Shawl to Die for’ look at balanced solutions to specific wildlife problems, in terms of wildlife conservation as well as livelihoods,” said Rita Banerji of Dusty Foot Productions who directed these films.