Forbesganj (Bihar): Water level in the flood-hit East Indian state of Bihar is gradually receding in places. However, the animal toll is not expected to stop at the current official number of 131. Over 23,000 cattle are estimated to have been affected by the flood in two districts of Araria and Supaul alone. The IFAW-WTI team based in Forbesganj, Araria has been working ceaselessly for the past two weeks to provide relief to the surviving animals. So far about 8000 animals have been treated by animal rescue team dispatched by International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) – Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). 
“Food scarcity has made the animals weak and affected their immunity. They are vulnerable to infection and disease, the heat and humidity will further aggravate the spread of communicable diseases,” warns Dr NVK Ashraf, IFAW-WTI Director, currently coordinating efforts on the field.
The team is working in tandem with local government agencies. Traveling mostly on boats provided by the Seema Suraksha Bal (SSB), it is also assisting the Animal Husbandry Department and the Disaster Management Group of Bihar to distribute fodder for animals stranded in remote areas.
To cover a wider area the group was divided into two. While one group headed for Purnea; another traveling on boats, vehicles, rickshaws as well as on foot, reached Narpatganj yesterday. This was the first animal rescue team to reach Narpatganj. Here the Kosi is still surging 15 feet deep. Narpatganj, situated about 25 km away from the base camp at Forbesganj in Araria district, is one of the worst-affected areas. Although not submerged, Narpatganj was completely isolated by the flood waters earlier. No fodder has reached the cattle, which according to the army count, is about 3000 individuals. High water level has also prevented movement of people to relief camps.
About 733 animals were treated on the first day in Narpatganj. Among the animals provided treatment was a cow with severe burn injuries. Likewise in Purnea, 380 animals cattle scattered in four relief camps were provided treatment.
“The livestock in Narpatganj is surviving on fodder stocked by the people, which may soon run out. We planned to buy or collect fodder and transport it to stranded cattle, but, it was difficult to prioritise livestock relief over human relief. However, the Sub Divisional Magistrate yesterday offered us some boats to take across Animal Husbandry dry fodder which will be reinforced with nutrition supplement concentrates by our veterinarians,” said Dr Ashraf.
The professional rescue team led by WTI vet Dr Abhijit Bhawal, assisted by Dr Pallabi Bhagwati also comprises student veterinarians from Bihar Veterinary College, Patna and local rehabilitators and volunteers. “This flood has been one of the most severe natural disasters to strike our state. It is good that the IFAW-WTI team has taken up the rescue of animals affected by the flood. When they (IFAW-WTI team members) approached us for help, we agreed. As veterinarians, it is our duty to save animals. We have sent another batch of students today along with supplies” said Siya Ram Singh, Prinicpal Bihar Veterinary College, Patna.
While the water is now receding in several areas, this fall in water level is ironically making relief work more difficult. Many marooned areas are getting even more inaccessible. Boats can no longer ply as the water is too shallow and the exposed ground is so swampy it makes movement almost impossible. Dr Abhijit Bhawal, first IFAW-WTI team member to reach the flood-affected area said, “Boat travel was our main mode of transport for distribution of relief material. A lot of places have now become unreachable as the water is not deep enough for boats to ply on.” The isolation is also preventing proper disposal of carcasses of animals, the decaying carcasses increases the threat of disease.
There is heat, humidity, anguish and hunger in most villages. The only salvation lies in over crowded relief camps hitched together by the army and some government and voluntary agencies.
Many families seeking refuge in the larger relief camps have brought their cattle with them, as a result the livestock in these camps run in to large numbers in close proximity. While treating some of the 278 cattle gathered at GVC Bachiga relief camp in Janki Nagar, Purnea, the team came across quite a few cases of foot and mouth disease. With the prevailing conditions the outbreak of this disease is imminent. This will further add to the suffering of animals that have somehow survived the fury of the flood. Grim news for villagers who, frail and weak themselves, ensured they brought their animals to safety with them against all odds. The crisis is far from over. Medicine, treatment and care is critical at this time.
“Considering the enormity of the situation, the operation has been extended by 10 more days,” Dr Ashraf said.
“Animal rescue, while humans themselves are in dire need, is rather difficult. People’s frustration is running high and that among other factors is affecting our work,” rued Dr Anjan Talukdar, IFAW-WTI veterinarian who recently returned from Bihar.
This grim reality was endorsed today as the animal rescue team on its way from base camp in Forbesganj was mobbed by 50 odd desperate and angry people. They were allowed to continue only later when they managed to explain that theirs was one of the only relief teams working for animal rescue and welfare in the area.



Related story:
IFAW-WTI step up emergency relief in Bihar
IFAW-WTI begins rescue operation in flood-hit Bihar