Tura (Garo Hills,  Meghalaya): Family of a local villager who was killed in a conflict with elephants in west Garo Hills district in the northeast Indian state of Meghalaya, was provided a relief of 10,000 rupees by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) on humanitarian grounds.
The deceased, Dunit Momin, belonged to Mandalgre – one of the several villages in the Garo Hills that have set aside community (A’khing) land for wildlife conservation. He was reportedly killed while he was working in the fields.
Sunil Kyarong, Coordinator, WTI, said, “No amount can compensate a human life, or the grief and difficulties of the family of the deceased. This assistance is a small token of support to the family in this hour of crisis.”
The amount was handed over by HA Sangma, Secretary, Garo Hills Autonomous Development Council (GHADC) last week. Other GHADC officials as well as representatives of World Land Trust (WLT) which supports WTI’s Garo Hills Conservation Project, were present to pay their condolences to the family of the deceased.
Rangku N Sangma, Deputy Chief Forest Officer, GHADC, said, “WTI has paid one time compensation to the victim family on humanitarian grounds. WTI has been involved in elephant conservation in Garo hills and  have successfully secured the Siju-Rewak elephant corridor by declaring the critical area as Village Reserve Forests.”
Facilitated by the Garo Hills Conservation Project, local communities have set aside more than 1200 hectares of A’khing land as Village Reserve Forests (VRF) in the Garo Hills. The project aims to establish a contiguous forest landscape for Asian elephants and Hoolock gibbons among other species through Rongram in west Garo Hills to Nokrek National Park. The project also involves securement of Siju-Rewak corridor connecting Nokrek to Balphakram National Park. The project additionally provides eco-development assistance in the contributing villages.
Working in association with GHADC, Meghalaya Forest Department and the local communities, the project attempts to secure the landscape through VRF declarations and restore jhummed habitats through afforestation to provide a safe passage for wildlife and a conflict-free life for people.