Periyar Tiger Reserve, Kerala, October 17, 2016: An undercover operation conducted by officials of the Kerala Forest Department near Kumili Forest Checkpost, Periyar Tiger Reserve, on October 7 resulted in the seizure of 14 jackal skins and the arrest of a trader and smuggler of wildlife articles.


The operation was led by Range Officer Mr Sajeevan. The suspect, Vijaya Kumar, a resident of the Theni district of Tamil Nadu, was caught red-handed while smuggling the jackal skins in a plastic bag topped with vegetables. He belongs to the Narikuruva tribe which is understood to have a longstanding involvement with the illegal wildlife trade.
 


A close-up of the jackal skins seized during the covert operation in Periyar Tiger Reserve



WTI’s Enforcement & Law division provided the Kerala Forest Department with crucial intelligence inputs for this operation. These inputs were gathered during a recent Rapid Action Project (RAP) study sanctioned by WTI’s Wild Aid division, seeking to investigate and address the hunting and trade of Indian foxes (Vulpes bengalensis) in the Theni district, allegedly by the Narikurava tribe.


The Narikuravas are an indigenous community from Tamil Nadu and are known for their hunting skills. Interestingly, the word ‘Narikurava’ is a portmanteau of the Tamil words ‘Nari’ and ‘Kurava’, and translates to ‘jackal/fox people’, referring to the tribe’s particular proficiency in hunting and trapping these creatures. The Narikuravas are also known to hunt and poach species like pangolins, mongoose and monitor lizards.


Under the study initiated by WTI, 15 Narikurva villages in the Theni and Madurai districts of Tamil Nadu, known to be hubs of the illegal wildlife trade, were investigated. The study was able to provide photographic and video evidence not only of a flourishing trade in fox parts, but unearthed a larger trade in Indian jackal (Canis aureus indicus) parts.
Both Indian foxes and jackals are listed under Schedule II (Part II) of the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972. Section 51 (1) of the Act states that “where the offence committed is in relation to any animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or meat of any such animal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from such animal […] such offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.”
 


Vijaya Kumar, the arrested wildlife trader, with the jackal skins he was smuggling



A case has been registered against Vijaya Kumar under various sections of the Wild Life (Protection) Act. He is understood to be a well-established trader: preliminary investigations have revealed that he has made a number of visits to South-east Asian countries, where he was allegedly involved in the sale of wildlife products. Along with other members of the Narikurava community, he is also suspected to be associated with the trade in star tortoises.
The WTI study has shown that traditional hunting tribes like the Narikuravas and the Hakki-Pakki are actively involved in the poaching of small animals in Tamil Nadu even today. Members from these communities were previously arrested at Chennai and Bangalore airports with fake tiger skins, star tortoises and other wildlife articles. Both tribes play a very important role in the illegal wildlife trade chain.

Vijaya Kumar’s arrest has reportedly created a panic within these communities. More leads and subsequent arrests are expected in this regard.