Yarmouth Port (USA): Leonardo DiCaprio and  IFAW (the International Fund for Animal Welfare – www.ifaw.org) today announced the start of Animal Action Week, one of the world’s largest environmental education programmes spread across a number of countries, including India. This year’s Animal Action theme, “Under One Sky,” highlights the importance of protecting biodiversity, habitat and ecosystems, as well as the bonds between animals and people. In India, Animal Action Week  is coordinated by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
IFAW encourages teachers and children across the globe to engage with nature during Animal Action Week, which takes place annually during early October. The week marks the launch of an international educational programme with a different animal welfare and conservation theme each year.
“It’s our responsibility not just to protect our planet, but also its animals,” said DiCaprio, an IFAW Honorary Board Member. “Animals are an integral part of human existence and we must always remember that. Unfortunately, they face more threats than ever before. These are threats that, if we all work together, we can begin to alleviate.”
“Animals have fascinated and inspired us since the earliest years of human civilisation. They are an integral part of the web of life. Yet today, animals and their vital habitat face more threats than ever before,” said DiCaprio. “Animals, like people, need a home that provides food, water, shelter and space. It’s our responsibility to protect animals and our planet’s vital ecosystems if we want to leave a better world for future generations.”
IFAW offers participating schools a FREE education pack and 15-minute film, Under One Sky, Why Animals Matter, which is narrated by DiCaprio. In India, the curriculum-based materials for middle school students (Grades 6-9) is available in English as well as Hindi and can be downloaded from WTI website (Download AAW 2009 materials).
The programme also aims to raise awareness among young people and their families about the impact of their everyday activities on animals and habitat, both far away and in their own backyards. Families nationwide are being asked to visit www.ifaw.org/animalaction to sign a global pledge to be more aware and take care of the animals they interact with, and to make lifestyle choices that better protect our shared environment.
For more than 16 years, IFAW’s Animal Action program has taught children worldwide about the value of animal welfare and conservation. The group reached seven million young people in 18 countries last year.
“We are proud to join forces with Leonardo in our global mission to safeguard animals and the environment,” said Fred O’Regan, President of IFAW. “His steadfast commitment is vital in our efforts to educate the environmental leaders of tomorrow and empower them to act now to protect animals and habitats around the world.”


Learn more about Animal Action Week 2009 
Related story:
Wildlife awareness event for students in Jammu & Kashmir