New Delhi: An impact assessment report on six independent investigations under the Wild Aid programme of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and supported by its partner the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) was released today by Mr Anil Baijal, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development. The report published in two volumes titled The Ground Beneath the Waves: Post-tsunami Impact Assessment of Wildlife and their Habitats in India is illustrated with some evocative photographs taken by the assessment teams. 
The impact of the tsunami on wildlife and habitats was assessed over six simultaneous investigations conducted as Rapid Action Projects (RAP) by WTI and IFAW. Six teams of investigators led by eminent scientists from reputed organisations, such as the Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History (SACON), the Madras Crocodile Bank Trust (MCBT), Care Earth, The Rainforest Initiative and the North Orissa University spent months in the field to arrive at findings that were presented to a section of the press in New Delhi today.
Mr Baijal’s presence at this event was significant in the light of rebuilding and reconstruction of the destroyed properties on the mainland and the islands because prior to his present position of Secretary Urban development, he was Chief Secretary of the Andaman and Nicobar islands. Mr Baijal, on releasing the report remarked, “I have seen a preview of one of the volumes, the island report and the survey is remarkable because the teams went island by island and habitat by habitat. I hope the recommendations are taken seriously.”
As a deputy director from the Ministry of Environment and forests conceded, “Though the ministry had post-tsunami assessment reports, these were from aerial surveys of the islands. This report is commendable because it is the first one that reports of on-ground surveys from inaccessible places”
Images of destruction of life and property following the tsunami of December 2004 brought home the immediate ground reality and helped mobilise humanitarian relief efforts worldwide. Local inhabitants soon recognised that individual or household based relief alone is not adequate for the revival process and that habitat improvement has to be a key feature of the post-tsunami rebuilding process.
The illustrated presentations also enlightened the media on recommended interventions to secure the future of wildlife and communities in the affected areas.
Some findings presented in the report include, violations of the CRZ norms that played a major role in the loss of human lives and property. The need for a review of the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) enforcement has strongly come across. The use of casuarina for plantations has not shielded the coast from the effects of the tsunami. Coastal areas have undergone severe damage and are ecologically highly unstable. Mangroves and coral reefs have been severely affected, thus affecting fisheries in the islands. Grazing areas have been flooded with salt water and covered with sand making these unsuitable for ungulates to graze. The use of concrete for rebuilding will lead to sand mining, leading to further erosion of land. A five-year moratorium on the use of concrete was recommended.
As Dr Sankaran, who presented the findings on the islands recommended, “Nothing should be built that wasn’t there on December 25th.”
The six studies covered the coastal areas of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Each volume of this Conservation Action Report documents several recommendations useful for ecological restoration and re-construction activities of the mainland and the islands, respectively. The findings and recommendations of the report hope to serve a valuable tool for the government as well as NGOs involved in the reconstruction and restoration of the tsunami hit areas.
To view the complete report online click here. 
Pix credit: Arvind Krishnan / WTI