Jammu: The detection of bird flu in neighbouring China has put India’s northern most state of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) under threat with the possibility of this virus being transmitted through migratory birds. This prompted Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to organize a training programme for wildlife officials mitigate the outbreak of the disease.
The training was conducted at Manda Mini Zoo in Jammu on 13th December in collaboration with the Wildlife Department of J & K and followed by a field-visit to Gharana wetlands to suggest measures to investigate, diagnosis and control the disease in case of a  possible outbreak. The training was organized under the Wild Aid Programme of WTI.
N. A. Kitchloo, Regional Wildlife Warden Jammu, gave the welcome address. Other speakers who spoke on the occasion included Dr. Prajna Paramita Panda (WTI), Tahir Shawl, Wildlife Warden and Dr. N. A. Sudhan of Sheri Kashmir University of Agricultural Science and Technology (SKUAST) Srinagar.
Apart from wildlife officials, local residents in Jammu and representatives from the SKUAST also participated in the programme.
R. L. Bharti, the Chief Wildlife Warden of J & K had earlier sought WTI’s assistance to help train the staff of the forest department who are monitoring the wetlands in Jammu for avian flu.
According to Dr. Prajna Paramita Panda, Programme Officer WTI, “A compendium was prepared by WTI for the training, which included different features on avian flu such as collection of samples, monitoring of migratory birds, disease investigation, prevention and control. Copies of the compendium were given to the wildlife officials and the representatives of the SKUAST.”
“Protective gear, gumboots, surgical instruments, vials, icebox, plastic bed sheets, polythene bags, chemicals and stationeries were supplied to the wildlife department of J & K.” Sandeep Tiwari, Sr. Programme Officer WTI adds.
About forty individuals were trained in responding to avian flu outbreak. They were trained on the clinical symptoms in humans and poultry, mode of transmission, use of protective gear, collection, preservation and transportation of samples, disposal of protective gear and sanitary measures to be followed.
A large number of migratory birds visit the wetlands of J & K every year from different parts of the world. Bar-headed geese and gulls, the common carriers of the H5N1 influenza virus are expected to visit these wetlands by December end.
The virus could also spread in domestic birds and large land mammals such as horses, pigs, sea mammals, chicken, turkey, ducks and other poultry.
Jammu alone has six major wetlands, which make it highly prone to avian influenza. With cases being reported from adjoining Pakistan, the officials of Jammu are not willing to take any chances.
The bird flu is caused by 15 subtypes of the influenza ‘A’ virus; some of them are H1N1, H2N2, H3N2 and H5N1 etc. Currently, the subtype H5N1 is the most commonly active virus. More than 18 countries this year in Asia and Europe have reported cases of avian influenza caused by H5N1 virus.
WTI will be helping other state forest departments in a similar fashion to monitor migratory birds and bird flu.
Photo credit: WTI