On 2nd December 2022, WTI inaugurated the Aa Aana, a one of its kind multidisciplinary celebration of Asian Elephant under its campaign- Gajotsavam. Gajotsavam is a celebration of India’s National Heritage Animal to highlighting its need for #RightofPassage. The month-long campaigning partnership with Whitley Fund for Nature and Cochin Collective, celebrates the Asian Elephant in our culture, ethos, and everyday life.
Lighting the lamp by Mr. K.J Maxi, Hon’ble MLA Kochi  | Photo by Sreenanth K/WTI
The coexistence of human – elephants goes as early as the 3rd century BC (Kautilya’s Arthashastra, written during Chandragupta Maurya’s rule). Even in Hindu mythology, lord Ganesh is a remover of obstacles and is worshipped during the inception of new ventures. Despite, being the figure of traditional and cultural beliefs, the Asian Elephant, recognised as the National Heritage Animal faces a lot of trouble. Kerala supports the third highest population of wild elephants in India (~3050 across 4 Elephant Reserves) with 7 elephant corridors (2 inter-state ones). Despite these impressive numbers, the underlying human-elephant conflict has always been a reason for concern in the state (68 wild elephant unnatural deaths and 190 human casualties between 2010-2021). To celebrate the Asian Elephants through art, music and dance parallel to Kochi Muziris Biennale, a month-long programme was inaugurated on 2nd December at CSI Parish Hall. 
The inaugural event was introduced by Mr Sajan John, Coordinator of Gajotsavam (Wildlife Trust of India) to welcome the dignitaries and share his experience of the campaign. The lighting of the lamp by Mr. K R Anoop, IFS, CCF (central circle), Thrissur, Mr. Stephen Robert Patron, Cochin Collective, Mr. K J Sohan, Former Mayor Cochin Corporation and President of Cochin Carnival Society, Mr. Bony Thomas, Co-founder of, Kochi Biennale Foundation and Advisor to Aa Aana (Malayalam), Mr. Bose Krishnamachari, President and Founder of Kochi Biennale Foundation, and Mr K J Maxi, Hon’ble MLA Kochi, Dr. Rahul Kaul, CEO, Wildlife Trust of India and Mr. Ananda Banerjee, Director and Chief of Campaign and Communications marked the formal inauguration.
Mr. K R Anoop, IFS, CCF addressing the audience at Gajotsavam launch | Photo by Sreenanth K/WTI
Mr. K R Anoop, IFS, CCF took to the stage and spoke to the audience about the age-old human-elephant co-existence.  The role played by the elephant in Malayalam culture goes on for years in history, be it in temple festivals or sharing labour, or the integral part of wildlife. In Kerala, elephants, and human come as pieces of one puzzle, one cannot be separated from another. 
Mr. Stephen Robert Patron, Cochin Collective thanked the audience to be a part of this event and spoke about the pride and happiness the Kochi crowd shares about Elephants. However, the thought of conservation does not get associated so easily with such a mighty animal. Even the biggest and mightiest of beings need support sometimes, and Aa Aana stands for such an initiative. He urged the community to understand and extend their support to actively be a part of the effort. 
Mr. Bony Thomas, Advisor to Aa Aana reminisces a childhood story that drew a strong impact on him. Aano in the Vatican is about an Elephant, sent to Pope as a gift from Kochi to show their love. Elephant as called in Malayalam “Aana” became Aano and was loved by the Pope. Years later, as the elephant died, he was put to rest as a friend in Vatican. Aa Aana revolves around the love towards the species and aims to sensitise the community to the positives the species share and its gentle nature.
Felicitation of artists featured at the exhibition | Photo by Sreenanth K/WTI
The chief guest of the event was Hon’ble MLA, Kochi Mr. KJ Maxi.  He spoke about elephants being a part of the integral Malayalee culture. While pride is associated with it, so is respect and the recent years haven’t been very smooth for elephants. A lot of positive conservation perspectives have been incorporated around Elephant treatment. The changes have brought out a more empathetic approach toward the captive elephant. With that learning, we can also treat the recent conflict and find solutions towards a healthy co-existence with their wild counterparts 
Mr Bose Krishnamachari, Founder of Biennale and renowned artist, praised the artistic take on a social political issue and spoke about the power it brings with it. He emphasised on how once a dearly loved species suddenly have been cast under the shadow of fear. Bose took to the stage to speak about the power of perception and the power of art to influence it.  He quoted Tagore and said that exposure and openness of the mind can only move us forward in thought and action. Bose extended his appreciation towards the marvellous wordplay of Aa Aana which connects it right at the inception age of learning. 
Mr K J Sohan congratulated Wildlife Trust of India, in curating a month-long thought out exhibition to subtly address the burning issue with art and address the issue to find a solution with a more active panel discussion. He announced as a part of the Cochin Carnival, WTI will showcase Aa Aana to bring more awareness towards Elephant conservation.
Inauguration of Aa Aana, Gajotsavam at CSI Hall, Fort Kochi | Photo by Sreenanth K/WTI
Dr Rahul Kaul, addressed the community to talk about the thoughts and the need of the campaign. He spoke about the struggle of Asian Elephants living in a region of densest human population, with a burgeoning population. Being migratory nomads, the restriction of moving space creates one of the biggest threat for them. Hence the need for the unhindered movement between key habitats which are through corridors. The need to protect and conserve corridors is more for the human betterment than the elephants. The Aa Aana comes to the community to celebrate the India’s Heritage Animal, the Asian Elephants, generate awareness towards the struggle and gather together from various disciplines to talk about elephants, coexistence and debate about the ways ahead. Aa Aana gives you and the community the opportunity to pledge their support and exchange knowledge.
Felicitation of frontline forest staff| Photo by Sreenanth K/WTI
The celebration could not have been complete without acknowledging the hard work done by the frontline staff of the Forest Department. Our conservation heroes are the reason we could achieve change together. Mr. Sivasankar. V, Beat Forest Officer, Olavakkode range, Palakkad Division, Mr. Kareem P.M., Section forest officer-Athirapally Range, Mr. Rejimon P.R., Section forest officer Mekkappala forest station Kodanad Range, Malayattoor Division were felicitated by Hon’ble MLA Mr KJ Maxi, for protecting the elephant and their forests and contributing towards a successful Asian elephant conservation. Dr Arun Zachariah is the chief veterinarian for the department who has been on-field handling the elephant conflict and aiding in solutions. Veterinary and Rapid Response Team of Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary for human elephant conflict (HEC) management, HEC Mitigation Team in Chinnakanal of the Munnar Division – this is self-explanatory for empathically mitigating the hostile situations when arise. The Uralungal Labour Contract Co-operative Society Ltd. team was also felicitated for their work to create mitigation measures along the nilambur nadugani road to facilitate elephant movement. 
Mr Ananda Banerjee extended his vote of thanks to the panel, Cochin Collective, the supporter Whitley Fund for Nature. He appreciated his team to plan and execute the event and launching a 30 day campaign.