Thiruvananthapuram, 30 January 2023: Four fishermen were felicitated for saving lives of three whale sharks – world’s largest fish species – on separate occasions in Kerala. At times, whale sharks get accidentally entangled into the fishing nets and meet a tragic end. To prevent this and protect the species (listed ‘Endangered’ under IUCN Red List), it is critical to promptly rescue the trapped individuals and release them back into the sea. The role of the fishing community, as the primary stakeholders in effecting such rescues is therefore paramount.
Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) is currently working with and sensitising the fishers and coastal community of Kerala, Karnataka and Lakshadweep as a part of ‘Save the Whale Shark’ campaign. Since the campaign’s launch in December 2022, three whale sharks have been rescued by the fishers off the coasts of Puthyathura, Poonthura and Beemapalli in Thiruvananthapuram. This week, the fourth rescue happened at Shanghumugham beach*.
Adult female whale shark rescued by fishermen off the coast of Poonthura. The whale shark was safely released back into the sea | Photo by Swathi K Nambiar
To honour the fishermen for this exemplary gesture, the felicitation ceremony was organised in PTP Nagar Forest Office, Maruthamkuzhi by Kerala Forest and Wildlife department, Oracle and WTI. Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (APCCF), Shri Pramod G. Krishnan awarded mementos to the fishermen – Jose R, Nixon S, Soosa Pakiyam and Ashraf – for leading the rescue operations. While praising the awardees, Shri Krishnan said that it is our responsibility to preserve this ‘Endangered’ species and the other fishers from the state should follow suit.
Group picture following the felicitation ceremony at PTP Nagar Forest Office, Muruthamkuzhi, Kerala | Photo by Charan Kumar Paidi
During the ceremony, Mr. Charan Kumar Paidi, Head, Whale Shark Conservation Project, WTI rightly said, “To conserve the marine biodiversity, it is crucial to engage the local community and educate them on the ‘protected’ status of the marine species. This is what we are trying to achieve through the campaign”.
‘Save the Whale Shark’ is an offshoot of the larger ‘Whale Shark Conservation Project’ running in Gujarat since 2002. The project, with the support of Gujarat fishermen and the coastal community, has accomplished over 850 whale shark rescues so far. The campaign in Kerala, Karnataka and Lakshadweep hopes to achieve a similar impact.
 
 *The fishermen who led the Shanghumugham beach rescue shall be felicitated soon.