Kavaratti, 9 October 2019: After the resounding success of turning hunters to protectors of the whale shark in Gujarat coupled with science that put spotlight on the whale sharkas a key species, Wildlife Trust of India launched its campaign in the islands of Lakshadweep.
WTI along with the Department of Environment and Forests Lakshadweep celebrated their most significant Wildlife Week closing ceremony in Kavaratti island owing to the highest number of whale shark sightings in India in Lakshadweep waters. The primary aggregation site of whale sharks here was key to the launch of WTI’s Minicoy Whale Shark Conservation project.
 
[acx_slideshow name=”vhali”]
 
With the help of IUCN, our team surveyed the west coast (excluding Gujarat), during 2012-13 and found that the highest number of whale shark sightings were near the Lakshadweep waters.  Literature survey shows that whale shark landings and stranding are largely reported from Kerala. Fishers of Kerala often go to Lakshadweep waters to fish, and the high incidental landings is attributed to this fact.
The campaign is an initiative of WTI and Lakshadweep Department of Environment and Forest designed to gain people’s active participation by imbibing a sense of ownership towards the conservation efforts.
The island show, as a part of the campaign in collaboration with Forest Department, was inaugurated by Mr Mihir Vardhan, IAS, Administrator, Union Territory of Lakshadweep on October 9. The dignitaries for the evening included Mr Damodar A. T., IFS, Secretary (Environment & Forest) & Chief Wildlife Warden; Mr Hassan Bodumukagothi, President cum Chief Counsellor, District Panchayath; Dr Sundara Vadivelu, IAS, Secretary Home; Mr T. Abdul Khader, Chairperson, Village Dweep Panchayat, Kavarrati; Dr K. Syed Ali, Range Forest Officer & ENVIS Coordinator, Department of Environment and Forest, Lakshadweep.
They acknowledged the pressure this species faces in the open waters even when the fishers practice sustainable line fishing in these parts. The evening show was a part of marine life themed closing ceremony of Wildlife Week 2019. The life-size mascot of the whale shark, strategically placed on the beach was welcomed with open arms by the islanders who had hardly seen this fish and had difficulty believing they visit their waters.
The campaign team on field interacted with children and islanders to share information about this species. The launch of the campaign by the lagoon saw a reach of over 3500 islanders. As was the norm in Gujarat, the life-sized inflatable whale shark was taken to four government schools with the WTI team to engage school children through films, talks and interaction with the mascot and painting activity for juniors where they got to take home a cloth whale shark pouch.
Following the success in Gujarat, this campaign in Lakshadweep aims to inspire conservation action through generating awareness and involvement, as the team continues its outreach across the islands.