Bhubaneswar, 18th October 2023: In a significant stride towards elephant conservation, the Odisha Government in partnership with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) launched the ‘Gaj Utsav’ campaign on 18 October 2023 in Bhubaneshwar.
The event witnessed the presence of distinguished dignitaries such as Shri Pradip Kumar Amat, Hon’ble Minister, FE&CC, Odisha, Govt. of India, Shri Sushil Kumar Popli, IFS, PCCF and CWLW, Odisha Forest Dept., Shri Debidutt Biswal, IFS, PCCF and HoFF, Odisha Forest Dept., Shri Satyabrata Sahu, IAS, Additional Chief Secretary, Forest, Environment and Climate Change, Govt. of Odisha alongside other esteemed guests representing the Legislation, District Administration, Forest Department, Media and civil society.
Baton handover by the Hon’ble Forest Minister Shri Pradeep Kumar Amat (middle)| Photo by WTI
The launch ceremony was marked by the unveiling of 6 elephant art pieces handcrafted by local artisans. This was followed by a symbolic baton handover from Shri Pradip Kumar Amat to Shri Sumit Kar, Dhenkanal DFO, Shri Bijaya Dash, Collective Initiation For Social Solidarity (CISS) NGO and Dr. Sandeep Tiwari, Chief of Conservation, Wildlife Trust of India. This unique Public-Private Partnership will take forward the vision of bringing the Gajah (elephant) to the Prajah (public) through the elephant districts of the state.
Cycle rally flagged off by Hon’ble Forest Minister Shri Pradip Kumar Amat and other dignitaries | Photo by WTI
The event showcased a series of engaging activities including cultural performances, a cycle rally, origami and storytelling workshops for students and informative sessions, all designed to highlight the importance of protecting these magnificent creatures and their habitats. It concluded with a Media Panel Discussion on “Sensitive and Responsible Wildlife Journalism which was moderated by veteran journalist Mr.Sampad Mahapatra.
Gaj Utsav is a visionary campaign by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) with a mission to raise awareness about safeguarding the future of India’s National Heritage Animal, while also advocating for their essential Right of Passage. Since its inception in 2018, this campaign has significantly impacted elephant range states in India.
 
Media panel discussion on the importance of sensitive and responsible wildlife reporting
Odisha is home to over 1900 elephants spanning three elephant reserves and having 12 identified elephant corridors. While these majestic animals roam freely across the country’s vast landscapes, they face challenges in their right to move across their natural habitats. Gaj Utsav seeks to encourage collective action among policymakers, media, infrastructure agencies, legal professionals, and wildlife experts, fostering insightful discussions on challenges, conservation strategies, and sustainable development models for elephant protection.
This year’s celebration in Odisha marks another milestone in the ongoing efforts to safeguard these magnificent animals and their habitats. Over the last 5 years, the campaign has successfully engaged with 75,000 people across the country.
Handcrafted elephant art pieces by local artisans were displayed at the event | Photo by WTI
Addressing the audience, Shri Pradip Kumar Amat, Hon’ble Minister, FE&CC, Odisha, Govt. of India, emphasised the importance of enhancing wildlife corridors with structures like overpasses, underpasses, and bridges. Odisha owes its wealth to elephants, whose historical significance dates back to the elephant army of the Gajapati (erstwhile king of Kalinga), which played a pivotal role in defending our land from intruders. Consequently, it our responsibility to save the elephants that inhabit our forests.
Vivek Menon, Founder and ED, Wildlife Trust of India, and Chair Asian Elephant Specialist Group IUCN SSC, conveyed his enthusiasm for the initiation of Gaj Utsav in Odisha. This event is a celebration of our National Heritage Animal and its Right of Passage, officially launched by Hon’ble Minister of the Forest, Environment, and Climate Change Department, Shri Pradip Kumar Amat. The organisation is collaborating with the Odisha Forest Department to pass on the message of elephant corridors and the need for habitat linkages to the common man.
Shri Sushil Kumar Popli, IFS, PCCF and CWLW, Odisha Forest Department expressed  his gratittude to WTI for bringing together the Gaj Utsav campaign. He expressed the department’s commitment to working together with media representatives and local communities to address the current issues relating to elephant conservation and human-elephant conflict mitigation in the state.