09 September 2023, Mithapur: WTI’s  The Mithapur Coral Reef Recovery Project team in collaboration with Tata Chemicals Ltd (TCL) and the Gujarat Forest Department recently organised an awareness workshop involving the fishing communities of Mithapur, Gujarat.
Our project combines scientific interventions with community awareness to safeguard the coral reef ecosystems and instil a sense of ownership and responsibility among the fishing communities reliant on these resources. It involves the creation of artificial reefs and the use of Biorock systems to facilitate natural coral recruitment. 
While these scientific interventions are pivotal for restoring the reef’s diverse coral species, the support and involvement of nearly 150 fishing families were also the key factors. These reef-dependent fishermen, operating non-motorised boats, hail from nearby villages like Bhimrana, Arambhada, Surajkaradi, and Mithapur.
The coral reef restoration project along the Mithapur coast has been instrumental in rejuvenating damaged corals and enriching reef ecosystems | Photo by WTI
 Approximately 50 fishermen from Bhimrana and Arambhada fishing villages participated in the workshop, where they were briefed about the scientific interventions of the project, including the construction of artificial reefs and the installation of Biorocks in the Mithapur reef, using visual aids and demonstrations. The coral reef restoration project along the Mithapur coast has been instrumental in rejuvenating damaged corals and enriching reef ecosystems, due to the active support of reef-dependent fishermen in the Mithapur region. 
Mr. Farukhkha Bloch, project sociologist, WTI, emphasised that while fishing activities by reef fishermen around Mithapur can be detrimental to the coral reef, it would be ethically inappropriate to deny them access to their livelihood resources. Fishermen were further educated through demonstrations showcasing the results achieved through this initiative. 
Mr. Chirag Solanki, Program Officer, C-SCAPES, a partner organisation of the project, emphasised the role of community involvement in any successful conservation effort.
The workshop witnessed the active participation of approximately 50 fishermen from Bhimrana and Arambhada fishing villages | Photo by WTI
The coral cover on the Mithapur reef had been notably sparse due to various localised threats and harsh environmental conditions. Since the inception of our project in 2008, we have dedicated our efforts to assisting in the recovery process through the establishment of artificial reefs and coral gardens at Mithapur. So far, 1,735 artificial reefs have been successfully created, providing an additional surface area of 4,406.9 sq.m for natural succession. Additionally,  we have established a total of 57 coral garden nurseries, populated with 1,040 coral boulders collected with community participation. These 1,040 coral boulders exhibited remarkable growth and development, with a mortality rate of only 2.7%.
Community participation has proven to be a critical pillar of support for our coral reef restoration project, with factors such as education and the active involvement of fishing and coastal communities playing a pivotal role in the success of the Mithapur coral reef conservation project.