Kokrajhar (Bodoland), February 7, 2013: Nearly ten years have passed since a group of local youth established Manas Maozigendri Ecotourism Society (MMES) to help secure the Greater Manas landscape. Even today, they continue to put up a strong fight against wildlife offenders, despite attempts to pull them down.
The most recent attack on MMES camp in Lakhi Bazar, Baksa district, took place on October 12, 2012. A group of angry mob of locals went on a retaliatory rampage, destroying the entire camp, and looting valuables including electronics.
 MMES is one of the numerous dedicated community-based organisations (CBOs) that have been formed since the Bodo Peace Accord in 2003 to protect Manas. And like them, attacks have been reported by other CBOs including Raigajli Eco-tourism and Social Welfare Society (RESWS) in Chirang district, (now dissolved) Manas Souchi Kongor Ecotourism Society (MSKETS) in Baksa. An eco-tourism lodge run by MMES was also vandalised in 2010.
The International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) has been helping strengthen these CBOs through Rapid Action Projects (RAPs) under its Greater Manas Conservation Project. This is among the numerous initiatives under the IFAW-WTI project that has been assisting Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) and Assam Forest Department in ‘bringing back Manas’ to its former glory.
“MMES was born at the most critical period of conservation in Manas and has proved its worth with the help of Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) and organisations like IFAW-WTI,” said DD Boro, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Manas.






DD Boro hands over relief items to MMES members



Over the years, IFAW-WTI has supported equipping, capacity-building, awareness and livelihood improvement, conflict mitigation initiatives by CBOs in Greater Manas. Some of these include installation of power fence in fringe villages, provision for patrolling field gear including bicycles, ration costs, etc. To help MMES after the latest attack, IFAW-WTI provided immediate relief in the form of uniforms, blankets, bed packs, mosquito nets, etc, as requested by them. 
“CBOs like MMES, MSKETS, RESWS, Bodoland Forest Protection Force and many others are an inspiration to us, as they would be for the local people for whom they fight to save Manas,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head, WTI. “What makes these attacks particularly ironic is that these CBOs are working for the welfare of the local people.”
Apart from assisting authorities in patrolling the protected areas, the CBOs also promote eco-tourism and help local communities in various capacities to improve local livelihoods.MMES, which comprises, members of All Bodo Students Union, former poachers and loggers, and Bodo Liberation Tiger cadres, for example have been supporting local self-help groups and helping promote Assam muga silk.
The good news however is that despite these setbacks, the CBOs are committed to preserve the heritage of Manas, and at any cost. “Torments (like the recent incident) will not hold us back,” declares Phwjwngsar Narzary, Secretary – MMES.