Blog by Rudra Mahapatra
Muddy roads, water-logged terrain, dense forest and incessant rain didn’t stop our giant Tata Xenon from ploughing ahead despite the harsh natural conditions. Pinku (the local guide) and I were tense but also excited as we approached the site where a rescued palm civet was to be soft-released. We were to install camera traps at the site to monitor the movement of the civet after its release. Apart from being excited, I was also nostalgic. Each meter crossed on this tricky jungle trail reminded me of the day when this civet was rescued and brought to us. Rescued by the Honorary Wildlife Warden of Baripada (Bhanu ji) from a man who was trying to sell it off in the local market, Bhanuji kept the civet at his residence before handing it over to our newly launched Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) unit for nursing and rehabilitation.


The Tata Xenon truck that the MVS team uses to rescue animals.

Photo: Rudra/WTI

While driving through the jungle, a sense of satisfaction filled my heart as we had been successful in taking care of the animal and went through the two-week long soft-release process. At that moment, I remembered a famous quote from American Biologist Edward O Wilson: “Each species is a masterpiece, a creation assembled with extreme care and genius.” This statement also implies that each species should be dealt with extreme care and compassion. Considering the threats posed to the wildlife, the need of human intervention in terms of care and concern becomes imperative.
I feel happy that realizing this need, WTI in association with Forest Department (STCF) has started an MVS unit in Similipal Tiger Reserve in Odisha which is striving to ensure that no wild animal in distress is left to its fate.


The camera trap photo of the palm civet being taken for soft release. 

Similipal Tiger Reserve Odisha, a compact block of eminent plateau, lying in the core of the Mayurbhanj District is spread over an area of 2,750 sq km. The stretch of forest which includes Similipal Reserve Forest was declared a Tiger Reserve under Project Tiger on December 4, 1973. Thick and green forests, extensive grassy lands and meadows, precipitous and sparkling waterfalls, meandering rivers, roaring tigers and trumpeting tuskers, fleeing deer and flying squirrels, talking myna and dancing peacocks are the main attractions of this place which provides a heavenly abode for wildlife of all kinds. While Similipal is home to such wide variety of wildlife, the task of conservation and care is also critical for the concerned forest officials.
With 66 cases being handled by the Forest Department between 2011 and 2013, the need for a veterinary service unit was felt and this led to the start of this new initiative. For the first time, Odisha got a dedicated mobile unit manned by a trained veterinarian and caretaker to attend to wildlife emergencies reported from the region. The objective was to return every displaced animal to the wild. Since the commencement of its service at Pithabata Wildlife Range Office campus in Baripada at the fringe of Similipal Tiger Reserve, the MVS Unit is responding to each wildlife emergency.


An orphan elephant being milk fed of by the MVS team.

Photo: Rudra/WTI

While wildlife displacement due to man-made causes is increasingly becoming a concern from conservationists and wildlife park managers, we have taken care of such cases with prompt action and sensitive approach. In the recent past, snake and chameleon rescue cases were also being handled by the unit. And now, we are also supporting the Forest Department in raising a distressed and deserted elephant calf.
The MVS unit at Similipal Tiger Reserve strives to provide a secure and healthy place for its wild denizens and I am confident that in the near future it will regarded as their most trusted friend and savior.