20th January, 2022, Seijosa, Arunachal Pradesh
A three-day conservation festival for Hornbill conservation was celebrated in Pakke Tiger Reserve, Seijosa, Arunachal Pradesh between the 18th and the 20th of January, 2022. The event was organised by the Pakke Tiger Reserve and the Pakke Paga Hornbill Festival committee, in collaboration with Wildlife Trust of India from. Being a state festival of Arunachal Pradesh focussing on wildlife conservation in general and Hornbills in specific, Pakke Tiger Reserve, Wildlife Trust of India and Festival Committee organized both online and offline activities, while maintaining all the SOPs of Covid 19.

The programme was coordinated by Mr. Suraj Singh, Divisional Forest Officer (Pakke Tiger Reserve), Shri Anil Chiri, Secretary of PPHF, Dr.Panjit Basumatary, veterinary doctor (Wildlife Trust of India) and Mr. Chandan Ri, Field Biologist (Pakke tiger Reserve). Shri T.R. Tapu, ADC, Seijosa graced the programme as the chief guest, alongside Dr. Topu Tok, Medical Officer, Seijosa.
Introducing birds to the young generation
Dr. Jaydev Mandal, Assistant Professor from Madhab Choudhury College in Barpeta, Assam, was the resource person and took a session on ebird and briefed about bird watching techniques. He also conducted practical sessions on bird watching and identification with school children while highlighting their importance in our ecosystem.
Future prospects for Pakke Tiger Reserve
The 2nd day of the event constituted of panel discussion including various field experts from across India who joined us online. Dr. Aparajita Dutta, Senior scientist from NCF and Mr. Vivek Menon, Executive Director, Wildlife Trust of India were resource person in these sessions and talked on “Present and Future conservation strategy of Hornbills in India”. They also proposed various future conservation strategies while focussing on the local community initiatives.

Mr. Manoj, Managing director, Jungle lodge resort, Karnataka and Divisional Forest officer Ziro also shared their experience on another plenary discussion on the topic, “Ecotourism as a Gateway of Conservation”. They suggested cultural tourism and homestay as a livelihood option as well as discussed about challenges in its management. They stressed upon the management of homestays for the promotion of ecotourism into the locality and their role.
Awareness through art
During the three-day festival various competitions were organised for children including quiz, essay, drawing, extempore, speech and photography competitions. Mr. Prem Tallang, Education Secretary, AAPSU and VKV alumni conducted these competitions. Mr. Chandan Ri, Biologist, Pakke Tiger Reserve, Mr. Asish Immanuel Baglary, Biologist, WTI, Mr. Rakesh Mallik, Field assistant supervised these events.

The event ended with a positive interaction among the resource persons and the participants regarding management of PTR. The event was officially concluded with a speech by Mr. Anil Chiri, Secretary PPHF Pakke Paga Hornbill Festival 2022.
WTI has been working in the Pakke Tiger Reserve since 2002 on the rehabilitation of Asiatic black bears. Visit this link to know more about our work.