Naya Raipur, Chhattisgarh, Jan 15, 2019 : Naya Raipur (Atal Nagar), in Chhattisgarh gets a new landmark with a life-size bronze sculpture of a wild buffalo mascot for the state. The statue has been placed around green landscaping as the center of a square, to be called the Shyamu-Radhe Chowk henceforth. Close to the Jungle Safari (Nandanvan), the largest zoo safari in Asia and IIIT, the mascot will be a major attraction in the town. The mascot design had been launched in 2017 by the then Chief Minister, Dr Raman Singh in the 10th State Wildlife Board Meeting on 14 November 2017. Today, the mascot, developed and produced by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), forms the face of the central India wild buffalo recovery campaign running across the state.

On the 10th of January, 2019, the mascot statue at Atal Nagar (New Raipur) was launched by Mr Kaushlendra Singh, IFS, PCCF (WL) and CWLW of Chhattisgarh. Also present in the event were Mr. H.L. Ratre, Field Director, Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve and WTI’s Dr. Rahul Kaul, Vice President & Project Incharge of the Central India Wild Buffalo Recovery Project, Dr. Samir Kumar Sinha, Head of Species Recovery Division and Dr. Rajendra Prasad Mishra, Head of Central India Wild Buffalo Recovery Project. Dr Rahul Kaul also presented a memento to the PCCF (WL) at the PCCF Office.

The wild buffalo is listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. With less than 4000 individuals estimated to be remaining in the wild, the species is also classified as endangered in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. WTI’s Central India Wild Buffalo Recovery Project is supported by Oracle and the Chhattisgarh Forest Department. The sculpture at Naya Raipur forms a permanent landmark in the heart of the newly developed city. This will not only help create awareness about the state animal of Chhattisgarh but also promote WTI and its donors as the prime contributors to the cause.
To help support the project and read more about it click here
All Pictures Courtesy: WTI