Bihar: Hidden camera traps are proving to be an effective method for spotting the elusive big cats in Valmiki Tiger Reserve, where natural sighting of the animal has become rare.  
Researchers have installed about a dozen hidden camera traps in the reserve to study animal activities which will help them to take conservation steps.
The camera works on a simple principle – as soon as the heat sensor in the camera registers a temperature difference – due to the movement of objects in front – the shutter of the camera clicks – trapping the image on a 35 mm colour film.
In the year 2005, a set of five cameras were placed in the reserve under a joint plan by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the Bihar Forest Department to trap the elusive animals.
Last year, additional eight cameras were installed to get a wider view of the activities and also to increase the chance of catching nocturnal wildlife.
Besides a tiger and her two cubs, a leopard, sloth bear, large Indian civet, porcupine and a variety of deer species were recorded by the camera traps.
Due to dense vegetation and uneven terrain spotting wild animals is difficult.
“Tigers in the reserve usually make use of dry rivulets and nullahs as their pathway and to find a good support to install cameras at these locations is not easy.” Samir Kumar Sinha, Sr. Field Officer of WTI said.
“Low density of the species has also made sighting difficult and in some occasions, cameras miss them at a very close range.” Sinha said.
“The current study has shown good wildlife habitat with the presence of tigers and leopards.” Dr. P. S. Easa, Sr. Director of WTI said.
“Recently, a leopard was photographed at dusk, next to the kill in Harnatanr Forest Range. Photographs have shown that the animal after consuming a portion of his kill hid the remaining portion at a nearby place. The findings will help us to record their presence and activities.” Dr. Easa said.
The predators in the reserve are threatened as a result of pressure from encroachments in their habitats by humans, and reduction of prey animals resulting in food scarcity.
Valmiki was established as 18th tiger reserve in 1990. The Chitwan National Park in Nepal forms the northern boundary of the reserve – famous for the Great one-horned rhino.
Rhinos have been known to migrate into the reserve from across the border. The region is rich in wildlife.