Whale Shark, the largest fish in the ocean has its migration route along the west coast of India. Although protected as a Schedule I species, it still faces several threats in the form of unregulated fishing practices, accidental entanglement in fishing nets, collision with boats as well as extensive coastal pollution.
To address the issues of accidental entanglement and ocean pollution, WTI has initiated the ‘whale shark conservation project’ along Karnataka, Kerala, and Lakshadweep coasts. The goal is to ensure the immediate release of the entangled whale sharks from the fishing net. The campaign is endorsed by respective state Fisheries Department, Forest Department and local fishers and panchayat.
Awareness drive in Honnavar for fishermen community | Photo by Charan Kr Paidi/WTI
In Honnvar – Uttar Kannada district, Wildlife Trust of India conducted sensitisation event for a fishermen community in collaboration with Indian Coast Guard and Karnataka Fisheries Department and Karnataka Forest Department on the 13th of December, 2022. The program was conducted with an aim to conserve these gentle giants in Kerala and provide them with a safe haven.
The event started with a welcome address and a brief note about the whale shark conservation project. Around 500 community members were present during the event.
The chief guest of the event, Shri T Manjunath, spoke about the need for these gentle giants and other marine megafauna conservation – “These magnificent creatures play an important part in our ecosystem, and everyone needs to extend their role in protecting them.” He had pledged his alliance and requested fishermen community members and students to the support the cause and actively participate in the Whale shark conservation.
Dr. Prakash N. Mestha, a marine biologist and member of the Karnataka Biodiversity Board, addressed the fishermen and encouraged them to follow the conservation efforts. He explained the importance of Honnavar as an ecologically sensitive area with turtle nesting areas and the upcoming Apsarkonda Marine Park, where there is an aggregation of baleen whales. Dr. Prakash N. Mestha thanked WTI, for capacity building of the fishers and extended his support to Save the Whale Shark Conservation Campaign by helping in gathering the fishermen.
Community gathering during the event | Photo by Charan Kr. Paidi
Mr. Nagaraja Challajjimane, Deputy Director of Fisheries, Govt. Of Karnataka, Honnavar Fishing Harbour, Kasargoda gave the keynote address on local fishing practices. He spoke about the problems of overfishing and the lack of awareness among the fishermen regarding the implications of the practice. He thanked WTI for conducting an awareness program for fishermen and giving them valuable insights into marine resources.
Mr. Sudarshan, Assistant Conservator of Forest, Govt. of Karnataka, Honnavar division, spoke about the importance of community conservation and its importance. He spoke on the importance of marine resources and how to save the marine environment, followed by information on how overfishing caused the natural imbalance.
Mr. JG. H. T. Manjunath, commandant, Indian Coast Guard Station Karwar, spoke to fishermen about his sightings of the whale shark. As a commanding officer, he’s been to the east and west coasts and has seen the whale shark while on patrol.
Around 350 members were present during the event, including 64 students from SDM College, Honavar. Apart from them, 50 primary school students from a community government school were also present during the event.
Guests during the event | Photo by Charan Kr Paidi
As a part of this conservation project, a mobile application has been developed for a database on Whale Shark entanglement and release. During the sensitisation sessions, the fishers are trained to use the application in case they encounter sightings or accidental entanglement. A session was conducted to capacity- build the fishers. WTI felicitated one fisherman and one forest guard for their selfless efforts in rescuing and releasing the marine turtle from their nets and creating the turtle nesting hatchery to protect the turtle eggs from predators. 
The event was concluded with a formal vote of thanks by Mr. Charan Kumar, project lead, Wildlife Trust of India. Know more about the project here.