Assam Chief Minister Mr Sarbananda Sonowal signs the CWRC Visitors Book as he and his cabinet colleagues are briefed by WTI Deputy Director Dr Rathin Barman about the centre’s activities.

CWRC, Kaziranga National Park, August 25, 2016: The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Assam Mr Sarbananda Sonowal visited the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), the wildlife rescue, treatment and rehabilitation facility run by IFAW-WTI and the Assam Forest Department earlier today. This was the first-ever visit by any Assam Chief Minister to the centre, which is located at the Panbari Range Forest near Kaziranga National Park.
Mr Sonowal was accompanied by two cabinet colleagues – Mr Keshab Mahanta, Minister for Science & Technology and Mr Atul Bora, Minister for Agriculture, Animal Husbandry & Veterinary – and his media advisor Mr Hrishikesh Goswami.
WTI Deputy Director Dr Rathin Barman and Head Veterinarian (NE) Dr Bhaskar Choudhury welcomed the chief minister and his colleagues to CWRC. Dr Barman briefed the ministers about the centre’s activities, emphasising its close relationship since its inception with the Assam Forest Department. Mr D Mathur, PCCF and HoFF, Mr Bikash Brahma, PCCF (WL), Mr Suvasis Das, DFO (Kaziranga NP) and other senior officials of the Forest Department were also present on the occasion.

The Chief Minister feeds an orphaned elephant calf being hand-raised at CWRC



The Chief Minister took a special interest in the orphaned rhino calves that had been rescued from the recent devastating floods in Kaziranga National Park, as well the elephant calves being hand-raised at the centre. He also recognised the sincere service of the CWRC team, especially the veterinarians and animal keepers, while interacting with team members at the campus.
Speaking with the media after his tour of the centre he said: “Today is Janamashtami, a holy day, and everyone is praying for world peace. I came to CWRC on this auspicious day to take stock of the nursing and healthcare being provided to the orphaned rhino and elephant calves. I am pleased to note that CWRC has taken very good care of the calves. The Government of Assam is ready to extend any support required to care of these orphans and other wildlife at CWRC. The authorities here have informed me about a need for more space and infrastructure for the elephants, and I have instructed the Forest Department to take time-bound steps to ensure this is done. We all have to work responsibly together to secure the future of wildlife.”


The Chief Minister feeds one of the orphaned rhino calves rescued from the recent devastating floods in Kaziranga National Park.