Sambalpur (Orissa): Five persons were apprehended in two days by the Orissa Forest Department assisted by locals – members of Village Protection Committees – in Redakhol Division in Sambalpur, Orissa last weekend. Three guns and 25 kgs of bear meat were seized in these operations.The Village Protection Committees (VPCs) comprising local youth were established under the WSPA-WTI Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project to encourage and facilitate their participation in wildlife conservation.
“The project has created and is supporting three VPCs in Redhakhol for protection of sloth bears and their habitat,” said Rudra Prasanna Mahapatra, Field Officer, WTI. “During summer, when water sources in the forest dwindle and animals come out to the few perennial sources of water, poachers become active. The VPC members patrol the forests with the Forest Department staff, and it was during the patrolling on Friday that three poachers were apprehended.”
“The WSPA-WTI project aims at empowering local people through awareness to dissuade poachers from killing and trapping sloth bears and other wildlife. We are glad that the intensive campaigning in the Redhakhol block of Sambalpur is bearing fruit and will contribute towards minimising bear poaching in an identified area of high incidence,” Aniruddha Mookerjee, Campaign Coordinator for WSPA said.
The patrol team reportedly heard a gunshot during the patrolling, and traced two poachers in Kholgad Reserve Forest, near Terevada village. The duo was attempting to hunt barking deer. One of the two hunters was caught by the patrol team while the other managed to escape. Even as the team waited for reinforcements from the Forest Department, another person with a gun approached the site and was nabbed.
Once the two nabbed people were taken into custody by the Forest Department, the patrol team continued on the strategically-decided route and caught another person. In addition to these arrests, throughout the day the team also found and destroyed at least eight hide-outs made by poachers.
“This just shows the intensity of the problem here. Sambalpur has been traditionally an area with a rather high wildlife crime rate. Over the past few years, the SBCWP has successfully mobilised locals through awareness campaigns and forming VPCs to protect their natural heritage. Once a hub for sloth bear cub trade, this has been completely curbed here. Other wildlife crimes also have been reduced here, but threats obviously continue to exist,” added Mahapatra.
A day later, the Forest Department reported arresting two persons with about 20-25 kgs of sloth bear meat from Charmal range in Redhakhol division.
Cases have been filed against all accused by the Forest Department. WSPA-WTI members are providing legal support.
“It is encouraging to see how the people of Terevada have got attached to wildlife around them and are actively participating in its conservation. We are extremely impressed and grateful for their support. We have proposed the VPCs to be declared as Vana Suraksha Samiti, so that they receive the support and recognition of the government for their contributions,” said Chabila Kumar Pradhan, Forester, Orissa Forest Department.
 

Related Story
State Level Workshop on Sloth Bear Conservation
Conservation Googly 
Sloth bear cubs seized, indicates shift in trade hub