Valmiki (Bihar): The tide seems to have turned for Valmiki Tiger Reserve in the northern Indian state of Bihar. Once undeservedly neglected as a lost conservation cause, the presence of tigers has now been scientifically proven through years of research by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) supported by US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and the Bihar Forest Department. This has revived interest in Valmiki as a viable tiger habitat; especially since it connects with a wide tiger landscape that goes beyond international boundaries into Chitwan National Park and Parsa Wildlife Reserve in Nepal.
However major challenges remain, with about 140 villages located within three kilometres of the forest boundary. 22 of these villages fall within the ‘Done’ valley, a precarious incursion of human settlements into the core area of the Tiger Reserve. With the core area bearing the pressure of about 18,000 residents from within the ‘Done’ valley, one of WTI’s prime concerns is eco-development activities within the community to reduce dependence on forest resources.
As a beginning, WTI has been working in eight selected villages- Naurangia, Gardi, Piparahawa Tola, Khairahni, Matiarawa Tola, Simrahani Tola, Kamarchinwa  and Majuraha. These villages were prioritised based on their proximity to the core area and level of dependency on forest produce among other factors.
Earlier this week, WTI organised a livelihood training programme for residents of these villages at the Society for Rural Industrialization and Social Transformation Initiatives (SRISTI) foundation, Patna.
Rajarshi Ranjan, Field Officer, WTI, said, “20 individuals from the villages within our project area were taken to Patna for an integrated agriculture training. Components of the training included farming of medicinal plants, mushroom etc, compost making, fishery, poultry and piggery among others. The participants were also trained in marketing aspects of business, arrangement of finance through bank and micro-finance institutions, etc, by experts associated with SRISTI.”
“We have made a long-term commitment for eco-development in the Done valley,” Ranjan added. “We will also help these people kickstart their businesses. 25% of the net profit they earn will be put aside for a community development fund.”
In the past, WTI has also trained one person in manufacturing husk-stoves, introduced as a measure to reduce fuel wood extraction from the forest.
“A rapid survey conducted by WTI with USFWS support in 2004-05 had revealed that the villagers use wood from the forest as a major source of energy. While most extraction takes place in the fringes of the forest, significant number of people also venture deep into the forest. We introduced husk stoves as an alternative to reduce the pressure on the forest. To popularise this alternative and to make it economically attractive, we trained one person to manufacture these husk stoves locally. Last month, this person made 10 husk stoves. Ten households in Matirahawa tola, Simrahani tola and Piparahawa tola purchased the stoves at a subsidised rate. Contributions from this sale will be deposited in the community development fund,” Ranjan said.
WTI and USFWS also plan to promote fast growing fuelwood plantations in community and private lands as a sustainable alternative to extraaction of fuel wood from the forest. Additionally, local people will also be trained in bio-gas and improved stove technology.
 
Learn about Valmiki Conservation Project