Captive elephant at Sonepur mela in Bihar

Sonepur, December 5, 2015: With over 14 years of history of visiting Sonepur Mela, one of the largest cattle fair in Asia, WTI has successfully concluded yet another health camp for captive elephants this year from November 24-30, 2015. The WTI captive elephant health camp at Sonepur has, over the years, metamorphosed from a simple veterinary health camp initiative to an annual system to monitor and evaluate the health and management of captive elephants, mainly in Bihar.
This year’s health camp was organised with support from Asian Elephant Support and in collaboration with the Bihar Forest Department. With the increasing policy level enforcements related to elephant trade, only 14 elephants came to the Sonepur Mela this year. This included three tuskers, five makhnas (tuskless male) and six females. Out of these, 11 were adults and three were calves (below eight years). Apart from collecting data on parameters like morphometric, general health, food condition, etc. on all attending elephants and owners, other important objectives of the camp were to perform routine examinations, de-worming and dressings on the animal, and to bring the elephant owners and caregivers on a common platform.


WTI veterinarian treating an elephant at the camp

Key Forest Department officials not only attended the Mela, but also interacted with the WTI field team, mahouts and elephant owners association. RK Srivastava, Inspector General, Project Elephant, MoEFCC; and SS Choudhury, Chief Conservator of Forests, Government of Bihar, were also present during a workshop that was co-organized by WTI, Bihar Forest Department and Elephant Owners Association. The workshop was organised for the mahouts to generate awareness on husbandry and welfare issues pertaining to elephants in captivity. “The cooperation received from the Bihar Forest Department, district administration and Elephant Owners Association during the Mela has been remarkable for the past three years. We are able to successfully conduct the Captive Elephant Health camp because of their unending cooperation,” said Achintya Tripathi, WTI coordinator, who has been attending the mela for the past three years.
Dr Shantanu Kalambi, Veterinary Surgeon, WTI, did the veterinary examination and provided all the required treatment to the elephants attending the Mela. “The overall health status of the elephants was found to be good, apart from a few foot related problems. The mahouts have been advised the necessary treatment and husbandry modification for the same and we hope that they continue to do the same to ensure welfare of their elephants” said Dr Shantanu.
WTI has been conducting health camps for captive elephants in Sonepur, from 2001 to 2014, and has attended to around 791 cases. However, this number is going down from 92 in 2001 to only 38 in 2014 (a decline of around 54% in 14 years).


WTI veterinarian enquiring about elephants

The estimated numbers of captive elephants in the country can be put at 3,400 to 3,600 (including 1,903-1,970 in the northeast part of the country; 860-920 in the south, 271-300 in the north, 209-240 in the east, 79-92 in the west and 78 in Andaman and Nicobar islands). Although elephant trade has been deemed illegal in the country as per the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, there are still a few cases of elephants that are being caught illegally and traded. By conducting such camps and collecting information on attendance to such Melas over long period of time gives valuable insight on the illegal trade. The project team believes that a continued presence at Sonepur Mela is essential for WTI’s continued endeavour to have the pulse of the captive elephant ‘illegal market’ in the country.
The project is thankful to Asian Elephant Support for the financial assistance for the past two years in successfully conducting this camp. This camp would not have been possible without the support from all the elephant owners and the Bihar Forest Department staff.