New Delhi: Conservationists are excited at the discovery of a new nesting site of the endangered Greater Adjutant stork in the eastern Indian state of Bihar.
“The discovery assumes significance since this is the first nesting site to be recorded outside Assam in the country.” Dr. Sandeep Kr. Tiwari of Wildlife Trust of India said.
These birds have been sighted in most parts of the state, but nests were never found – till very recently in Sultanganj in Bhagalpur district.
Members of a local NGO, Mandar Nature Club have sighted two nests on a Semul tree (Bombax ceiba). Seven other nests of the Lesser Adjutant storks were also seen on the same tree.
The bird is classified as endangered on the IUCN Red list. In India, it is listed under schedule IV of the Wildlife (Protection) Act.
Today, their breeding populations are confined only in Assam in Eastern India and Cambodia in south-east Asia. Earlier, these birds were found across Asia.
A project has been initiated by the NGO with support from WTI to carry out conservation steps and also to identify more nesting sites.
To prevent thefts of the chicks and eggs, an awareness drive was initiated by the NGO among the villagers.
“A fortnight ago, the storks have dismantled their nests, probably due to the reason that they are inexperienced mothers or the nests which they built, turned out to be small.” Dr. Rahul Kaul, Director Species of WTI said.
“Pieces of egg shells were also found scattered at the base of the tree. A search is on to find out if they built alternate nests nearby.”
“Prior to this development, a safety net was placed around the nesting tree to prevent the chicks from falling down.” Arvind Mishra, who is supervising the project and also a state coordinator for the Indian Birds Conservation Network said.
A round-the-clock vigil is being kept near the site.
Their unique bare pink head, thick yellow bill and a hanging-neck-gular-pouch make them look very attractive. They can grow upto a height of five feet.
These birds are scavengers, feed on frogs and large insects. Chicks of other birds, lizards and rodents are also their preferred food.
A similar project was initiated in Assam in the year 2001 by WTI to protect these birds from various threats.