Srinagar: The endangered Pir Panjal markhor is fast becoming a driving force for declaration of new protected areas in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. Following the creation of Kajinag National Park and extension of Hirpura WLS in 2007, the state government this year notified Tatakuti Wildlife Sanctuary, bringing additional 66 sq km under state protection.
The latest notification, as that of Kajinag, was recommended by the J&K Department of Wildlife Protection, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), and Nature Conservation Foundation (NCF), as part of a joint research to help develop a holistic conservation strategy for this rare mountain goat.
With an estimated population of less than 350 individuals remaining in the country, the Pir Panjal markhor (Capra falconeri cashmiriensis) faces high risk of local extinction. The majestic flare-horned animal now survives only in pockets of Kajinag and Pir Panjal ranges in J&K.
“These are the last remaining stronghold for these beautiful goats,” said Intesar Suhail, Wildlife Warden, Shopian Wildlife Division, who looks after the J&K Wildlife Department’s Markhor Recovery Project.
Upender Pachnanda, Regional Wildlife Warden – Jammu, added, “These areas were game reserves during the era of Maharajas’ rule, and harbor rich biodiversity.”
During 2004-05, WTI and the Wildlife Department carried out a state-wide survey to assess markhor distribution across its historical range. Viable populations were found only from Limber and Lachipora WLS and Naganari Conservation Reserve in Kajinag range, and Hirpura WLS in the northern slopes of Pir Panjal range. Secondary data collected during the survey indicated presence along the southern slopes that includes Kalamund-Tatakuti and Khara Gali areas (including Kalamund-Tatakuti and Khara Gali Reserves); a repeat survey was carried out in 2011 for confirmation.
“The repeat survey was carried out through Hirpura WLS at the southeastern end of the range, adjoining Kalamund-Tatakuti and Khara Gali towards the northwestern part of the range,” said WTI researcher Riyaz Ahmad. “For the first time in 60 years, we were able to find direct evidence of markhor in both these areas. Five groups of markhor were sighted.”
The 2011 survey also assessed threats to the markhor in Pir Panjal range. The only WLS in Pir Panjal with known markhor presence – Hirpura, was found highly disturbed.
“The Mughal road construction is going on through the ‘heart’ of Hirpura along the Pir Panjal pass. The disturbances associated with this have made it unfavourable for the markhor. The upper reaches, free of the chaos of construction, have been grazing grounds for ages. Only now, it is not only being used by the traditional graziers, but is being exploited by ‘non-traditional’ too, who have found illegal ways to let their livestock graze here,” added Riyaz.
With these findings, the survey recommended as priority, according greater legal protection to Kalamund-Tatakuti and Khara Gali areas.
“The markhors of Hirpura seasonally move towards these areas. So protection in these areas is necessary, not just for long-term survival of markhor but also for the benefit of other species like musk deer, brown bear, western tragopan etc that are found here,” added Intesar Suhail.
The survey also recommended detailed study to understand the population dynamics of markhor and other species, and controlling grazing, poaching and resource extraction.
“The notification of Tatakuti WLS is a beginning,” said Dr Rahul Kaul, Chief Ecologist, WTI. “There is a lot of potential in the landcape, and the protection must be upgraded for the adjoining Kalamund-Tatakuti and Khara Gali Reserves too, as the next step.”