September 25, 2019 : India’s forests and wildlife are protected across the country by frontline forest staff but not without sacrifices. Sacrifices of life and limb are a way of life for these frontline warriors.
Attacks by wild animals, confrontations with poachers and accidents on duty result in serious injuries and sometimes even death. IFAW – WTI under its Van Rakhsak Programme has been providing financial support in such exigencies since the past two decades (2001).
In 2019, we received more than usual number of requests for ex-gratia relief from across the country. Some of the details of these cases are provided below for sharing:
Kaziranga National Park 
Thuluka Pegu, forest guard, aged 42 was mauled by a wild buffalo near the Tilaidubi Anti-Poaching Camp under the Kohora Forest Range on the afternoon of 14th March 2019, while on patrolling duty. He was shifted to Bokakhat Civil Hospital by forest staff for treatment, and subsequently referred to J.M.C.H Jorhat. Unfortunately, Thuluka Pegu succumbed to his serious injuries by the time he could reach JMCH, Jorhat. IFAW – WTI’s Supplemental Accident Assurance Scheme under the Van Rakshak Programme, provided ex-gratia support of Rs. 1,00,000 to the family of Late Mr. Thuluka Pegu.

Ex-gratia cheque of Rs 1 lac given to Shmt. Numoli Moni Peku W/O Late Thuluka Pegu
In another such example of injury, Mr. Liladhar Sharma, a forester in Kaziranga National Park in Assam, was seriously injured by a sloth bear on anti-poaching patrol. WTI helped him out by giving an additional assurance support of Rs 25,000.
Wayanad, Kerala
On the morning of 22nd April, Sri. Karunakaran, S/o Thambi, Thoramangalam colony, Valluvady, a temporary forest watcher with 15 years of service in the Sulthan Bathery Wildlife Range of theWayanad Wildlife Division, Wayanad, Kerala, was attacked by a tiger at a private plantation while on duty. He has been working as elephant scaring watcher and fire watcher for the last 15 years in Sulthan Bathery Range, Wayanad Wildlife Division.
Mr. Karunakaran was following the pugmarks of a tiger near a human settlement along with another watcher, when the attack took place. Currently recuperating from serious injuries on his left arm and legs. Karunakaran belongs to the Kuruma tribe with a family dependent on his earnings, including two school going daughters. This unexpected accident and the recuperation period of 90 days recommended by the doctor posed a financial crisis to the family, as forest watchers are essentially daily wagers. Hence at the request of the Wildlife Warden, Wayanad Forest Division, IFAW – WTI stepped in and provided ex-gratia support of an amount of Rs. 50,000/ as financial assistance to his family and the cheque was presented to his family by Mr. Assif. P.K (Wildlife Warden, Wayanad Wildlife Division) in the presence of Sri. Shajan M.A, Field Officer, WTI, Miss. Remya Raghavan (Assistant Wildlife Warden, Sulthan Bathery Range) and Naiketty Forest Station Staff.
 

Cheque being handed over to Mr. Karunakaran’s family at his house in Thoramangalam
In another unfortunate incident at Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary, anti-poaching forest watcher, Sh. Kenchan of Kattunaika Tribe lost his life to an attack by a wild elephant.  A cheque of Rs. 1,00,000 was provided to his wife Smt. Seetha on 3rd September, 2019 by the Assistant Wildlife Warden, Wayanad as an ex-gratia support by IFAW- WTI.

 
Kalagarh Forest Division, Uttarakhand 
A tiger attack took the life of Mr Sohan Singh while patrolling his beat Dandapani on July 15, 2019. Late Sohan Singh was posted in the Plain Range of Kalagarh Forest Division as forest watcher. He is survived by his father (with special needs), sister and elder Brother.
IFAW-WTI through its National Supplementary Accident Assurance Scheme provided an ex-gratia support of Rs 100,000 to the family of the late Sohan Singh. Sh. Deewan Singh, the elder brother of late Sohan Singh received an ex-gratia cheque on behalf of his father with an amount Rs. 100,000/- on August 29th, 2019. The cheque was handed over at Range office, Sendhikhal by Assistant Conservator of Forests, Range Forest Officer and Mr. Jeetendra Kumar, WTI. 

Cheque being handed over to Sh. Deewan Singh, brother of Late Sohan Singh at Range Office, Sendhikal
Hassan Range, Karnataka
On 23rd July, 2019, Mr. L.N. Annegowda a temporary forest watcher in Hassan Range, Hassan Wildlife Division in Karnataka was attacked by a wild elephant while on patrol duty. He is survived by his wife. IFAW – WTI through its National Supplementary Accident Assurance Scheme provided EX-gratia support of Rs, 50,000 to his wife.
Singrauli Forest Division, Madhya Pradesh:  Mr. Ram Darash Sharma, a 45 years old forest guard was killed by a solitary elephant on October 11, 2019 while on duty Gobha forest beat of Wairhan forest range in Singrauli forest division, Madhya Pradesh.    The APCCF (WL), Madhya Pradesh, wrote to IFAW – WTI if his family could be provided ex – gratia assistance and on 19th Dec a cheque of Rs. 25000/- (Twenty-five thousand) Was handed over by Mr. Lal Sudhakar Singh, SDO, Warhan, Mr. Ravendra Singh Chandel, SDO Deosher and Dr. Rajendra Mishra, to Late Shri Sharma’s Son.
Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary
In a case of an elephant attack on the 21st of May, 2019, Mr. Alaga Thambadi a forest watcher in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary was gravely injured. Mr. Alaga unfortunately succumbed to his injuries after a few days of intensive treatment.  He is survived by his wife and three daughters. IFAW – WTI under its National Supplementary Assurance Scheme supported the grieving family with an ex-gratia support of Rs. 1,00,000.




Ex-gratia cheques being handed over to the family members of Late L.N. Annegowda, Karunakaran and Alaga Thambadi (In clockwise direction)

Additional Assurance Cheque being anded over to realtive of Balchand Kapil
Baranwara Wildlife Sanctuary, Chattisgarh: 
Mr. Yogeshwar Sonwani works as a forest guard in Barnawara Wildlife Sanctuary in Chhattisgarh. On 29th March 2019, While on a regular patrol in his area, he had a face to face encounter with poachers. The poachers attacked Mr. Sonwani using arrows which injured. Yogeshwar very gravely. IFAW – WTI supported him in this need of hour by providing him an ex-gratia support of Rs 25,000. The cheque was handed over to him by PCCF Wildlife Sh. Atul Shukla on 18th July 2019.
Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary
In remote areas, often frontline staff guarding our natural resources also are susceptible to fatal afflictions while on duty.
Kimo Mizi worked as a casual laborer and a member of the Forest Protection Squad in Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary, Arunachal Pradesh. He contracted Japanese Encephalitis while on duty. He fell severely ill and was admitted in a hospital in Guwahati, however unfortunately he could not recover and he passed away on July 17, 2019. He is survived by his wife and two daughters. IFAW – WTI decided to support his surviving family members with an ex-gratia support of Rs 1,00,000 was provided to his wife. Assistance during Grave injuries in the Field:
Mr. Khargeshwar Gour who work as forest guard in Kaziranga Wildlife National Park in Assam, was attacked by a wild buffalo while on rhino protection duty on 17th July 2019. IFAW – WTI provided an additional assurance support to him of Rs. 50000 for covering his treatment expenses.
Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve, Chhattisgarh
Rs. 25,000 was granted to Balchand Kapil a forest watcher, who was gravely injured by a wild buffalo while tracking it in the Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve, Chhattisgarh. He suffered from a broken leg injury, few broken ribs and back injury. IFAW – WTI provided financial support by sanctioning an ex-gratia amount of Rs. 25,000 to him. The cheque was handed over to his relative by the field Director of Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger reserve.
Guarding the wild is not an easy task. The frontline staff of our country often face life-threatening situations while on duty. IFAW- WTI’s ex-gratia assurance scheme under its Van Rakshak Program ensures that the protectors of the forests get financial assistance in the event of death and grave debilitating injuries.