Junagadh, 29th August 2023: International Whale Shark Day, celebrated every year on the 30th of August, is aimed at raising awareness about the importance of whale sharks for marine ecosystems and the threats they face. Events across the globe help promote conservation efforts for this species within their distribution range. This year, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) organised an event at Bahauddin Science College in Junagadh, Gujarat, under the Whale Shark Conservation Project, in collaboration with Gujarat Forest Department, and Tata Chemicals Ltd.
The event was attended by more than 1500 individuals, including biology graduates, faculty members, post-doctoral scholars, media representatives and locals. Notable attendees included representatives from the Forest Department of Gujarat and the TCL C-SCAPES team from Mithapur, Gujarat. A life-sized inflatable whale shark adorned the campus, serving as a poignant reminder of the need for steadfast conservation efforts toward this majestic creature.
International Whale Shark Day celebrations at Bahauddin Science College in Junagadh | Photo by WSCP-WTI
Dr. R.P Bhatt, Principal of Bahauddin Science College emphasised the need for the protection of whale sharks as well as endemic species in the marine environment. Mr. A. A. Bhaliya, Assistant Conservator of Forests from Junagadh Forest division also gave insights on the conservation efforts of WTI and the Gujarat Forest Department.
Mr. Farukhkha Bloch, Manager and Head of the Whale Shark Conservation Project at WTI, delivered a detailed technical presentation that highlighted the achievements of the project which has spanned two decades along the coast of Gujarat. He highlighted the need for conservation actions, significant milestones, the challenges, and the future directions of the co-managed conservation model, which is nationally awarded and internationally recognised. Addressing the biology undergraduates in the audience, Mr. B.M Praveen Kumar talked about the ‘significance of marine ecological systems’ underlining the pivotal role of marine ecosystems and their interconnectedness with the well-being of whale sharks and the planet as a whole.
Mr. Dhaval Vargiya and Mr. Chirag Solanki, Programme co-ordinators at C-SCAPES, Tata Chemicals Ltd. Mithapur, delineated upon this campaign as a reflection of Tata Chemicals’ commitment to environmental conservation. They lauded the significant behavioural change among the fishermen community while presenting other green initiatives around marine ecosystems. 
The event was attended by more than 1500 individuals |Photo by WSCP-WTI
The event garnered multi-folded extensive coverage from regional digital and print media networks, effectively disseminating the message of whale shark conservation to a broader audience. This initiative is geared towards addressing the conservation needs of these majestic creatures, as well as emphasising their pivotal role in maintaining oceanic equilibrium.
The closing remarks were delivered by Dr. Chitranjan Dave, Assistant Professor at Bahauddin Science College, expressing gratitude for the collective support and participation.
Wildlife Trust of India’s long-standing project for whale shark conservation along the Saurashtra coast of Gujarat began in 2002. Since then, more than 900 individual whale sharks have been voluntarily released by the fishing community from the fishing nets. The project has earned two of the most prestigious conservation awards – the BNHS Green Governance Award (2005) and India Biodiversity Award (2014). As of today, seven municipalities along coastal Gujarat have adopted the whale shark as their city mascot. The project has accumulated a reach of more than 150,000 fishers and 600,000 students through various awareness workshops and campaigns.
Consider making a kind contribution to support our Whale Shark Conservation Project.