Kaziranga, Assam: After several days of incessant rain about 80% of Kaziranga National Park in North-eastern India has once again been inundated. The level of water in the park is around knee-high in some areas and higher in others.

The flood, a result of an overflow from the mighty Bhramaputra and Dhansiri rivers has submerged seven Forest Protection Camps inside the park.
The park covers about 430-sq-km and is home to 80% of the global population of One-horned Rhinos, Tigers, Wild Buffaloes, Wild Elephants, Hog Deer, Wild Boars, different species of reptiles, besides many other migratory birds and different other small species.




Poachers have been taking advantage of the monsoons. Fourteen rhinos have been poached this year — the highest in recent years.
Seeking safety, the animals in the park are moving towards higher ground. A 24- hour strict vigilance has been enforced, said a Forest Department official.
According to a source, one buffalo calf and eight hog dear have died in the last three days. This figure includes three hog deer that were admitted to the Center for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Rescue Centrex (CWRC) in Kaziranga. A rescued python at the centrex will be released soon.
“Our teams of veterinarians are on high-alert to respond to any rescue call and to attend to any of the animals at the centrex” said Dr.Anjan Talukdar of the CWRC.
Seven rhinos were found on their way to a tea garden. They were crossing National Highway 37. The herd of Rhinos was redirected and is presently at the Pahartoli Forest Camp.
The Forest Department has beefed up the night patrol on National Highway 37 to monitor and control the movement of the distressed, migrating animals in order to avoid causalities to animals crossing the highway.



The Karbi District Authority along with local NGOs like Bhumi are assisting forest officials to create awareness among locals as well as rescuing the animals.
Meanwhile, another flooded sanctuary in the state — The Probitora Wildlife Sanctuary has received support in the form of a 2.5 KV generator. The generator, which is vital for charging wireless sets used by forest officials for communication and for providing electricity in the office, has been provided to the forest department by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
“Thanks to the prompt action by the WTI, the Forest Department is now better equipped to deal with this situation.” said Mr. S.Dutta, Divisional Forest Officer of the Wildlife Division, Guwahati who has proposed this project to WTI.
 Photos : Uttam Saikia