Khammam district, 19th June 2024: In the past three months, the frontline forest staff at Sathupally and Khammam Forest Division in Telangana have thwarted two wildlife crime incidents. They successfully apprehended the poachers and seized their weapons before a crime could be committed.
The state of Telangana has rich biodiversity, with 9 sanctuaries and 3 national parks. Sathupally Forest Division is a part of Khammam District; comprising of a region with a Southern Tropical Dry Deciduous forest type, in the Eastern Ghats landscape. The forests here host several key species including the Gaur (Bos gaurus), Four-horned antelope (Tetracerus quadricornis), Civet cats (Paradoxurus hermaphroditus), Chital (Axis axis), Jungle cat (Felis chaus), and a visiting tiger. Khammam district has RoFR lands (Podu land) in between the natural forest areas; leading to many cases of negative human-wildlife interactions and casualties on both sides. Further, during the summers, in areas adjacent to electrical lines/electrical connections; wild animals from the nearby Podu land (agricultural land) visit the area when water or fodder is not available in the forest, making them vulnerable to snares and electrocution; as well as wildlife hunting.

Snares and wildlife articles seized by the patrolling staff of Sathupally and Khammam Forest Division | Photograph by Deepak Ramaiyan
Protecting this diversity are the local youth who have taken up the role of base camp watchers in two campsites. Currently, 15 individuals from the local indigenous community in the forest fringe villages are engaged in patrolling activities in Regallapadu and Chowdaram campsites. The staff has also been conducting sign surveys twice a week to monitor wildlife movements across an area of five hectares while also developing anti-poaching intelligence networks in fringe villages. These base camps are strategically placed at sensitive locations near smuggling routes and poaching hotspots inside the Reserve Forest. The frontline forest staff have booked a total about 26 wildlife crime cases in the district, leading to the seizure of 32 kg of snares and 5 kg of traps; over the past couple of years (between Feb 2022 and Feb 2024), as communicated by the Divisional Forest Officer, Khammam.
Gray francolin seized from poachers in Sathupally Forest Division | Photograph by Deepak Ramaiyan
Supported by the Segré Conservation Fund, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has been assisting the patrolling staff with equipment support including field gear and basic amenities. In January 2024, WTI provided binoculars, flashlights, jackets, raincoats, backpacks, group tents, snake rescue kits, portable water purifiers and first aid kits through a Rapid Action Project grant. The staff has since conducted raids in the fringe villages, consequently seizing traps, snares and several wildlife articles. The field gear which includes tents, jackets and flashlights has also facilitated night patrols, thereby enhancing protection in the landscape. “The Rapid Action Project has provided valuable assistance for protecting Khammam forest and wildlife”, quotes FRO Sethupally.
Following the success, WTI will extend the support to the basecamp watchers in the Karepally Range, wherein field gear and basic equipment will be distributed among ten patrolling staff, in the coming month.
Rapid Action Projects such as this, provide urgent critical support to local individuals and organisations to nip wildlife emergencies in the bud. A series of effective outcomes through a consistent approach contribute to a larger conservation impact. If you know of a deserving individual or organisation that needs support to effect conservation action on ground, get in touch with us through rap@wti.org.in.