Panjit monitoring the health of the rhino calf

It was a sunny July morning and my two and half year old daughter Nikky was pegging me to indulge her in some fun activities. This is how we usually start our day and today was no different. Despite the scorching sun, we headed out for some fun. However, I had some hidden agenda of which Nikky was totally unaware of. While playing with her, I wanted to convince her to get a haircut which otherwise is an impossible task. Somehow I managed to take her to the salon and as the barber got ready to chop her long tresses, I got a phone call from Rathin Barman, Regional Head, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)-Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), who informed that a lonely male rhino calf has been found that needs immediate medical intervention.
I immediately put the hair cut plans to rest and rushed back to attend to this young calf. On my way, I called Subhamoy Bhattacharjee, Assistant Manager, Communications, CWRC, and asked him to be ready to cover the rescue operation. I even spoke to the Forest Range Officer who informed me that the calf has already been rescued by the forest guards. He said that the calf was in desperate need of some veterinary care for which he has been taken to the Range Office. Hurriedly, we reached the range office and found that the calf was severely stressed, dehydrated and needed medical support for survival.


The rhino calf walking with one of the animal keepers

It is always tricky to care for such young rhino calves that have separated from their mothers. This calf even had its umbilical cord intact and it is even harder for such young babies to survive without their mothers. But, we were determined to save this beautiful baby and give him a new life at the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation near Kaziranga National Park in Assam.
After primary investigation at the range office, we shifted the calf into a large animal nursery of CWRC for 24X7 monitoring and care. There were no visible injury marks on the body. Most probably the baby lost his way when crossing a water body and got stuck in the bushes. Possibly, the mother too couldn’t locate the calf due to rising waters. The forest guards searched for the mother but could not trace her.


The rhino calf with another animal keeper

Considering that such young calves need care of their mother, my first thoughts were to provide him the comfort of a foster mother along with all veterinary care. Ramen and Bogiram, CWRC’s animal keepers, were then given the task of acting as a foster mother for the youngest herbivore at the centre. While Romen will spend time with him during the day, Bogiram will comfort him at nights. We even named the calf as Balidubi.
It’s been two months since he has been under our care and his condition has improved considerably. Balidubi is stable and keenly waits for the milk formula that is fed by our animal keepers each day. Plus, he cherishes the company of his foster mothers who take turns to look after the baby.
Each morning, he goes out for a walk in a patch of grass that also has a water body and it has made a huge difference to his well-being. Today, whenever I see Balidubi wallowing in the small water body and chasing the animal keeper, my heart fills up with joy. We are conditioning him in a certain manner to ensure that he returns to the wild when the time is right. Till then, we continue to enjoy the company of this beautiful baby who is a fighter that survived despite the odds.


Panjit’s daughter Nikky checking photos of the rhino calf

Since then whenever I return home, a volley of questions are thrown at me by Nikky who is has been worried about the calf. She has only seen his pictures on my laptop and yet calls Balidubi her friend. Every day when I come, she jumps onto me and asks me about her friend and I just show her some pictures which make her smile. Her smile tells me that whatever we are doing is not only bringing happiness to calf but also to Nikky and others like her. And that feeling is above everything I have experienced before.
It is too early to think about the calf’s release in the wild because it’s a long process and we would be there with him in every step. I just hope and pray that everything goes well and one day Nikky’s friend can return to the wild. I would be the happiest father in the world if I could bring Nikky with me when we release her friend to his natural home. Till then, I will keep taking pictures and answer all questions that Nikky has about her friend Balidubi.