This must-read series by Wildlife Trust of India features 10 eminent wildlife experts who share their list of top 20 wildlife titles. This time we have Neha Sinha, the author of Wild and Wilful.
“As a bibliophile, I had many more books to list than these twenty here. So this is not my all-time favourite list, it’s a list of my favourites right now. Nature books aren’t restricted to field guides or non-fiction essays. They also include books that help us understand and interpret the natural world around us. Some of the books in this list are guides, some are about natural history, but many are about seeing the world differently, to find that Nature isn’t something far away, but something to be welcomed into our daily lives. I hope you enjoy this eclectic list (and read each book)” – Neha Sinha.




Neha Sinha is an award-winning conservation biologist and author. Her bestselling book, Wild and Wilful- Tales of 15 Iconic Indian species, tells the stories of tigers, leopards, fluffy tit butterflies, elephants, Ganges river dolphins, Great Indian Bustards, and more. She believes all wild animals, especially the ‘ugly’ ones, are special. She is a policy specialist and writes columns for many newspapers. She is on Twitter at nehaa_sinha and would love to hear from you on birds and words, and books and critters.


Here’s her list of top 10 titles about wildlife in India and another 10 on global wildlife topics.

Her pick of the top reads on wildlife of India:


Aaranyak by Bibhutibhushan Bandhopadhyay


Field notes from a Waterborne land by Parimal Bhattacharya


The Vanishing by Prerna Singh Bindra


Marginlands by Arati-Kumar Rao


Women in the Wild: Stories of India’s Most Brilliant Women Wildlife Biologists. Edited by Anita Mani


Indian mammals: a field Guide by Vivek Menon


A Life With Wildlife by MK Ranjitsinh


The Living Air by Aasheesh Pittie


What’s Left of the Jungle by Nitin Sekar


Snakes of India, the Field Guide by Romulus Whitaker and Ashok Captain


Her pick of the top reads on global wildlife topics:


Embrace Fearlessly the Burning World by Barry Lopez
Underland by Robert Macfarlane
The Great Derangement by Amitav Ghosh
Vesper Flights by Helen Macdonald
The Nature Chronicles Prize -1- Winning entries edited by Kathryn Aalto
Braiding Sweetgrass by Robin Wall Kimmerer
Lost Words by Robert Macfarlane and Jackie Morris
Tigers in Red Weather by Ruth Padel
The Home Place: Memoirs of a Colored Man’s Love Affair with Nature by J Drew Lanham
Feral by George Monbiot

Also read the curated lists by:
M K Ranjitsinh
Aasheesh Pittie
Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan
Tara Gandhi