Kunhimangalam, 7 July 2020:
Shout out from the Kannur Kandal Project to all Photographers, both amateur and professionals who have experienced a mangrove ecosystem in India. In the run up to this year’s International Day for the Conservation of the Mangrove Ecosystem on 26 July, WTI and its project partner Apollo Tyres Ltd bring you a photo contest for you to participate and win exciting prizes.
Given the social distancing guidelines necessitated by COVID-19, this year’s celebration of Inetrnational Mangrove Day shall be online and so instead of the usual outreach programmes at our interpretation centre in Kannur, Kerala, we bring to you online events and contests in which you can participate from home.

Read on the know more about the contest guidelines and submit your entries.
Contest closes on 18th of July and the winners shall be announced on 24th of July!
Guidelines 

The participant should be an Indian Citizen
The photograph should be from mangrove ecosystems in India
There will be three categories for submission

Mangrove flora and fauna
Mangrove habitat
Mangrove and humans


No quad copter /aerial shots are allowed (Drone)
Photographs hurting the sentiments of dependent communities are not allowed
The participant can only submit one photograph in each category
The initial submission can be a low-resolution image. The selected participants will be asked to submit the Raw/ Hi-Res image later.
The file name should be <Category_Location_State_Name of the participant>

For example, the category applying for is Fauna, the location of photograph is from Bhitarkanika, Odisha and name of the photographer is Sanjay Behera then the file name should be <Fauna_Bhitarkanika_Odisha_Sanjay Behera>
Winners will be announced publicly during our online International Mangrove Day event (24th July 2020) and on WTI’s social media (Facebook, Twitter and Instagram).

Intellectual Property Rights

Ownership and copyright of all entries will be shared by the photographer and the organisers of the photo contest. By submitting an entry, the entrant grants Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and its project partners Apollo Tyres Limited (ATL) an irrevocable, perpetual, and royalty-free right to use, reproduce, edit, display, transmit, prepare derivative works of, modify, publish and otherwise make use of the submitted entry for any purposes based on their sole discretion.
These rights include, but are not limited to, the right to modify, censor, compress, edit, affix logos to, and to otherwise alter or make use of the submitted entry. Entrant agrees that WTI and ATL shall have no obligation to post, display, or otherwise make publicly available the entry, and may, in their sole discretion, remove or delete the entry from project website, social media platform, or in other published locations.

Warranty & Indemnification
By entering the Contest, you warrant that your entry is original, that you are the sole owner and copyright holder of your entry, and that you have not granted exclusive rights to all or part of your entry to any other person or entity. You also warrant that your entry does not violate the right of privacy of any individual; does not infringe any trademark, trade name, trade secret, intellectual property right, or other common law or statutory right; nor does it contain any material that might be deemed offensive or obscene, or that otherwise violates any criminal prohibition or the personal or proprietary rights of any person or entity. You agree to indemnify and hold harmless WTI and its partners from any claims, costs and expenses that WTI may incur arising out of or in connection with your breach of the foregoing warranties.
A panel of judges from conservation and communication domains will choose the winner in each category. In addition to a cash prize, all winners will be featured on WTI’s social media, and stand a chance to have one photograph featured in our 2021calendar.
 
Prize

Each category will receive three prizes (First, Second and Third),

First Prize :           Gift Vouchers INR 5000
Second Prize :           Gift Vouchers INR 3000
Third Prize :           Gift Vouchers INR 2000

 
Click Here to Submit your photographs for the contest >> https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdrjlqAnZ43NZrjagLk7WuUj4LHnCpoyi_zDyMdjWiJ6X2WUg/viewform?pli=1 <<
For more information on WTI’s Kannur Kandal Project on Mangrove Conservation and Restoration supported by Apollo Tyres Ltd., click here >> https://www.wti.org.in/projects/mangrove-restoration-project/<<