Sambalpur (Odisha): A group of volunteers have been traveling across 30 villages in the Sambalpur district conducting a mobile campaign to spread awareness on sloth bear conservation among locals. A joint effort of the Odisha Forest Department and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), with the support of the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA), this campaign will culminate in a fair on the November 20 at Redakhol.
Sloth bears are found in high numbers in Sambalpur, but face threats due to conflicts with people, poaching for trade of live cubs or body parts.
“Sambalpur is one of the areas with highest sloth bear population in Odisha. Cub trade, hunting and conflict incidents used to be very common here, and until recently it was the main hub of illegal sloth bear trade in the country. But this has changed now, thanks to the people here,” says Rudra Prasanna Mahapatra, Field Officer of the Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project, a joint venture of WSPA and WTI. “Education and awareness through street plays and targeting youth has sensitised people to the need for conservation and formation of Village Protection Committees has helped cut down cub trade and nab poachers.”
The mobile campaign is a part of the Project and is expected to reach 3000 people in the 30 villages. It will include documentary screenings, talks and distribution of literature on threats to sloth bears, and their conservation. On November 20, the campaign culminates in a sloth bear conservation fair in Redhakhol, involving participation from representatives from the Forest Department, Van Suraksha Samitis, Panchayats and political organisations apart from locals.

“This fair will provide the Gram Panchayats a platform in the form of stalls to exhibit their biocultural  heritage, and to share information and knowledge, discuss and deliberate on sloth bear conservation in their respective areas, especially with respect to conflict mitigation and trade control,” said Sudipto Chatterjee, Head of Communities and Biodiversity division, WTI.