Rajaji National Park (Uttarakhand): An adult tusker, allegedly involved in human elephant conflict, was captured from Narendranagar Forest Division and relocated to the Chilla Range of the Rajaji National Park on Saturday in a joint operation by the Uttarakhand Forest Department, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) and the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), after two months of efforts.
Human elephant conflict has resulted in seventeen deaths in the area over the past two years. The authorities on November 9 issued orders to put the animal to sleep. Analysis of casualties revealed that most of the killings were accidental and as a result of people venturing inside the forest area or were on roads that are in an elephant corridor. Simultaneously, other options were explored that involved capture and translocation to similar habitat to reduce conflict.
“One of the keys to this success was co-ordinated effort of various agencies,” says DVS Khati, Chief Conservator of Forests, Garhwal. “Realising the sensitivity of the situation, resources from across the country were mobilised. Three captive elephants and six mahouts were brought in from Corbett Tiger Reserve. Apart from experts from the FD, WII and WTI, Dwipen Kalita an elephant specialist from Assam, and his mahout Rabha were flown in with the support of the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF).”
The DSWF support was provided through WTI as a Rapid Action Project (RAP) sanctioned to handle the urgent need for field experts to track the elephant.
The animal was sedated on Saturday morning by Dr Parag Nigam, WII. This was the third time the animal was darted. Capturing was not successful the previous two times due to unfavourable terrain and conditions. Meanwhile, the Forest Department carried out regular patrolling and awareness drives to control the situation.
The tusker, weighing approximately four tonnes, was loaded on a truck and moved 20 kms across the river Ganga to the pre-selected site.
“This site has been identified as a rich elephant habitat,” said NN Pandey, Divisional Forest Officer, Narendranagar. “It is separated from the capture site by the Chilla Power Chanel and its steep embankments and also the river Ganga, minimising chances of the animal returning there. Our task, however, does not end here and the animal shall now be monitored closely by the team.”
Dr Anil Kumar Singh, WTI has been working on human-elephant conflict mitigation for the past 18 years. He feels there is a need to educate and sensitise people to respect wildlife and give it space. Building of physical barriers and deterrents, such as electric fences and trenches, will reduce incidents of elephants entering human habitation.