Sivasagar (Assam): Despite drastic decline in populations of several vulture species in the 1990s that edged them menacingly towards extinction, vultures continue to fall victim to human apathy even today. Although efforts are being made by governments as well as non-government institutions to curb this downfall, reckless activities by people residing within home range of vultures, continue to take a toll on this dying group of scavengers, across India. 
About 21 vultures (Gyps spp) have died after consuming poisoned carcasses in Sivasagar District in the northeast Indian state of Assam, since April 28. 18 of these deaths were reported yesterday from Akhoiphutia Koch village, while death of three Himalayan Griffon vultures (Gyps himalayensis) were reported on April 28 from Dikhomukh village.
Assam Forest Department officials rescued 10 affected vultures (including four Himalayan Griffon, three slender-billed and three white-rumped) in the two incidents and transferred them to the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) near Kaziranga National Park. Following treatment, all except one slender-billed vulture, are reportedly out of danger.
Dr Anjan Talukdar, IFAW-WTI veterinarian, CWRC, said, “The vultures were in a pretty bad state when they were brought here on Tuesday. They were showing acute symptoms of poisoning including drooping necks, extreme weakness and regurgitation. Fortunately however, nine of them responded well to our treatment. One slender-billed vulture that was brought in yesterday is still in a critical state. We are working on reviving this one too.”
Utpal Bora, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Sivasagar, said of the first incident, “The April 28 case was a retaliatory attack against a rabid dog which had killed a goat in a local family. The family members had poisoned the goat carcass with pesticides to kill the dog. The vultures got affected by consuming the contaminated carcasses of the goat as well as the dog, which also died after consuming the poisoned goat meat.”
Dr Abhijit Bhawal, IFAW-WTI veterinarian assisted the Forest Department in rescue and treatment of affected vultures in Akhoiphutia Koch village, along with members of the Vulture Conservation and Breeding Centre, Rani, Assam. Dr Bhawal said, “Our volunteer Mahi Puri found out from the locals that yesterday’s case too was of poisoning. Apparently, a flock of approximately 50 vultures were feeding on a carcass of a dog poisoned by villagers. There was a sudden onset of restlessness among birds. 18 of them died soon after.”
Population of three Gyps vultures decreased by about 95% within as few as three years in the 1990s, across parts of their home range in south Asia (source: Birdlife International). Once commonly-used livestock analgesic/anti-inflammatory drug ‘Diclofenac’ was identified as one of the main causes. Use of ‘Diclofenac’ is presently banned in India. However, because of higher costs of the safer alternative ‘Meloxicam’ and lack of awareness among users, Diclofena continues to be used.
Over the years, IFAW-WTI alone has attended to nearly 40 individual vultures (including Himalayan Griffon, slender-billed, white-rumped, cinereous) in Assam through its wild animal rescue system comprising CWRC and Mobile Veterinary Services (MVS) spread across the state. Poisoning has been identified as the one of the major known reasons necessitating these interventions. Other reasons include railway accidents, fall from nests (chicks and juveniles), injury by people or feral animals, etc.
“We have successfully released several vultures following treatment. However, the problem of vultures being killed due to various reasons just doesn’t die down… Conservation of vultures will require effective awareness drives to prevent removal of these birds from the wild as well as breeding programmes (especially for the critically endangered ones) to increase their numbers,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Director, Wild Rescue programme, IFAW-WTI.
The Himalayan Griffon vultures (Gyps himalayensis) will be ringed (used for identification) and released soon after they are deemed healthy. The slender-billed vultures (Gyps tenuirostris) and white-rumped vultures (Gyps bengalensis), both categorised as critically endangered by IUCN and listed as Schedule I species in the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, will be transferred to the Vulture Conservation and Breeding Centre.
 
Related story:
Saving scavengers: Vulture conservation in Gujarat