Ranikhet: In the wake of mysterious deaths of eagles in Ranikhet, a preliminary report from the Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) has revealed that it may be a case of poisoning which led to the mass mortality of Steppe eagles (Aquila nipalensis). The Wildlife Trust of India’s (WTI) Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) based in Corbett and close to the hill station in Uttaranchal was pressed into service to provide rescue and relief operations on January 10.
Carcasses of sixty birds have been recovered by the volunteers from a local NGO (Lok Chetna Manch) from the affected area. Ailing and dead birds were found strewn all across the place.  Further search is on for more in a two kilometer radius from the garbage dumping site in the cantonment area of the Indian Army, which is believed to be the source of contamination.
According to Dr. Bhaskar Choudhury, the wildlife veterinarian of the MVS, “after a visit to the affected site and inputs received from the forest officials and local NGOs, we came to learn that several street dogs after being poisoned to death by the Municipal Corporation dumped at the garbage site. Carrion eaters such as eagles and house crows who are the regular visitors to the site might have succumbed after the consumption of the contaminated carcasses.”
Choudhury accompanied by two Wildlife Rehabilitators Exchange Network (WREN) members Jagadamba Maithanee and Ashish Sati offered help to the local officials of the forests and animal husbandry departments to mitigate the crisis. He also trained the officials from the two departments and the local NGOs on handling the sick birds- catching, housing and feeding of the birds, during the treatment and rehabilitation.
“External symptoms like paralysis of the legs and excessive salivation indicate that it could be a case of organochlorine poisoning” adds Choudhury. Now, the site has been temporarily closed and the left over garbage is being burnt to destroy all contaminants.
“The results of the four samples sent to the high security lab in Bhopal have been confirmed to be negative of Avian Flu. The result of the histopathological test conducted on the internal organs of the bird sent to Bareilley has revealed severe toxicity. The cause of toxicity however has not been confirmed by the lab tests.” said Dr. Prajna Paramita Panda, Programme Officer WTI.
To prevent such incidents from being repeated, an awareness programme on scientific disposal of hazardous waste is on the anvil together with the army and the forest officials in the state. The local NGOs have sought WTI’s help in the proposed workshop.
With the decline in number of vultures and eagles from the sub-continent, it calls for an immediate measure for long term conservation of the species. Shrinkage of wetlands and other habitats exerted pressure on their progeny and has raised serious concerns of their long-term survival.