Keonjhar (Orissa): Based on the information provided by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), four persons were arrested last Friday, March 7, while trying to sell elephant tusks to decoy customers in Haridagoth, a town near Keonjhar, Orissa. Two tusks weighing about 10 kg and illegal arms were seized from the traders who are currently under police custody. 
Acting on the intelligence collected by the WTI undercover agents over a period of four months, a team comprising officials from the forest department, police and WTI was set up by the Orissa Forest Department to nab the traders. Under the supervision of Pradip Raj Karat, Divisional Forest Officer, Keonjhar, the traders were arrested while delivering the consignment.
The operation began in the morning when the traders had scheduled the meeting with the decoy customers. The experienced traders screened the new ‘buyers’ several times to verify their authenticity. They also changed the delivery venue thrice to avoid traps, while one of them accompanied the ‘buyers’ to keep tab on their conversation and movements. One of the traders, Sk Abdul Rahim, reportedly spoke in good English and claimed to be a lawyer as he quoted a few sections of the Wildlife (Protection) Act. He was confident of his tactics and assured the ‘buyers’ that this was only a token deal, and that once they were taken into his confidence, he would deliver more material whenever and wherever they wished.
The consignment was finally brought around 2.30 pm in an autorickshaw accompanied by two persons in a motorbike. The arrest was made by the raiding team hidden inside a truck stationed nearby, when the decoy buyers signaled them through mobile phones while pretending to inspect the ivory.
The suspects, Sk Abdul Rahim, Kurban Alli, Rafik Khan and Sk Faizal were taken to the forest office and another raid was conducted in Rahim’s house in the Old Town area where a rifle, an air gun, a 12-bore double barrel gun and a hand-made gun were seized along with other items suspected to have been used in poaching. The accused were later produced in the court and were booked under the Wildlife Protection Act – 1972 and the Arms Act for possessing illegal weapons. Their bail application was rejected by the magistrate.
“It was a difficult operation as the smugglers were quite experienced and were aware of possible dangers from enforcement authorities; they were constantly checking the decoy customers and they changed the delivery location thrice in four hours. The enforcement team had to be patient and had to gradually win their confidence before they finally fell into their trap,” said a WTI official who was involved in the operation.
WTI has engaged an advocate in Orissa to assist authorities and public prosecutor in the court case.