Sahdol, 12th July, 2023: A herd of wild elephants had entered Moser Baer Projects Private Limited, a thermal power plant in Jaitahri, district Shahdol of Madhya Pradesh, India. The plant, located near the villages of Murra, Laharpur, Takuli, Gumaria, Guwari, and Chhulha, produces 2,520 MW energy, supplying the entire state.


The elephants had made their way from Cholna village, which is located in close proximity to the Moser Baer campus. It was the smell of paddy, stored in one of the houses that had caught their attention, drawing them toward the boundary of the industry. Despite the villagers’ efforts to deter them, the elephants sought refuge within the industry’s premises, due to the presence of lush green patches and available resources. In the early hours of the morning of 6th July, they had ventured into the industry campus, that has an ideal refuge with a rich canopy cover, plentiful grass, and a small canal providing them with a water source. Earlier, a middle-aged man from a nearby village was unfortunately killed by this herd when he had approached the elephants in an intoxicated state.

Wild elephant entering Murra village in Sahdol, Madhya Pradesh | Photograph by Sharath Anchatageri


Understanding the gravity of the situation, the Range Forest Officer (RFO) of Jaitahri sought assistance from Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to address the issue. Team WTI including Pushpendra Nath Dwivedi, Saranya Tewary and Sharath Anchatageri responded by assessing the situation, identifying possible exit points and devising strategies to guide the elephants out of the industrial area. The elephants were located in a dense patch of Subabul trees (Leucaena leucocephala) along the campus boundary on one side and a canal on the other. The primary objective was to guide them away and redirect them back to the nearest forests.



The team waited for the evening to start the operation. Guiding the herd away from the human habituated area during daytime would have attracted more crowd and increased the chances of conflict. Sensitive exit routes were blocked with JCBs and chilly deterrents and food materials were used to guide the elephants out of the campus. The elephants had soon crossed the canal and moved towards the nearby forest patches.

Poster on Do’s and Dont’s during Human-Elephant conflict handed over to the security staff of the Moser Baer Power Plant | Photograph by Sharath Anchatageri



After the success of the operation, a brief meeting with the security of power plant heads was organized by Team WTI. They expressed deep appreciation for the assistance rendered and shared their concerns regarding the potential closure of the power plant due to elephant raids. The team discussed preventive measures, and informative posters were handed over. The RFO too expressed his gratitude on behalf of the forest department for our presence and assured continued collaboration in future emergencies. Together, we remain hopeful for a harmonious coexistence between humans and elephants in the landscape.
The Bandhavgarh Conflict Mitigation project is supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare.