Mehao, Arunachal Pradesh, March 14, 2014: In what has been the quickest operation so far, the team from International Fund for Animal Welfare and Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI), in collaboration with the Arunachal Forest Department, have captured another family of the endangered Eastern hoolock gibbons from their fragmented habitat in Dello and released them, yesterday, to a more viable location in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary.
 

 Keijum Rina, the Divisional Forest Officer of Mehao Wildlife Division (MWD), commended the recent translocation saying, “This new gibbon family capture by the IFAW-WTI team happened in very little time and the release was also carried out successfully. Such efficient functioning gives confidence to the whole team including the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department on the efforts being made in the state for saving these apes. It also is a direct indicator of conservation efforts being strengthened to save the Eastern hoolock gibbon in Arunachal Pradesh.”
 

The adult female gibbon being checked by IFAW-WTI veterinarian Dr Nupur Buragohan.

Photo: Dr Kuladeep Roy / IFAW-WTI
 
Ipra Mekola, Advisor, Dibang Valley Conservation Project said, “A short span of time in capture and release is a major achievement since it directly reduces the level of discomfort of the apes. Another thing that touched me is the social commitment of the locals to rescue the animals and give them a better habitat to live in. The IFAW-WTI team is thankful to Vijay Swami, Executive Director of RIWATCH (Research Institute of World’s Ancient Traditions Cultures & Heritage) for his interest in conservation works in Arunachal Pradesh .”
 
Mr. Vijay Swami, who was present during the whole two-day long capture-release session gave his helpful inputs to the team. “It was a very different experience for me witnessing the successful translocation of the gibbon family being a bio-diversity conservationist. I am happy to see the family accepting the new habitat and eating food and howling,” he said.
 

This family of three- a male, female and young- had been spotted by the villagers who immediately informed the IFAW-WTI team and the State Forest Department. The gibbons had apparently been under a lot of stress after being marooned on an isolated cluster of trees and were being attacked by dogs frequently when they tried to move out of the area.
 

Dr Nupur with the infant gibbon immediately after capture.

Photo: Dr Kuladeep Roy / IFAW-WTI
 
“Gibbons are arboreal in nature and require contiguous canopy to be able to survive. Unfortunately, farming and other anthropogenic pressures have degraded the habitat in Dello, Roing to the extent that the gibbons are stuck in isolated patches with very little resources at their disposal. They’re forced to descend on the ground to look for food or even to move around and since they’re anatomically not built for mobility on ground, they are unable to escape any danger, especially predators which includes domestic animals like dogs,” elucidated Dr Kuladeep Roy, the Project Lead of the Dibang Valley Conservation Project, as he explained the need for the moving the gibbons to the nearby Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary which has continuous canopy.
 
Explaining more on the methodology Sunil Kyarong, the Regional Head of Arunachal Pradesh for WTI, said, “A site was selected in the Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary which falls within the species’ natural distribution range, based on IUCN Primate Reintroduction guidelines. All three gibbons were determined healthy and fit for release upon examination by our veterinarian Dr Nupur Buragohan. Like with all our previous releases, these gibbons will be monitored for the next six months. In fact in one of our monitoring sessions last year, we discovered that one of our released gibbons had given birth! This became a major cause of celebration for the project, since reproduction in translocated animals always indicates acceptance of the new environs as their home.”
 

Mr. Jino Linggi, prominent social activist along with villagers from nearby Kebali village, was present during the exercise and appreciated the efforts of IFAW-WTI in Eastern hoolock gibbon conservation. “The level of involvement and concern of the locals towards the conservation of these gibbons is literally increasing day by day. This signifies only a good future for the apes since without the help and contribution  of the local Idu Mishmi tribe it’ll be practically impossible to secure a better future for these gibbon families,” added Dr Kuladeep Roy.
 

The team at the release site. Photo: IFAW-WTI
 
The IFAW-WTI Hoolock Gibbon Conservation Project, a leg of the Dibang Valley Conservation Project, was kick-started in Novemeber 2011, when a family of two gibbons had been translocated to Mehao WLS, after 20 stranded families had been identified in the village of Dello in Roing, Arunachal Pradesh.
 
Hoolock gibbons are the only apes found in India, with their distribution restricted to the country’s northeast region. Two species have been identified here – Eastern Hoolock gibbon (Hoolock leuconedys) and Western Hoolock gibbons (Hoolock hoolock). They are protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.