Raimona, Assam, 9 January 2021:
In an open air event at Jamduar, Raimona forest range, frontline forest staff and NGO volunteers were equipped with essential field gears in a morale boosting initiative by Wildlife Trust of India supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare.
The event which saw participation of the Forest Range Officers, frontline staff as well as NGO members was presided over by the Chief Guest Shri Ranjit Basumatary, Hon’ Executive Member, Forest, Bodoland Territorial Council who handed over the field gears to the frontline forest staff of Raimona Range (Western), Central Range (Kachugaon), Sanfan Range and Athiabari Range (Eastern) including the 105 service providers of Green Forest Conservation under the Kachugaon Division.
The basic gears included 300 winter jackets, 100 sleeping bags, 20 rechargeable torch lights, 500 copies of Handbook on the 6th Edition of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, in Assamese language and inverter sets for morale boosting of the staff and enhancing law and enforcement in the proposed Raimona National Park.
Shri Anindya Swargowari (IFS) Additional PCCF and Council Head of Department Forest, BTC was the guest of honour in the distribution ceremony.
[acx_slideshow name=”greatermanas”]
“The Gazette Notification notifying the First Addition to Manas NP adding 350 sq km was a result of relentless efforts towards achieving the recommendations made by the UNESCO World Heritage Site Committee which in turn encouraged the state to consider the extension of the Manas  in three stages” said Shri Anindya Swargowari
‘We have also submitted the proposal to the Government of Assam for notification of ‘Raimona National Park’ covering 422 sq km area, a major chunk of the Ripu Reserve Forest. The area has a century old traditional knowledge of forest management, the proposal would have positive ramifications for conservation both at landscape and transboundary level. IFAW-WTI has been a part of the entire process towards this and the  BTC  is also very keen in safeguarding the floral and faunal biodiversity of the area by legal measures  for the benefit of the future generation,’ added Shri Swargowari.
‘This is an opportunity as well as some bigger responsibilities to retain the rich biodiversity of Manas. It is my privilege to be a part of this unique opportunity to share responsibilities with our frontline forest staff under Kachugaon division. The gazette notification of ‘Raimona National Park’ will be like a feather on the crown. I will take this opportunity and appeal to the Govt. of Assam for immediate notification in the official gazette,’ emphasized Shri Ranjit Basumatary at the event.
“Manas is an unique in setting a multi-stakeholder approach in wildlife conservation. We will keep this journey together in coming years and I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to both IFAW-WTI for their contributions for the last fifteen years,’ he added.
“Ripu is a historic place having pristine scenic beauty, rich in both floral and faunal biodiversity. In the last two months, we have recorded more than 30 species of mammals, 150 species of butterflies, and about 170 birds in a biodiversity survey conducted jointly with IFAW-WTI. The list will be added by more species when we carry out the survey in other seasons. There is enough scope in promoting nature-based tourism here and this could be the best destination for sighting of the Golden Langur (Trechypithecus geei), the pride of Bodoland apart from rare butterflies and orchids. ‘We will take bold steps to safeguard our biodiversity,’ added Shri Brahma.
WTI with the support of IFAW have been working with the Assam Forest Department (AFD) and BTC for over 15 years in the Manas landscape to secure the rich natural heritage of Bodoland. With the support of AFD and BTC, WTI-FAW has been able to achieve re-introduction of Rhinos from Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), Kaziranga in 2006, translocation of Eastern Swamp Deer from Kaziranga to Manas in 2014 towards the recovery of Manas to its past glory in its Greater Manas Recovery Project.