The national animal of India, the tiger has been celebrated for centuries in Indian art, culture, and heritage. But, over the past few decades, this magnificent animal has been losing its home and pride, thanks to loss of prime forest habitats, poaching and increasing conflict. International Tiger Day is one of those many annual occasions where people are made aware of the threats that the animal faces and the ways to co-exist.
Wildlife Trust of India put together varied programs across its project landscapes to celebrate the tiger and its role in the jungles.
Cycle Rally at NNTR Corridor | Photo by Mahendra B Rout
Nagzira-Nawegaon Tiger Reserve (NNTR), Maharastara
In NNTR corridor, a program was held in M. B. Patel College, Sadak/Arjuni with nature club members and Forest dept. staff on 29th July, 2022. Talk sessions on the ecological importance of large carnivores such as the tiger, and the importance of youth’s role in conservation were organized by Dr. Mahendra B. Raut (Field Officer, WTI). The first session briefed the gathering about the background of Global Tiger Day celebrated to acknowledge international efforts for tiger conservation and provided them the Indian context including the formulation of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972, initiation of Project Tiger in 1973, and the report released by MOEFCC, Government of India on the current status of wild tigers in India. In the second interactive session, engaged students to provide insights about the ways in which they could contribute to the protection of the tiger and its habitat, while also reducing human-wildlife conflict. The students enthusiastically participated in the discussion. A short awareness film on ‘tiger conservation’ and ‘ways to reduce human-wildlife conflict’ in Hindi “Kinara” was screened for the participants, followed by a quiz competition and distribution of book prizes to the winners. In the third session conducted a 12 kilometers “Cyclothon” (cycle rally) from M. B. Patel College Sadak/Arjuni to Baki Gate, NNTR in the corridor to spread awareness among the students and villagers regarding tiger conservation. It was followed by a nature walk for students. Participants observed various flora and fauna while walking around the roadside. A total of 150 students and faculty members of various departments from the same college attended the program, among which professors, Heads of Departments (HoDs) and the college principal were present.
Workshop on tiger conservation in Mainpur, Chhattisgarh | Photo by Dr. Rajendra Mishra
Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserve (USTR), Chhattisgarh
WTI organized a painting competition in five schools in villages around USTR. 75 students participated in the event and their artwork was exhibited for the public and for evaluation. A quiz completion was also organized for students and local forest staff. Like every other year, a rally of school children (about 300), teachers (10), frontline field staff (About 70) and local people (35) was organized on the morning of 29th. The rally covered around 2 km of the Mainpur town. Later in the day, a seminar was hosted in the forest campus, where WTI’s Dr. Rajendra Mishra talked about tigers and answered related to is conservation from the audience.
The Chief Guest in the event was Mr. Sanjay Netam, Vice President, Gariyaband district Panchayat and the meeting was chaired by Mr. Varun Jain, Deputy Director, USTR. 5 Sarpanch, teachers, village heads, EDC members also attended the event.
International Tiger Day celebration at Sundarbans | Photo by Samrat Paul
Sundarbans, West Bengal
Our team at Sundarbans too organized painting competitions and seminars, in collaboration with the local forest department. WTI also participated in a seminar session, hosted by the forest department in South 24 Parganas where we showcased our short film “Abosese” that showed the majestic mangrove tigers and their plight.
International Tiger Day celebration in Nagarhole NP | Photo by Venkata Naidu
Nagarhole Tiger Reserve, Karnataka
WTI and the staff of the Metikuppe sub division of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve organized an awareness programs for locals and school students. The event was chaired by the Conservator of Forests (Medikeri Circle) and the DCF and FD of Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. 8 local schools were invited to the program along with local PRT members and villagers.
Celebration in Dundhwa TR on occasion of International Tiger Day | Photo by Aman Bhatia
Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, Uttar Pradesh
WTI team organized an “Awareness workshop and open quiz competition” at The Indian Academy school where over 160 students and 10 teachers attended this workshop. All the participants were shown a movie on tiger “Kinara” made by IFAW and WTI. We also talked about the tiger’s importance, the threats it faces and conflict-related issues in the landscape. About 30 quiz questions were asked and the winners were awarded by small gifts. DFO North Kheri Mr. Sundaresha, SDM Mr. Avinash, C.O. Police, Mr. Rahul, founder of Royal Dudhwa Safari and other dignities attended the program. Awards were given by Dr. Khanin and DFO Mr. Sundaresha who appreciated WTIs efforts on ground. At the end of the program, WTI team was handed over a memento for the work in the landscape.
Rally in Seijosa, Pakke Tiger Reserve | Photo by Asish Immanuel Baglary
Pakke Tiger Reserve, Arunachal Pradesh
At Seijosa, Pakke Tiger Reserve, WTI, along with the local forest department organized a rally focused on the conservation of tigers and the importance of its habitat. A interactive lecture session was also organized later in the day, where local school students engaged in discussion on the finer aspects of wildlife conservation and how they can help in the protection of the tiger.