WTI team members with Forest Department officials at one of the Legal Assistance Review Meetings


 

Wildlife offences are complex phenomena often resulting from an interplay of cultural, economic, social and environmental factors. At their centre of course are the wild species, sometimes critically endangered species, that have been affected. 
As wildlife and forest offences are fundamentally distinct from other crimes, a coordinated and multisectoral approach is essential in order to evolve an effective response to them.
In pursuance of such a multi-pronged approach, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has, on a monthly basis since 2013, been providing legal assistance to Pench and Kanha Tiger Reserves (TRs). WTI’s Legal Assistance Team has helped the relevant authorities file wildlife and forest related cases in a comprehensive manner using the provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and provided legal advice on prior cases pending in the local trial courts.
Two Legal Assistance Review Meetings – the first such for Kanha TR and the third for Pench TR – were held at Kanha and Pench between March 27 and 30, 2016. In attendance were Subhoranjan Sen, Field Director, Pench TR (at the Pench review meeting); Jasbir Singh Chauhan, Field Director, Kanha TR (at the Kanha meeting); Aniruddha Mukherjee, Advisor, WTI; Advocate Abhimanyu Mann, WTI; Advocate Yash Kumar Soni; and concerned ACFs and Range Officers of their respective TRs.
Jasbir Singh Chauhan, Field Director, Kanha TR spoke about the positive impact that WTI’s monthly legal assistance had manifested. This was evident, he said, through the improved conviction rates and speedy trials seen in local wildlife crime cases. Mr Chauhan also underscored the importance of the Legal Assistance Team’s support during the initial filing of wildlife crime cases, which provided much needed direction. The telephonic assistance provided by the consultant advocate to Forest Officers was also appreciated.
Subhoranjan Sen, Field Director, Pench TR, also acknowledged the work that WTI’s Legal Assistance Team had done to decrease wildlife crime in the Tiger Reserve and ensure better conviction rates for offenders over the past few years.
Among the decisions taken during the Review Meeting was the determination to take all necessary action against absconding accused released on bail, such as forfeiture of the bail bond. It was also decided that a Moot Court/Mock Court exercise be conducted as part of the legal assistance, for cases where judgement had already been pronounced. This, it was affirmed, would ensure that any shortcomings were duly identified and would not be repeated in future.
WTI’s monthly legal assistance programme shall continue for the next year to ensure that wildlife criminals are not acquitted due to legal and procedural lacunae. Further, continuous collaborative efforts in the form of quarterly meetings shall henceforth be organised to review the legal assistance and follow up on decisions taken, under the guidance of the Field Directors.