Jodhpur, April 10, 2006: The Chief Judicial Magistrate of Jodhpur, Brijendra Kumar Jain today convicted Bollywood actor Salman Khan and a co-accused Govardhan, in the second case of Chinkara (Gazella gazelle) hunting under sections 51 and 52 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act. After this judgment he was sent to Jodhpur Central Jail.  The defense lawyers contended that there were discrepancies in the statements made by the witnesses, and also the fact that the FIR was delayed, they prayed for acquittal. However, the court rejected these contentions. In another related case of Chinkara hunting, the same court on Feb 17, 2006, had convicted Salman to one year imprisonment.
This is for the first time a popular Bollywood actor is being sentenced to five year jail in a wildlife case. Former cricketer Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi was also accused in a case of black buck hunting, the case is still pending in court.
Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) after hearing this judgment said, “These two convictions have brought teeth to the Wildlife Act. And it’s about time that people take wildlife seriously.”
The case dates back to Sep 28, 1998 at Ujalia Bhakhri in Jodhpur District, when the offenders committed the crime. The actor is sentenced to five years of imprisonment with a fine of rupees twenty-five thousand, while Goverdhan will face one year in prison and a fine of rupees five thousand.
On the night of Sep 28, the actor allegedly shot a Chinkara and then slit his throat to death, a Schedule I species under the Wildlife Act. The carcass was later carried to a stud-farm located at the Mathania village where the animal was skinned. The knife used by the actor was handed over to the Investigating Officer by his brother Sohail Khan on Oct 15, 1998. Several incriminating documents and weapons were recovered from the Guest House ‘Umaid Bhawan’ where the actor was living on the night of the crime – including one .32 revolver, one .22 bore rifle, one air gun and a telescope.
The case was mired by several setbacks initially when one of the key witnesses in this case, the driver of the vehicle RJ 19 IC 2201 Harish Dulani went underground for several years. Following his reappearance on the scene and the subsequent disclosures before the media that he was under pressure when the statement was recorded, has also led the court to initiate proceedings against him. About ten witnesses including the Investigation Officer, Ashok Patani, Wildlife Warden and the Assistant Conservator of Forests deposed before the court.