Garo, Meghalaya, 24 December 2020
Wildlife Trust of India with the support of HCL Foundation in collaboration with the Garo Student Union (GSU), Southern Zone celebrated World Soil Day on the 5th of December 2020.
On this day, a cleanliness drive was held in a stretch of six kilometres inside the Baghmara Reserve Forest (BRF) with the active participation of over 200 nature lovers from the State Forest Department, the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC), Baghmara Municipal Board, State Police Department, Baghmara Sports Association and local groups which included students from local schools and also the Capt. Williamson Memorial College.
The participants collected discarded litter along the six km forest trail and the waste was sent to the local municipality, where it was further segregated into glass and plastics by collectors for reuse and recycling.
This drive with the participation of every stakeholder as a team to clean up the Baghmara Reserve Forest, one of the ecological jewels of the South Garo Hills has been a unique exercise” stated Shri Chuang, President, GSU in his introductory speech during the event.
[acx_slideshow name=”soilday”]
 
Ms. Mary T Sangma, Addl. Dy. Commissioner (South Garo Hills) acknowledged WTI and GSU for organizing the event and sensitizing the public on the importance of keeping forest areas litter free and on the proper disposal of waste.
Shri KD Shira, Nokma (village head), Karawani village, BRF too expressed his gratitude to WTI, HCL Foundation and the GSU team for organizing the programme. He encouraged the participants to safeguard the rich forests and to spread the message of conservation to their friends and family so that the forests stay healthy. “We shall set up notice boards along the trail to dissuade people from doing picnic and littering in and around the BRF” he added.
Baghmara Reserve Forest connects to the Balpakram National Park which is connected to the Nokrek National Park and a part of the Garo Green Spine Project. WTI has been working towards securing the Baghmara –Balpakram National Park elephant corridor along with other key elephant corridors in Garo with the partnership and support of the World Land Trust, GHADC since over a decade with the recent support of the HCL Foundation since the last two years. Read more here about the Garo Green Spine Project which aims for corridor connectivity for 800-1000 elephants in this region by a long term community conservation approach.
All Pictures by Rimachi Leisan/WTI