Patna: A team of WTI and forest officials, who went to rescue a leopard in Balwapar village in Nalanda district in the Eastern Indian state of Bihar, were seriously injured when the animal attacked them in order to free itself.
The incident occurred late afternoon in Balwapar village on May 26, where hundreds of villagers armed with sticks and nets struggled to capture the animal.
“A distress call was received from a villager on the whereabouts of the animal and soon we mobilized a team along with Wildlife Trust of India for rescuing the animal.” Arvind Verma, the Range Forest Officer said.
“I was just two meters away from the animal when the darting equipment which we carried stopped functioning. Though I pulled the trigger, the sedatives did not go inside which alerted the animal and it surged on me.” Dr. Rakesh Kr. Singh of WTI said on phone from the hospital where he is being treated.
Singh was attacked three times by the leopard that day, one on the shoulder, hip and on the forearm where the animal forced its entire canine teeth, his colleagues said over phone.
In the commotion, when Singh was being carried away to the hospital, the Chief Wildlife Warden who reached the spot for reinforcement was also attacked by the leopard. He too had to rush to the hospital.
The leopard was suspected to have entered the human habitation a fortnight ago from the Nalanda Forest Division, which is about 15 kms away and home to these cats.
The animal was last sighted two days ago at a different village prior to this incident. People were afraid to move out of their homes after it was reported to have attacked several people.
After the injured officials left the scene, the animal was left at the mercy of the angry public who eventually killed the animal.
“It was difficult, since a large crowd already gathered at the scene and we had to struggle to control them, which took most of our time. After the darting equipment failed, we placed three nets to capture it, but each time we tossed the net on him, it cleverly jumped out of it.” Morariji Mishra, the Chief Wildlife Warden said.
“We gave our best to save the animal, but despite our best efforts we could not save it and it is very unfortunate,” Mishra said.
“What happened in Bihar last Saturday is a rare example set by these honest officials who in spite of danger to their life, led from the front to protect the animal.” Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of WTI said.
“I am lucky to be alive,” Dr. Singh said.
WTI welcome your Feed Backs/ Comments : Click Here