New Delhi:  An investigation by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) in the illegal wildlife trade carried out through the internet revealed that large quantities of wildlife products and live animals are being traded illegally and is pushing the world’s most endangered species to the brink of extinction.The report, “Caught in the web: Wildlife trade on the internet”, was released by IFAW on the 16 th following an intensive three-month investigation of wildlife trade on the internet in the UK . Investigations revealed that in just one week, over 9,000 live animals or products were for sale on English-language websites, including chat-rooms and the popular auction site eBay. The investigation also revealed that at least 70% of these animals were from critically endangered species and protected by international law.
A shocking array of species, ranging from a live gorilla for sale in London to a Siberian tiger on a US website was among some online advertisements that showed that wildlife crime has come of age in cyberspace.
Hawksbill turtle shells, shahtoosh shawls , taxidermy specimens of lions and polar bears, ivory items and traditional medicines containing the parts of endangered tigers and rhinos were also up for sale on websites operated from India, Israel, UK, USA and Germany.
A similar review of the wildlife trade on the internet carried out by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), IFAW’s partner in India also revealed the sale of contraband wildlife articles on the net. In India , cases of shahtoosh shawls illegally sold through the net were reported in the past. WTI‘s enforcement personnel were also able to trace a tiger skin that was on sale at bazee.com last year.
“We came across shahtoosh shawls being offered for sale by some in Pakistan . Trade in endangered species is an enforcement matter and internet portals have just made it easier” says Ashok Kumar, Senior Advisor and Trustee WTI.
Phyllis Campbell-McRae, Director of IFAW said, “Trade on the internet is easy, cheap and anonymous. However, it is clear that unscrupulous traders and sophisticated criminal gangs are taking advantage of the opportunities provided by the World Wide Web. The result is a cyber black market where the future of the world’s rarest animals is being traded away. This situation must be tackled immediately by governments and website owners before it is too late”.
“Each one of us has a responsibility to stop buying and selling wild animals and wildlife products. Trade in wildlife is driven by consumer demand, so when the buying stops, the killing will too. Our message to online shoppers is simple; buying wildlife online is as bad as killing it yourself” she further adds.
Considering this a global problem, IFAW is calling on governments and law enforcement agencies around the world to work together to stop this illegal trade. A code of practice for website owners is incorporated in the report for control of the online trade that briefly includes review of internal policy and practice for website owners, a reporting mechanism to allow users to report offenders, cooperation with enforcement agencies and NGOs and access to information on internet wildlife trading and related sanctions
The IFAW report, with recommendations for governments, law enforcement agencies, ISPs and website owners, encourages them to take a proactive and targeted action for educating internet users, stopping repeat offenders and to reduce the risk of illegal wildlife trade.
IFAW and WTI share a common concern for conservation and protection of wildlife across the world and find humane and ecologically sustainable alternatives to trade in wildlife that benefit people and animals. For this endeavor it calls for all governments to make law enforcement a priority and strictly monitor sites where wildlife trading occurs.