Bhubaneshwar (Odisha), October 14, 2013: An IFAW-WTI (International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India) team reached here yesterday to provide emergency relief to animals affected by the super cyclone Phailin that saw the largest evacuation drive in the country.
With nearly 900,000 relocated from the coast by the government, a high likelihood of animals getting displaced triggered the action by the team. 
Swinging into action to minimise animal casualty, IFAW-WTI mobilised their Rapid Action Project and Emergency Relief Network team to coordinate with local rescuers, veterinarians and volunteers across the state as well as in the neighbouring state of Andhra Pradesh. 
Radhika Bhagat, Head – WTI’s Wild Aid division under which the Rapid Action Projects function to provide quick aid during animal emergencies, who reached Bhubaneshwar yesterday, said, “With quick support from IFAW’s Animal Rescue division (that deals with disaster response among others), we have begun mobilising our resources. We will be meeting authorities here to identify worst affected areas and have also begun communications with former RAP implementers, grass roots NGOs and ERN members from both states for joint action.”
IFAW-WTI ERN is a network of animal rehabilitators with over 400 members from across the country. 
Dr Reetika Maheshwari, Officer-in-Charge, IFAW-WTI ERN, said, “During such disasters, food shortage and spreading of diseases are the major threats to animals. We have already begun the process of procuring fodder and medicines.”
Rudra Prasanna Mahapatra, IFAW-WTI Field Officer based in Bhubaneshwar, said, “This time we saw a very commendable action by the authorities, saving hundreds and thousands of lives. We are providing assistance to help minimise animal casualties.”
“We have requested help from youth volunteers from universities here. We call upon individuals and NGOs to take stock of the situation in your respective localities, and join us in this initiative. Information on badly-affected areas with high number/probability of animals in distress can be reported to – 09437575774,” he said, adding that providing reference of local Forest Department officials and other forms of evidence would be sought for by the coordinating team to prevent abuse of the situation.