New Delhi: Wildlife Trust of India’s (WTI) legal counsel Saurabh Sharma reports that the bail applications of the three accused in a massive seizure of skins of endangered animals in North Delhi on the 6th April were withdrawn today. Saurabh Sharma, who has been following up on all legal cases related to seizures of wildlife articles was present at the court of Hon. Justice R C Chopra in the High Court when the bail application nos. 1649-51/2005 of Anand alias Tashi and others vs. the State (CBI) came up for hearing.
The justice observed that the offence was serious and hence he was not inclined to grant bail. Counsel for the applicants, A K Manan then withdrew the bail application and the matter was dismissed as withdrawn at this stage. CBI counsel Harish Gulati opposed the bail.
The accused are to remain confined in judicial custody for some more time. It may be recalled that a trap laid by the Delhi Police on 6 th April 2005 following a tip off resulted in the arrest of three persons and a seizure of 45 leopard skins and 14 otter pelts.
WTI had provided the original lead to Delhi Police that wildlife skins will be traded on that date. The North District Police apprehended two persons from Nepal and one Tibetan enroute to board a bus going to Nepal .
The bail application of one of the accused, Lobsang Puntshuk was heard and dismissed on 12th April by Mr. Manoj Jain, Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi . A WTI lawyer appeared in court and assisted the prosecution by pointing out that the said accused, Lobsang Phuntsok was a Tibetan in exile and a resident of the Tibetan settlement at Majnu Ka Tila and was likely to abscond if granted bail.
The finger of suspicion again points to the wildlife trafficker kingpin Sansar Chand. The accused had confessed that the fourth person (Tsewang) who is still absconding had brought these trophies from men working for Sansar Chand.
Ironical as it may be, the Wildlife Trust of India joined forces this very day ( 6th April 2005 ) with the UK based charity Care for the Wild International to launch an awareness campaign targeted at Tibetans in view of the noticeable involvement of some Tibetans in illegal trafficking of wildlife articles. The campaign was launched by His Holiness the Dalai Lama at a packed auditorium comprising mostly of Tibetans.