New Delhi : The youngest member in the group, the seven month old bear cub being raised at the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) in Pakke, Arunachal Pradesh, has earned many an admirer for its rather engaging behavior and has been fondly nick-named ‘Teddy Bear’ by the keepers.










The cub, who arrived at the CBRC in a very weak condition, is now pretty active and is seen spending most of its time on trees. Though Asiatic black bears ( Ursus thibetanus) are one of the most arboreal of all bear species, but Teddy seems exceptional. Yet, as it grows old and gains weight, it will start to spend more time on the ground to forage for food.
Presently, it only comes to the ground for food. It has been observed that he produces a typical grunting noise and starts licking his forearm to convey his hunger to humans present around. The biologists at the centre consider this an undesirable behavioral “vice” and hope to rid the cub of this when it is fed in the absence of the keeper. Also, keepers are being cautious to not call the animal by its nick-name so as to avoid any long-term human association even though the name will be helpful to track the animal when it is released into the forest.
Dr. N.V.K Ashraf, on a recent visit to the Centre said, “”We are looking forward to a companion for Teddy to encourage play behavior which is essential during the growing stage. We don’t want to release him alone.”










Teddy will continue to receive milk for another 2 months before it switches over to a mixed diet of fruits, vegetables, leaves, tubers and some animal matter. It is the new addition to the existing two young bears at the Centre, a joint-initiative of Arunachal Department of Environment and Forests and the Wildlife Trust of India. The project is being run with the support of the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), British High Commission (BHC) and the Government of India.
The Asiatic black bear (Ursus thibetanus), found in large numbers in Arunachal Pradesh, are killed for its meat and fur. Any cubs found are kept as pets at home till they become large and aggressive and given to the zoo. The practice came to the notice of Sunil Subba, a Project Officer with Wildlife Trust of India, who along with the then divisional forest officer of the Pakke wildlife sanctuary, C. Loma, decided to take up the cause of the cubs.
To address the problem of displaced Himalayan black bear cubs WTI has set up the CBRC to try and release the bears around the Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary.  The project was initiated in March 2002 and currently has two bears from the Itanagar Zoo, which are being prepared for release.
The rescue centre in Pakke has the potential to function as a satellite facility to complement WTI’s Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) near Kaziranga National Park , Assam . The CWRC is the country’s first scientifically managed rescue and rehabilitation
facility.  It is a joint effort of the WTI and the Assam Forest Department, and operates with the support of WTI’s partner, the International Fund for Animal Welfare.