September 15, 2023: The Wildlife Trust of India recently conducted a wildlife crime prevention training workshop for the frontline forest staff of the three ranges (Nawegaon Park Range, Bonde Range and Dongargaon Range) of the Nawegaon Nagzira Tiger Reserve (NNTR) in Maharashtra. The training took place between September 4 to 6, 2023 and recorded the participation of 47 forest staff. 
The wildlife crime prevention training workshop was conducted for the frontline forest staff of the three ranges of the Nawegaon Nagzira Tiger Reserve (NNTR) in Maharashtra. Photo by WTI
NNTR spanning 1897.62 sq. km (656.35 sq. km. core area and 1241.27 sq. km. buffer area) along Gondia and Bhandara district of Maharashtra is a critical tiger habitat with 12 tigers recorded in the 2022 tiger census report. Besides linking the major PAs in Vidarbha, it links two Class-I TCLs, the Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve and the Kanha Tiger Reserve, where more than 75% of the corridor habitat falls outside the PA network. Capacity strengthening training helps in the prevention of wildlife crime in the Tiger Reserve.
The workshop included classroom tutorials as well as field sessions with modules on basic ecological knowledge, patrolling, wildlife crime, the steps required to be undertaken in a criminal investigation, documentation and case presentation, illegal wildlife article documentation and cyber wildlife trade. It also encompassed insights into the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 (WPA) and Wildlife (Protection) Amendment Act, 1972, emphasizing effective utilisation as a legal tool for booking cases. Additionally,  the field training involved tracking wildlife through pug marks, scats, and identification of snares.
Advocate Yash K. Soni during the training session. Photo by WTI
The training workshop was conducted by WTI’s WCCD team headed by Monesh Singh Tomar, along with Adv. Yash Kumar Soni and Mr. Milind Pariwakam conducted the legal sessions on the WPA 1972, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. 
Shri Pawan Jeph (Deputy Director, Nawegaon Nagzira Tiger Reserve) highlighted that this training will help enhance the capacity of the staff in preventing wildlife crimes, collection of evidence, the investigation process and documentation. These are essential to increase the protection measures within the tiger reserve” mentioned. Shri Jayrame Gowda (Field Director, NNTR), also emphasised that such training should be organised for staff of the other four forest ranges of the NNTR.   All trainees received a field kit containing essential items such as a winter jacket, cap, torch, raincoat, bag, and stick as per the requirements outlined in a prior assessment by the forest department. 
Shri Roshan Rathod (Assistant Conservator of Forest, NNTR) in his address during the closing session shed light on the importance of wildlife crime prevention training for the staff and also emphasised the need for anti-snare walks, as they contribute to safeguarding wildlife from hunting and poaching.