Kaziranga (Assam): The Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Ltd (ONGC) and the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) today launched an initiative to assist the Assam Forest Department in long term conservation of the eastern swamp deer that are far lesser in number than the Royal Bengal tiger or the greater one-horned rhinoceros.
Unlike the tiger and the rhino of which several populations exist across the Indian sub-continent, the eastern swamp deer (Rucervus duvaucelii ranjitsinhi) survives as a single population of about 600 individuals restricted to the flood-prone Kaziranga National Park in Assam.
“Any severe epidemic like diseases transmitted from livestock or otherwise to this population (in Kaziranga) could be disastrous for the eastern swamp deer. Moreover, an isolated (or single, in this case) population is prone to the effects of inbreeding depression, making it more vulnerable,” said Dr PC Bhattacharjee, Executive Trustee, WTI. “There is an urgent need to secure its future or we face the risk of losing this magnificent natural heritage.”
The ONGC Eastern Swamp Deer Project was conceived to specifically mitigate threats facing the eastern swamp deer through appropriate conservation initiatives. The project plans to initially assess the population dynamics, threats and factors limiting its growth and distribution in order to prepare and implement a conservation strategy including creation of new viable populations outside Kaziranga NP, if considered appropriate.
A Memorandum of Understanding on the project was signed between ONGC and WTI in New Delhi on November 3, 2010. The project was launched today during a ceremony held at the Interpretation centre at Kaziranga NP in the presence of officials from the Forest Department, ONGC and WTI.
Speaking in the occasion, Dr BS Josyulu, Basin Manager, ONGC said, “Oil major ONGC is committed to the conservation of natural resources, flora and fauna of Assam and other northeastern states of India. ONGC adds value to the lives of communities wherever it works, in India as well as abroad, and Assam is very special as the Indian oil industry started here. The eastern swamp deer conservation project is a vital one from ONGC’s perspective as all need to take concerted efforts to preserve this beautiful animal.”
“There are a number of projects targeting conservation of flagship species like the tiger, rhino and elephant. The threats faced by these charismatic animals cannot be undermined, but it is equally important to look beyond to ensure that special needs of others are not overlooked. We thank ONGC and WTI for understanding this need and implementing this project,” said Dibyadhar Gogoi, DFO, Eastern Assam Wildlife Division. “We would also be grateful if ONGC could also help the communities in the fringe areas of Kaziranga NP. There are more than 200 villages that we have identified and needs upliftment, and ONGC being such a powerful company can help in the form of creating livelihoods, eco-tourism or capacity-building which would benefit the grassroots people.”
S Gopinath, General Manager – CSR, ONGC, said, “ONGC has taken up this conservation project of eastern swamp deer as one of the anchor wildlife conservation project in this part of the country, as the project is equally if not more significant than those of rhinos and tigers. This alliance, where ONGC is providing 100 % finance, also underscores ONGC’s increasing contribution in conservation of wildlife in India.”
Eastern swamp deer, locally known as ‘Dal horina’ is one of the three recognised sub-species of swamp deer distributed in India and Nepal. The other two sub-species are wetland swamp deer (R.d. duvaucelii) found in Gangetic plains and hardground swamp deer (R.d. branderi) found in central India.