File photo : Manas landscape


Manas Reserve Forest (Assam), August 7, 2012: An armed poacher who was apprehended inside Manas Reserve Forest, Bodoland Territorial Council, last month, is currently under custody, while two of his accomplices who escaped are still at large.


The accused, Lakhan Musahari was arrested following a gun-battle initiated by the accused and his two accomplices in Kalamati area of Manas RF, about a month ago. The arrest was made by members of the BTC Forest Department and Raigajli Ecotourism Social Welfare Society (RESWS), who carry out joint patrolling in the Kuklung Range of the Reserve Forest.  An FIR was lodged in the Bijni Police Station.



The International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) that supports anti-poaching patrolling in the area, commended the arrest and the conviction.



“The members of RESWS as well as the Forest Staff of Chirang have shown exemplary commitment towards the protection of the natural resources of one of the critical buffer areas of Manas Tiger Reserve,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head-Northeast, WTI. “Search is on for the two accomplices according to authorities here. Hopefully they are nabbed soon too, and the case taken forward, to ensure that the risks taken by the frontline staff and RESWS volunteers are not in vain.”



RESWS is one of the several Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) that are actively working to protect Greater Manas landscape. The Assam Forest Department, BTC and IFAW-WTI through the Greater Manas Conservation Fund (GMCF) provides a variety of support to these CBOs to help them in their service to the landscape.



“We have faced a lot of hardships. Our anti-poaching camps were demolished twice. Through campaigning and patrolling in the area, we have helped local poachers and hunters surrender in the past, but this is the first incident of direct firing,” said Premzit Narzary, Secretary, RESWS. “Still, we take pride in our activities, we take pride in Manas, and we will continue to protect it.”



File photo : A handover ceremony at Manas last year where CBOs were provided aid