Ooty, August 29, 2013:  Commemorating the completion of  silver jubilee of India’s first  biosphere reserve – the Nilgiris, experts from  diverse backgrounds have  congregated here for the National Conference on  Nilgiri Biosphere  Reserve to celebrate the occasion, share learning and  recommit  themselves to secure this unique natural heritage. 
The three-day Conference, organised by the  Government Arts College, Ooty, supported by Wildlife  Trust of India  (WTI) and a number of other agencies, will be held till August  30. The  platform will see over 130 individuals – forest  officials,  conservationists, researchers, scientists, academicians, industrialists,   photographers and students present their work in the Nilgiris.




The Nilgiris landscape
 Photo credit: N P Jayan

“Over  quarter a century’s work  has been carried out in the region, but there exists  no one  comprehensive document of the various kinds of work undertaken,” said   the event’s Organising Secretary Dr B Ramakrishnan. “This silver jubilee   celebration aims to create one such document, which will allow better   conservation and management of NBR, which depends on coordination  between  government agencies and various other groups.”
Sprawled  over 6000 sq km over three south  Indian states – Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and  Kerala, Nilgiris is host to  over 3,300 species of flora and fauna, including 132  endemic. It falls  in the Western Ghats region of India – a global biodiversity  hotspot  and also recognised last year as the UNESCO World Heritage Sites.                         


WTI’s Executive Director Vivek Menon lights the lamp during the inauguration ceremony of the National Conference on the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve
 Photo credit: Amrit Menon/WTI

                          It  was  declared a biosphere reserve on September 1, 1986, to conserve the  natural  diversity of the region, restore degraded ecosystems and  provide baseline data  for ecological and environmental research and  education. 
“As we celebrate  its declaration as India’s  first biosphere reserve over 25 years ago – a  much-deserved  recognition, we acknowledge that these epithets notwithstanding,  its  existence itself is worth celebrating,” said Vivek Menon, Executive   Director, WTI. “Yet, these recognition gives us occasions to cheer,  reasons to  cherish its presence in our midst and remind ourselves of  the heritage that we  hold the responsibility of preserving.”
“WTI is proud to  have been associated with  conservation in the Nilgiris, be it doing  ground-level work at saving  individual animals, helping secure habitats and  corridors for animals  like the elephant and tiger, or even being a part of the  Government  delegation that brought it the World Heritage tag. And on this  silver  jubilee celebration of its biosphere reserve status, we recommit   ourselves to saving this unique natural heritage,” he added.