Kanha (Madhya Pradesh), June 26, 2014: Continuing its efforts to save the tiger, the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) begun training on June 23, 2014, on wildlife crime prevention for frontline staff of Kanha Tiger Reserve which is a crucial part of the central Indian landscape that holds over 6% of the world’s population of wild tigers.
“Safeguarding Kanha is critical for the conservation of this majestic species,” said Aniruddha Mookerjee, who heads the IFAW-WTI training team comprising an advocate, a biologist and a wildlife crime specialist.


The diligent ‘students’ during the training. Photo: Sheren Shrestha / IFAW-WTI

The training is being organised under IFAW-WTI’s Van Rakshak (Guardians of the Wild) Project, which not only helps build capacity of frontline staff but also insures them against accidents or death on duty. Since its launch in 2001, more than 13000 frontline staff in more than 120 protected areas around the country have been trained and equipped under VRP. Over 20000 frontline staff are insured for relief of up to Rs 100,000.
“Our team had earlier this month conducted refresher training for core staff and fresh training for buffer area staff in Pench TR in the landscape; we will also be moving on to the newly-declared Nagzira-Nawegaon TR later this year,” said Dr Rajendra Prasad Mishra, IFAW-WTI Regional Head.


Aniruddha Mookerjee taking one of the sessions. Photo: Sheren Shrestha / IFAW-WTI

This is a refresher (follow-up) training to selected 120 frontline staff from all of the 13 ranges in Kanha TR. The first training in Kanha was held in 2010 when all of the 650 staff protecting the TR were trained and equipped. Following that, last year, a refresher training for 230 of the previously trained frontline staff was organised.
The current training will be held in three batches, with each batch being intensively mentored over two days. The sessions include wildlife biology – understanding biodiversity and threats and identification of wildlife signs, wildlife crime and law, crime scene investigation and court proceedings including accurate filing of legal papers and follow-up against wildlife offenders.
The trainers, apart from Mookerjee and Mishra, also include Jose Louies who has been assisting authorities across the country in nabbing wildlife offenders and advocate Yash Kumar Soni who provides legal assistance to central Indian forest authorities.


Jose Louies, Head of Enforcement of WTI interacting with one of the trainees.

Photo: Sheren Shrestha / IFAW-WTI