[acx_slideshow name=”Kanha Pench Training 30072017″]
Kanha and Pench Tiger Reserves, Madhya Pradesh, August 1, 2017: As part of the continuing efforts under its Van Rakshak Project to train, equip and boost the morale of frontline forest staff across the country, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), in partnership with the Madhya Pradesh Forest Department and with support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), conducted a training event in two phases for new frontline forest staff in Kanha and Pench Tiger Reserves.
The training, which was held between July 12 and 19, was inaugurated by Dr Sanjay Shukla, the Field Director of Kanha Tiger Reserve, and attended by 81 frontline personnel from across 27 ranges of both the tiger reserves. The curriculum included legal and biological aspects of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, as well as wildlife crime prevention components such as the basics of wildlife biology, tracks and signs, anti-poaching patrolling techniques, intelligence gathering, search and seizure, interrogation, crime scene investigation and the preparation of Preliminary Offence Reports. A dedicated field day ensured that trainees received hands-on exposure to the investigative aspects of the training. Trainees were also briefed on relevant provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Proceedings, and the powers conferred on them therein for the prosecution of wildlife crimes.
The purpose of the training was to ensure that forest staff received both wide-angle and specific perspectives on the investigative and the legal aspects of wildlife crime.
The purpose of the training was to ensure that forest staff received both wide-angle and specific perspectives on the investigative and the legal aspects of wildlife crime, with close attention paid to proper case documentation and appropriate legal procedures. Trainees were evaluated on the basis of a test conducted before and after the programme; field kits were distributed to trainees who passed this evaluation.
“As these are new personnel posted in the field for the first time, it is all a learning phase for them; whether walking in the forest, identifying wildlife and its presence, or investigating a case. It is very important for them to learn the lessons of law enforcement and the legal formalities at this stage as it will help them undertake their duties better and give them a sense of honor and pride in their role as frontline law enforcement officials”, Dr Shukla said.

WTI has been conducting such Wildlife Crime Prevention Training events under its Van Rakshak (Guardians of the Wild) Project since 2001. Over 16,325 frontline forest personnel have been trained in over 138 Protected Areas across 14 states. VRP follows a multi-pronged strategy with four thrust areas abbreviated as TEAM: Training, Equipping, Awareness and Morale Boosting, to build capacity and strengthen the spirits of personnel in tough field conditions.
Since 2013, IFAW-WTI has also been providing legal assistance to both Kanha and Pench Tiger Reserves. Yash Kumar Soni a trial court lawyer who is a WTI trainer and legal consultant, visits both Tiger Reserves for two days every month to follow up on cases registered under the Wild Life (Protection) Act. “The overall quality of the documentation has improved very much”, Soni said. “Some range officers are now excellent at it and hardly require inputs from my side. A well-documented case is half the work done, since the suspect does not get bail easily to begin with. Results are now coming in the form of bail rejections and convictions, which is very encouraging.”