Veraval, 28th December, 2023: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) conducted one-day training sessions on satellite tagging of Whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) for the frontline forest officials of Veraval and Mangrol ranges of Junagadh Forest division in Gujarat.
These training workshops were conducted by the field team of WTI at the Veraval Range Office on 28th December 2023 and in the Mangrol Range Forest office on 1st January 2024. Mr. Manoj Matwal, Marine Biologist of WTI, spearheaded the sessions while elaborating on the technicalities of the tagging process and orienting the trainees on the various types of tags employed to track Whale sharks and other marine fauna.
Workshop on satellite tagging of whale shark | Photograph by Prakash Doriya/WTI
Apart from participation from frontline staff of both forest ranges, the workshop was also attended by the Mr. V. Aparnathi, veterinary officer, Junagadh Forest Division, and a team of research scholars from the college of Fisheries Science at Veraval. A total of 60 participants gained hands-on experience of the tagging process, including a demonstration on a dummy fin.
WTI and the Gujarat Forest Department have joined hands to extend the satellite telemetry studies to five Whale sharks from Gujarat waters in the year ahead. This is aimed at better understanding the biological preferences of the world’s largest fish and also study it’s movement patterns. Between 2011 and 2018, the team had successfully tagged eight individuals, providing crucial insights into the movement patterns of these gentle giants.
Mr. Farukhkha Bloch, Manager & Head of Whale Shark conservation project of WTI, also briefed the participants on past two decades of co-managed conservation actions that have led to the protection of these majestic creatures in Gujarat’s waters. Emphasising on the significance both biological research and active participation from fishing communities for protecting the species, Mr. Bloch highlighted the need for a collective commitment of diverse stakeholders for the conservation success of the project. The workshop also included a pool training session on safety protocols, ensuring that participants were well-prepared for their roles during the tagging process and safe handling of Whale sharks during rescue and tagging operations.
Workshop on satellite tagging of whale shark in Mangrol, Gujarat | Photograph by Prakash Doriya/WTI
“The knowledge gained from satellite tagging  and research initiatives will undoubtedly contribute to the ongoing success of conserving Whale sharks and their habitats in the waters of Gujarat”, adds Mr. Bloch. For the past two decades, the fishing community of Gujarat, in collaboration with the Gujarat Forest Department, WTI, and their partner Tata Chemicals, has been actively engaged in the conservation efforts of whale sharks. Among the most successful conservation campaigns in India, the whale shark project has now been extended to the coasts of Kerala and Karnataka.