Addl PCCF unveiling the new signboard

Diphu, August 22, 2015: Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) formally handed over a newly constructed MVS Field Station to Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) at a function in Diphu, district headquarters of Karbi Anglong, Assam.
Commissioned in 2005, the Karbi Anglong MVS Satellite facility was being run from a temporary shelter at Diphu. Karbi Forest Department has now allowed WTI to use this newly constructed building for the MVS. The previous temporary shelter area was also provided by the Forest Department for holding small animals and birds.
Pradip Signar, the honourable Executive Member (Forest), KAAC, handed over the facility in presence of Dr Abhijit Rabha, Additional PCCF, Karbi Anglong Forest Department, in presence of other senior officials of both forest and civil authorities of the council.

Pradip Signar, EM-Forest, hoped that the rescue and rehabilitation centre would help in building the bridge between people and wildlife in this district of Assam.


Mr Singnar inaugrating the newly constructed MVS station

While welcoming the august gathering at the inauguration of the MVS field station, Dr Abhijit Rabha, Addl PCCF, Karbi Anglong, told that the partnership of KAAC and WTI has been a historic one so far and has resulted in many conservation milestones for Karbi Anglong hills.
The handing over ceremony was jointly organised by Karbi Anglong Forest Department, KAAC and WTI near Morat Longri Wildlife Sanctuary. Divisional Forest Officers of West Karbi Anglong Division and Working Plan Division along with Village Headmen, frontline staff and locals attended the event.
WTI team that represented the organisation at the event included Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head & Head Vet; Dilip Deori, Yuri Pator, Bosrsali Teron, Amitabha Choudhury and Dr Daoharu Baro .
In the last 10 years of its operation, this facility has handled around 300 rescue cases and 41.32% of animals were released back to the wild. Majority of cases attended by the Karbi Anglong MVS team included Asian elephants, clouded leopards, Eastern hoolock gibbons, slow loris, among others.