Smooth-coated Otter (Lutrogale perspicillata) is a semi-aquatic mammal with an affinity towards undisturbed wetland habitats. India is home to three different species of otters, amongst which smooth-coated otters are the most widely distributed species across the country. Being a top predator, they help indicate a healthy riverine ecosystem in a landscape. Though protected under Schedule II of Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and categorized “Vulnerable” by IUCN Red List of Threatened species smooth-coated otters today, face the grave danger of poaching and habitat loss. 
Recent studies undertaken in Gujarat highlighted the presence of smooth-coated otters in Surat, Bharuch & Narmada districts. Along the Tapi river in Surat, the otter population that was rebounding to good numbers were, however, considered a nuisance to the resident fishing community. Every morning the fishermen were greeted by torn nylon nets that they had left overnight to collect fish. The trapped fish being a natural food for the otters, stealing the catch eventually became a daily habit. When the alternate method such as suspending nets deeper for fish, began to fail, the fishermen were left in vain. The severe economic loss of replacing nets worth Rs 400-1500 instigated fisher folk to adopt aggressive methods such as setting trap cages, using poisoned fish as bait etc. thereby affecting the thriving otter population of Surat. A Rapid Action Project was thus initiated by Krunal Trivedi (Nature Club Surat) to promote co-existence of fishermen and otters in the landscape. There was an urgent need to sensitize the fishing community and initiate an ex-gratia policy by involving the forest department for a sustainable approach to the problem.
[acx_slideshow name=”smoothtail”]
As part of the RAP, a reconnaissance survey was carried out by the team along the Tapi river to identify potential sites with otter presence and to understand the core issues regular consultative meetings were conducted with the community.  Fishermen then began to share information on potential otter movement areas and their interactions with otters daily. As a follow-up sensitization workshops were also conducted highlighting the species, the importance of the environment and the protection status of otters under the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. A total of 56 fishermen and 11 Surat Municipal corporation staff participated in these workshops conducted throughout the year. Selected fishermen were brought together and called “Team otter watch”. This team was further trained to set up camera traps and also conduct boat patrolling. Four infra-red camera traps were installed in areas where indirect/direct sighting information was received from the network.
With time, the fishermen gained confidence and slowly opened up to sharing regular updates on otter sightings and on threats/ disturbance that were observed near the identified den sites. One such instance was when Team otter watch helped seize a trap cage found during the patrolling and helped trace its source. The project helped enlighten the fact that otters were a protected species and any attempt to harm or kill them was a punishable offence under section 9(1) of WPA 1972 amongst the fishing community.

On World Wildlife Day, a programme was organized, inviting the fishing community and range officers from the forest department. The event celebrated the enthusiasm shown by ten fishermen in carrying out this RAP, by presenting them appreciation certificates and new fishing nets. To further voice out the community’s plea, the team helped draft an appeal signed by all the fishermen for the introduction of an ex-gratia scheme which was then submitted to the DCF Mr. Puneet Nayyar, DCF Surat Division.  He acknowledged the work carried out and the intensity of the issue on ground. The appeal was received very positively, and he agreed to forward it to the PCCF. Mr. Puneet Nayyar quotes, “I appreciate the campaign conducted by Nature club Surat and Wildlife Trust of India. This has facilitated the fishermen in reporting sightings of otters to the concerned authorities of the forest department. I believe the forest department, along with such local organizations shall take the lead in making Surat district a great example in the conservation of the species”.
The team is currently following up with the forest department to ensure the ex-gratia scheme is implemented. WTI aims to take up more such small interventions in the future to help the otter population thrive in our country.