Pilibhit Tiger Reserve, Uttar Pradesh, November 24, 2016: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) personnel assisted the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department in the rescue of a tiger that had strayed out of Pilibhit Tiger Reserve and into a village bordering the forest yesterday. The tiger was subsequently released back into the forest.
 

The tiger, a sub-adult male, had moved out of the Mahof range of Pilibhit TR and into Mallpur Khajuria Village about a kilometre from the edge of the forest. It entered the home of a villager named Jagdish at around 7.30am; Jagdish’s wife was making tea in the kitchen area when she saw the tiger and raised the alarm, waking her husband. The family fled the house and a large crowd of villagers gathered around it as news spread of the cat’s presence, effectively trapping the animal within.
 


The petrified sub-adult tiger in the courtyard of the house it had entered. Police and the forest department arrived soon after and stopped the villagers from pelting it with sticks and stones.


A team from the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department reached the spot shortly after. The local police department was called in to manage the crowd and WTI’s UP Big Cat Conflict Mitigation Project team was also intimated. 
 
WTI’s Rapid Response Team (RRT) reached the village at around 3.30pm. “The situation was particularly tense since there had been an altercation between the villagers and the police”, said RRT member Prem Chandra Pandey. “Stones were being pelted at the authorities and our rescue operation had to be put on hold till the situation was brought under control.”
 

The tiger, meanwhile, was moving from room to room inside the house. The RRT assisted forest department personnel in fixing a net over one of the house’s two exits, and setting up a trap cage with a live goat as bait in front of the other. As the tiger did not enter the cage, veterinarians were called in and eventually Dr Utkarsh Shukla from Lucknow Zoo successfully tranquilised the tiger through a window.
 


The tiger after it was tranquilised and captured. It was subsequently released into the Mahof range of Pilibhit TR.



“The job was only half done since we still had to get the animal to safety”, Prem Chandra Pandey added. “This was proving difficult since the villagers were very agitated; it took a lathi-charge from the police to disperse the crowd and allow us to leave the area.”
 


The tiger was brought to the Mustafabad Forest Rest House at around 8pm. The District Magistrate of Pilibhit Mr Masoom Ali Sarvar arrived, and the RRT and forest department personnel took to the tiger to a release site deep into the forests of the Mahof range, where it was subsequently released at around 8.30pm.