Srinagar, 7th October 2023: Highlighting this year’s Wildlife Week theme— “Partnerships for Wildlife Conservation,” a walkathon was organised in which approximately 3000 individuals, including students, actively participated.
The ‘Walk For Wild’ Walkathon was organised by the Department of Wildlife Protection, J&K in collaboration with the Wildlife Trust of India, Astral Foundation and several other institutions and organisations such as the Forest Department, Jammu and Kashmir Police, Directorate of School Education, Kashmir, JKDMA, Universities, Wildlife SOS and Wildlife Conservation Fund.
Lt.Governor J&K Shri Manoj Sinha at the Walk for Wildlife Walkathon in Srinagar | Photo by Madhumay Mallik
The Hon’ble Lt. Governor of the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, Shri Manoj Sinha flagged off the walkathon in the presence of Mr. Aftab Malik, Chairman, DDC Srinagar, Mr. A.K. Choudhary IPS, Special DG Crime, Mr. Dheeraj Gupta, Principal Secretary, Department of Forest, Ecology and Environment, Dr. Mandeep Kumar Bhandari, Principal Secretary to Lt. Governor, Mr. Roshan Jaggi, IFS, PCCF & HoFF, J&K along with senior officers and community members. The 5 km walkathon, commencing from the Police Golf Course and culminating at Nishat, aimed to amplify awareness regarding pressing conservation issues, with a special focus on involving the youth actively in wildlife conservation efforts.
Kashmir, renowned for its breathtaking scenery, is home to a rich array of flora and fauna. The marathon highlighted endemic species like the Hangul, Himalayan brown bear (Wazul haput), Markhor (Keel bakra), Hangul and Black-necked crane (Trung Trung Karmu) through the representation of mascots. This walkathon was a significant step towards nurturing a deeper sense of responsibility and care for the region’s invaluable natural heritage.
The walkathon saw over 3000 participants including students | Photo by Madhumay Mallik
Hon’ble Lt. Governor, Shri Manoj Sinha, emphasised that Kashmir is home to an amazing diversity of wildlife and wild spaces ranging from RAMSAR sites like the Hokesar to the alpine wilderness of the Kazinag. On the occasion of the 67th National Wildlife Week, he urged the youth of Kashmir to come forward and contribute towards the cause, in whatever capacity they can.
Tanushree Srivastava, head of Wildlife Trust of India’s Mountain Ungulate Project expressed hope that this initiative will help people grow more informed, motivated, and drawn towards the cause of environmental and wildlife protection. WTI has been working with members of the community, mostly youth, to mobilise conservation efforts across the PAs of Hirpora and Kazinag.
Read about WTI’s Markhor Recovery Project which is supported by the Department of Wildlife Protection, J&K and Astral Foundation.