Wendell Berry, the great American novelist, poet, environmental activist, and farmer once wrote that “The Earth is what we all have in common.” Even though his words are true, majority of the mankind still fails to understand the meaning of this. To make the world realize the importance of protecting the earth through the conservation of the environment, June 5th is celebrated every year as the World Environment Day (WED) by the United Nations Environment Programme.
The theme for WED 2022 was “Only One Earth”, focusing on living sustainably in harmony with nature. Wildlife Trust of India also joined hands with forest departments and local communities to remind the world of their responsibilities in preserving and enhancing the environment as individuals and organizations.
WTI hosted several awareness programs across three WTI project sites in two states, in Arunachal Pradesh and Assam.
 
Pakke Tiger Reserve, Arunachal Pradesh  

WED celebration at Pakke Tiger Reserve, Arunachal Pradesh: Photo – CBRC
The event started with a cleanliness drive along the West bank of Pakke river, in presence of the Range Forest Officer Mr. Mayuk Lamgu (RFO) and Dr. Panjit Basumatary. 30 forest staff and six WTI staff participated in the program.
The event was later followed by a plantation drive along with the students where endemic plant species were planted on the West bank of the Pakke river. DFO Pakke, Mr. Suraj Singh, School Principal and other teaching staffs were a part of the drive. Tree saplings were distributed and planted at Seijosa Police station and the Indian Reserve Police Battalion, Monai.
More than 500 saplings of endangered tree species were planted across four different locations namely, West bank Pakke riverbed, VKV School complex, Upper Seijosa police camp and Indian Reserve police battalion compound.
 
Paglam, Arunachal Pradesh
 
WTI Team along with the participants: Photo – DDS Team
World Environment Day was celebrated in Paglam village (one of the beneficiary villages of the DDSEL project implemented in collaboration with World Land Trust), Arunachal Pradesh with the school children of Govt. Higher Secondary School, Paglam, Lower Dibang Valley District. Forest staff of Mebo Range, East Siang Dist., Arunachal Pradesh, Committee members of Kotga Gorah Community Reserve Society (KGCRS), community members, and young students of Paglam village attended the event along with the WTI team.
The event constituted of a discussion on ‘Why do we celebrate Environment Day’ with the students led by Dindi Padi (sociologist of the project) owing to their current awareness knowledge about the persisting environmental issues in the world. The staff of the Forest department and committee members of KGCRS also mentioned the impact of young students’ knowledge and actions to help create a better environmental surrounding for us and our future generation.
Activities like creating a biodiversity wall and a cleanliness drive were organized as a part of the event for children and their action-oriented participation on this environment day. More than 60 students participated in the event, with 15 community and committee members of KGCRS and four forest staff. The event ended by felicitating students for their participation in the cleanliness drive followed by students collectively taking an oath to save the environment by taking action to protect our “Only One Earth”.
 
Tinsukia Wildlife Division, Assam
 
Students Participating in the discussion: Photo – DDS Team
Under the DDSEL project, WTI also organized a day-long awareness program with the local community on June 5, 2022, at Hatigholi High School in the Saikhowa Range of Dibru- Saikhowa National Park, Assam (which is the other connecting habitat of the DDS Corridor). Honorable Assistant Conservator of Forest (ACF), Tinsukia Wildlife Division and Range Forest Officer (RFO), Saikhowa Range, and Panchayat officials from Na-Barmura and other neighbouring villages attended the program.
More than 250 students attended the program along with Panchayat members, EDC members, village defense party, and local public leaders. The event began with a student’s cultural program mostly from the indigenous community.
An art contest was organized amongst the school children and the Honorable ACF felicitated the winning students with prizes later that day. An interactive session was held by Dr. Sheikh Marifatul Haq and Mr. Deepankar Barman from the WTI team, during which they addressed the importance of World Environment Day and community participation in wildlife conservation.
Several local issues were discussed during the event and also at the general meeting held between officials and village panchayat members. Finally, the event came to an end with a plantation drive organized at school premises by the Forest Department, Panchayat members, EDC members, village defense party, local public leaders, and school children wherein 20 saplings were planted and 50 saplings were distributed to commemorate the celebration.