Wayanad (Kerala): In a significant step for protecting the Brahmagiri – Tirunelli elephant corridor in Southern India, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has acquired a part of the Valiya Emmadi village as part of its efforts to relocate the five villages which fall on the corridor.
This is the second village after Thirulakunnu, which has been moved from the corridor.

The corridor, covers a portion of the Wayanad district in Kerala and forms an important pathway for elephants moving between the Begur and Brahmagiri reserve forests in Karnataka.
The five villages in the corridor (Thirulakunnu, Valiya Emmadi, Kottapadi, Edayur Vayal and Pulayankolly) has been a major source of obstruction in their free movements.




In May this year, WTI had successfully relocated five houses from the Thirulakunnu settlement to an alternate site in Anappara outside the corridor.
The 5.6 acres in Valiya Emmadi village comprises both dry and wet lands, which villagers used for various plantations, mostly paddy, coffee and coconut.
“Another 6.1 acres here, which is also privately owned, would also be acquired for conservation. Currently, five households live in this area.” Mr. Sabu Jahas, Sr. Field Officer of WTI, said.
Human-elephant conflicts have been common, since the village is deep inside the forest and falls on the elephant pathway.
“Conflicts are mainly due to crop raiding by elephants and wild boars. The situation would improve, once these five families move out to an alternate site,” he said.
The Kabani river which passes close to this village is an important source of water for wild animals during summer. The area is covered by moist deciduous forest.
“We will soon initiate dialogue for relocation of the other three villages, which will be in the next phase.” Dr. Sandeep Kr. Tiwari, Manager of the Wild Lands Programme of WTI said.
Following a four-year survey in 11 states, WTI had identified 88 elephant corridors across the country, including the Brahmagiri – Tirunelli corridor for taking up conservation actions.
The National Elephant Corridor Project of WTI is supported by IFAW (International Fund for Animal Welfare) and WLT (World Land Trust).
Currently in several states, various actions have been initiated in conjunction with the forest department for protection of these corridors.