Minicoy Island, 19 October 2019: After winning hearts in Lakshadweep, the whale shark campaign reached Minicoy Island today. Fishermen around this 4 sq. km, island have been witness to the biggest congregation of whale sharks, the world’s largest fish and it was important to sensitise the populace on its conservation.
The resident population of 10,500 people speak Mahl and Hindi. Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Department of Environment and Forest, Lakshadweep jointly conducted school activities in the solitary high school and three elementary schools on this island. WTI’s campaign team held an illustrated talk and discussion session in the Minicoy Government Senior Basic School with fifty students from middle school classes. The session started with a discussion on the ecological importance of the species, its distribution and the need for the conservation. “Fiberish” as whale shark is locally known here, has been sighted by several fishermen while fishing in the open sea.  Children were very inquisitive while they discussed the behavioural pattern and the distribution of the whale shark. All kids were provided with a drawing kit for the activities planned.
 
[acx_slideshow name=”sayam”]
 
The life-size mascot of Whale Shark had the warmest welcome at all the schools and children’s excitement knew no bounds. The mascot travelled to the Government senior secondary school of Minicoy for the activities that followed later. The interactive session started with screening of a video clip followed by a discussion and a quiz based on topics like marine life, turtles, coral reef, sharks with visual cues where they were to identify Lakshadweep flora and fauna.
Aligning with our mission of working with communities for conservation, a multi-stakeholder consultative workshop was arranged in the Island of Minicoy on 21st October 2019. The meeting was attended by officials from the Coast Guard, government departments, such as civic service, public relations, police, fisheries, etc. and eight Moopans out of 11 villages and four village dweep members. The team stressed the use of community involvement in the conservation of the docile filter feeder, which congregates around the island. Ms Zafoora Beevi K, Officer in Charge, Fisheries, spoke about the importance of conservation of flagship species like Whale Shark. Efforts like these can strengthen marine conservation in the entire area. She also accentuated that sustainable fishers can be the protectors of the species in the ocean and congratulated WTI to take up the initiative and urged all the fishermen to assist in the effort actively.
Mr Prakash Brahm of the Coast Guard emphasised on the mandate of the Coast Guards in the high sea and shared the importance to conserve endangered species like Whale Shark. He added that Coast Guard would be happy to get associated in efforts like this.
Dr Munner, a village dweep panchayat member, spoke to the members in Mahl urging them to spread awareness. He spoke about the efforts to conserve species irrespective of their protected status and the importance of protecting every species. He pledged his support and urged the Moopans of 11 villages to spread awareness. He also pledged on behalf of the fishers who take pride in sustainable fishing and have no intention of changing their practices.
Mr Taussef K of the Department of Environment and Forests endorsed and supported WTI’s initiative. He stated that there has been no accidental catch because of sustainable fishing. The fishermen have seen the “fiberish” for time immemorial, and they are aware of their protected status. He stated that the workshop was a testimony and suggested to use the knowledge and conserve the island fauna in a more co-ordinated way.