Guwahati, 7 October 2020:
In a triple recognition for our commitment to saving wildlife, the Assam government awarded three felicitations to Wildlife Trust of India’s project and people for their exemplary services to save Assam’s natural heritage.
At the concluding function of the 66th Wildlife Week organised by Assam Forest Department in Guwahati on 7th October 2020, WTI’s Vice Chair and Trustee Prf. P C Bhattacharjee received the Lifetime Achievement Award; Dr. Rathin Barman represented the team from the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) to receive a medal and certificate for its contribution to the conservation of wildlife in Assam and Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, WTI’s Head Veterinarian received his award for saving an elephant and releasing it back to the wild in a most difficult wildlife rescue and release operation.

The Honb’le Chief Minister of Assam Shri Sarbananda Sonowal was joined by Shri Parimal Suklabaidya, Minister, Environment and Forests, Assam, Shri, Hrishikesh Goswami, Media advisor to the Honb’le CM, Assam, Shri Sanjay Kishan, Minister, Tea Tribe Welfare and Ms. Angurlata Deka, MLA (Batadroba) in honouring the awardees in this event which was also attended by Dr. A. M Singh IFS, PCCF and HoFF, Dr. Amit Sahai IFS, PCCF (Wildlife) and  Shri M K Yadava IFS, CWLW, Assam along with other dignitaries from forest and other departments of Assam government, as well as representatives of various conservation NGOs who were present on this occasion.

Accepting the award from the CM of Assam, Dr. Parimal Chandra Bhattacharjee, an icon of wildlife conservation said, “Though information and knowledge regarding the conservation of nature and its elements has percolated in almost all works of life, the wisdom is yet to come. Although the contribution of wildlife in ecosystem services has now been fully recognised, but the need of the hour is increased scientific work. Wildlife studies, in big or small species, must go beyond photography and tourism. We need more field biologists.”
“Lifetime achievement award is the recognition of a large group of students and field workers and not of an individual only. Nothing worthwhile can be achieved alone, ” he added, with his characteristic humility.

CWRC is a jointly run facility of WTI-IFAW and Assam Forest Department. The felicitations were awarded by the Hon’ Chief Minister, Shri Sarbananda Sonowal to CWRC team for its contribution towards forest and wildlife in the state of Assam with a medal and a certificate of merit which was received by Dr. Rathin Barman, Joint Director, WTI who has been in charge of CWRC since almost 20 years.

Dr. Bhaskar Choudhury Head Veterinarian received his felicitation from the Hon’ble Chief Minister for his contribution to the cause of conservation of forest and wildlife in the state of Assam. Dr. Choudhury’s sincere effort for saving an elephant in Kamrup district and in its successful  release back to the wilderness in Rani RF near Guwahati was highly commended by the forest department.
In our mission of working with communities and the government, such public plaudits from our key stakeholders are an additional feather in our cap that motivates us to deliver our best.