Tippi (Arunachal Pradesh), August 20, 2014: To help promote and spread awareness about the biodiversity of Pakke Tiger Reserve, a Nature Interpretation Centre was recently inaugurated at Tippi with the support of Wildlife Trust of India’s (WTI) Wild Aid division.

Learning about Pakke and the wildlife in the new Interpretation Centre. Photo: Sanjay Sondhi

“Initiated by Nandini Velho and Anjora Noronha , this is the first of its kind Nature Interpretation Centre for Pakke Tiger Reserve and it has been specifically designed to be interactive, with the help of artists like Rohan Chakravarty, especially to encourage the next generation in the areas as well as tourists to learn more about the Reserve and the wildlife within,” said Radhika Bhagat, the Head of WTI’s Wild Aid division.

Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary and Tiger Reserve (PTR), located in East Kameng district of Western Arunachal Pradesh, is a biodiversity hot spot and is home to at least 15 endangered species including the tiger, Asiatic black bear, binturong, Chinese pangolin, clouded leopard, fishing cat and slow loris. This area is part of the Kameng Elephant Reserve and Protected Area Complex. 296 bird species have also been recorded in the TR including the Critically Endangered white-rumped¬ vulture, the Endangered white ¬winged wood duck and the Vulnerable Rufous-¬necked hornbill. The reserve also has 31 species of amphibians including the Indian flying frog.


Displaying Pakke with pride. Photo: Sanjay Sondhi

The collaterals within the centre include infographics, posters, and interactive quiz games among other varied displays which aim to help create and increase awareness about the numerous elements that make up an ecosystem, with specific references to Pakke and in a broader environmental context.
“The State Forest Department has been instrumental in employing people from the indigenous tribes like Nishis, Akas and Mijis from around the park as forest watchers, helping them move away from using forest resources to helping preserve it. The Forest Department of Arunachal Pradesh has also always been supportive of awareness initiatives in the area which include activities implemented by WTI such as Grain for. We also have the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation centre in Pakke which helps rehabilitate orphan black bear cubs back to the wild,” added Radhika Bhagat, expanding on the desire to extend support to help raise the Interpretation Centre.
The centre’s inauguration which took place on August 1, 2014 was preceded with a five-day workshop in Tippi and Seijosa, with many local teachers, students and forest watchers where the basic concepts of biodiversity were imparted. The trainers included Sanjay Sondhi (Titli trust), Chandini Chhabra (Leaps and Bounds), Gerry Martin (The Gerry Martin Project) and Chandan Ri (field biologist). National Moth Week and Global Tiger Day also happened to coincide with the days of the workshop and formed a part of the guidance conveyed. Gerry Martin also lended his expertise on snake rescue and handling, training the participants on the same, with a special focus on the technical equipment involved.


Learning together in the new Interpretation Centre. Photo: Sanjay Sondhi