[acx_slideshow name=”David Shepherd 20092017″]
 
September 20, 2017: It is with great sadness that we announce the death of wildlife artist and conservationist David Shepherd, FRSA, CBE, founder and president of the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF). He died peacefully overnight after a 10-week battle with Parkinsons Disease.
For over 50 years David dedicated his life to protecting some of the world’s most iconic and endangered animals. Using his talent as an artist to generate funds for their protection he inspired hundreds of others to follow and, in 1984, established his own wildlife foundation, DSWF, to give something back to the animals that had given him so much success as an artist.
With a deep fondness for Africa’s elephants many of David’s most iconic paintings are of the world’s largest land mammal including ‘The Ivory is Theirs’ and ‘Wise Old Elephant’. ‘Tiger Fire’ was one of his first major fund-raising successes, raising £127,000 for Indira Gandhi’s Operation Tiger in 1973. In 2014 he painted an elephant for his Foundation’s 30th Anniversary black tie dinner raising £50,000 for conservation projects in Africa and Asia.
Speaking at the time David said: “What more could an artist wish for but to repay my debt to the animals I painted.”
In 2007 David helped establish the DSWF Wildlife Artist of the Year competition, which runs annually in London attracting artists from around the world generating funds to help save endangered wildlife.
His awards include an Honorary Degree in Fine Arts by the Pratt Institute in New York (1971), the Order of the Golden Ark by HRH The Prince of The Netherlands (1973), Member of Honour of WWF and OBE (1979), FRSA (1986), Order of Distinguished Service, Zambia (1988) and a CBE (2008) for his services to conservation. In 2012 David was invited to open Zambia’s first elephant orphanage nursery at a ceremony officiated by Dr Guy Scott, Vice-President of Zambia. Just last year he was awarded the Animal Hero Lifetime Achievement Award, receiving two standing ovations as he collected his award at the Grosvenor House Hotel, London.
David’s work went far beyond animal protection, and he recognised many decades ago the need to support those living in poor rural communities around protected wildlife areas – raising thousands of pounds for disadvantaged people, communities, and schools across Africa and Asia.
“In David’s passing the world has lost a rare palette of artistic genius and conservation vision”, said Wildlife Trust of India CEO Vivek Menon.
He will be remembered for his charismatic presentation of wildlife programmes on television, and was close friends with international royalty and many celebrities, but he was never happier then when on his knees in the dirt with his beloved elephants in Africa.
“David’s passion for wildlife and the role of man in its demise infuriated and inspired him. He was dedicated, tenacious and outspoken, a champion of animals and the people who worked to protect them. He will be greatly missed,” said DSWF CEO Karen Botha.
“David was a giant among wildlife artists and DSWF, the foundation that he established, was one of Wildlife Trust of India’s earliest supporters. In David’s passing the world has lost a rare palette of artistic genius and conservation vision”, said Wildlife Trust of India CEO Vivek Menon.
David leaves a wife, four daughters, nine grandchildren, one great-grandchild and an enduring legacy for wildlife conservation. He will be sadly missed by those he inspired and worked with.