Rushikulya (on the Orissa coast): Each year between the months of March and May, around a hundred thousand female Olive Ridley sea turtles converge to the Rushikulya rookery to lay eggs on the coast of the eastern state of Orissa in India. Only a few thousand hatchlings survive the journey back to the ocean. Wrought with multiple dangers of predation, erosion and desiccation, the turtle hatchlings find themselves at the losing end of the fight for survival.The mass nesting, arribada, happened between March 10 and 15 this year but it also resulted in thousands of nests being exposed to dangers of plunder and erosion. More than 100 nests were being plundered daily by jackals and dogs. A few thousands were washed away or inundated due to beach erosion. Recent developmental activities at this rookery have threatened adult females as well as their eggs and hatchlings. Artificial illumination from adjacent areas is the biggest threat as a result of which many of the hatchlings get disoriented and move away from the natural beach and get stranded and die due to desiccation.
Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) supported Mr. Basudev Tripathy, who initiated and implemented the Rapid Action Project to save the sea turtle nests and hatchlings, which was completed within six months. The outcome of this project was provision of a clean, undisturbed nesting site to sea turtles as well as safety from feral dogs, jackals, and hyenas. Hundreds of hatchlings of this endangered species were saved from untimely death due to disorientation, lifting by carnivores and destruction of habitat. This project also created awareness among coastal fisher folk who were involved in protecting the nests at this rookery.
Mr. Basudev Tripathy, who has extensively studied and worked on the nesting habits of sea turtles initiated this project and chalked out a plan with the local Rushikulya Sea Turtle Protection Committee (RSTPC) to save the nests and hatchlings. Under the Rapid Action Project disoriented hatchlings were collected from the beach and released safely into the sea. Plastic nets were embedded at a safe distance from the nesting beach so that hatchlings did not enter the grass fields. In the morning, these hatchlings gathered at the nets were collected and released safely.
“The recent flood in October 2003 in Orissa has not only changed the course of river Rushikulya but also has deposited huge amount of domestic garbage on the beach. The accumulation of garbage including polythene, plastic articles, glass pieces, torn clothes and other such items on the beach at Rushikulya pose problems for the turtle in their natural nesting processes and interfere in the hatching success,” said Mr. Tripathy. Beach clearing and clearing of debris was taken up during January 2004 before mass nesting took place at this rookery.
“The rookery is not yet declared as a Protected Area and thus lacks formal protection. Predation of eggs and hatchlings by feral animals and jackals, hyenas etc. is a menace at this rookery”, Mr. Tripathy explained. Protection of the beach round the clock by the members of RSPTC was duly started.
Dr. Sandeep Tiwari, Senior Programme Officer at WTI visited the Rushikulya rookery last month and made some pertinent observations. “Arribada of Olive Ridley Turtles at Rushikulya has increased over the years due to habitat degradation of other rookeries. However, coastal illumination and increase in aquaculture in adjacent areas are a potential threat to turtles in Rushikulya. Although the Forest Department and NGOs working in this area are doing their bit, they need to coordinate their efforts to yield better results in conservation of this species,” observed Dr. Tiwari.
In view of the rapid fragmentation of nesting habitat at Gahirmatha and Devi rookeries of Orissa, the Rushikulya rookery emerges as an important rookery that can help in sustaining a stable population of Olive Ridleys in the long run, although Rushikulya receives a smaller number of nesting turtles compared to Gahirmatha. Protection of nests and hatchlings is of urgent need at this rookery due to the natural beach destruction along with predation of nests, disorientation of hatchlings due to artificial illumination and erosion of the beach, which results in destruction of incubated nests.