Bansbari, November 6, 2014: In yet another successful IFAW-WTI reintroduction programme, three hand-raised male rhinos were released from their temporary enclosure (boma) in Manas National Park, Assam on 29th of October. Out of these three, two of them were radio collared before the release. The three rhinos were hand raised at the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), Assam for almost five years before being shifted to the enclosure at Bansbari Range in Manas NP, as part of restocking the rhino population that was decimated in the year 2000. 


Darted rhino before being released from the enclosure. Photo:JP Das/IFAW-WTI

The team of IFAW-WTI experts led by Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Dr Anthony Nokso Phangcho and Anjan Sangma along with the officials from the Assam Forest Department that comprised of Deputy Director- Sonali Ghosh, Dr Prabhat Basumatary, ACF- DD Boro and their staff members oversaw the entire operation.

“We first sedated the two animals before radio collaring them. Blood samples from the three rhinos were then collected and microchips were fitted on the neck fold of the two healthy males before their release,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury. These radio collars would allow IFAW-WTI members to monitor their progress, movement and behavioural changes.
The three hand-raised rhinos, T-20, T-21 and T-23, were rescued from the Kaziranaga National Park in 2009. Early this year, these three were shifted to a boma in Manas NP at Bansbari Range, where they stayed for almost a year undergoing acclimatisation.


The three rhinos in their enclosure before the release. Photo:JP Das/IFAW-WTI
 
“The release successfully culminated the efforts of the Assam Forest Department and IFAW-WTI to bring rhinos back to Manas, which began in January 2006 when the first rhino was translocated from Kaziranga NP,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, WTI. This effort has been part of the efforts to bring back the pride of Manas and retain its status as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.