Arunachal Pradesh: Three wild elephants that were rescued a fortnight ago from poachers from the forests of India’s remote north-east Arunachal Pradesh state were successfully united with a large herd on Friday, in a joint operation by the forest officials and the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
The forest officials had rescued the three young elephants from a gang of poachers based near the forests of Dibang division, who were trying to train them using cruel methods and had badly injured one in the process.
“At 1.30 pm, the elephants were released near a herd of 100 wild elephants deep inside the Dambuk forest reserve.” Nani Sha, the Divisional Forest Officer of Dibang Wildlife Sanctuary, said.
“The three elephants are seen moving with the same herd today, which is indicative of their integration with the herd.” he said.
A team of experts from WTI and the forest department are monitoring the situation. This rapid action project to aid wildlife in distress was supported by WTI’s partners, the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF).
“The three elephants are between 5 to 7 years old and were micro-chipped. One of them was radio-collared – for post-release monitoring and identification.” Prasanta Boro, the veterinarian of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) said.
The elephants were rescued from three different persons in Dibang forest division and had suffered injuries, after having been trussed with ropes. A team of WTI veterinarians treated the injuries and stabilized them for release.
“The elephants are safe now from poachers, as they are integrated with a larger herd.” K. D. Singh, Chief Wildlife Warden said.
Dibang and Pasighat forest divisions and Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary in Eastern Arunachal Pradesh form an important elephant habitat – supporting over 200 elephants.
“This population is made up of fragments from the adjoining populations in Lohit, Changlang and Tirap districts. Arunachal Pradesh has an approximate population of about 1600 wild elephants,” Dr Sandeep Tiwari of WTI said.
A temporary shelter was made at Bomjir – isolated from human contact – for their rehabilitation. The elephants fed themselves naturally from the wild at the centre.
Before their release, the area was searched for a suitable wild herd that would accept them since it was difficult to find the natal herd.
Three Kunki elephants (captive elephants) were used by officials to guide them into the wild – 14 kms from the center.