Wildlife Trust of India and the Department of Wildlife Protection (DWP) J&K, with the support of the Astral Foundation, organised a day-long first aid and CPR training for the nature guides of Kazinag National Park.
As an integral aspect of the Markhor recovery project, we aim to strengthen the conservation of Markhor by establishing community-based conservation models. One such model seeks to promote eco-tourism in the landscape to provide a sustainable livelihood option to the local communities.
The training session was organised by WTI and Department of Wildlife Protection (DWP) J&K |Photo by Tanveer Akbar
As a part of eco-tourism promotion and development in the park, WTI and the DWP, North Division J&K had already taken a few steps such as registration of homestays with the tourism department, identification of nature guides followed by training and sensitisation sessions for the guides.
The training was provided by Block medical officer URI Dr. Balvinder Singh which included learning basic life support and life-saving skills like performing CPR after cardiac arrest, administering first aid during an accident, and rescuing someone during drowning. Held at the Wildlife Rest House Limber Wildlife Sanctuary, the event saw the participation of 35 identified guides from Limber, Lachipora, and Naganari PA fringe villages. The event was hosted by Mr. Sameer Khazir, Assistant manager, WTI, Mr. Riyaz Ahmad, Block Forest officer, Limber Wildlife Sanctuary, Dr. Balvinder Singh, Block Medical officer, Sub District Hospital URI, and Mr. Mudasir Ahmad, SHO Boniyar Police station.
Dr. Balvinder Singh demonstrated the use of CPR and First aid |Photo by Tanveer Akbar
Dr. Balvinder Singh (Block Medical officer sub-District Hospital, URI), who provided hands-on training on basic life-saving skills through ways of visual medium practice mannequins, exhorted that being trained in CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) provides the knowledge, confidence, and skills to stay calm in a medical emergency and is mandatory for the nature guides during the guiding process. He added that continuous training in CPR and basic life support (BLS) should be encouraged among the guides to optimise the prompt use of the skills in any cardiac arrest occurrence.
Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Sameer Khazir from WTI  emphasised the unpredictability of emergencies, noting that they can occur unexpectedly to anyone.  He further highlighted the importance of having trained guides readily available to swiftly spring into action to save the lives of fellow guides, family members, and tourists during the guiding process. Mr. Khazir added that it was an enriching experience for these nature guides who will be registered with the tourism department to obtain their certification.