Guwahati: Wildlife Trust of India, as part of Wild Rescue programme is establishing India’s first wildlife rehabilitation centre in northeast India, in the state of Assam. The centre will be involved in the rescue of wild animals, which have been injured, maimed, orphaned, sick, or stray, in addition to those that have been confiscated from live and pet animal trade, and provide treatment and rehabilitation to these animals. The centre will also ensure that these animals are returned to their natural habitats, as far as possible.The centre is being started in collaboration with the Assam State Forest Department, and is being supported by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. In addition, the Centre for Conservation Biology will be the local partner. The centre is also planning to involve the Central Zoo Authority, Government of India and Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. The participation of the Guwahati University and the College of Veterinary Sciences, Assam Agricultural University, Guwahati is also being sought.
The centre will be a state-of-the-art facility, which will be the first scientifically managed wildlife rehabilitation and re-introduction center in India. This center is expected to open soon.
The proposed centre will be located near Kaziranga National Park in Assam. One veterinarian has already been posted there along with a mobile clinic. Three elephant calves have been rescued and hand-reared by the Assam Forest Department under the supervision of the WTI veterinarian. One of the calves, however, died recently. WTI will also build two satellite centers located in Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya.
The centre will be equipped with five separate shelters for holding carnivores, deer, birds, monkeys and turtles. The hospital will have an examination room to handle minor cases and a surgery room to conduct major surgical operations. Besides the anesthetic apparatus, the surgery room will be also be equipped with pulse oxymeter for monitoring the anaesthetized animals. The facility can be used for conducting major abdominal surgeries including hernia operations and removing tumours and foreign bodies.
This will be the first centre with specific enclosures for each species that will permit the veterinarians and keepers to handle the animals with ease. WTI’s centre will be unique also because it will be India’s only wildlife rehabilitation centre to be located in a forest area.
The centre aims at optimizing the conservation value and re-introduction potential of the rescued wild animals. The centre will also function in such a manner that it does not endanger the behaviour, conservation and health status of the rescued wild animals during the period of confinement, or in anyway diminish their potential to be reintroduced into the wild.
It will promote ethical and humane methods of handling, maintenance in captivity, and veterinary care. The centre will follow international guidelines for the rescue and release of wild animals.