On June 17, 2022, South Garo Hills was severely hit by a flash flood cutting off-road connectivity, telecommunication network, and power.
Kalu, one of WTI’s Project villages located on the northern side of Balpakram National Park was also severely impacted by the flood. Kalu is situated on the right bank of the Rongkai river and on the left bank is the West Kasi Hills which has 21 households. Mr. Etion Marak, A’king Nokma of the village had committed to support the corridor initiative and the team was also familiar with the villagers and the landscape.
During the flood, most houses along with the school building in the village were damaged; road connectivity was totally lost and the village was without electricity and mobile connectivity.

Silted houses and community ground, Photo by Rimachi Leisan
On receiving a distress call from the villagers, WTI and HCL Foundation in partnership with Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) Forest Department and State Forest Department extended immediate relief to the affected families.
Bags of rice, blankets, tarpulin, mats, and a few other basic essentials along with food items were distributed to each household in the village. During monsoon, the village is not easily accessible and the villagers usually stock up on rations for the whole monsoon period. However, in the current flood, more than five houses were completely washed away including their storage of rations and their livestock. Other houses have also suffered major damage and their storage of rice, utensils, blankets, household items, etc. was totally damaged.
The village has also lost many of the community infrastructures including the community hall and church. The school building was totally damaged beyond repair and was washed down a few meters from the original spot. Cultivated lands were submerged and now largely silted.

Villagers waiting and collecting the relief kits, Photo by Rimachi Leisan
The whole village expressed heartfelt gratitude to the organisation and the donor for remembering the villagers in times of need and supplying relief material.  “I cannot express how much to thank and how to express my gratitude. I have lost everything. My house, my cattle and all my stored food. Me and my family are alive and I thank God for that” Mr. Rella M Sangma, an elderly local. The A’king Nokma also acknowledged WTI’s support and also thanked the organisation for standing by the villagers in their difficult time.
Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and HCL Foundation, in partnership with the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) and the state forest department, have been working with these communities to secure the Baghmara-Balpakram corridor. Our overarching aim is to connect the fragmented forest patches located between the West Garo Hills and Nokrek National Park, with a view to establishing an unbroken wilderness link with Balpakram National Park. This network of forest patches forms the backbone of the region’s biodiversity and has been designated the Garo Green Spine Project.