India has a mangrove cover of 4975 sq. Km, out of which Kerala holds only 17 Sq. Km. Kerala’s mangroves face many threats due to developmental pressures such as urbanization, agriculture, aquaculture, road, etc. Due to these Kerala has lost 90% of its historical extent. The lion’s share of mangroves in Kerala is under private ownership, which makes it vulnerable to massive destruction.
Since 2006 WTI has protected 35 acres of undisturbed mangrove wealth in Kerala; Photo by Sreenanth K, WTI
The Kannur Kandal Project is envisaged to create a model for mangrove conservation in Kerala by adapting unique measures. The private purchase model that the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has undertaken since 2006 has protected 35 acres of undisturbed mangrove wealth in the state with the support of the World Land Trust (WLT).
Currently, the project site holds 10 species of mangroves, which include Avicennia marina, Rhizhophora mucronata, Avicennia officinalis, Excoecaria agallocha, Rhizhophora apiculata, Bruguiera cylindrica, Kandelia candel, etc. The secured site has a wide range of faunal species also.
The green interpretation facility of the Kannur Kandal Project consists of an interpretation centre, a mangrove nursery and in-situ awareness trails; Photo by Sreenanth K, WTI
The green interpretation facility of the project includes an interpretation centre, mangrove nursery, in-situ awareness trails etc. All these facilities are developed and maintained with the aim to promote awareness among the local communities around the mangrove to ensure social fencing. The knowledge created and imparted through student research projects also forms an important element of the project.
WTI maintains a mangrove nursery in Narath panchayath, Kannur where saplings of three different species (Rhizophora mucronata, Kandelia Candal, and Avicennia officinalis) are maintained; Photo by Sreenanth K, WTI
The Kannur Kandal Project now expects to restore at least 30 acres of degraded mangrove areas through scientific and community-based approaches with the support of SBI Foundation. Local community support is garnered through collaborations with panchayaths and the state forest department.