A rhino found poached and without horn

Guwahati, October 22, 2012: Expressing serious concerns over the spate of brutal rhino killing in Assam, the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) have pledged their support to authorities to help prevent further killings, and calls upon all stakeholders to unite for the natural heritage of Assam.



At least 14 rhinos have been reportedly poached in and around Kaziranga National Park in the past four months alone. Most were killed during the floods that hit the state twice during this period.



Located in the Brahmaputra flood plains, Kaziranga NP epitomises successful conservation of rhinos particularly. With as few as 10-20 individuals left in early 1900s, Kaziranga now supports more than 2000 (70%) of the world’s greater one-horned rhinoceros.  However the conservation challenge lies in protecting the rhino during the annual floods in the state.



During floods, animals from the low-lying Kaziranga NP move out of the park boundary in search of higher grounds. This leaves them vulnerable to poachers.



To provide additional protection during this chaotic period, security was enhanced in Kaziranga National park with deployment of more and better armed frontline staff this year. This includes deploying additional Assam Forest Protection Force personnel bringing the total to 220 personnel across the NP. This in addition to the frontline staff and home guards man the 152 anti-poaching camps in Kaziranga.



Welcoming this initiative, IFAW-WTI stressed on the need to move beyond conservation in isolation. Kaziranga is a part of the greater Kaziranga – Karbi Anglong landscape, and must be conserved accordingly. Securing Kaziranga is a good step, the NGO stressed, but it is equally crucial to ensure similar enhancement in neighboring areas, particularly in Karbi Anglong Hills. The frontline staff in these areas must also be strengthened to provide protection of rhinos in the entire landscape.



IFAW-WTI has been assisting the authorities in Kaziranga in rescue and rehabilitation of animals in distress. Over the past ten years, IFAW-WTI has saved more than 1500 individual animals of more than 160 species in and around Kaziranga alone. They have also been providing support in terms of capacity building of frontline staff and community-based organisations, awareness generation, habitat securement, and species recovery programmes across the state.


IFAW-WTI also calls for a united and coordinated approach involving all stakeholders including the civil societies and the media to help protect the natural heritage of Assam.