Signifying knowledge, beauty, strength, ecological and cultural importance, the Elephant has a special place in our society. For that August 12 is celebrated as World Elephant Day by governments, wildlife conservation organizations and individuals across elephant habitats around the world.
The Wildlife Trust of India, supported by Rohini Nilekani Philanthropies and in association with the Green Corridor Champion celebrated this day with Hume Centre for Ecology and Wildlife Biology, Wayanad, Kerala. Since 2001, Hume’s Centre in Kalpetta has been emphasizing science education amongst the local communities to foster scientific temper in society. They focus on educating children and nurturing young scientists towards quality research and practice of science.
Vishnu Das introducing Krishnan to the students; Photo by Hume
The day is used as a platform to interact with the upper primary and higher secondary students from Subha Krishna Memorial Jain Higher Secondary School and Government High School, Athirattukunnu, Kerala. The major objective of this program for the 30 young minds was to convey to them the importance of elephants in our ecosystem and the threats they face. While the elephants are considered sacred and loved by many, those who live on forest fringes, are increasingly getting into conflict.
To help the young understand the reality, Hume invited Krishnan, a Mahot and a member of the Kattunayakan community in the Muthanga Wildlife sanctuary. It was a wonderful opportunity for students to listen to someone who has dedicated his life to these giants. The Kattunayakan community of Wayanad has cared for, loved and tamed elephants for centuries and in recent times has been engaged in driving out wild animals from human habitations. Krishnan shared stories of his life from when he was a child and the experience of living in the wild with both wild and captive elephants.
Vivek Menon and Ananda Banerjee Join with the students; photo by Hume
Vivek Menon (Founder, Trustee, and Executive Director, WTI), Ananda Banerjee (Chief of Communications & Campaigns at WTI), and Ramith M (Assistant Manager at WTI) also attended the celebration, cheering and listening to the stories Krishnan had to share. This interactive, storytelling classroom session was a way to establish and endorse conservation solutions to make the world a safer place for elephants and their habitats for future generations to appreciate them and their habitat.
Elephant Day at the Nilgiris and Rajan Nagar
The Department of Wildlife Biology, Government Arts college, and the Mudumalai Tiger reserve in Masinagudi, organized a special lecture by Professor B. Ramakrishnan, WTI’s GCC partner, on elephant conservation. The initiative was undertaken as part of the World Elephant Day celebrations, supported by Rohini Nilekani Philanthropies.
Students from Kasthuria Higher Secondary School during the event; Photo by Kasthuria HSS
The session began with an awareness drive involving school students in Masinagudi, where children and the community, were briefed about the importance of elephants and forest health. Over 60 school students from across the Nilgiris were sensitized about Asian elephants and the importance of protecting them.  An online drawing and photography competition was organized as a part of the event.
Students rally in Rajan Nagar
Elephant day was also celebrated in Rajan Nagar, a village near the Talamalai-Guttiyalattur Elephant Corridor which is overseen by our Green Corridor Champion Jungle NGO in Sathyamangalam. Mr. VS Subramaniyan of Jungle NGO organized an event for the students of the Kasthuriba Higher Secondary School. The special assembly commenced with informative interactive sessions highlighting the plight of elephants in the region and the need for conserving elephants and reducing Human-Elephant conflicts. More than 100 Young minds attended the event and later the day, prizes were distributed to the participants and a rally was also organized for the village as a part of the celebration.