The Kannur Kandal Project in Kerala, a mangrove conservation initiative by the Wildlife Trust of India with support from the SBI Foundation, celebrated World Wetland to promote the sustainable management and conservation of wetlands.
The theme for World Wetlands Day 2024, ‘Wetlands and Human Wellbeing,’ underscores the interconnectedness between wetlands and various aspects of human health, including physical, mental, and environmental well-being. Wetland ecosystems play a vital role in maintaining water quality, supporting biodiversity, mitigating climate change, and providing livelihoods for millions of people globally.
This initiative reflects a commitment to raising awareness about the importance of wetlands and their impact on human life, aligning with global efforts to ensure the sustainable preservation of these vital ecosystems.
Our team highlighted the significance of the Mangrove ecosystem to students in Kannur |Photo by WTI
A group of 70 students, comprising both undergraduate and postgraduate scholars from the Department of Botany at Payyanur College, visited our interpretation centre. Dr. Narendran, a Mangrove Restoration ecologist from WTI, took the opportunity to highlight the significance of wetlands, emphasising the importance of conserving the unique mangrove ecosystem. He provided insights into the occurrence, morphological adaptations, and the pivotal role mangroves play in mitigating climate change.
Mr. Ramith, Manager & Project Head of Kannur Kandal, discussed the destruction and the current status of mangroves in Kerala, highlighting the conversion of mangrove lands into aquaculture ponds for construction purposes. Acknowledging the conservation and remedial measures initiated by WTI, Dr. Ratheesh Narayanan, Head of the Department of Botany at Payyanur College, highlighted the contributions of WTI in mangrove conservation and explained the dispersal of propagules along with their saline adaptations. Mr. Rajan P P, Mangrove Conservationist, urged the students to actively participate in conserving natural ecosystems for the well-being of future generations.
A visit to the WTI-secured Mangrove Nursery | Photo by WTI
The students had the opportunity to visit the WTI-secured plot and the Central Mangrove Nursery alongside the Kannur Kandal team and planted Rhizophora mucronata saplings. Dr. Narendran and Mr. Ramith provided insights into mangrove taxonomy and the identification of different species, the scientific methods employed in mangrove restoration and explained the intricacies of the planting process. This hands-on experience enabled students to gain practical knowledge, understand the challenges and contribute directly to conservation efforts. 
Meanwhile, in the state of Uttar Pradesh, our team at the Sarus Crane Conservation Project site organised a bicycle rally to promote wetland and wildlife conservation. 125 NCC Cadets from Ramharsh Intermediate School, located in Nichlaul, Maharajganj participated in the event. 
Bicycle rally to raise awareness on wetlands | Photo by WTI
A nature walk at the Sohagi Barwa Wildlife Sanctuary was also organised in partnership with the Forest department. The team imparted hands-on training and knowledge pertaining to wetland species which was followed by awareness activities undertaken with students from three schools of Nichlaul.  WTI has been working with the Forest Department across eastern Uttar Pradesh since 2013. They have been involve local communities in safeguarding these birds and the wetlands that sustain their existence.