Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), January 2, 2013: Helping conserve the world’s tallest flying birds, farmers around Bhoj wetlands in Madhya Pradesh – a Ramsar site and an Important Bird Area (IBA), are shifting to organic farming to save sarus cranes from harmful effects of pesticides. A watch group ‘Sarus Mitra’ has also been created to keep the cranes safe from other anthropogenic threats.
 
A pair of sarus cranes at the Bhoj wetlands.

Photo courtesy: Bhopal Birds
Once seen in hundreds, the sarus crane population has drastically declined from the Bhoj wetlands. As per reports, around 160 individuals were counted in 2001 which reduced to 24 in 2008. This year, only 10 have been counted.
Alarmed by the drastic decline, the Bhopal Birds – a local organisation supported by the Wildlife Trust of India and CAF-India, carried out a Rapid Action Project to save these birds.
“The people of Bhoj – including a few tribespeople – worship the cranes, as they consider their fidelity to their partners a virtue, and would not knowingly harm them,” said Dr Sangeeta Rajgir, of Bhopal Birds. “However, over the years, over-grazing, fishing, desiltation, pesticide use and pollution was taking a toll on the birds.”
The RAP began last October with determining the population of Sarus cranes in the area, monitoring their populations, holding consultative meetings with locals and developing a systematic strategy for the conservation of the species.
“One of the biggest killers, which was discovered early on, was the uncontrolled use of pesticide by the farmers – especially on their vegetable crops that the birds feed on,” said Debobroto Sircar of Wildlife Trust of India’s Wild Aid division. “There was an immediate need to shift from the use of chemicals in the area, to something organic.”
Workshop held to make the farmers aware of friendly farming practices to help

conserve the sarus crane population in the area.

Photo courtesy: Bopal Birds




Accordingly, awareness camps were carried out in Goragaon and Bishenkhedi villages. Agricultural scientists from Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) and other agriculture research organisations spoke to the farmers, students and locals about the ill-effects of chemical fertilisers on people. The experts recommended organic farming, which would not just benefit people consuming the products but also the Sarus cranes.
“Every awareness session was followed by a feedback or interactive session that aimed at ensuring that problems faced by farmers in the eventual shift are negated. We even gave out organic fertilisers for them to try out,” said Dr Rajgir.
Early this year, five farmers from Goragaon village took the leap, making a permanent shift to organic farming. Following them, 30 more, of the 60-odd farmers in the area have begun making the transition to organic farming. A survey among the farmers that ended in November 2013 also revealed that 80% of the farmers were keen to permanently shift to organic farming.
Dawarka Prasad, a farmer who has only a few months ago stopped using chemicals on his farmland said, “A few people here had taken to this method, and people from Bhopal Birds told us the benefits of organic farming. A little experimentation, and over time, I have realised it is so much better in terms of our health, cost of materials and helps save the environment at the same time – do you need any more reasons?” 
Sangeeta added, “This is a huge step – and is only the beginning. The people have understood the benefits in terms of their own health, and more farmers are showing an interest in making the shift.”
A group of village youth from Goragaon have also formed the Sarus Mitra, translating to ‘friends of sarus cranes’, to monitor the birds throughout the year. The volunteers not only keep a watch over the cranes and their nests but also carry out rescue of individuals in distress. Only a few months ago, the group found a juvenile crane that was injured, treated it and successfully rehabilitated it with the rest of the Sarus cranes. Dr Rajgir said, “Our experience with the project demonstrates that it is possible to re-establish a bond between famers and nature.”
A sarus mitra monitoring the cranes. Photo courtesy: Bhopal Birds


Sarus crane (Grus antigone) is listed as vulnerable by the IUCN Red List and falls in appendix II of CITES. They require large areas for foraging and brooding, and are known to prefer wetlands that are close to croplands – especially paddy, wheat, maize and soyabean fields.