Raipur, 8 October 2019: The Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh Shri Bhupesh Baghel released a special cover on the Wild Buffalo, the state animal at the CM Office today. The commemoration of the state animal is a key milestone for the ongoing campaign conducted by Wildlife Trust of India along with Chhattisgarh Forest Department supported by Oracle.
The Honb. Chief Minister, along with the Forest Minister, Mr. Mohammad Akbar, expressed concern about the situation and discussed about the project at large while congratulating WTI for its consistent efforts in the recovery of state animal. A specially made memorabilia, a wild buffalo statue made of bronze, was also presented to the two ministers at the event. The special cover was circulated among all guests at the event, including, the Chief Minister, The Forest Minister, Shri Rakesh Chaturvedi, PCCF & HoFF; Shri Atul Kumal Shukla, PCCF (WL); Shri S.S.D. Badgaiyan, CCF Raipur;  Shri. H.L. Ratre, Field Director, USTR;  Shri Harish Kumar Mahawat, Senior Supdt. of Post Offices, Raipur Circle and Dr. Rajendra Mishra, Wildlife Trust of India.
[acx_slideshow name=”postal”]
Wildlife Trust of India has been working in this landscape for more than 14 years now for the conservation of the Wild Buffalo. The commemorative cover has been issued by the Postal Department of India along with a cachet. The primary objective of such messaging is to inculcate pride in the state animal not just among conservationists and forest department fraternity but also in the masses. The release also marked a fitting finale to Wildlife Week across the country.
The Wild Buffalo has been categorized as a threatened species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. It is also a Schedule I animal with the highest level of protection by the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. Fewer than 50 animals remain in Chhattisgarh. To bring back the species from the brink of extinction, WTI started its Central India Wild Buffalo Recovery Project in 2006 and has since worked to limit the habitat loss and unnatural mortality while supporting the state forest department in captive breeding of the animal. A state wide “Pride Campaign” aims to mobilise positive conservation action through inculcating pride in its status as a key natural heritage that deserves attention at all levels.
Incidentally, a male wild buffalo calf has been added to the dwindling population last week at Udanti’s conservation breeding centre. Another male calf had been born a month back, taking the total number of animals to 10 in Udanti Sitanadi Tiger Reserve (USTR), where WTI’s project currently operates.