Ahmedabad (Gujarat): Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL), the Gujarat Forest Department and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) today joined hands to start a pioneering conservation project on whale shark and coral reefs.
The 20 million (rupees) grant from Tata Chemicals Limited, one of the largest for wildlife research by any corporate house in India, follows on from TCL’s  earlier support of the four-year-old whale shark campaign that successfully stopped the commercial hunting of the world’s largest fish on the coast of Gujarat in western India.
At an event in Ahmedabad today WTI signed two Memoranda of Understanding, one with the Gujarat Forest Department and one with Tata Chemicals to work towards the science and conservation of whale sharks and coral reefs in Gujarat.
The first marine conservation initiative of its kind in India, the whale shark conservation project will include extensive studies on its habitat, migration pattern, life cycle, population estimation etc to enable more effective protection measures. The study will also undertake a feasibility study on whale shark tourism in the region. Likewise, the research on corals will include study of coral diversity, mapping habitat, threats, and experiments on coral transplantation. This will eventually help establish India’s first privately conserved coral reef at Mithapur, which would serve as a global role model to conserve these endangered habitats.
The project will be implemented in association with the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) and technical inputs from Indian and international marine experts.
Homi Khusrokhan, Managing Director, TCL, said, “We, at Tata Chemicals have been in the forefront in the conservation of the environment and the well being of the local community that we are engaged with. This initiative is the next step towards taking the conservation efforts on a national scale that was started four years ago. There was greater need to undertake research on these rare species which will not only help us preserve them for our future generation but also create opportunities that will boost tourism for the state and thereby pass on the benefits to the local people through employment possibilities.”
The collaboration in whale shark conservation between Gujarat Forest Department, WTI-IFAW and TCL began in January 2004 with the launch of the widely-acclaimed whale shark campaign. With the support of other major players including the local community, popular spiritual leader Morari Bapu, and the Coast Guard, the campaign successfully converted the whale shark from a brutally hunted species to a celebrated flagship popularly referred to as Vhali – the loved one.
The success of the whale shark campaign was marked by the change in attitude of the stakeholders. Within a year of its initiation, local fishermen began voluntary release of accidentally-trapped whale sharks, enthusiastically taking pride in its protection. The Gujarat Forest Department announced compensation to fishermen who sacrifice their nets for whale shark release, this helped to strengthen the effort. Nearly 80 whale sharks have been released since the start of the campaign.
Only a decade ago, the whale shark was brutally hunted in hundreds along the Gujarat coast for its liver oil to water proof boats and also for its meat, which was exported. On May 28, 2001, the species was listed under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, banning its hunt. However, its continued vulnerability became evident through a TNS survey which indicated low awareness of the presence and legal status of this species, prompting a need for the campaign.
“It would normally take about 10 years for the conservation of a commercially exploited species to kick in, but here we have managed to cut through time and limited resources to activate a response in 4 years, on the strength of the concept of the campaign. It was a combination of key ideas – we provided information on the species, created a flagship with the life-size whale shark inflatable that drew people wherever it was taken, the spiritual leader Morari Bapu connected emotionally to the traditional and cultural ethics of local people and fishing communities, a huge groundswell of response was generated from young people and schoolchildren and the effect of the campaign was consistently and professionally surveyed to measure its outcome. Today all of us who collaborated on this effort can finally hope that whale sharks in India are in safe waters…” said Vivek Menon, Executive Director, WTI.
Pradeep Khanna, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests & Chief Wildlife Warden, Gujarat Forest Department, said, “We along with WTI and TCL have successfully worked on the whale shark conservation project for over 3 years. We are now looking at filling the gap in information on whale sharks. I am looking forward for inputs for whale shark based tourism to benefit the local community that has made major economic sacrifice.”
“Coral, another field of wildlife conservation, is less explored and needs significant scientific inputs for conservation. I hope that the interest shown by WTI and NIO with support from TCL will provide vital inputs for long term conservation of corals,” Khanna added.
Terming the collaboration as a major conservation initiative, Dr SK Nanda, Principal Secretary Forest and Environment, said, “I am glad that WTI is taking active interest in Gujarat while TCL is supporting the cause. The government with its forward outlook will make best use of the inputs in furthering the cause of conservation with communities. NIO’s scientific back up will ensure major gains for these projects. I am sure the success of the effort will act as a role model and will lead to many more similar initiatives.”
 
Learn more about Whale Shark Campaign