The International Day for the Conservation of Mangrove Ecosystems is celebrated every year on the 26th of July.  Popularly known as International Mangroves Day, the event holds special significance as we focus on these unique and vulnerable ecosystems, promoting solutions for their sustainable management and conservation. This year, Wildlife Trust of India, supported by the SBI Foundation, joined hands with Sir Syed College to commemorate the International Mangrove Day. The aim was to raise awareness about the importance of mangroves as a self-sustaining ecosystem in Kannur through restoration efforts under the Kannur Kandal Project.
The event commenced with a warm welcome address from Dr. Ismail Olayikkara, the Principal of Sir Syed College. He emphasized the crucial role of Mangrove Restoration in Kerala. Following this, Advocate P. Mohamood, Manager of Sir Syed College, Taliparamba, highlighted the college’s remarkable contributions to mangrove research, awareness, and conservation in the Kannur district over the past few decades, encouraging students to continue these efforts. Sajan John, Marine Projects at Wildlife Trust of India, captivated the audience with his insights on mangroves and their increasing importance in the context of global climate change.

Mr T. P. Murukesan sharing his learnings from mangrove plantation | Photograph by Chandran



The inaugural session of International Mangroves Day was concluded by the vote of thanks by WTI’s Assistant Field Officer, Mr A. Bharat Kumar and an engaging short film on the conservation efforts of the Kannur Kandal project was showcased.


The second session, chaired by Dr. Sreeja P., HoD of the Botany department at Sir Syed College, and co-chaired by Ramih M., Manager of Kannur Kandal Project, focused on “Learnings from Mangrove Restoration in Kerala.” This informative session included documentary screenings and experiences shared by mangrove plantation experts, followed by enriching discussions. Among the highlights were the screenings of “Mangrove Family,” a tribute to the late legendary mangrove conservationist Sri Kallen Pokkudan, and “Climate Portraits from the Brink,” showcasing coastal conservation efforts from Ernakulam, including Mr. T. P. Murukesan’s inspiring mangrove planting endeavors.
Field visit for students to mangrove forests | Photograph by Vimal / WTI
The experiences shared by Mr. T. P. Murukesan, Mr. Anandan P., and Mr. Surendran sparked immense interest among the audience about mangrove plantation. They shared valuable insights from their plantation efforts in different parts of Kerala, while also expressing concerns about the rampant mangrove destruction happening across the state. Dr. Abdussalam A.K., Assistant Professor at Sir Syed College, concluded the session on a positive note, and Ms. Bushra N., Assistant Professor at the same institution, delivered a heartfelt vote of thanks. Later in the day, Dr. Narendran, the officer in charge of the Kannur Kandal Project, led the college students on a visit to a nearby mangrove forest for a hands-on field class on the ecosystem.

The Kannur Kandal Project – ‘kandal’ being the Malayalam word for mangroves – aims to ensure the survival of existing mangroves and increase the acreage of such coastal wetlands across Kannur, potentially making it a prototype for other coastal districts in Kerala and the rest of the country.