Garo Hills, Meghalaya, October 13, 2016: A free, one-day Medical Health Camp for residents of four villages in the Garo Hills was conducted at the community hall of Mesimagre village on October 6.





A total of 150 people attended the free medical health camp organised by WTI-WLT at the village of Mesimagre, Garo Hills


The camp, which was implemented under the Garo Green Spine Conservation Project run by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and World Land Trust (WLT) with support from the Meghalaya Forest Department and Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC), was organised in collaboration with the Asanang Primary Health Centre (PHC). The four villages that were catered to – Mesimagre, Bibragre, Tosekgre and Selbal Misak – are all of key importance to the Garo Green Spine region where the WTI-WLT team has worked for over a decade, motivating and supporting local communities to set aside land for Village Reserve Forests (VRFs) to provide better habitat and connectivity for wild animals.

The medical team from Asanang PHC was headed by Dr ST Sangma. A total of 150 villagers attended the camp: 66% were adults and 21% were children between the age of 0 and 12 years; there were more men (55%) than women (45%); the most common diseases treated were skin infections (22%), followed by the common cold, cough and fever (19%); gastroenteritis, back-pain, peripheral neuritis and clinical anaemia were other diseases treated. With the support of Dr Mamta Marak, Medical and Health Officer – Tura, and Dr Marbin Marak, District Medical and Health Officer – Garo Hills, the WTI-WLT team also distributed medicines to the villagers free of cost.




A doctor attends to patients during the medical health camp at Mesimagre


“I am overwhelmed with the way this camp has been organised”, said the Nokma (village chief) of Bibragre. “Most of the villagers here are underprivileged and cannot afford such treatment or medicines. I would like to express my gratitude to the government medical personnel, WTI-WLT and the Forest Department for setting up the camp.”


The Head of Mesimagre’s Government Lower Primary School also stressed on the low socio-economic status of people in the region and their lack of access to medical facilities, stating that such camps would also help the villagers to understand certain diseases better and deal with them appropriately. The Range Officer of Northern Nokrek, Mr Connor Tengvan Marak was equally appreciative of the health camp: “The local public has responded very positively”, he said. “This area is remote and deprived of adequate medical care; such camps are a prime necessity and I am proud to have been associated with this one.”




A pharmacist provides free medicines to patients as part of the health camp 


The camp ended with a note of thanks by WTI’s Sunil Kyarong, Head – Garo Green Spine Project. Mr Kyarong said that the initiative was a small token of gratitude towards the people of Mesimagre and its surrounding villages for their continued support towards conservation of forests and wildlife in the region. He hoped that such camps would do their part in improving the health of the local population.