Faridabad, Haryana: The special environment court in Faridabad in the northern Indian Haryana state Monday framed charges against former Indian cricket captain, Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi, and seven others, in a case related to the poaching of a Black buck, an animal protected by law.
Evidence of witnesses will be recorded from next date onwards and regular trial will begin. A cricket commentator and celebrity, Pataudi had surrendered in the Court of Chief Judicial Magisterate on 18th June, 2005 after his anticipatory bail was rejected by Punjab and Haryana High Court a day earlier.
On 5th June, 2005 he was booked under section 9, 39 and 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and bailed out after three days in jail.
Interestingly in a separate case, his son, who is popular Bollywood actor, Saif Ali Khan, has also been charged by a Jodhpur Court in the northern Rajasthan state for hunting Black bucks along with other film stars during a shoot.
Pataudi, popularly known as “Tiger,” was present in the court along with the seven other accused. The charges, if proved in the subsequent trial, will attract a punishment of three to seven years of imprisonment and a fine.
Arguments were put forward by the counsel for Pataudi that the accused had been falsely implicated and that no case was made out for framing the charges. The counsel for co-accused, Shashi Singh, director of an MNC based in Gurgaon, also argued on the same lines. The next hearing is fixed for August 7 when the trial will begin and the depositions by prosecution witnesses will be recorded.
“There is sufficient proof gathered by the prosecution against Pataudi and his co-accused and charges were required to be framed as per law against the accused for hunting the black buck” Saurabh Sharma, Advocate for Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) who is assisting the prosecution said. WTI has been granted permission by the trial Court to assist the prosecution by an order dated 19 June 2005.
“The legal process may be slow and often made slower by sharp defense lawyers. But with diligent application, the  law catches up in the end” Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman WTI said.
The trial had been delayed because it was not clear whether the trial should take place in Jhajjar, Haryana where the alleged hunting had taken place or in the environment court in Faridabad. On March 29, 2006 the Punjab and Haryana High Court clarified that the trial should take place in Faridabad. This order took quite some time to reach the concerned court which delayed the proceedings.