Panbari: The recent floods in the north eastern state of Assam had left livestock from the villages surrounding Kaziranga National Park susceptible to Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). The Wild Aid programme of Wildlife Trust of India swung into action and vaccinated over 1800 animals in two days under a Rapid Action Project (RAP).
The two-day vaccination camp was organized by veterinarians and volunteers from the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) on 30 and 31 July at Panbari in Assam . The camp targeted livestock from the flood affected Panbari ideal village, Panbari Missing Gaon 1, Panbari Missing Gaon 2 and Bokakhat in the district of Golaghat.
CWRC, located near Bokakhat is the first rehabilitation centre for wildlife in India . It was established by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the Department of Forest and Environment, Government of Assam, and supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
Wild animals such as deer, rhinoceros, deer, hoolock gibbon, wild buffaloes, leopard, slow lorises, snakes, birds etc. are often rescued and rehabilitated in this centre. Among these deer, rhinos, wild buffaloes and elephants are susceptible to FMD, which is very common among the domestic animals like cattle, pig and goat. Close to CWRC are the Panbari Ideal village, Panbari Missing Gaon 1 and Panbari Missing Gaon 2, where the villagers mainly rear cattle, goat and sheep. Diseases like FMD are easily transmitted to the animals which are kept in CWRC for rehabilitation and also to animals in the reserve forest.
Dr Bhaskar Chowdhury, the CWRC veterinarian said, “Earlier reports from the Animal Husbandry Department, Bokakhat and a discussion with the head of the village (Gaonburah) revealed that there had been no vaccination camp for the last three years. This had resulted in a severe outbreak of FMD in the last couple of years. Considering these factors a proposal was made to immunize the animals susceptible to FMD and also to treat the animals with existing diseases.”
“The objectives of the camp were—to keep biosecurity of the animals staying at CWRC and animals in the reserve forest; to maintain the personal relationship of CWRC with the villagers; to continue the outreach activity of CWRC and to generate awareness about protection and conservation of wildlife among the villagers,” said Bhaskar, justifying the need for the camp.
At the camp conducted over two days, 1863 animals were treated as well as vaccinated. Most of the animals were found suffering from diarrhea which could be a result of parasitic infestation. Some surgical as well as gynecological procedures were also performed.
The technical program of the work consisted of – vaccination of the cattle , goat and pigs against FMD, treatment of the animals suffering from any disease condition, deworming of animals and general health checkup of the animals. On the first day of the camp a total number of 928 animals were vaccinated and treated. Another 897 animals were vaccinated and treated the next day,
Prasanta Kumar Boro, who organized the camp reported, “The vets treated parasitic cases, debility and respiratory problems. Surgical cases like maggoted wounds, cysts and dressing of wounds were done. Pregnancy diagnosis and anoestrus constituted the gynecological cases.”
The team that made the camp a success consisted of- Dr. Bhaskar Chowdhury, Centre veterinarian, CWRC; Dr. Siddharth Baruah, who attended to the surgical cases; Dr. Sourabh Deori, who attended to the gynecological cases; Dr. Jimmy Borah, who specialized in Animal Production and Management; Dr. Hamen Bharali, and two local volunteers. Since this camp was the first of its kind in this area, the villagers were happy with the initiative taken by WTI.