Maharajgunj, 23rd July 2023: A workshop on cross-border wildlife crime prevention and prevention of illegal wildlife trade was organised in Maharajgunj for the members of the judiciary, in collaboration with International Narcotics, Enforcement and Law (INL). This workshop was part of the project that aims at Strengthening Cross-Border Wildlife Crime Prevention and Law Enforcement Between India and Nepal.
The project was initiated in 2018, spanning six Protected Areas, namely- Pilibhit (UP) Dudhwa (UP) and Valmiki (Bihar) Tiger Reserves and Katarniaghat, Sohelwa and Sohagibarwa Wildlife Sanctuaries. The major activities ongoing in the landscape include Anti-Snare Walks, orientation programs for Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) and WTI’s Primary Response Team (PRT) unit that works towards intelligence collection and enforcement assistance against illegal wildlife trade (IWT).

WTI team with the trainers and Legal Fraternity at the Judiciary Workshop in Maharajgunj | Photograph by R.K Tripathi


While strict enforcement is crucial for the protection of our natural heritage, it is also equally important that strong actions are taken against identified offenders. Generally, a team of six legal assistants (one in each PA) ensures that there is proper usage of the law, ultimately leading to bail rejections and convictions. When one takes into account the legal framework within the country to protect wildlife, a vast majority enjoy the protection awarded to it through the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. There is, however, a dearth of knowledge regarding wildlife laws amongst the enforcement and legal fraternities.  Last December (2022), a landmark amendment was made to the act and the inclusion of CITIES listed species to the WPA. These changes incorporated a long-standing issue of the rampant and unchecked trade in exotic species within the country.


In order to bridge the knowledge gap, an orientation program on Wildlife Protection Act, Amendment 2022 and inclusion of CITIES – impact and Perspective of Changes was held at Maharajgunj as a collaborative effort of Sohagibarwa Wildlife Division and WTI, on the 23rd of July 2023. The chief guests of the program were Shri. Kamleshawar Pandey, Additional District Judge (ADJ) and Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Maharajgunj and Pushpkumar K, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Sohagibarwa Wildlife Sanctuary, Maharajgunj. A total of 40 participants were orientated, including members of the District Legal Services Authority, Additional Defense Counsel (Criminal), Special Public Prosecutor, Legal Defense Council (District Chief), Lok Adalat, Sashastra Seema Bal 22nd Bn Maharajgunj, Uttar Pradesh Police, Superintendent Land Customs, Sonauli and Range Forest Officers of all ranges within the wildlife division.

Chief Guests & Trainers at the Judiciary Workshop, Maharajgunj | Photograph by R.K Tripathi



The key topics of discussion included ‘Introduction to WTI’ and the project in Uttar Pradesh by Project Head, Anil K Nair. Common identification techniques of wildlife articles, extent and drivers behind illegal wildlife trade were presented by Inspector, D.S Rathore, WCCB North Zone. Other topics covered in the discussion included the ‘Changes in WPA 72 post 2022 amendment’ by Advocate, Bahraich District Court and ‘Explanation and inclusion of CITIES’ by Advocate, Lavish Sharma, Delhi High Court. Both the chief guests deeply appreciated the efforts made by the WTI team, were thrilled that such an initiative was taken up by WTI to address such an important topic and requested similar programs to be held in future.

Know more about the project here.