IFAW-WTI staff ensure food availabilty for cattle affected by flood
New Delhi: Even as the Kosi River continues to wreak unprecedented havoc in the lives of humans and animals alike in Bihar, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) have dispatched a team of veterinarians and rehabilitators to assist in rescue operations. 1,100 sq kms of inhabited farmland lies submerged in the wake of this disaster. 
The team, led by Aniruddha Mookerjee, senior director, WTI, is headed for Forbesganj town in the northeastern Arraria district bordering Nepal, where a temporary base camp is being set up.
Assessing the situation, Mookerjee said, “We should have a clearer picture of the situation by Friday evening. We will then devise a broader and larger plan, if it merits it. From a distance and after discussions with friends in the area, the problem looks huge and scattered. The need of the hour is skilled manpower and we are trying to organise that locally.”
Mookerjee is accompanied by WTI veterinarians Dr Anjan Talukdar and Dr Pallavi Bhagwati.
Preliminary assessment on the situation was provided by Chandan Singh of Green Power India which is focusing on humanitarian work. Singh said, “We have been doing our work at Forbesganj and Aurai (Muzaffarpur). We have no veterinarians with us but have distributed deworming tablets which would have benefited 200 animals.”
Based on Singh’s assessment, WTI had earlier sent its veterinarian, Dr Abhijit Bhawal to evaluate the immediate needs of the animals. Along with the Bihar State Disaster Management Committee, Animal Husbandry Department and Seema Suraksha Bal (SSB), Dr Bhawal estimated about 23,000 cattle without fodder in Arraria and Supaul districts of Bihar.
Responding rapidly, IFAW provided the funds to carry out the relief operations. “Dr Abhijit Bhawal has been helping reach cattle feed to various locations. He is also making arrangements to set up the base camp,” Mookerjee said.
“Animals get neglected in cases like these where one has to try to save as many human lives as possible. We are thankful for the presence of IFAW and WTI,” said Singh.
Dr Bhawal will be joined by the team by this evening. Four Emergency Relief Network (ERN) members based at Jharkhand have been called in for assistance. An initiative of IFAW and WTI, ERN is a network of wildlife rehabilitators from different parts of India and abroad. The ERN provides a platform to  rehabilitators to share experiences, learn and teach animal rehabilitation techniques, and provide emergency relief to animals in crisis.