A campaign to save the Whale Shark was launched by WTI and Gujarat Forest Department with the support of Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL) and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), back in 2004. It was a multi-pronged approach to build awareness of its protected status and stop the illegal and accidental killings of the largest fish. In the past two decades of work, the campaign has resulted in the whale shark becoming a mascot for marine conservation in the state while being adopted by the locals as Vhali, the Dear One. 
Marking two decades of a conservation partnership with the Department of Forests, the Government of Gujarat, and Tata Chemicals Ltd. with the cooperation with fishing communities on the Gujarat coast, Wildlife Trust of India celebrated the 14th International Whale Shark Day at the TCL township in Mithapur on August 30, 2022. 
From 2014, international Whale Shark Day was celebrated under this collaborative project as a day to create awareness among people to protect and safeguard the world’s largest fish from all its threats and reaffirm fishers’ solidarity toward whale shark conservation along the coast of Gujarat.
This half-day event brought together all the key stakeholders and acknowledged two decade long sustained successful partnership, which resulted in the protection of Whale Shark from all threats along the coast of Gujarat. Mr. Satyajit Roy, Head-Operations at Tata Chemicals Ltd. Mithapur, was the chief guest, and Mr. Agneeswar Vyas, IFS, Deputy Conservator of Forests was the guest of honor of the event.
Mr. Agneeswar Vyas, IFS, Deputy Conservator of Forests addressing the gathering; Photo by Anuj Alukathra
Mr. B.M. Praveen Kumar, Manager, Technical Head of Marine Projects in Wildlife Trust of India, during his inaugural address, mentioned the significance of the International Whale Shark Day celebration, also marking two decades of conservation partnership in the State of Gujarat.
Post the Inaugural session, Mr. Farukhkha Bloch, Manager & Head, Whale Shark conservation project, WTI presented the success story of the Whale Shark conservation project in details. This presentation focused on background information, conservation actions thus far, significant achievements during past 20 years, challenges managed and way forward for the same. This presentation enlightens participants on its key initiatives and conservation journey thus far.
Representing the custodian authority, the guest of honor, Mr. Agneeswar Vyas, IFS, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Dept. of Forests addressed that Forest Department has paid about one crore of the amount to fishermen as net loss compensation for rescuing about 850 Whale Sharks from the fishing net. The project has won the India Biodiversity Award by UNDP for the conservation of the whale shark, under the co-management category in 2014; the Green Governance Award by BNHS in 2005. The concerted efforts of the company and the partners have resulted in the whale shark becoming the second wildlife pride in the State of Gujarat, after the Asiatic lions.
Mr. Vivek Talwar, Director of C-Scapes, Prof. B.C. Choudhury, Executive Trustee & Chief Advisor of Aquatic projects in Wildlife Trust of India, Mr. Veljibhai Masani representing fishing communities of Gujarat as the President of Akhil Bhartiya Fishermen Association, Mr. Satish Trivedi from TCL and Mr. B.M. Praveen Kumar participated in the event along with the front line forest officials, Okha Fisheries Department officers, Marine police officers, fishermen community members, and TCL employees. Volunteers, Media representatives from various media houses, college and school students in and around Mithapur also attended the event. 
Mr. Vivek Talwar, Director of C-Scapes during his talk; Photo by Anuj Alukathra
During the event, the conservation partnership, milestones achieved, challenges faced, and the future plans were discussed. Dr. K. Ramesh, IFS, Chief Conservator of Forests & Director, Marine National Park Jamnagar, conveyed his greetings through a video message. In his message, he congratulated all the key stakeholders involved in contributing to this conservation success of Whale Shark in Gujarat. A poster revealing the past two decades of conservation partnership for the conservation of Whale Sharks in the state of Gujarat was released during the inaugural ceremony by the project partners.      
Marine National Park (MNP) in Jamanagar had instrumentally supported this event by not only contributing part funding in organizing this event but also actively participating about 25 front-line forest officials team to learn and gain knowledge on co-management in marine wildlife conservation under the PPP model in Gujarat coast. 
Students and Volunteers cleaning the beach; Photo by Anuj Alukathra
As a curtain raiser to this celebration, coastal clean-up activity was also conducted at Mithapur beach on August 28, 2022, where about 200 students and volunteers from Mithapur DAV school participated. The life-sized Whale Shark inflatable model was exhibited at the program venue as well as installed its demonstration in TATA Mithapur township for the entire day which reiterated the message of Whale Shark conservation. 
Students and Volunteers after the coastal cleanup; Photo by Anuj Alukathra
A studio session was held by the Doordarshan channel on the same day, which was telecasted for a half hour during the second half between 03:30 to 04:00. Mr. S.J. Pandit (Retired Senior Forest department official), Dr. K. Ramesh, IFS (Chief Conservator of Forests & Director, Marine National Park Jamnagar, Gujarat Forest Department), Mr. Farukhkha Bloch (Manager & Head, Whale Shark conservation project, WTI) and Mr. Veljibhai Masani (representing fishing communities of Gujarat as the President of Akhil Bhartiya Fishermen Association) were featured in the studio session. 
Prof. B.C. Choudhury talking to the media; Photo by Anuj Alukathra
Mr. Satyajit Roy, Head-Operations at Tata Chemicals Ltd. Mithapur defined the campaign as the reflection of Tata Chemicals’ commitment to environmental conservation. Talking about the global perspective, Prof. B.C. Choudhury, Executive Trustee & Chief Advisor of Aquatic projects in Wildlife Trust of India emphasized that “Although, worldwide global community works for Whale Sharks on several Whale Shark congregation spots, however, India’s WSCP is the only project in the world that has a unique approach for its conservation”. He also highlighted the major achievements and conservation milestones during the past two decades under the Whale Shark conservation project, which is nationally awarded and internationally acclaimed. 
WTI has been replicating this project in the state of Karnataka, Kerala & Lakshadweep and as the first step to that, a campaign launch was held in Mangalore on the same day.