The growing complexities of wildlife crime have pushed the experts to think of an innovative, holistic, all-encompassing mechanism that can effectively tackle these challenges. Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) works with various state forest departments across the country, focusing largely on skill enhancement and capacity building of the frontline forest officials. Interacting with these personnel makes the team understand the lacunae and the challenges that arise as a result of these lacunae when it comes to on-ground conservation efforts. 
The HAWK system is driven by the need to incorporate technology in addressing threats to wildlife. To help bridge this gap between conservation and technology, WTI developed a unique wildlife crime centralized database management system called Hostile Watch Activity Kernel (HAWK). HAWK is a unique software package designed to manage all aspects of forest and wildlife crime-related information. The development of the software was pioneered by WTI-IFAW, in association with technical experts and forestry professionals. The system was first implemented in the state of Kerala in 2019 and has risen, over the years, as the official data management tool for wildlife and forest crime in the state. The HAWK system is now the centralized software for the Kerala Forest Department, with all the divisions in the state entering real-time data onto the software. Over 4000 cases pertaining to wildlife crimes have been uploaded onto the HAWK database, since the advent of HAWK in Kerala. 
HAWK’s adaptability and simple user interface is its most unique, reliable feature – it has the ability to be customized according to the priority of the respective Forest Department. Centralized management of data is the key to developing an efficient mechanism for minimizing the impact of crime on wildlife as it helps gain access to real-time data, GPS locations, detailed reports and apt representation of data. HAWK fulfills this crucial aspect while also addressing specific needs in its properly developed modules such as the Peregrine (crime-management module tracking the case from the incident of the report until the final court decision), Shikra (data management module for all wildlife-related deaths in a state), Harrier (data management module to keep a record of habitual offenders related to wildlife crime) and C-HAWK (mobile-based application to report real-time online and offline wildlife crime by the users).
WTI’s Jose Louies receiving the memento on behalf of NTT Data from Karnataka Forest Department
The HAWK system was introduced to upgrade and enhance the technical skills of the Forest Department, which would facilitate the enhanced capacity to deal with wildlife crimes. By switching to a digital format, the Department is relying on a sustainable method of data management which ensures better recording, transparency and governance. 
Observing the impact that the system has made in the management of forest and wildlife crime in Kerala, the only way forward was to introduce HAWK as a pilot test in the state of Karnataka. With the support of a leading software company, NTT Data, WTI customized the HAWK software as per the requirements of the Karnataka Forest Department and introduce it in a phased manner. As Karnataka witnesses various degrees of wildlife and forest crime within its vast landscape, the primary focus was to organize the historical data of wildlife crime in the state to present an analysis and understand the trends of crime and how they have changed over the years. 
The enthusiastic participation from the Karnataka Forest Department has been a force to reckon with. Our team of developers has worked closely with the Information, Communication and Technology Cell (ICTC) of the Karnataka Forest Department to develop this module for storing historical data, which is known as the Legacy module. The Legacy module is centered around storing historical data related to wildlife and forest crime in the Karnataka Forest Department. 
In the month of October, the Karnataka Forest Department formally inaugurated HAWK at the Forest Headquarters, Aranya Bhawan, Bengaluru. A detailed demonstration of the functioning of the software was presented by the ICT Cell officers to the Chief Wildlife Warden, Sh. Vijaykumar Gogi, IFS; PCCF and Head of Forest Force (HoFF), Sh. R.K. Singh, IFS and other senior officials of the Karnataka Forest Department. The CWLW highlighted the efficiency of the HAWK system and how it has been instrumental in organizing the vast information for the Forest Department. The inaugural event was attended by the NTT Data team. He expressed his heartfelt gratitude to NTT Data and acknowledged being a part of this collaborative effort between the Forest Department, NTT Data and WTI. The Department unanimously agreed on how HAWK fulfilled their expectations and the important role it will play in reviewing cases. 
The inaugural event was also attended by officers from the ICT Cell, the Developers team of HAWK, WTI officials and senior officials of the Karnataka Forest Department. The NTT Data team joined the inauguration virtually and was enthused to partake in the event that is set to revolutionise the relationship between technology and conservation. Ms. Gauri Bahulkar, Director Marketing, Global CSR for NTT Data Services explained the organisation’s commitment to conserving wildlife for future generations and pursuing social good. She further added that WTI’s vision to preserve and protect the natural world and its wild habitats resonates strongly with us. As a company that is always innovating, NTT DATA focuses on the future and has partnered with WTI to develop the HAWK system, a specialized software system, to manage and monitor data concerning forest and wildlife crime across Karnataka state in real-time. We applaud WTI for initiating the development of the HAWK as it is the first of its kind in India which will go a long way in saving wildlife and helping the generations to come to enjoy and experience nature and the incredible species that live within it.

Mr. Ankur Dasgupta, Vice President, Global CSR and India Marketing, NTT Data Services, who joined the event virtually, was proud to support this unique software which will enable the reduction of wildlife crime and completely aligns with NTT DATA’s aim to support technology innovations for a sustainable world. He further added, “We are also thankful for the positive impact that WTI is driving to spread awareness, curb forest crime and realize a sustainable future. Their dedication to this worthy cause benefitting generations to come is truly commendable.”


WTI is grateful to the Karnataka Forest Department and NTT Data for their support in developing and customizing HAWK to fulfill the needs and requirements of the Forest Department and enhance the capacity of the forest officers in the field of conservation technology.