CWRC, Assam, December 11, 2017: A male and a female elephant calf were rescued in separate incidents and admitted to CWRC (the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation, IFAW-WTI and the Assam Forest Department’s wildlife rescue, treatment and rehabilitation facility near Kaziranga National Park) last week.

The male calf, just about 10 to 15 days old, was found in a debilitated state in the Ghoghora Tea Estate in Assam’s Sonitpur district on December 6. Frontline forest staff observed that while the mother was nearby and frequently visited the calf, it did not suckle or respond to her, nor moved away with her. On December 7 the forest department called in Dr Santosh Kr Gupta, veterinarian with the Karbi Anglong Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) unit established by WTI and the Japan Tiger and Elephant Fund (JTEF), with support from the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) and the Assam Forest Department. Dr Gupta examined the calf and in consultation with forest officials determined that given its deteriorating condition, it needed to be transported to CWRC for intensive care.
“The calf weighs just 97kg and its condition remains grave”, said Dr Samshul Ali, the CWRC veterinarian attending to the calf. “The requisite treatment and care is being provided under quarantine.”

The female calf, about a month old, was found alone in the Mainashri area, Sonitpur West Division, by forest department personnel of the Amribari Central Range on December 9. As the natal herd could not be located it was brought to CWRC for long-term care.
“The calf is currently under quarantine”, said Dr Samshul Ali. “Oral rehydration fluid is being offered to stabilise it, which will be followed by the introduction of milk formula. It also has a pulmonary affection which is being treated.”
P Sivakumar, Conservator of Forests, North Assam Circle said, “These two calves were discovered in ill health and rescued in time by forest department and CWRC personnel. My thanks to CWRC for their quick response in these two cases, as well as other rescue cases that have occurred during my 15 years of service in Assam.”