Assam: Even as intrusions by wild elephants into human settlements are on the rise in several parts of Assam, yet another wild elephant has left one dead and several injured in Lungsung village. 
On the night of July 10, desperate villagers ran for cover as the wild Jumbo at 3 am. hastily made its way into this sleepy village in Central Assam.
The dead victim’s family was sleeping as the first blow struck on their house. It took merely few seconds to flatten the bamboo and earthen built structure to the ground.
Ten-year old Bijen who was sleeping beside his parents was crushed to death. The father initially tried to chase the animal away by shouting and beating utensils but finally gave up, as the elephant became more and more violent.
The action was repeated in several other neighbouring households but luckily nobody else was killed except for broken bones and bloody scratches. In all, about eight persons were injured in the melee beside several other homes destroyed.
Shimanta Goswami, a member of the WREN network of the Wildlife Trust of India said, “Elephant depredation can be observed in these areas throughout the year however, it increases many fold during winters.”
“These elephants normally raid houses in search of paddy, salt, seasonal fruit and sometimes even for country liquor. A solitary bull or small herds comprising young males is commonly sighted in such attacks.” said Goswami.
About 200 wild elephants in the neighbouring Burhapahar Hill range are constant threat to some of the villages nearby – Chapanola, Salona including Lungsung. Prajna Paramita Panda of Wildlife Trust of India said that over 100 people are killed by elephants each year in India and in retaliation elephants are often killed.
Degradation and fragmentation of forest habitats have contributed to the increase in human-elephant conflicts in several parts of India. Dr. Sandeep Kr. Tiwari, Asst. Manager of WTI said, “A long-term scientific approach based on the area specific experiences need to be looked at for conservation of elephants and to minimize fatal conflicts.” WTI has been providing help to affected villagers in different parts of the country.