Ashok Kumar Memorial Scholarships for Wildlife Law and Enforcement.
It gives us immense pleasure to announce Ashok Kumar Memorial scholarships that are being given out to students on Masters courses related to Wildlife Law and Enforcement. All three scholarships announced will be given to scholars who will specialize in tackling the menace of Wildlife Crime. One scholarship is restricted to the Wildlife Trust of India and Institute of Environment Education and Research, Bharati Vidyapeeth University, Pune Masters Course in Conservation Action. The other two are open scholarships for any students who wish to apply for a Masters in India that will contribute in the fight against wildlife crime. One of these is for scholars of Law and the second is for courses related to Wildlife enforcement.
[acx_slideshow name=”scholarships”]



1. For an MSc – ‘Wildlife Conservation Action’ student of BVIEER.
a. Applicant should have a confirmed admission into the BVIEER course and the application has to be ratified by the Vice Principal, IEER, BVIEER.

b. The candidate has to undertake a dissertation and internship with the Wildlife Crime Control Division (WCCD) of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).

c. The selected candidate will get One Lakh Rupees in the first year as scholarship and another One Lakh Rupees in the second year, provided that he/ she successfully clear all exams of first year.
2. For a Master’s student pursuing any course on Wildlife Conservation from any Deemed University in India
a. Applicant should have a confirmed admission into the course of a recognized university in India and be nominated for the course by an appropriate authority of the University.

b. The candidate must undertake a dissertation and internship with Wildlife Trust of India’s Wildlife Crime Control Division.

c. The selected candidate will get One Lakh Rupees in the first year as scholarship and another One Lakh Rupees in the second year if he/ she will clear all exams of first year.
3. For a student pursuing a Masters course in Law: Specialization in Wildlife and Environment laws
a. Applicant should have a confirmed admission into a Masters course of a recognized university in India and be nominated for the course by an appropriate authority of the University.

b. The candidate must undertake a dissertation and internship with Wildlife Trust of India’s Wildlife Crime Control Division.

c. The selected candidate will get One Lakh Rupees in the first year as scholarship and another One Lakh Rupees in the second year provided that he/ she will clear all exams of first year.
The application details and format will be available on WTI website shortly after the conference.

The application process will be open between April and June of every year. The Selection of candidates for the scholarship will be done by a panel of experts after the initial screening process. Interviews over phone / skype or in person will also be scheduled for a final round of screening.



For more details, please write to us at amrit@wti.org.in