On May 2, 2015, the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) veterinarian, Dr Jahan Ahmed, received a call from Dr. Sorang Tadap, Zoo veterinarian, Itanagar Biological Park, who informed him that two Asiatic black bear cubs are in possession of a family in Itanagar.


The very next day Dr Jahan Ahmed and CBRC animal keeper Mr. Doluk Dagang left for Itanagar. By the time, the duo reached, it was already dark and they decided to rescue the cubs next day. Dr Tadap had received the news about the bear cubs from Mr. Niktar Techi, a Forest Guard with the Itanagar Biological Park who was informed about it by the family that was in possession of these cubs.
The next day, the CBRC team went to meet Mr. Niktar who revealed that the cubs were about 4-5 months old and were kept in a house in Hollongi — 20 kms from Itanagar. He, thereafter, spoke to the family and informed that the team had come to take possession of the cubs. The family agreed.
Dr. Tadap accompanied the team to Hollongi and the team could spot only one male bear cub which was about two-months-old. The team enquired about the other cub after which a lady started to search the house. After a few minutes delay, she came back with the other cub, a female. The cubs looked healthy and the lady informed that they were feeding milk powder to the cubs for 5-6 times a day.
The team then enquired about the mother and they were told that the cubs were found alone in the forest and picked up by locals. As it was too late for experts from IFAW-WTI to attempt a reunion with the mother, the team took possession of the cubs and after physical examination left for CBRC. These two cubs would join the other two cubs already being hand raised at the CBRC taking the count of bear cubs to four in this specialised rehabilitation centre.


“I informed the CBRC team because they are best suited to take care of these cubs. They have handled and raised orphaned bear cubs in the past and continue to do so. I feel happy that these cubs are in right hands and hope that one day they return back to the wild,” said Dr. Sorang Tadap.
The CBRC is the first specialised rehabilitation centre for Asiatic black bears in India. Supported by the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), the centre was established jointly by the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in 2002, with an aim to rehabilitate displaced cubs back into the wild. Situated on the West Bank of Pakke River in Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary and Tiger Reserve (WLS & TR), CBRC provides shelter, food and veterinary care to orphaned cubs.
“Very rarely would a mother abandon her cubs, unless she has been killed or driven away. There have also been many instances of people picking up cubs when the mother is foraging or hunting. This results in forced separation and can only be addressed through awareness and education at the village level,” said Sunil Kyarong, Regional Head, IFAW-WTI.