The Garo Hills of Meghalaya is home to several species of flora and fauna and forms a part of the Indo–Burmese biodiversity hotspot. Wildlife Trust of India, with support from WLT and HCL Foundation, has been working with the local council (GHADC) and the state forest department for almost two decades. The aim is to secure and restore the forest patches located between West Garo Hills and Nokrek National Park to establish wilderness connectivity with Balpakram National Park (BNP) – a landscape titled the Garo Green Spine, forming the backbone of biodiversity of the region. This connectivity is key to ensuring the smooth passage of elephants and other wildlife.
Given the rich biodiversity that the region supports, community involvement in the conservation and restoration of the landscape is one of the most crucial components of the project. Celebrating important biodiversity days with the community has an important platform to deliver the message of conservation and raise awareness about preserving the biodiversity of the region and safeguarding the landscape.
Celebration of World Nature Conservation Day in Alokpang – Nakalgre Village in South Garo Hills | Photograph by Rimachi Leisan
Nature Conservation Day, 2023
On 28th July 2023, WTI observed World Nature Conservation Day in both the West and South Garo Hills of Meghalaya. This message was to encourage people to live sustainably alongside nature. In the South Garo Hills, the event was held in the Alokpang – Nakalgre Village with the support of the HCL Foundation and the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC). More than 80 people including villagers and school students across all age groups, were a part of the event. Similarly, in the West Garo Hills, an event was hosted in Rongasigre Village with the support of World Land Trust (WLT) as well as the GHADC and saw the participation of about 100 people. In both villages, drawing competitions were conducted where the students were asked to present what ‘nature’ means to them. A plantation drive was also undertaken where native saplings were planted by the students and villagers and they were asked to maintain them and see them grow as they grow.
Native saplings being planted in Alokpang – Nakalgre Village by school students | Photograph by Silga

Mr. Hikke R Sangma, headmaster of the Alokpang Upper Primary School in south Garo Hills said, “We thank the WTI and HCL team for conducting this awareness program with the school students to celebrate Nature Conservation and impart environmental education which will inculcate the love for nature and wildlife”. The project follows the community securement model of habitat securement in the region where community-owned lands are set aside through easements or bilateral benefit sharing models. Alokpang–Nakalgre is one of the most recent villages in the south Garo hills that has set aside 25 ha as a Village Reserve Forest (VRF). These VRFs are a part of the Baghmara – Balpakram elephant corridor as well as the Nokrek – Emangre corridor and are consequently essential in ensuring connectivity in the region.


HCL Foundation Day, 2023


To thank the HCL Foundation for their support in implementing the project, HCL Day was organised on 11th August 2023 in the village of Ampanggre in the South Garo Hills. The celebrations took place in the Ampanggre Lower Primary School with the students, teachers, the village headman (Nokma) and other locals. To commemorate the foundation of the HCL Foundation and to acknowledge the support being offered by them to several projects all across the country, the Garo team organised activities, including cleanliness and plantation drives, in and around the school campus and distribution of study materials like globes, dictionaries and encyclopaedias to students.

 
Students thanking HCL Foundation on HCL Day for renovating their school and for all the support being given by them | Photograph by Rimachi Leisan/WTI
World Elephant Day, 2023
The Garo team also celebrated the World Elephant Day on the 12th of August. A football match was organised in the District Sports Complex of South Garo Hills to bring the youth together. This was followed by an awareness program, titled ‘Football for Elephant Conservation’ . WTI, with support from the HCL Foundation, organised the event in collaboration with the State Forest Department (SFD), District Sports Office (DSO) and the GHADC. The event was also supported by the District Football Association,  the Directorate of Information and Public Relations (DIPRO), the Pioneer School and lastly, the Maharis (Clan members) of Raksam and Tegite.



The Deputy Commissioner of South Garo Hills, Shri S Awasthi was the chief guest for the event along with the Balpakram National Park Director, Ms. Rimse K Sangma who presided over the event as the chairperson and gave the welcome address and introductory speech. The football match was between the Raksam and Tegite clans and the students from the Pioneer School along with the teachers were also present. Before beginning the match, a pledge was taken by all the participants to affirm their support in conserving and protecting wild elephants and the biodiversity of the region. A special song was also sung by the members of the Forest Department pertaining to the conservation of nature and its habitat. Mr. Awasthi addressed the crowd on the importance of conserving elephants and their habitat and safeguarding their ‘Right of Passage’. He also requested the SFD and its partners to organise more such awareness programs in and around Baghmara and in regions where human-elephant conflict commonly occurs. Ms. Sangma spoke about how each and every individual can play their part and contribute to conserving elephants. She also spoke about the Do’s and Dont’s one should keep in mind when encountering wild elephants on the road or in the forest.



Spectators and school students at the football match organised to raise awareness amongst the youth for elephant conservation | Photograph by Rimachi Leisan



The event concluded with Mr. Balsreng Sangma, Project Head of the Garo region, thanking the various organisations and departments present as well as the participants for their support.  He expressed that, “We look forward to organising more awareness programs along with our partners – WTI and HCLF and reaching more people to tell them about elephants and the need to conserve them”.


Click here to know more about the Garo Green Spine Project.