Baithalangshu, Assam: April 25: The IFAW-WTI run CWRC’s Mobile Veterinary Service Unit (MVS) rescued an injured female elephant calf near Sampora beel in Habe Teron village in Karbi Anglong district of Assam on April 24, 2015. After initial assessment, the animal was shifted to CWRC in the wee hours of April 25, 2015.



IFAW-WTI team taking the calf to CWRC for treatment

The local police and the forest authorities informed the CWRC team that the two and half year old elephant calf was frequently seen around the foothills of Chakso hills for the last one week or so. They claimed that despite the efforts, the elephant could not be sent back into the forest.
During this time, the calf was chased and even attacked by the villagers whenever they saw her trying to enter the agricultural fields in Baithalangshu. According to Maheshwar Tisso, Forest Range Officer, Hamren Forest division, “The lone elephant calf has been in this area for more than a week. It was roaming freely and venturing into nearby villages damaging crops. We tried our best to locate the natal herd and reunite the calf, but couldn’t succeed. Since the elephant is under threat of getting poached by the miscreants and is already injured, it is better if we shift it to CWRC for the safety of the animal.”



The injured elephant calf near the Baithalangshu village

After efforts to locate the natal herd failed, the Forest Department asked the CWRC-MVS team to save the female calf. Accordingly, a team of veterinarians lead by Dr. Bishwajit Boruah, along with another vet Dr. Khanin Sangmai and an animal keeper Raju Kutum, moved for Habe Teron village and reached the site around 3pm.
On reaching the site, the CWRC MVS team encountered a hostile crowd. A unit of para-military forces lead by Central Reserve Police Force were already working on keeping the mob at bay to ensure the safety of the animal. The police tried to keep the calf safe from the unruly crowd, but had to deploy CRPF as the situation had gone out of control.
Unfortunately, for the last two days few miscreants attacked the animal with sharp weapons with the intention of killing the calf. They had even beaten her badly. The situation was brought under control with the help of civil police and Para military force. Considering the volatile situation, the FD, Police and IFAW-WTI decided to shift the animal to CWRC for further care. IFAW-WTI veterinarians then sedated the calf and took it to CWRC– 200kms away from the village — at night. The animal was admitted to CWRC in the wee hours of April 25 and was kept under observation.



The IFAW-WTI team making preprations to transport the elephant to CWRC


At CWRC veterinarian Dr. Panjit Basumatary said that the elephant calf is stressed and has noticeable puncture wounds at the stifle joint in the body. After initial assessment of the extent of injuries, the animal was provided the necessary treatment. Moreover, Chitra Newar, ASI, Baithalangshu PS, Assam, who is monitoring the area, informed that no herd was seen in the area since then.

“It is an unfortunate incident, but if our team had not reached there on time, the chances of survival of the animal would have been very low. The crowds there were violent and wanted the animal killed. I must thank the Forest Department, the police, the CRPF and our team for saving the life of this innocent animal that had been displaced from its herd. Once the animal recuperates, efforts would be made to reunite it with a wild herd,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, IFAW-WTI.