Achanakmar Tiger Reserve, (Chhattisgarh), July 24, 2014: WTI recently trained and equipped 55 frontline forest staff deputed to protect Achanakmar Tiger Reserve over a period of three days. The training which ended recently , saw top brass of the Forest Department also joining the training including the Field Director, Deputy Director, along with the Assistant Directors, Range Officers, Foresters and Forest Guards.
CL Agarwal, Deputy Director, Achanakmar TR, commented, “In all my experience in the Forest Department, this has been the most informative and useful training that I have attended. I am sure this would have helped our frontline staff understand the issues better, and it is my hope that such trainings are organised in the future as well.”


Aniruddha Mookerjee taking a class on illegal trade. Photo: WTI

“The trainers for this included Advocate Yash Kumar Soni, Arbing Jha from WCCB and WTI’s Central India Regional Head Dr R P Mishra. The training topics covered a select variety of issues that the officials have to tackle frequently in the field. This included imparting information on the biodiversity of the area, nuances of wildlife crime and enforcement. The Wildlife Protection Act 1972, the Evidence Act as well as the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 were also delved into,” said Krishnendu Mondal, the Project Lead of Van Rakshak Project, under which the training was conducted.
This was the first such training to be conducted in Achanakmar Tiger Reserve on wildlife crime prevention. Located approximately 60 km from Bilaspur, the reserve is part of the much larger landscape of the Achanakmar-Amarkantak Biosphere Reserve. The Kanha-Achanakmar corridor which links the Kanha Tiger Reserve to Achanakmar Tiger Reserve is important for the movement of tigers and their prey.
“Since the region is crucial for the movement and invariably helps maintain a genetically healthy population of tigers, it becomes pertinent to make sure that the frontline forest staff are trained to tackle all aspects of wildlife crime prevention,” commented Dr R P Mishra.


Dr Mishra taking a class during the training. Photo: WTI

Kits were also provided under the Van Rakshak Project to 50 participants, including a ruck-sack, jacket, rain suit, torch, cap, water bottle and sleeping bag. Water filters, torches and pressure cookers were also provided to each field camp under IFAW-WTI Rapid Action Project.
In a bid to equip and strengthen the frontline forest staff of the country, WTI has been conducting Wildlife Crime Prevention Training Programmes, under the Van Rakshak Project (VRP) since 2001. VRP follows a multi-pronged strategy with four thrust areas, abbreviated as TEAM: Training, Equipping, Awareness and Morale Boosting, to broadly facilitate capacity building and strengthen spirits of personnel in tough field circumstances.


Participants during the crime scene investigation exercise. Photo: WTI

As part of its morale boosting initiative, VRP runs the only one of its kind umbrella insurance scheme for forest staff all over India. This unique Group Accident Insurance Scheme provides an insurance cover of up to Rs 100,000 covering over 20000 frontline field staff and their families in case of permanent disability or death while on duty. Over 75 families till date have been assisted and more than 33 families provided with ex-gratia support.