NOIDA, May 6, 2014: We respect, encourage and celebrate wildlife photography. However, like any aspect with attached ethical obligations, wildlife photography also comes with its own set of norms and rules that one MUST obey to help save the very animals which are being ‘shot’.
Resisting geo-tagging photos is one such norm that should be followed with much greater zeal than it is now. When you geo-tag a photograph of wildlife especially of tigers, leopards, bears etc., you make the life of a poacher (even an aspiring hunter) easier. By giving their locations you’re essentially helping reduce the gap between the hunter and the hunted by making it easier for poachers to track their targets and finish them off.
One needs to remember not all who see wildlife are conservationists or people simply happy to see these gorgeous creatures out there living a natural life. What they see is money… and tons of it. Too many depraved minds across the world are willing to spend exorbitant sums of cash to procure a part of an animal or even the animal alive. Reasons could be many- for medicinal purposes, for decorative or for sheer entertainment ‘value’ of having them as a pet.


Photo: Sashanka Barbaruah / IFAW-WTI

It’s not just the large animals who’re caught in the mesh of cyber-poachers. Did you know some of the most traded animals in the world are small animals like snakes, butterflies and beetles, with their trade (live or body parts) running into millions of dollars every year across the globe?
Take photographs without disturbing wildlife. Celebrate it. Do go ahead and post these photos on your social networking sites and encourage people to not kill them and help save them.
But please never put the specific location with those posts. With so many species vulnerable and on the brink of extinction, it is our duty to do whatever we can to make sure we safeguard them from those determined to profit from them come what may.
Next time you see a photo of wildlife with the geo-cordinates/exact location, do your civic duty and ask them to remove the details if not the photo itself!
Share this with as many people as you can. Spread awareness and help save the last of our wildlife.