Arunachal Pradesh, July 01, 2016: For many tribes in the biodiversity-rich North-eastern state of Arunachal, hunting, even though it is banned under the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972, remains a way of life – their primary source of meat, recreation, medicines and ornaments. The Nyishi, for instance, the most populous tribe in the state, used to wear the casque of a hornbill on their headgear as a symbol of male adulthood. This longstanding tradition had led to the severe decline in hornbill populations in Arunachal until Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) stepped in and, through a dedicated project in 2002, convinced the tribe to accept a fibreglass alternative.
 

SHG participants being trained in the creation of fake fur dao covers


 
A survey conducted by WTI and the Indo-Global Social Service Society in September last year highlighted another conservation issue in the state. A considerable population of capped langurs and Asiatic black bears were being killed for their fur, which was used to make dao (machete) covers. Though both these species are protected under the law, the fur collected from these primates was found being sold in local markets across Arunachal Pradesh both as strips of fur as well as finished dao cover sets. The survey identified two districts, East Kameng and Papum Pare, as having a significant use of fur in traditional attire, and determined that while dao covers with natural fur and bear skin belt cost Rs 3500 to Rs 4000, those with artificial fur and a bead belt cost Rs 2500. Because of this, and the fact that natural fur/skin of wild animals like langurs and bears is difficult to source and officially banned, it was found that the Nyishi were willing to use artificial fur products.
 

Traditional Nyishi dao covers are made from capped langur fur and bear skin belts; these are now being replaced with artificial products


 
In February this year WTI, in a Rapid Action Project (RAP) that followed the same conservation model as that of the hornbill casques, provided training to 30 participants of a women’s SHG, the Baming Self Help Group, on making dao covers using synthetic alternatives to both capped langur and bear fur. The raw materials, including raisin, wax, clay, fake fur etc were provided to the participants and training was also imparted in the art of making artificial hornbill beaks. The ongoing training will develop SHG livelihoods by establishing a self-sustaining model where members can develop and market alternatives to animal-based products. The Nyishi will thus be able to continue with their traditional attire, but will use artificial replacements that ensure the affected wild species are not hunted to extinction.