Noida, Uttar Pradesh, 21 March 2021
In keeping with its long term commitment towards the welfare of frontline forest staff, WTI granted financial assistance as ex gratia support to the surviving family members of frontline forest staff who succumbed to their deaths while on duty.
Four of these brave men were from Kaziranga National Park, Assam. Two of them Moheswar Hazarika and Tipusaran Sahu succumbed to injuries sustained in rhino attacks. Moheswar Hazarika, a game watcher was on patrolling duty on 30th Jan at the Eastern Range of Kaziranga National Park. While Tipusaran Sahu, Forest guard was on duty at Pohubeel anti-poaching camp in Kaziranga range, Kohora when he was attacked by a Rhino on 17th of February.
In separate incidents, Sundhan Patgiri, passed away in a road accident while on duty at Deosur, NH 37 at Burapahar range, Ghorakhati on 2nd February and Jwel Singh Teron, Assam Forest Protection Force died in a road accident on 13th February while on duty at Rangalu.
[acx_slideshow name=”exgratia”]
The families of these brave men received an ex gratia support of INR 1 Lakh each, handed over by Vivek Menon, Founder, CEO and ED, WTI on the 19th of March.
Ex gratia support was also given to Smt Premlata whose son Gaurav Kumar died due to an elephant attack while on patrolling duty at the Beriwada range, Rajaji National Park.
In a separate incident reported by the DFO, Panna tiger reserve, two frontline staff were grievously injured in an attack by timber mafia at North Panna Division of the tiger reserve. Chattrapal Singh (beat guard) had fractures in both his legs, while Swamideen (forest worker) was badly injured after being attacked by an axe on his shoulder and legs. They were admitted to the Panna Govt hospital and are recuperating. Both of them received financial support as bank cheques handed over by WTI in the presence of the Gaurav Sharma, DFO Panna tiger reserve.
Frontline forest staff of our country brave harsh weather, timber mafia, fatal attacks by wild animals while guarding our natural heritage. Help us help them. Our ex gratia supplementary accidental assurance scheme has been supportive of their cause since 2001.
If you liked reading this story, consider donating to support their families in the event of death and life changing injury.
Donate Now