Kunhimangalam, Kerala, June 9, 2016: A one-day seminar on the ecological significance of mangrove ecosystems was organised on World Environment Day, June 5, at the site of the Kannur Kandal Project (Mangrove Conservation Project), launched last month by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in partnership with Apollo Tyres.
The Kannur Kandal Project aims to ensure the survival of existing mangroves and increase the acreage of mangrove habitats across the Kannur district of northern Kerala. The project is based out of Kunhimangalam, the largest mangrove village in Kerala. Land for the project site was procured with the assistance of World Land Trust, an international NGO.


The WTI-Apollo Tyres project lies in Kunhimangalam, Kerala’s largest mangrove village and home to some rare mangrove species
Mangroves prevent coastal erosion, act as barriers against cyclones and tsunamis, and are both refuges and nurseries for a large variety of threatened terrestrial and aquatic species. For people living in coastal communities they are an important source of fodder, medicines and firewood. Kannur has 7.55 sq km of mangroves, i.e. around 45% of Kerala’s total mangrove forest cover. Nearly 90% of these forests – which support at least 10 species of mangroves (including the uncommon Rhizophora apiculata), 87 species of fish, 83 species of birds and 13 species of mammals – are under private ownership and are therefore highly threatened.
It is essential, for the long-term conservation of mangrove ecosystems, that the general public and in particular students be made aware of the biodiversity value of such habitats.  The seminar on World Environment Day, in which 35 students, teachers, researchers and scientists from across Kannur participated, was the first of many awareness activities planned under the Kannur Kandal Project going forward.
A study tour through the mangrove forests of Kunhimangalam preceded the seminar. Dr Sreeja Rajeev (Assistant Professor, Sir Syed College, Taliparamba) led the tour, guiding the students through the forests, talking about the taxonomy and identifiable characteristics of various mangrove species. Following this field session participants gathered in the nearby Edanad West LP School to interact with Dr KC Muraleedharan (Head of Department, English, Payyanur College) and Dr Swaran PR (Assistant Professor, Department of Zoology, Payyanur College), who spoke about various aspects of mangrove conservation in the area. Dr Sreeja followed with a detailed presentation on World Environment Day, its theme for 2016 and other global aspects of conservation. The event, which was coordinated by WTI Field Officer Ramith M, ended with participants taking the World Environment Day pledge.
The participants were all of the view that more such events needed to be conducted on a regular basis, and that biodiversity-rich mangrove forests must be protected through community participation.


Dr KC Muraleedharan of Payyanur College interacts with students during the seminar on mangrove conservation