Wildlife Trust of India’s Kannur Kandal project in Kerala, extended its wings to Cheruthazham Grama Panchayath, earlier this week. To commemorate this significant step in the ongoing efforts to restore and protect coastal wetlands, an inaugural event was hosted in collaboration with SBI Foundation, Cheruthazham Grama Panchayath, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) and Haritha Keralam.
The participation of various organisations emphasised the significance of collective action in preserving the mangrove ecosystem, reflecting the shared commitment to environmental conservation and community involvement.
Shri. Ramachandran Kadannapalli, Minister for Registration Museums and Archeology, Kerala, inaugurated the event and Mr Ramith M, Manager of Wildlife Trust of India attended as the chief guest. Other attendees included Mrs PP Rohini, Vice President, Cheruthazham Grama Panchayat, Shri. EK Somasekharan, District Coordinator, Haritha Keralam, MT. Sabitha, Chairperson, Welfare Affairs Standing Committee, Cheruthazham Grama Panchayat, V. Ramesan, President, Ramapuram Library, Mrs.Sindhu Patoli, NSS Program Officer,  Kunhimangalam Govt, Higher Secondary School, M. Shreedharan, President, Cheruthazham Grama Panchayat and Mrs. PP Rohini, Vice president, Cheruthazham Grama Panchayat.
Shri Ramachandran Kadannapalli gave an inaugural speech during the event | Photo by WTI
Shri Ramachandran Kadanapally in his inaugural address, recognised the policies and conservational efforts of WTI and extended his heartfelt support to the restoration project. He also stated that the duration of summer and hot weather is increasing annually, leading to heightened natural calamities along the Kerala coast due to human illicit activities harming mangroves. Our Mangrove Restoration Program aims to reduce these disasters and benefit the local community. 
M.Shreedharan and Mrs. Sindhu Patoli appreciated the collaborative efforts in mangrove restoration, while the officials from Cheruthuzham Panchayat pledged their support to WTI and emphasised the vital role of local bodies and communities in conservation efforts. Students from GHSS Kunhimangalam Govt, Higher Secondary School also showed their support by planting mangrove saplings during the event. 
The event concluded with a mangrove sapling plantation by the dignitaries and students | Photo by WTI
MGNREGA has played a crucial role in restoring 4 acres by planting 10000 mangrove saplings of 2 different species. The committed participation of women aged 35 to 60 has emerged as the cornerstone of community engagement, taking the lead in various initiatives, particularly in the restoration of mangrove ecosystems. 
Efforts to restore mangroves involve various strategies, including restoration and ecosystem rehabilitation. These initiatives often entail planting mangrove saplings, restoring hydrological connectivity, and implementing measures to reduce human-induced pressures such as pollution and unsustainable resource

extraction. Mangrove restoration not only helps conserve biodiversity but also contributes to carbon sequestration, as mangrove forests store vast amounts of

carbon in their biomass and soils. Additionally, restored mangroves can support local economies through activities such as sustainable fisheries, and coastal protection services.