Manguraha, 4th March 2024: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI)  in collaboration with DoEFCC, Govt of Bihar conducted a two-day training session on Human-Wildlife Conflict Management, focussing on large carnivores such as tigers, leopards, and sloth bears, at Valmiki Tiger Reserve, Bihar. This is a follow-up to the strategic meeting that was held in the month of February.
WTI, with support from the local community, has formed Primary Response Teams (PRT) in seven villages under the Manguraha Range. 30 volunteers, including 5 women have taken on the responsibility of mitigating conflicts between their communities and large carnivores. The formation of PRTs has been a proven tool that establishes the success of the collective effort and commitment of the local communities and conservation organisations towards mitigating human–large carnivore conflicts across various tiger reserves.
The two-day training session on Human-Wildlife Conflict Management focussed on large carnivores.
The training workshop was held on 1st March at the Manguraha Tourism Campus’ Conference Hall, where 24 PRT members comprising 21 men and 3 women participated in discussions led by Dr. Samir Kumar Sinha, Chief Ecologist at WTI and a veteran in the field with two decades of experience at the Valmiki Tiger Reserve. He elaborated on the ‘Roles and Responsibilities’ of PRT members in conflict reduction.
The following day, forest staff from the Manguraha, Gobardhana, and Raghia Ranges attended a session on Human-Wildlife Conflict Management. 18 members, comprising  Foresters, Forest Guards, and Tiger Trackers participated in the training. Dr. Sinha delved into the definition, types, causes, and stakeholder roles of Human-Wildlife Conflict resolution.
Both trainings were overseen by  Mr. Sunil Pathak, Range Forest Officer, Manguraha; Mr. Pankaj Ojha, VTR Field Biologist; and Mr. Subrat Kumar Behera, Project Head, WTI.
Session conducted by Dr. Samir Kumar Sinha, Chief Ecologist at WTI 
Participants included community leaders and PRT members including Chhotak Shah (Rupawalia Village); Jitendra Shah (Dumari Village), Mohan Panjiyar (Purainiya-Manpur village) and Ashok Ram (Dhumatand-Jasauli village) EDC President. Forester Udit Sharma, Dhirendra Thakur, Brijlal Baitha, Forest Guard Sintu Paswan and Keshav Kumar were also part of the training program.
WTI’s project, “Living with Large Carnivores – Integrative Coexistence through Community Empowerment,” aims at fostering a harmonious coexistence in the villages adjoining the Valmiki Tiger Reserve. The project is supported by Chester Zoo and the Darwin Initiative.