The two vultures recovering at CWRC
Kaziranga, December 17, 2015 : Two Himalayan griffon vultures (Gyps himalayensis) are presently under care at the IFAW–WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC).
One Himalayan griffon vulture was rescued from Ghelalata (Lungsung) area of Nagaon district of Assam by a local NGO, Green Guard Nature, and Assam Forest Department on December 17, 2015. Seeing the bird in a human settlement, unable to fly and in a visibly weak state, the rescuers contacted the IFAW-WTI team that rushed to the spot. The bird was handed over to the team at the Jakhalabandha forest beat office and was admitted to CWRC the same day.
On physical examination, the IFAW-WTI veterinarian found no external injuries and the bird seemed dehydrated. Now it’s under observation inside the bird enclosure at CWRC.
According to Dr Daoharu Baro, the IFAW-WTI vet who examined the bird, “The vulture responded well to treatment and recovered quickly. It will soon be released back into the wild.”

One of the vultures being handed over to the CWRC team


 The second Himalayan griffon vulture was rescued from Barhat area of Sivsagar district of Assam on December 3, 2015. Villagers informed the Forest Department about the bird, suspecting it to be a case of poisoning which was ruled out when the IFAW-WTI team reached the spot. It was later admitted to CWRC where Dr Panjit Basumatary, the veterinarian, examined the bird and found it to be very weak. However, the bird responded well to treatment and is now recovering.
At present, both the Himalayan griffons have been kept together in the same enclosure for observation. Once they recover fully, they will be released back to the wild.
This species has been listed by IUCN as Near Threatened. The impacts of diclofenac use in livestock, has caused drastic declines in other Gyps species and appears to be fatal to this species when ingested. In the past, the IFAW-WTI team has attended to several cases on poisoned vultures in Assam. Though not all cases could be saved, the IFAW- WTI veterinarians have successfully treated and released many rescued vultures back to the wild.
Read More on Vulture rescues:

https://www.wti.org.in/NewsDetails.aspx?NewsId=1364

https://www.wti.org.in/NewsDetails.aspx?NewsId=1346

http://wti.org.in/NewsDetails.aspx?NewsId=1355

http://wti.org.in/NewsDetails.aspx?NewsId=1341