Trivandrum, Kerala, July 29, 2019: The UNESCO mandated ‘International Day for the conservation of the mangrove ecosystems’ is celebrated every year on 26July 26. This year International Mangrove Day is indeed a milestone for mangrove conservation in Kerala since the Forest Minister of the state proposed to create a mangrove cell or mangrove foundation. The announcement happened while he was inaugurating the International mangrove day celebration organised by Kannur Kandal Project and Kerala Forest department in Trivandrum. Advocate Sri. K. Raju, honourable forest minister, said that “Mangroves are critical ecosystems that can protect the coasts from natural calamities and support the livelihoods of people living along coastlines.
 
To conserve the mangrove forests of Kerala, the government will initiate proper institutional mechanisms involving various stakeholders, including local communities.” The minister also said that the extent of mangroves had shrunk over the last century from 700 square kilometres to merely around 21 square kilometres. Out of this, only about 4.4 square kilometres of mangrove forests enjoy the legal protection in the state. It poses an immense threat to the future conservation of prospects of mangroves in Kerala. 


[acx_slideshow name=”kannurkandal”]
 
‘Special plenary on mangrove conservation’ was organised to celebrate the day on 26 July discussed in detail about the institutional mechanisms needed for the conservation of mangroves.  The plenary discussed the model mangrove cell and mangrove foundation initiatives of Maharashtra Government. The invited talk by Mr N. Vasudevan IFS, the Assistant Principal Conservator of Forests, Mangrove cell of Maharashtra threw lights into the activities of the cell in conserving mangroves. Chief Wildlife Warden of Kerala, Sri. Surendra Kumar IFS chaired the plenary. He said that the recommended mangrove and marine biodiversity conservation foundation would help conserve the critical ecosystems from the pertinent threats. 
 
Sri Satyajeet Rajan IAS, Additional Chief Secretary, Forests and Wildlife, Kerala chaired the panel discussion on public-private partnership in mangrove conservation in Kerala. Sri. P. K. Kesavan IFS, Head of Forest Force, Kerala co-chaired the session. The panel discussed the organisational structure for the mangrove cell and mangrove foundation and its future. 
 
Dr B. C. Choudhury, the Executive Trustee of Wildlife Trust of India, explained about the mangrove conservation initiatives of Kannur Kandal Project. Kannur Kandal Project is a joint initiative by Wildlife Trust of India and Apollo Tyres aiming at the conservation of mangroves in Kannur district of Kerala. 
 
Ms Rinika Grover, Head CSR and Sustainability, Apollo Tyres Ltd, said “Eco conservation is no more a necessity but our responsibility for future generations. Apollo Tyres is happy to work on Mangrove conservation towards realising that goal”. 
Quite a few forest officials, scientists, NGO representatives, media professionals and students attended the conference. 
 
Kannur Kandal Project over the last three years had spread the message of mangrove conservation to more than 41,000 people through its awareness activities and had been working on the restoration of mangroves. 
Kannur Kandal Project is situated in one of the mangrove rich panchayaths in Kerala, the Kunhimangalam. Wildlife Trust of India, with support from World Lands Trust (WLT), had secured around 22 acres of mangrove forests in the panchayath after purchasing it from private owners. This protected mangrove area becomes the centre of activities of the project along with the Mangrove Interpretation Centre of the project situated in its premise.