Gir (Gujarat): The result of the recent Asiatic lion census in the western Indian state of Gujarat was a rare occasion of cheer for Indian wildlife enthusiasts. Their population had sprung to 411, from 359 in 2005.
A trend that has eluded most wild species, the Asiatic lion in Gujarat has been a relievingly fortunate exception with the population increase. A decline in the population would mean a disaster in the making as Gujarat is literally the last bastion of the Asiatic lion.
Just about two centuries ago, the Asiatic lion (Panthera leo persica) was distributed across eastern Europe till northern India through south-west Asia. The species is now confined to the dry deciduous forests, scrub jungles and dry savanna forests in Gir. Being the only existing wild population, the lions in Gir have a wary existence with epidemics being a single largest threat to its existence. Poaching and conflicts with humans are other threats to individual lions.
The ‘13th Asiatic lion population estimate’ was carried out over four days in April (23-27) this year, by over 1500 participants led by the Gujarat Forest Department. It covered the entire Greater Gir area – conceptualised by the Government of Gujarat bringing all lion range areas under one administration for a more effective conservation of the endangered big cat.
The census reported 270, 108, and 33 lions from Junagadh, Amreli and Bhavnagar districts respectively, in Gir National Park & Wildlife Sanctuary, Girnar, Mitiyala and Paniya WLS, coastal areas including Una, Kodinar, Sutrapada and  Chhara, among other fringe areas.
“This is really a great news for all,” said Dhiresh Joshi, Coordinator, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). “I’d like to congratulate the Forest Department staff including the frontline members who work very hard under adverse field conditions to ensure that the pride of Gujarat is preserved successfully. The local people play a significant role in wildlife conservation, and the people of Gujarat have time and again proven their dedication be it for the lion or for the whale shark. Their role must be acknowledged too. Gujarat has set yet another example for the entire country, with Forest Department, local people, NGOs working together for the common cause to effectively conserve its wildlife.”
With the support of the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF), WTI in association with the Gujarat Forest Department, had recently organised a capacity building training programme for the frontline staff of Greater Gir. A total of 490 field staff were trained on Wildlife Protection Act, preparation of patrolling plans and creation of a crime map to identify sensitive areas for effective control of illegal activties, among other issues. A total of 228 meritorious participants were provided field kits to help them in their patrolling duties.
“WTI has been organising trainings for frontline staff through its Van Rakshak Project, led by Dr Rakesh Kumar Singh, who has so far trained over 8,500 individuals in more than 100 protected areas across the country. WTI with the support of its donors like DSWF commits to continue assistance to the Forest Department in the form of trainings or otherwise, to help conserve Gujarat’s wildlife,” Joshi added.
 
Learn more about Van Rakshak Project
Related story:
Forest Department frontline staff trained for more effective protection of the Asiatic lion