Smt Pramila Rani Brahma, Minister for Environment and Forests, Government of Assam, at the photo-exhibition’s inauguration
Guwahati, Assam, March 28, 2017: In a bid to reach out to an urban audience that is sympathetic to wildlife conservation yet may be unfamiliar with the conservation activities being conducted by CWRC (the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation; IFAW-WTI and the Assam Forest Department’s wildlife rescue, care and rehabilitation facility near Kaziranga National Park), the IFAW-WTI team organised a photo-exhibition at the State Art Gallery, Rabindra Bhawan Campus, Guwahati, from March 24 to 26.
Titled ‘CWRC: A Pictorial Journey of Securing Wildlife’, the exhibition was curated by IFAW-WTI Assistant Manager Subhamoy Bhattacharjee and portrayed, through 80 stunning photographs, CWRC’s work in the 15 years since its inception.  The event saw a heavy footfall and was attended by a variety of people from artists to biologists, entrepreneurs, housewives, students, photographers, conservationists and veterinarians.
Smt Pramila Rani Brahma, Minister for Environment and Forests, Government of Assam inaugurated the exhibition on March 24. “I have personally witnessed CWRC’s tireless efforts to assist wildlife in distress,” the Hon’ble Minister said, “and I laud the specialised wildlife care the centre provides not only for Kaziranga but the entire north-east.”
Also present at the inauguration were Dr Parimal Chandra Bhattacharjee, Trustee, Wildlife Trust of India; Bibhab Talukdar, Secretary General and CEO of Aaranyak; heads of various NGOs; senior officials of the Assam Forest Department; and other dignitaries. Dr Rathin Barman, Deputy Director, Wildlife Trust of India and Centre-in-charge, CWRC thanked the attendees and for their support in making the event a success.

A variety of people, from artists to biologists, entrepreneurs, housewives, students, photographers, conservationists and veterinarians thronged the three-day exhibition
“IFAW-WTI should consider making this a mobile exhibition”, said Ranoj Bori, an assistant school teacher from the Golaghat district; “it should be taken to people living near the Protected Areas of Assam so that these communities can understand wildlife conservation better. This will help in reducing the human-animal conflict as well.”
“Very beautifully done! Interesting and heart-warming pictures of the birds and animals”, Vaishali Kashyap, a student of TISS Guwahati wrote in the Visitor’s Book. Aniruddha Das, a photography enthusiast said that the exhibition, and the work by the Assam Forest Department and IFAW-WTI that it showcased, would have a long-term impact. “More than mere pictures in a frame, each of these photographs represents an actual conservation story. This is what makes them especially noteworthy”, he said.