Gilola, Shrawasti, February 2, 2015: More than 100 students gathered around the Sacrail Wetland in Shrawasti district, UP, and took pledge to be part of the global wetland conservation initiatives. The occasion was to mark the World Wetlands Day observed throughout the world on 2nd February. Students and teachers of Nehru Smarak Inter College, Gilola, participated in the event organized by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in partnership with Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and the Allied Trusts, Mumbai.


Arshad Hussain administering oath to the students to

conserve wetlands.Photo: Narendra Kumar/WTI

Earlier in the day, students and teachers took out a procession and reached the Sacrail — the nearest wetland from the school. They spent the day observing the wetland’s biodiversity and appreciated the ecological and economic services offered by this particular wetland.
The students noticed several bird species, including Sarus Crane, Cotton Pygmy-goose, vultures and many species of waders inhabiting the wetland. Arshad Hussain, Senior Officer, WTI, addressed the students and made them aware about the reasons why wetland ecosystems should be conserved. He also stressed on the threats that cause wetland deterioration throughout the country and Uttar Pradesh in particular. Teachers also spoke about the importance and ecosystem values of wetlands. Later, the students took pledge to save the wetlands for the benefits of future generations.


Students participating in a rally on World Wetlands Day.

Photo: Arshad/WTI

Thereafter, students shared their experiences of the visit and then participated in a Quiz Competition on wetlands. Thirty eight students from Class 7-10th participated in the contest. Anchal Shukla of Class VIII, who won the first prize, said that it was a learning experience to visit Sacrail Wetland, which is in the vicinity of her town. Raman Shukla and Jyoti Shukla of Class VIII were adjudged 2nd and 3rd in the quiz competition, while Chandranshu Mishra, Shivam Shukla and Vandini Gupta of Class VIII, and Anchal Gupta of Class X won consolation prizes.
Dr. Rajendra Singh, Principal, Nehru Smarak Inter College, handed over the awards to the winners and lauded the initiatives of WTI for raising awareness amongst students on wetlands and other conservation related issues.


The prize distribution ceremony on World Wetlands Day.

Photo: Narendra Kumar/WTI

With support from Sir Dorabji Tata Trust and the Allied Trusts, WTI is engaged in Sarus Crane Conservation Project in 10 agriculture dominated districts of Eastern Uttar Pradesh. The project ensures that farmers, grass-root organizations, agriculture institutions and the State Forest Department play a crucial role in wetland conservation.
“State bird of UP, Sarus crane symbolizes the healthy status of wetlands. The Sarus Crane Conservation Project has demarcated Eastern Uttar Pradesh as an important landscape for Sarus conservation and propagated Sarus friendly agricultural practices amongst the farming community,” said Samir Kumar Sinha, Regional Head, WTI.
Under the project, about 700 adult Sarus cranes and nearly 130 nests of the species were located and monitored in this landscape during the 2014 nesting season.