Kalapa Gowda. Photo: WTI

Wayanad, August 14, 2014: The Wayanad Elephant Corridor today lost one of its biggest local supporters in the Anappara village, right outside the wildlife sanctuary, Kalappa Gowda. All of 80 years, he passed away peacefully due to natural causes. A member of the Thirulakunnu settlement within the corridor of the Gowda community, a centuries old community from Andhra Pradesh which settled in Wayanad 400 years ago, Kalappa had been one of the first to come forward when WTI announced their relocation plan for the villagers.
The settlement had been located within the elephant corridor and was forced to share their resources with the wild animals who routinely used the conduit to move between Thirunelli in Wayanad and Kudrakote in Karnataka.
“When WTI approached the village, in our first attempt to voluntarily relocate people from an elephant corridor adjacent to a wildlife sanctuary, Kalappa- the Head of the Village- was extremely cooperative and willing to help us in our effort to conserve this right of passage for the elephants. Had it not been for him, perhaps the elephants wouldn’t have been able to reclaim their land when they did. We offer our deepest condolences to family in this time of profound grief,” said Dr Sandeep Kr Tiwari, Deputy Director of WTI.


Kalappa taking care of his farmland. Photo: WTI

The relocation process from Thirulakunnu was started in 2006 and completed within a year, where every single family was given a new model home, specially designed to suit the climatic conditions and needs of the family while keeping with the traditions and cultural identity of the community.
Kalappa himself had been given 6 acres of land and he had started cultivation on the same, mainly of paddy, ginger and vegetables. The land also has cash crops like coffee and pepper which are a good source of income. Kalappa worked extremely hard at this new lease of life and was able to earn to live a very comfortable life.
“Two years ago he proudly told me that he is now one of the richest Gowdas in Wayanad. He has shown to all how to live a decent life and succeed after relocating from the corridor land. I heard a week before he passed away he had even bought a power-tiller and had big plans for his land!” fondly said Sabu Jahas, Manager with the Nilgiri Conservation Project of WTI, as he remembered the endearing old man.