Kaziranga, 15 July 2020:
What happens when a tigress comes calling at midnight, trying to escape the floodwaters? If it’s Kaziranga, and the house of Prabin Bora, the tigress stays overnight and the owners stay calm until expert help arrives.
In a 28 hour operation, a sub-adult female tigress (approx 2 yr old) that was stranded since yesterday at Baghmari village around Deopani adjacent to the western boundary of Kaziranga National Park was successfully captured by chemical immobilization by the IFAW-WTI-Assam Forest Department (AFD) team this afternoon.
As mentioned in the previous update, this is the third tiger to be displaced in the Kaziranga floods of which two have been provided safe passage. Read more about this here.
This tigress was first spotted near NH 715 early yesterday, it had taken refuge in the bushes during the day, only to later cross NH 715 and enter the house of Prabin Bora around midnight, it then decided to spent the night there. This incident emphasizes the need for community sensitization towards displaced wildlife. Covid – 19 prevented pre-flood awareness meetings with communities due to Covid-19 this year but WTI–IFAW-AFD teams reached out to them by radio talks last month.
[acx_slideshow name=”tigress”]
WTI-IFAW-AFD team in action, Pic @Rathin Barman and Daoharu Baro /WTI
It was expected that she would move out towards the foothills of Karbi Anglong. IFAW-WTI-AFD teams were in place to monitor any movement of the animal overnight. However, it did not move.
Today, the rescuers tried to draw the tigress out of the house using standard practices but it did not come out of the house.
The second option, which was to chemically immobilise the tigress was acted upon and Dr. Samshul Ali, IFAW-WTI veterinarian successfully managed to get the perfect shot with his tranquilizer gun. The shot had to be precise as an imperfect shot would have made the tigress rushing out and seeking refuge in another human habitation. And the delight in Samshul’s face can be seen in the video here. Dr Daoharu Baro, the IFAW-WTI veterinarian was on constant vigil at the other end of the house with a team on alert in case the tigress charged from the other side.

Post immobilization, Dr. Panjit Basumatary, also a WTI-IFAW veterinarian joined Dr. Samshul Ali and Dr. Daoharu Baro and the CWRC animal keepers for further care and treatment of the rescued animal.
The tigress has been taken to CWRC for now and will stay under observation until it is safe to release her.
While you are here, take time to read this story of a tigress who occupied someone’s bed for a day last year. We thank the local communities for displaying such sensitivity and large-hearted tolerance to accommodate wildlife in their homes, even while they are rendered homeless due to floods.
On 17th July, this tigress has been released back to the wild, click link for insta video.