Group photograph of trainers, trainees and senior Forest Department officials.




Pench, July 6, 2015: A 10-day long training on wildlife crime prevention conducted by International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) concluded today. This refresher training under IFAW- WTI’s Guardians of the Wild or Van Rakshak Project at Pench Tiger Reserve, Madhya Pradesh saw participation of around 277 frontline forest staff of Pench TR. During the course of training, the participants learnt about Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, and its various sections. The frontline staff was also trained in anti-poaching patrolling techniques, Crime Scene Investigation (CSI), intelligence gathering, interrogation techniques, and preparation of Preliminary Offence Report (POR).
The training laid emphasis on the understanding of the various concepts, and the common mistakes often committed by frontline forest staff while preparing the POR and CSI that could cost a possible conviction. They were also briefed about the importance of the independent witnesses during raid operations and CSI. Various procedures for collection and preservation of evidences were also taught during the training.
IFAW-WTI was represented by a Legal Advisor, Mr Yash Kumar Soni; Jose Louies, Head, Enforcement and Law; Mr Prafulla Bhamburkar and RP Mishra, Regional Heads. While Mr Soni taught various aspects of wildlife laws, Mr Bhamburkar and Dr Mishra talked about wildlife crime, tracks and signs and various schedules of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, respectively.


IFAW-WTI trainer talking to participants

The IFAW–WTI team was strengthened by the presence of Mr Arvind Jha from the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau who also participated as a trainer. Mr. Jha’s expertise as a national level wildlife crime investigator ensured that the staff had an opportunity to discuss practical field situations and challenges they face while dealing with such crimes.
“All these days, we were looking at the tiger which has the highest demand in banned wildlife products, but it looks like that the lesser known species such as pangolins, monitor lizards and otters are more in demand. As these animals are found in the fringes of the park, it is difficult to monitor the trade, we need to change our tactics too or face consequences,” said Mr Rambharose Pathak, Deputy Range Officer, Pench TR. He secured the highest marks in all the exercises that frontline forest staff underwent.


The participants taking notes during one of the training sessions

“The improvement is very much visible in the paperwork and the staff feel assured that they have a reliable support from the IFAW-WTI lawyer who visits the park two days a month only to provide exclusive legal assistance to the park management on crimes registered under Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. So, it is not just class room training and exercises that make the Guardians of Wild project a model mechanism to deal with wildlife crime, but also the regular legal support by the lawyer,” claimed Mr Alok Kumar, Field Director, Pench TR, during the project review session.
IFAW-WTI is expanding the training and legal assistance to other tiger reserves of Madhya Pradesh this year in association with the State Forest Department. “We are thankful to the Forest Department for their support and encouragement and with the joint efforts of the department and organizations, we can reduce the wildlife crime related issues in the state in the coming years,” said Dr RP Mishra.
The Field Director attended the first, second and fifth batch of training while the Deputy Director of the reserve attended the fourth batch of training. Fifty-six frontline forest staff attended the first batch of training while 58 participated in the second, 48 in the third, 52 in the fourth and 63 in the final batch.
“Since the three year refresher training has come to an end, we will evaluate the effectiveness of the training next year instead of holding a training. More such trainings will be planned in the future as determined by the results,” said Jose Louies.


Legal assistance review meeting in progress.

The gathering of trainers and legal experts provided the opportunity of holding the first Central India Legal Assistance Review meeting on June 29, in presence of Mr Alok Kumar, Field Director, Pench Tiger Reserve.
WTI has been providing legal assistance to the Pench Tiger Reserve since 2013 by way of assisting the forest authorities in filing cases comprehensively and also advising on pending cases in the courts from these areas. The aim of the project is to prevent crimes against wildlife as per the definitions and provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, and take cognizance of all wildlife cases filed with the help of IFAW-WTI’s legal assistance team in the trial courts in these areas.
‘Legal support will continue to ensure that the trial court cases that are registered under Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, are well-documented to ensure favorable judgments in the courts,” said Mr Jose Louies.
It was decided that regular meetings will be held under the supervision of the senior Tiger Reserve Management and a review meeting will be held after every two/three months with all the Assistant Conservator of Forests and Range Officers on wildlife crime management in the presence of the advocate for legal assistance to ensure efficacy. The purpose of the review meeting would be to get an update on each of the case filed in each Range.
Mr Alok Kumar was satisfied with the legal assistance review meeting with WTI and stated, “The Legal Assistance Program has led to confidence build- up and sensitization of the forest staff of Pench Tiger Reserve.”