Roing (Arunachal Pradesh), August 3, 2014: Six Asiatic black bear cubs, hand-reared by IFAW-WTI team, were released back to the wild in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary. One of the cubs was radio-collared yesterday, to facilitate post-release monitoring.
The cubs rescued from various parts of northeast India were hand-reared at the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department and International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) run Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation in Pakke TR. The cubs were later moved to Mehao to begin their acclimatization in the wild, late last year.
The cubs were walked daily into the forest, accompanied by IFAW-WTI animal keepers, to help them learn skills necessary for survival. Over the past few months, the cubs had become increasingly independent of the keepers.
The radio-collaring was done by IFAW-WTI veterinarian Dr Nupur Ranjan Buragohain in the presence of Ipra Mekola, member of the State Wildlife Advisory Board, Arunachal Pradesh. IFAW-WTI team headed by Soumya Dasgupta with animal keepers Rama and Chotu will now monitor the cubs, tracking radio-signals emitted by the radio transmitters attached to the collar. The signal will be received by a high frequency receiver.


The bear being radio collared. Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee / IFAW-WTI

Kenjum Rina, DFO, Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary Division of Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department had appreciated the effort of IFAW-WTI towards wildlife conservation in the state. G B Pulu, senior wildlife activist of the region has congratulated the team for this effort.
Sunil Kyarong, Regional Head IFAW-WTI emphasized, “Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary is identified as one of the best habitat for Asiatic black bears. By releasing the displaced bears inside this sanctuary, we are adding to the richness of the bio-diversity of this sanctuary.”
Dr Kuladeep Roy, the Assistant Manager of IFAW-WTI’s Dibang Valley Conservation project said that monitoring the two collared bear cubs, will provide vital data not just on the bears but also on their habitat.