Chhattisgarh: Two Kalandars in Chhattisgarh have finally settled for alternative livelihood after weeks of discussions between Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the community. Sloth bears in their possession were surrendered to the forest department.
Kallu and Tinku, affectionately called by their masters, have been sent to the Kanan Pendari Zoological Park situated in the outskirts of Bilaspur city. The bears, aged 16 and 14 years respectively, will spend their time at the temporary enclosure built in the park, till a care centre for bears comes up.
This development comes less than a month after few Kalandars in Bhopal surrendered their bears to the forest department to embark on alternative livelihoods.
WTI and its partner World Society for Protection of Animals (WSPA) have initiated the Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project to end the practice of dancing bears by the Kalandars and to protect the species from illegal wildlife trade.
Various proposals for alternative livelihoods of the Kalandars are being planned in these states.
In Bhopal where Kalandars were given incentives to start new livelihoods such as initial capital for purchase of commercial vehicles and to open shops, many others have also expressed their desire to give up their traditional occupation.
Arjun Nayar, Programme Officer of WTI said, “I sincerely hope that this step taken by these two Kalandars will encourage others to join this programme. What stands out is their trust and confidence in the programme.”
“But for us the happiest moment was when the restrictive nose ropes and muzzles were cut off and the bears found themselves ‘free’ for the first time, possibly in years to be themselves,” Nayar adds.
Another 250 sq. m facility is currently under construction in the park which can house as many as 16 sloth bears. This shelter will be important for the rehabilitation of rescued sloth bears in the state.
Raj Ali, one of the Kalandars already accepted a temporary position of a caretaker of the surrendered bears.
WTI and WSPA in collaboration with the forest department have planned for various interventions to save the future of these wonderful animals.