During the past few months in the North 24 Paraganas district of West Bengal, numerous incidents have occurred from snake conflict, leading to casualties on both sides. Snakes are being killed in retaliation or fear while people are getting injured or succumbing to snake bites. The local hospital had been collaborating with a local NGO, Bonding with Nature and Animals Foundation (BAN) and sharing details about cases related to snake conflict. In the past two years ( 2022 & 2023), BAN has rescued a total of 80 venomous snakes while having recorded 55 snake bite cases in the North 24 Paraganas. 
Snake bites and human fatalities, as well as retaliatory injuries and the killing of snakes, have led to increasing conflict among the low-income community of farmers and slum dwellers in this area. Encounters with snakes are quite common in the North 24 Paraganas, however, in many instances when the snake is found in close proximity to human settlements, people have reacted in ways that have caused the snake to act in self-defense. Additionally, farmers and their families spend most of their day outdoors or working in fields, barefoot (or wearing slippers), handling tasks with their bare hands, thus increasing their risk of getting bit by a snake. Furthermore, while venturing outdoors after dark, villagers frequently walk in poorly lit areas without using flashlights, which can lead to snake bites if they fail to spot the snake and accidentally step on it.  
Russell’s viper is one of the ‘Big Four’ venomous snake species in India | Photo by Soumitra/ Bonding with Animals and Nature (BAN)
The majority of these cases in this area were attributed to two species–the Russell’s viper, often found in the agricultural lands and the Common Krait, which is nocturnal. The Russell’s viper is identifiable by its yellow-brown body which has notable dark circular spots with black and white edges. The Common krait on the other hand is characterised by its black or bluish-black colouration and its flat, blunt, short head with small eyes. Additionally, it has distinctive yellow and black cross-bands along the backbone. 
Identifying the issue at hand, BAN reached out to the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to provide equipment support to the community, in an effort to mitigate human-snake conflict.; The organisation applied for a RAP (Rapid Action Project) to secure the necessary resources (equipment) for the community members that would enable them to protect themselves when encountering snakes. As a part of this RAP, 200 mosquito nets, 200 torches, and 200 pairs of gumboots were distributed to community members from four panchayats which were the most snakebite prone zones in the area with the most number of fatal attacks. Additionally, awareness programs were conducted by BAN members to educate the community on identifying venomous snakes and preventing snake bite incidents.
Equipment distribution drives conducted by BAN with support from WTI | Photo by Soumitra/ Bonding with Animals and Nature (BAN)
The health department and forest department were also present during the distribution drive. According to BAN, the community members have been utilising mosquito nets, gum boots, and flashlights; and no snake bite cases have been recorded in the past couple of months; since the time the distribution drive was conducted in January 2024.
Human-snake conflict can be prevented by adopting precautionary steps. In the event of a snake bite, it is crucial to follow proper first aid procedures and seek medical treatment at a hospital, especially in rural areas; instead of resorting to traditional healers. Practices undertaken by “traditional healers” are rather dangerous and often lead to fatal outcomes, especially if the bite is from a venomous snake. As a part of the medical treatment at the hospital, the administration of Anti-Snake Venom along with life support equipment can help save patients bitten by venomous snakes, if treated in time. 
Snake awareness workshops were also conducted to sensitise the communities | Photo by Soumitra/ Bonding with Animals and Nature (BAN)
Our RAPs operate through collaborations with grassroots organisations, government agencies and community stakeholders. For equipment requests;  applicants are required to fill out an application detailing the specific equipment needed, its intended use, and background information about the location where it would be used. Equipment provided through RAPs in the past includes jackets, raincoats, torches, ponchos, binoculars, leaf blowers, snake rescue kits, and various other items. In the past year, we have supported RAP partners in Telangana, Kerala, West Bengal, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha, and Madhya Pradesh, among many others.