New Delhi: Hundreds of Tibetans today at Majnu Ka Tilla settlement applauded the Chief Minister, Sheela Dixit’s announcement of halting the demolition drive planned here by the Public Works Department. 
Chief Minister was attending a function organized by the Tibetans to celebrate His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s 71st birth anniversary.
As many as three hundred Tibetans among others participated in the programme. Besides talks by the guests, a range of cultural programmes was also organized.
Dixit said that the government will not allow the demolition to go ahead. Dispelling fears of the Tibetan refugees, she asked them to carry on with their lives and not to worry.
The local MLA, Parlad Sahni, Tempa Tsering, the representative of His Holiness in Delhi and several other important dignitaries participated in the programme.
Later, Tsering inaugurated the Wildlife Conservation Awareness Stall of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
This initiative has been undertaken as a step forward to the Tibetan Conservation Awareness Campaign launched by His Holiness the Dalai Lama last year in conjunction with WTI and the Care for the Wild International (CWI).
Tsering said, “His Holinesses’ message for conservation of endangered species had been taken seriously by people. This stall will allow people to learn about the endangered species and their conservation status.”
Ashok Kumar Vice Chairman of WTI said, “The aim is to educate them about the ongoing wildlife trade. Beside other programmes people will also be familiarized about the species which are commonly used in the trade.”
“A residual wildlife trade still appears to exist here – this initiative by WTI will ensure an end to this.” said Kumar.
In 1993, in one of the biggest wildlife seizures, 387 Kg. of tiger bones, 43 leopard skins, 128 otter skins, 8 tiger skins, and a host of other skins comprising chital, black buck, fox, civet etc. were stored in a safe house in Majnu Ka Tilla, which were later seized.
In April last year, 45 leopard skins and 14 otter pelts were recovered from illegal traders, during a raid close to this Tibetan settlement.

>

In addition to this, there were about 10 other wildlife seizures during this period which had links to trans-himalayan carriers, and some of whom had connections with this settlement.
Mandeepa Ahluwalia, who is managing the project here said, “This conservation awareness stall will remain here for six months. Regular interactions with the Tibetan community will definitely bring an attitudinal change, especially for those few who are still involved in wildlife trade.”
WTI has identified 51 Tibetan settlements across the country where this awareness campaign will be initiated.
“About 26 settlements will be covered this year and the rest will be covered next year.” said Mandeepa.
A positive result of this campaign came early this year when Tibetans in Tibet, Nepal and in the North Indian state of Himachal Pradesh had burnt ‘Chubas’ made from animal skins (animal clad garments) in support of His Holinesses message to renounce them.