Gujarat: Investigation into the illegal trade of rare birds in the Anand district of Gujarat has led to the arrest of a dealer on April 09 and is likely to throw light on this alleged network of bird seekers. 
The operation was conducted jointly by the members of the Wildlife Rehabilitators Exchange Network (WREN) and representatives from the local media. WREN was initiated by the Wildlife Trust of India with support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) for rescue and rehabilitation of the distressed and diseased wild animals across the country.
Dhaval Patel, the Managing Trustee of the Vidyanagar Nature Club, also a WREN member in Anand said, “Our volunteers had brought the news that two hill mynas (Gracula religiosa) were up for sale at Nadiad 22 kms. from Anand. Following which, we sent a decoy customer to confirm. As it turned out to be the case, a team of five from the VNC and the Divya Bhaskar newspaper nabbed the dealer Vinod Devipujak and handed him over to the forest officials.”
The accused was apprehended from the Ekta Parivar Jhupadpatti locality, a sensitive slum in the outskirts of Anand. The court has sent the accused under four days of remand to the Forest department. In court, the accused revealed that the birds were originally bought from a local market ‘Gurjari Bazzar’ held on the banks of river Sabarmati on special days and that he is not the original owner. One of the several owners from whom he received the birds, had died a few months back.
Reportedly, various types of rare birds were brought to Gujarat as pet animals which are mostly endangered or schedule species. About five hundred birds were sold and bought in the state annually to cater the increasing demand for pet animals among certain section of the Gujratis. Crawford market in Mumbai is alleged to be the primary supplier of these species. According to Patel, “You name a species and they are at your door step. Parakeet, great-horned and barn owls etc., besides a range of other species are being sold.”
According to Patel, “Hill mynas are well-known for their mimicking abilities. In the ‘backstreet’ markets, their price varied from rupees 15000 to 50000 for a pair depending on their ability to mimic. Though, macaw, species of parrot and many other are not found in India, they are considered rare in their native range countries and are illegally brought from countries in South America and Africa for this trade.”
The average life span of the mynas is considered to be about eight years. The hill mynas are placed under the Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, the highest protection accorded to species in the country.
Prajna Paramita Panda, Programme Officer of WTI said, “The hill mynas are residents of the Himalayas and they are also found in the northeast India. These birds are important for the regeneration of forests as they help in the dispersal of seeds from the fruits they feed on.” It is also the state bird of Chhattisgarh and Meghalaya.