Darjeeling (West Bengal), August 12, 2008: The trial of the two Czech nationals apprehended for illegal insect collection in Singhalila National Park will begin on August 25, the Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) said today during a hearing held in Darjeeling. 
The accused, Petr Svacha and Emil Kucera were arrested from their hotel room in Shrikhola near Darjeeling on June 22. About 500 insects in various growth stages were seized from them. The forest department officials had identified a few species including a butterfly belonging to the Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act. However, confirmation from the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) on the classification of the insects is awaited.
Last month, after about 30 days in jail, they were granted interim bail based on certain conditions set by the court. The conditions continue to remain valid, meaning that the accused will not be allowed to leave Darjeeling without the court’s permission.
However, the authorities were asked today to return the cash seized from the accused during their arrest. The CJM also ordered for their passports to be deposited with the court, which were earlier in the possession of the Inquiry Officer.
Saurabh Sharma, advocate, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) said, “The forest department has filed a complaint under Section 55 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act. The trial will begin on August 25 and is likely to proceed expeditiously as the accused are foreigners.”
The two foreigners, by collecting wildlife from a national park without any permits, are accused of violating the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and Biological Diversity Act, 2002. Although, they claim the collection was for research, evidence hinting at their involvement in trade has been unearthed by the forest department. If convicted, they will face a minimum of three years imprisonment which may extend up to seven years.



Related Stories:
Czech ‘insect thieves’ granted ‘interim’ bail
Czech insect collectors remain in Jail 
International pressure to bail out “insect thieves”
Foreigners arrested in Darjeeling for illegal collection of rare insects