Amaravati: The campaign to stop the merciless killings of endangered wild animals for making traditional garments and medicines among the Tibetans gained further momentum at Kalachakra in Amaravati when three thousand odd devotees came forward to sign pledges against its use.
This Annual Buddhist Pilgrimage to Kalachakra, was held this year in Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh. Over one lakh twenty-five thousand devotees from India, Tibet, China, Taiwan, Japan, Korea, Bhutan, Nepal, and even from far away Mongolia and Russia had assembled to receive the ancient Buddhist sermons delivered by His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama during the two week-long empowerment initiation.
His Holiness, who launched this Tibetan Conservation Awareness Campaign in conjunction with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the Care for the Wild International (CWI) last year in Delhi, reminded his conservation message for kindness and compassion towards all living beings at the Kalachakra and said, “when you go back to your respective places, remember what I had said earlier. Neither use, sell or buy wild animals, their products or derivatives.”
He spoke about the poaching of the endangered Tibetan antelope and the resultant devastating trade in shahtoosh wool and shawls. “I am ashamed and don’t feel like living when I see all those pictures of people decorating themselves with skins and furs.” He implored.”
In response to this call, three thousand Tibetans have signed pledges against the use of wildlife products.
According to Pasang Lhamu Bhutia, Project Officer WTI, “an exhibition stall was organized for information on the endangered wild animals. A series of video presentations highlighting the cruel exploitation of wild species were also shown to the public. In addition, posters and handouts expressing support by some eminent personalities of the fashion world in India were distributed to gauge people’s reactions.”
Dr. Barbara Mass, Chief Executive of the CWI was invited for presentations on the role of Tibetans in the protection of endangered species. “From the feedback we received, it was evident that the message of His Holiness and that of the video presentations had been received loud and clear, as more and more pilgrims crowded around our stall.  They also took away CD copies of our educational videos, which were in great demand”, she said.  “Visitors to our stall were really shocked by what they saw. Those who took the CDs with them will spread this conservation message in their respective homelands.”
Tibetans and other Himalayan communities have recently been identified as the primary consumers of endangered tigers. Tibetan antelope, leopards, otters and other species such as fox skins are also traded in large numbers. “Thanks to His Holiness’s dedication to this issue and the honesty and open-mindedness of the Tibetans, there is no doubt in my mind that this Kalachakra was not only a deeply meaningful Buddhist event, but will also make a genuine difference by saving the lives of countless wild animals,” said Maas.
“We will continue to carry this important joint initiative forward at many other such opportunities in the future and to the Tibetan and Himalayan communities wherever they are.” said Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman WTI.