Kaziranga  National Park , Assam :  Poachers killed one more rhino, raising the number of deaths to ten  this year, despite the park administration’s claim that enforcement efforts had been intensified. 
The Kaziranga National Park (KNP)  in the north-east Indian Assam state is facing its worst year in the last decade with the death toll aleady reaching ten, with six months to go. In a  span of last ten days, a poacher was shot dead by the park authorities and  after a few days of the incident a rhino was killed by the poachers.
Tough security measures, including an emergency action plan, had  been  been put in place and  as a bold step the park administration had issued shoot-at-sight orders last April to  send a clear signal to the poachers.
The carcass of the rhino was discovered by the park officials during a patrolling. A large pit was made by the poachers in a path which was frequented by rhinos and covered it with leaves and twigs to avoid detection. The fallen animal was later killed and the horn sawed off. The pit method is used to avoid detection by the forest staff.   This  method is a matter of concern for the forest officers  as it clearly indicates the involvement of  at least five member poaching teams and not individual opportunists.
 
On 14th evening, forest guards who maintain a round the clock vigil, heard the sound of gun shot and following it, came upon the carcass of a  freshly killed rhino with its horn sawn off .  This was despite reaching within ten minutes  of  having  heard the shots. Two empty .303 rounds were  found near the spot.
The poachers are believed to  have entered from the border that runs along the National highway 37, which runs along the border of Karbi Anglong district of Assam.
“This is a serious situation!”  Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman , Wildlife Trust of India  said . “Such a severe threat to the rhino population comes after a gap of many years and if required armed police should be  deployed to raise the level of security inside the 430-square-kms Park”
Five rhinos were poached last year and seven were killed in 2005. About 500 rhinos have been killed by poachers over the past 20 years, according to government estimates.