Kaziranga (Assam): Two rescued rhinos – Maju and Raja, are on their way back to the wild in northeast India, after recovery under the care of the Assam Forest Department (AFD) and International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI). Covering a 450-km long journey from one UNESCO World Heritage Site to another, the two will be a part of Manas National Park.


Maju was orphaned in an unfortunate incident in February 2009, when his mother charged at a team of researchers and had to be killed by forest guards protecting them. Raja was found alone in January 2008, dehydrated and weak, with the whereabouts of his mother unknown.
Both incidents occurred in Kaziranga National Park – a World Heritage site that hosts over 70% of the world’s greater one-horned rhino population.
The calves were admitted to the IFAW-WTI-AFD run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), where they were hand-raised by experienced veterinarians and animal keepers. Now between three and four years of age, the two healthy males will be released in Manas National Park, to play their role in establishing a viable population to aid long-term survival of the species.
“Some of the most interesting and pioneering conservation and welfare initiatives have taken wings in Assam. The rehabilitation of rescued animals in the wild  and repopulation is one of those. It combines individual animal welfare and conservation and proves that every individual matters,” said Suresh Chand, IFS, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Assam.

Historically found across the Brahmaputra valley, viable populations of the greater one-horned rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis) in Assam arecurrently confined to Kaziranga, Orang NP and Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary. The species faces threats from poachers, in addition to conflicts withlocals and habitat loss. Rhinos are being reintroduced in Manas National Park thruogh wild to wild translocation from Pobitara Wildlife Sanctuary and Kaziranga National Park as well as through such rehabilitation of rescued rhinos from CWRC.
“The current condition of the greater one-horned rhinoceros is like an ‘all-eggs-in-few-baskets’ syndrome,” said Vivek Menon, Regional Director South Asia – IFAW, Executive Director – WTI, and a member of IUCN-SSC Rhino Specialist Group. “They are found only in a few pockets in India and Nepal”. With this initiative we have an opportunity to return rhinos like Maju and Raja – who would otherwise be dead or have to spend life in captivity – back to the wild -more crucially, to Manas to help in establishing a new population there.”Maju and Raja follow three rhinos that have been moved from CWRC and released in Manas by the Assam Forest Dept assisted by IFAW-WTI since 2006 kickstarting the crucial rhino reintroduction programme in the World Heritage.
Rhino Translocation from Kaziranga to Manas by IFAW – WTI team
Rhino Translocation from Kaziranga to Manas by IFAW – WTI team – Transportation & Release