New Delhi: Four leopard skins and two elephant tusks were recovered from traders in three separate undercover operations conducted over three consecutive days last week. Ten persons were arrested following the operations by authorities in Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh that were assisted by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).The first of the three seizures was conducted on March 2 in Hosur along the Tamil Nadu-Karnataka-Kerala border by Tamil Nadu Forest Department officials. Two tusks, each cut in two halves, were recovered. Five traders were apprehended.On March 3, two leopard skins were seized in Hapur in west Uttar Pradesh by the state’s Special Task Force. Two traders were arrested.The third seizure was carried out on March 4 by the Tamil Nadu Forest Department in Hosur. Two leopard skins were recovered. Three persons, including one who reportedly confessed to poaching the animals, were apprehended. The gun used to kill the leopards was recovered too.“Although, the illegal market price of a full tusk is much higher than of the pieces like the ones seized in Hosur, the traders could have cut them for easy storage and transportation. It would also be easier to find multiple customers for smaller pieces, rather than one who can afford a complete tusk. There could also be a possibility that the tusks were damaged when the tusker bearing them was poached,” said Prasenjeet Navgire, Programme Officer, WTI. “Elephant ivory is used mainly to make ornaments, and the bulk of the ivory trade is fuelled by demands from far-east Asia.”Both the common leopard (Panthera pardus) as well as Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) are listed in schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. If convicted for illegal trade, the accused may be awarded a maximum prison term of seven years along with a fine.All the accused have been booked. Further investigation is ongoing.
A recent seizure by authorities in Dharmapuri, Tamil Nadu, has brought to light the use of fake articles as alibi for wildlife trade in India.
Two 5.5 feet-long tusks and a jungle cat skin were recovered along with fake tiger and leopard skins from four persons in Dharmapuri on February 20. The accused are currently under judicial custody.
“Fake articles are often used as alibi for wildlife trade,” said a WTI official, working for wildlife trade control. “The traders in question are highly skilled in making fake tiger skins by painting on those of other animals including cattle. They often hide original skins in a consignment of fake skins to hoodwink authorities, as well as their customers.”
“In the recent past, fake ivory has also surfaced in illegal wildlife markets of south India. This trend seems to have been fuelled by an increase in demand for ivory. The ‘replica ivory’ are made of various materials and are sometimes very difficult to differentiate from original ones,” he added.
Tenzin Norsang/WTI (third from top)