Surat: The Wildlife Rehabilitators Exchange Network (WREN) which was launched by the Wild Rescue Programme of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) early this year to take up rescue and rehabilitation measures for wildlife in crisis across the country have come forward to help wildlife in the flood affected areas of Gujarat. WREN volunteers stationed in Gujarat have reportedly rescued two marine turtles from submerged areas of southern Gujarat . Reptiles such as snakes, monitor lizards, water dolphins, olive ridely turtles, fresh water turtles, birds and mammals were all affected in the turbulent floods of Gujarat . According to Darshan Desai a WREN member of WTI in Surat , “One olive ridely turtle and a hawksbill turtle were rescued from the Tapti river basin in Dumas and Suvali villages about 15-20 km away from Surat . One of the turtles had injuries in the hind leg and was provided medical treatment. Both the turtles were released later at the mouth of the Tapti Bay in the Arabian Sea”.
“A rescue hotline is being established in Surat to deal with the displaced and distressed wild animals along the coasts. The local forest department has extended maximum help in the rescue effort. One of the turtle was provided treatment at the local forest range office”, he added.
The olive ridely and hawkbill are endangered marine turtles and are protected under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
The western most coastal state of India was under turbulent flood waters for more than a month due to continuous heavy rainfall in the region. Humans as well as wildlife in the state were displaced as the flood waters took over their habitations. Valsad, Surat , Dangs and Bharuch districts of southern Gujarat were the most affected. Roadways and railways connecting these southern most districts of the state were cut off from the rest of the world by the flood waters.
Wildlife habitats in southern Gujarat , such as Vansda National Park , Purna Wildlife Sanctuary, Dangs Reserve Forest and forests areas in the Surat District-home to a large number wildlife were severely hit. According to Desai, “More help is urgently required from the government for protecting and transporting these injured and distressed animals to safer places.”
According to Dr. Ashraf, Director Wild Rescue, WTI, “In any flood situation there is always a danger of an epidemic of water-borne diseases, both in the wild as well as for the domestic cattle. Besides, lack of sufficient food in the situation also make them weak.
Wildlife Rehabilitators Exchange Network (WREN) which was initiated by WTI for the rescue and rehabilitation of distressed and injured wild animals under critical and emergency situations in the country has 39 active members across the country today. WREN members are individuals from different regions and various occupations and have a passion for wildlife. WTI seeks their help and service whenever a need arises that requires immediate attention.
Pictures:Darshan Desai