New Delhi: The Gujarat government in western India has announced a compensation of Rupees 25,000 for each fishing net that is damaged in attempts to save the whale shark.
Officials said it will boost the conservation efforts of the species in the state. The provision has come into effect on the Christmas Eve.
The proposal was forwarded to the government in May by the forest department for approval, whose decision has come at the right time, conservationists said.
The fish was provided highest protection in the country – Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act in 2001, following widespread commercial hunting of the species which threatened their existence.
“Fishermen had to cut their nets open to release the fish – a huge loss, as they depend on them for livelihood. This step has been taken to protect their interest and also to ensure that the fish is not harmed.” Pradeep Khanna, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest said.
“Every year, a number of whale sharks get trapped in the fishing nets – though occur unintentionally is still a major concern. Last year, two sharks were rescued off the Saurashtra coast.” Khanna said.
As per the conditions, the fisherman applying for the compensation has to inform the local forest officer immediately after the incident – who will collect evidence to support the claim.
The damage will be decided by the local forest and fisheries head. Besides the compensation, a certificate of appreciation will also be provided to the fisherman.
In 2004, Wildlife Trust of India initiated a campaign “Save the Whale Shark” to include the fishing community in the conservation efforts.
Street plays, rallies, school activities, film screening etc. were organized along the coastal towns as part of the campaign.
Consequently, in several such incidents fishermen played an important role – not only in passing information to the forest officials but also actively involving themselves in the rescue operations.
“Earlier, some fishermen who used to hunt these fish down have now turned protectors.” Jivan Jungi, leader of the fishing association in Porbandar said.
The mood among the fishermen is very encouraging, which complement the steps taken by the government. Dhiresh Joshi of WTI said.
“A sticker with conservation status of the species has also been developed, which will be pasted on each fishing vessel.” Joshi said.