Mumbai, July 19, 2014: Coming out in support of India’s wildlife, the popular Bollywood celebrity Dia Mirza yesterday launched ‘Indian Mammals – A field guide’ by Vivek Menon, Executive Director of Wildlife Trust of India and Regional Director – South Asia for the International Fund for Animal Welfare. 
The book was launched in BNHS, Hornbill House in the presence of Praveen Pardeshi, Principal Secretary (Forests), Dept of Revenue and Forests, Maharashtra and Bittu Sahgal, Editor, Sanctuary Asia.

The book lauch event at Hornbill house, BNHS. Photo- Shaleen Attre/WTI
“It takes immense passion and love for wild life to compile a book of this nature. I have great admiration for Vivek’s effort. This book is delightful, insightful and a treasure trove of information. Every child and adult alike must own this book, read and revel in the glory of our rich natural heritage. I also do most sincerely hope that it contributes to many more happy volunteers/contributors towards wild life conservation,” said Dia Mirza.
The launch was followed by a panel discussion on ‘India’s Mammal Conservation Story: Success or Failure?’. The panel constituted of Dia Mirza, Praveen Pardeshi, Bittu Sehgal and Vivek Menon, with the Director of BNHS, Dr Asad Rahmani, as the moderator.




Author Vivek Menon sharing his experience about the book. Photo: Shaleen Attre/WTI
“For the wildlife and conservation circle, such a book is indeed good news. The details in this, especially the photographs and maps, are extremely well done and can be of great assistance to the Forest Department as well,” said Praveen Pardeshi.
The book is an updated, superbly illustrated guide to more than 400 species of mammals found in India.
Covering the rich diversity of mammal species in India, from tigers, elephants, rhinos and whales to primates, rodents and bats, Indian Mammals is a comprehensive and field-ready illustrated guide for use by all wildlifers.
Vivek Menon, commented on publishing such a book, saying, “This book has been the culmination of many years of hard work and I am pleased at the result in shape of the book. My thanks to International Fund for Animal Welfare for its support and also to the publishing house Hachette for this impressive product.” He further added, “Wildlife Trust of India has been an intrinsic part of conservation work in Maharashtra for many years and I am honoured that Bombay Natural History Society is generously hosting the Mumbai launch of this book.”
Dr Asad Rahmani remarked, “We are pleased to be holding the book launch. Vivek Menon, and by extension Wildlife Trust of India, have been ardent supporters of BNHS for a long time. Cataloguing all the 420 mammals of the country, I think is indeed a great feat! We wish Vivek all the best with his book.”




Dia Mirza sharing her thoughts on conservation and Indian Mammals – A Field Guide.

Photo: Shaleen Attre/WTI
Accompanied by superb full-colour photographs and distribution maps and based upon impeccable scientific research reviewed by experts, the guide records details of virtually every mammal known to exist in India.
“I’ve known Vivek for several years now. He is a fine combination of conservation purpose and natural history knowledge. As an editor, I can only imagine how much work has gone into this production, which will be extremely useful to the large numbers of kids and adults in the Sanctuary Asia network!” said Bittu Sahgal, the Editor of Sanctuary Asia.
The in-depth, up-to-date text by Vivek Menon, one of India’s leading naturalists and an authority on Indian wildlife, describes key identification features, biometrics, behaviour, social strategies, habitat and distribution of the mammals.
Encyclopaedic in sweep yet accessible in approach, Indian Mammals includes the majestic and most sought-after as well as the extraordinary and elusive mammals.