New Delhi: Apollo Circus of Bulandshahr is displaying 11 lions as a part of an exhibition in complete contravention of section 38 of the Wildlife Protection Act. An attempt by the Uttar Pradesh forest department to seize the lions on Friday failed due to political pressure and the threat of public disturbance by local leaders.
The Apollo circus, which is holding a show at the Nauchandi grounds, near Gandhi Ashram at the Gadh Road in Meerut has 10 lions and a pregnant lioness to attract the crowds. Although not a part of an act, the lions are being kept in small cages on wheels. Ticket holders are encouraged to visit the lions as a part of the show.
On a complaint filed by the People For Animals, the Wildlife Warden of Meerut served a notice to the circus owners, who reportedly ignored it claiming the matter was sub-judice. Apollo Circus had filed an application claiming compensation for being dispossessed of a means of livelihood. However, as the court had granted no stay, the forest department went ahead with the seizure with the plan to shift these animals to the Nahargarh lifetime care facility near Jaipur in Rajasthan. The Central Zoo Authority, which had been informed of the matter had asked the Wildlife Trust of India to assist with any veterinary needs.
On Friday, May 3, when they decided to seize the animals, forest officials, police force, media persons and representatives from People For Animals and Wildlife Trust of India gathered to document and assist the movement of these animals. However, the operation was mired in confusion.
The crane needed to lift the cages on to trucks did not arrive amid rumours that the crane owner was a relative of the circus owner. The narrow approach to the circus ground was so crowded with people that it made movement difficult. To make matters worse the circus staff deflated the tyres of the wagons that carried the lions. Local politicians from
the BJP party also turned up in support of the circus threatening public disturbance if the animals were taken away.
The local administration, which seemed overwhelmed by the situation, then did a tactical retreat and the drama ended late on Friday night. Mr. A.K.Singh, DFO, Meerut said, “Lack of adequate resources led to this confusion. We hope to overcome this soon
and transport the lions to Nahargarh”. The Circle Officer, Meerut, Rakesh Singh Jolly also told media persons that the police force would stand firmly behind the forest department and would offer any help needed.
Meanwhile, the lions await rescue.