[acx_slideshow name=”Dudhwa Conflict Workshop 22122017″]

The workshop included practical sessions on camera trapping, GPS devices, identifying and tracking wildlife signs, and the proper use of chemical immobilisation equipment
Dudhwa National Park, Uttar Pradesh, December 22, 2017: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), working in partnership with the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department and with support from Aircel Ltd, conducted a two-day interactive training workshop on Human Wildlife Conflict at Dudhwa National Park on December 18 and 19. The workshop provided hands-on training on various aspects of Human Wildlife Conflict and appropriate conflict mitigation strategies to frontline staff from ranges and forest divisions in and around the national park. By conducting such workshops, WTI aims to build the capacity of forest staff to handle conflict situations independently in the future.
In comparison to previous training events organised by WTI in this landscape, this workshop was limited to a select group of 15 participants from the forest ranges of Katerniaghat, Kishanpur, North Kheri Forest Division and Dudhwa National Park, ensuring focussed individual attention to all attendees. The Divisional Forest Officer – North Kheri Mr Patel, who is currently holding charge in place of the Deputy Director of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, was the chief guest. During the introductory session he spoke about the role of the forest department and NGOs in tackling Human Wildlife Conflict, the challenges faced therein, and the need of such workshops in Uttar Pradesh.
By conducting such workshops, WTI aims to build the capacity of forest staff to handle Human Wildlife Conflict situations independently in the future.
The training included sessions on social, biological and veterinary aspects related to Human Wildlife Conflict. The theory sessions conducted on the first day covered topics such as causes and consequences of conflict, mitigation strategies, an introduction to chemical immobilisation of wild animals and the equipment used therein, monitoring of wildlife signs, documentation and use of GPS, camera trapping, and the deployment of trap cages. Sociological elements such as community engagement in conflict affected areas, case studies, and the role of the media in conflict mitigation were also addressed. Participants interacted with WTI’s Terai Tiger Project team, sharing their understanding of conflict, its causes and possible solutions, and discussing incidences of human-big cat conflict that have occurred in the landscape over the past few years.
Practical sessions were held on the second day of the workshop and included hands-on training with field gear typically used during conflict situations. Sessions on camera trapping, use of GPS devices, identifying and tracking wildlife signs, and the proper use of chemical immobilisation equipment were conducted, wherein participants were able to practice their skills on an individual basis. The training concluded with a post-training assessment that will help the team better assess the scope and efficacy of such workshops going forward.