A clinic for elephants of the northeast was inaugurated today at the upcoming Mark Shand Memorial Learning Centre by Sir Evelyn de Rothschild, Founding Patron of the UK based charity Elephant Family and its CEO, Ruth Powys, in the presence of distinguished guests and a colourful audience from the neighbouring villages. The facility, named after legendary conservationist Mark Shand, is a part of the Kaziranga Discovery Park, coming up opposite the IFAW-WTI and Assam Forest Department run Centre of Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation near Kaziranga National Park.
Inaugurating the facility, Sir Evelyn de Rothschild congratulated the team and all the people who built the facility. “Mark was an energetic and dynamic personality who believed in lending a helping hand to animals. Today is a great day for me to inaugurate this facility for elephants.”
The Mark Shand Memorial Asian Elephant Learning Centre in the Kaziranga Discovery Park is supported by Elephant Family — a leading conservation organization dedicated to the conservation and welfare of elephants in Asia. Mark Shand had spent lot of time taking care of the captive elephants in Kaziranga and several mahouts here honour him at the end of the tourist season each year.




Prior to the unveiling of the relief of Mark Shand, Shri M. K. Yadava, Director, Kaziranga National Park, welcomed all the dignitaries from India and abroad and guests from the villages to this colourful event.
Summing up the event, Vivek Menon, Executive Director and CEO of Wildlife Trust of India, said, “We are already working for the animals of Kaziranga at CWRC. But, if Kaziranga has to be saved, it is the people who will have to play the most important role. So, it is for you that we are developing this learning hub of Kaziranga Discovery Park where your children will play, learn and appreciate the bio-diversity that Kaziranga houses.”
Mark Shand Asian Elephant Learning Centre is established as one of the three wings under the Kaziranga Discovery Park whose foundation stone was laid on December 28, 2014.The other two wings are Kaziranga World Heritage Learning Centre and IFAW-WTI Wildlife Rescue Learning Centre which will be dedicated to the public in coming years.