Kerala, Sunday Nov 20, 2022
110 cyclists came together to show support for the conservation and protection of the world’s largest fish – the whale shark. On early Sunday morning, cyclists in two batches – 60 bikers from Thrissur and 50 from Trivandrum cycled around 72km and 45km respectively in support of WTI’s Save the Whale Shark Conservation campaign supported by Oracle.
Cyclists with life size inflatable whale shark | Photograph by Shefin Rafale
Thrissur
In Thrissur, the cultural capital of Kerala, the rally was flagged off from the auspicious temple grounds of Vadakkunnathan (Shiva) Temple. 60 riders from ‘Cyclers Thrissur’, sporting campaign t-shirts and caps with the message – Save The Whale Shark, biked through the coastal villages. The campaign drew cyclists from various fields – from software engineers, business, media, medicine, and artists. Further, some were professional athletes who have cycled for over 1000 kms across India for causes they believe in.
The route was planned from Thrissur Temple – Snehaatheram – Mundoor and back to Thrissur.  The first halt was at the beach of Snehatheeram. Here the cyclists were cheered by the GVHS School Thrissur, the youngest biker of eight years was especially applauded. This pit stop had some refreshments by the beach side with discussions on marine conservation (especially on Whale Sharks) and how one can actively participate. To facilitate conservation action in the area Team WTI also conducted a short sensitisation workshop attended by members of the civil society. After a rather long long pit stop the cyclist were back on the road and finished their last lap back to Thrissur. The valedictorian session for the cyclists happened over lunch. The session was attended by Mr. Varghese Koonampalve, Secretary, Thirssur District Jewellery Manufacturing Association, Kerala. Mr Koonampalve in his special address spoke on daily use and disposal of plastics ending up in the oceans. And how the discarded plastics effect marine wildlife. He also pledged for not to use single use plastics and requested other association members the same under their business activities.
8-yr old Shreya Sukumaran, the youngest among the group en-route her 30 km journey | Photograph by Shefin Rafale
Mr. George V.T, Secretary, Vyapari Vyavasayi Ekopana Samithi, Thrissur District, addressed the gathering by congratulating WTI, and for the initiation of – Save the Whale Shark Conservation Project. He emphasised on how rampant use of plastic is now a major environmental issue (for both humans and wildlife) and how most of the disposed plastics end up in marine waters. As secretary representing his association he took an oath for not using single use plastics. 
Ms. Saymanti B, Campaign Lead, WTI, welcomed the guests and introduced – Save the Whale Shark Conservation Project. 
Mr. Charan Kumar Paidi, Project Lead, Whale Shark Conservation Project, WTI, spoke on the 20 years of whale shark conservation work in Gujarat and the need for expansion of this project to Kerala and Karnataka. 
Mr. Sudheer P.S, Secretary, Cyclers Thissur, requested the cyclers to reduce the use of these single use plastics as much as you can. And he quoted that “The change starts from one”. 
Thiruvananthapuram: 
In Thiruvananthapuram, the rally was planned in collaboration with Indus Cycle Embassy. The rally was flagged off from Kowdiar circle at 7am with 45 bikers.  Interestingly, the motley group had a four and half-year-old boy as well as a senior citizen.
The team from in front of Trissur Temple | Photograph by Shefin Rafale
Mr Ajith Shangumugham, the fisher’s community representative and Indus Cycling Embassy member Mrs Veena flagged off the rally. The riders covered 45 Kms of distance from – Kowdiar – Valiyathura, biking through Valiyaveli and back to Kowdiar.
There was a quick pit stop in Valiyathura for refreshments. During this scheduled pit stop there was a campaign sensitisation talk for bikers and local community members by Ms. Swathi K Nambiar, Campaign Field Officer, WTI. At Valiyathura, the cyclists interacted with the fishing community, over breakfast before riding back to Kowdiar. All participants were felicitated with certificates and medals for their efforts in advocating for Save the Whale Shark Conservation Project on their wheels.
This campaign is supported by Oracle and Department of Fisheries, Government of Kerala.