Bagori Range, Kaziranga National Park, August 11, 2016: A female elephant calf found in a waterlogged area near the Haldibari forest beat of the Central Range of Kaziranga National Park was successfully rescued by forest staff in the early hours of August 6.


An IFAW-WTI MVS team from CWRC, led by centre-in-charge Dr Rathin Barman and veterinarian Dr Samshul Ali, had earlier that night noticed the calf in the flood waters on the northern side of National Highway 37. The team had informed the forest department and advised that captive elephants be used to support the calf and keep it in the area so that it could be examined and treated.





Captive elephants escort the calf along NH37 from Haldibari to the Bagori Forest Range of Kaziranga

A few hours later, using four captive elephants, forest staff rescued the calf by helping it out of the water onto stable ground. Seeing that the calf was in poor shape, having been in the flood waters for a long time, it was decided that chemical sedation would not be an appropriate course of action. “The calf was debilitated and weak and could not be tranquilised for fear that it might succumb under anaesthesia”, Dr Ali said. “We decided instead to drive it along the highway from Haldibari to the Bagori Forest Range about 5km away. There is less traffic on the highway in the early mornings and we used the four captive elephants to create a protective cordon around the calf. Our MVS vehicle followed the elephants along the way.”




Dr Samshul Ali treats the elephant calf near the Bagori Range Office


Dr Ali provided the requisite treatment once the calf arrived at the Bagori Range Office after its hour-long journey. The Assam Forest Department has made provisions for its feeding and regular health check-ups will be conducted over the coming days.

The calf has two small holes in one of its ears, which indicates that it may have been captured earlier and escaped to the wild.

UPDATE: Dr Ali, who has been monitoring the calf, reports this morning: “The rescued calf is showing signs of improvement. It has been de-wormed and provided supportive treatment. It is showing signs of wild behaviour as it regains strength.”