Kaziranga (Assam): A six-month old elephant calf displaced from its natal herd has been admitted to the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) near Kaziranga National Park for hand-raising and eventual rehabilitation into the wild. The calf has joined a group of nine elephant calves already under care at CWRC.
The calf was brought to CWRC from the Chariduar Range office of Sonitpur district in Assam. It was spotted near the bank of the river Jia Bhorelli by a local person who proceeded to inform the Forest Department. It was then rescued by the Forest Department staff.
Sonitpur region has the distinction of being a ‘hotspot’ for human-elephant conflict in Assam. Many of the calves handled by CWRC were brought from this region. However, this calf is believed to have been swept away from its natal herd during a flood. As with the other elephant calves at CWRC it will go through a long-term acclimatisation process for rehabilitation.
“There is inflammation in the elbow joint of (the) left foreleg of the calf. Presence of lacerated wound in forehead, stress and moderate dehydration is apparent,” informed Dr Anil Deka, IFAW-WTI (International Fund for Animal Welfare-Wildlife Trust of India) veteterinarian, presently attending to the calf.
Assisting the Assam Forest Department, IFAW-WTI has successfully reunited several elephant calves with their natal herds soon after separation. A total of eight other elephant calves have been successfully hand-raised at CWRC and relocated to Manas National Park for reintegration with wild herds. They are under various stages of rehabilitation.
Currently, there are approximately 35,000-45,000 Asian elephants remaining in the wild and an additional 10,000 in captivity in Asia. Asian elephants are listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and in Appendix I of the Convention on the International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).

 

Learn more about Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation