Nawada (Bihar): Tamanna, the ten-year-old daughter of rehabilitated Kalandar (sloth bear performer) Sovrati began attending preparatory school as her first step to formal education, only two months ago. She is one of several fortunate ones. Her father gave up the semi-nomadic existence of performing sloth bear dances to take up alternative livelihood options provided by the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
The WSPA-WTI initiative of providing alternative livelihood to Kalandars was a humanitarian approach to tackle one of the key threats to wild sloth bears in India- confinement in Kalandar homes. In October 1998, the Government of India had banned confinement and performances of sloth bear with the amendment in the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act (1960).
However, without alternatives, Tamanna’s family, like many other Kalandar families had continued bear dancing covertly, before WSPA-WTI team members struck a relationship with them.  Post many months of diaogue, her father Sovrati agreed to give up the illegal profession and opt for an alternative livelihood. He purchased a plot of land and two cycle rickshaws with the fund provided by WSPA-WTI.
Tamanna is yet to understand the significance of the change and the stability in her life, brought about by her father’s decision. She still misses the bear that she grew up with, which her father has surrendered to the Bihar Forest Department on WSPA-WTI’s request.
“For these children, their bear was more than just a means of livelihood; it was a part of their family. We have observed this emotional attachment in many Kalandar families that we have worked with over the last three years,” says Manali Baruah, Programme Officer, WTI, adding that it was necessary to stop this practice.
While Tamanna and her younger siblings adjust to their new lifestyle, the WSPA-WTI team endeavours to ensure her father’s success in his new venture.
“We are continuously monitoring Sovrati’s progress. He is doing quite well, but is still a long way from being economically comfortable,” says Sushovan Roy, Field Officer, WSPA-WTI. “We try to bring about attitudinal changes among the Kalandars we work with, through repetitive motivation. Sovrati understands the importance of educating his children; now, we are only helping him fulfill his duties.”


Related story:
Project makes new lives for bears and people (on WSPA’s website)
A Kalandar’s life beyond the bears
4 sloth bears readied for Indian Kalandar market seized in Nepal
‘Refresher’ training to protect sloth bear