NEW DELHI: The Fifth Venu Menon Animal Awards were given away by former President, Mr KR Narayanan, at a sombre, but well-attended function at the India Habitat Centre here last evening.The Venu Menon animal awards, the first animal welfare awards to be given in India, completed five years this time. The awards, instituted by the Venu Menon Animal Allies Foundaiton (VMAAF), are an attempt to appreciate the hard work and efforts by individuals and organisations in the field of animal welfare. They are also aimed at sensitising the general public about animal rights and creating a much-needed awareness about animal care.
Octogenerian Dashrathbhai Thaker was presented with the Venu Menon Lifetime Achievement Award for devoting more than 50 years of his life to animal welfare. He runs shelters in various places in Gujarat where stray animals like donkeys, horses, goats, cows and cattle saved from the clutches of slaughter houses can find a new home.
Ms Angela Kazi won the Venu Menon Animal Allies Award for virtually single-handedly bringing the stray dogs in the state of Goa under control within a span of two years.
People For Animals, Bangalore was given the Special Organisation Award for being at the forefront of the animal welfare movement in the capital city of Karnataka state. One of the organisation’s major achievements has been the campaign which stopped the ritual hunting and sacrifice of wildlife in 58 villages around the city. Ms Edna Simmons, who has spent half her life in feeding, nursing, treating and taking care of stray dogs and cats in the Colaba area of Mumbai where she lives, was given the Jury’s Special Award.
The David Shepherd Wildlife Award went to Mr Subrat Mukherjee, West Bengal Conservator of Forests, who has has devoted himself to the protection and conservation of wildlife for more than 15 years. This award was presented by Mr David Shepherd himself, who was present on the occasion.
The Wildlife Trust of India gave away three awards this year. The Endangered Species Award went to Mr Mike Pandey, a documentary filmmaker, whose riveting essay on celluloid, Shores of Silence: Whale Sharks in India, went a long way in building up a strong global case for the conservation and protection of the world’s largest fish, which are highly endangered.
The Van Rakshak Award was presented to M Kalan a tribal forest watcher in Mudumalai Wildlife Sanctuary, who has been instrumental in the arrest of a number of elephant poachers in the Mudumalai Range of the sanctuary in the last three years.
The dynamic Forests Minister of Uttaranchal, Mr Navprabhat, who has been leading the crusade to save wildlife by example in his state was bestowed with the Leadership in Conservation Award. It has been because of Mr Navprabhat’s personal endeavours that police and forest officials have had the necessary support in clamping down on wildlife crime in the fledgling state of Uttaranchal.
The jury this year comprised Ms Usha Uthup, singer; Ms Sathya Saran, Editor, Femina; Dr Jacob Cheeran, wildlifer; Dr Iqbal Mailk, Director, Vatavaran; Mr Fardeen Khan, film personality, and Mr KV Menon, Chairman, Venu Menon Animal Allies Foundation.
Three merit certirficates were also presented on the occasion. The two proactive police officials from Uttaranchal, Mr SS Negi and Mr DL Verma, were given certificates for coming down heavily on those involved in trade of wildlife articles in Udham Singh Nagar district of the state. The chairman of People For animals In Haryana, Mr Naresh Kumar Kadyan, at whose initiative the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests took steps against a major circus company for violation of notifications on exhibition and training of animals, was the third certificate winner.
Though The Venu Menon Young Achiever’s Award was not given away this year, four youngsters were awarded merit certificates – Twinkle Gogia, Samira, K Kannan and Vishal Morey.
For more pictures of the event click here