Kolkata, August 13, 2014: British Deputy High Commissioner Scott Furssedonn-Wood today joined hands with Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) to support the cause of conservation at the book launch of WTI’s Executive Director and CEO Vivek Menon’s Indian Mammals- A Field Guide, in Kolkata. The book was launched to a packed audience in the presence of some famous personalities like Gautam Ghosh, noted film director, Sabyasachi Chakraborty, renowned actor and Jayant Kriplani well known television and theatre actor.


Covering the rich diversity of mammal species in India, from tigers, elephants, rhinos and whales to primates, rodents and bats, Indian Mammals is a comprehensive and field-ready illustrated guide, for use by all wildlifers, to more than 400 species of mammals found in India.
 



 Scott Furssedonn-Wood  launching Indian Mammals- A field Guide with Vivek Menon. Photo-Subhamoy/WTI

Scott Furssedonn-Wood remarked on the importance of such a book in the field of conservation saying, “India’s wildlife is a national treasure that must be protected for future generations. Knowledge is the key to conservation and Indian Mammals- A Field Guide by Vivek Menon will play an important role in fostering that. It’s a beautiful book, which has clearly been a labour of love. I warmly congratulate the author on producing something so special and important.”


Vatsala Kaul Banerjee, Publishing Director of Hachette India, the publishers of the book added “Indian Mammals- A Field Guide by Vivek Menon has been one of the most gratifying and enduring books that I have worked on as an editor and publisher because it archives very comprehensively the amazing diversity of Indian mammals with equal respect to all of them… from the smallest to the largest, from the most glamorous to the least. The depth of experience and insights shared by the author who has spent decades in the field, as well as the contributions of the best wildlife experts and photographers in the country make it a unique and all-embracing project accessible to everyone from the conservationist to the nature lover. And it all comes at a great price too.”





 (L-R) Scott Furssedonn-Wood, Vivek Menon, Dr Ashish Ghosh and Jayant Kripalani . Photo- Subhamoy/WTI

An interesting and lively panel discussion on the ‘Cultural Significance of Wildlife in India’ followed the launch . The esteemed members of the panel were Scott Furssedonn-Wood (British Deputy High Commissioner), Dr Ashish Ghosh ( Director, Centre for Environment and Development), Sabyasachi Chakraborty ( Actor), Jayant Kriplani (Actor),  Vivek Menon and Subir Bhaumik (Former BBC Eastern India Bureau Chief) who moderated the event.

Dr Ashish Ghosh commended Vivek Menon’s endevour saying “I congratulate Vivek on the release of the book. Wildlife Trust of India for many years now has been an integral part of conservation. We’re glad that his book has been launched in this state as well.”


Accompanied by superb full-colour photographs and distribution maps and based upon impeccable scientific research reviewed by experts, the guide records details of virtually every mammal known to exist in India.


 Supporters of wildlife at the event. Photo- Subhamoy/WTI



Noted Film Director, Gautam Ghosh who was present at the occasion said “I am delighted to be a part of this event. We need more people and more books like this for understanding the current status of mammals of our nation. I am impressed to see a book of such detailed information on mammals of India alone.”

Vivek Menon, commented on publishing such a book, saying, “This book has been the culmination of many years of hard work and I am pleased at the result in shape of the book. My thanks to International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) for its support and also, to the publishing house Hachette for this impressive product. “I’m happy that the book has been receiving such a tremendous response and am grateful to all supporters.”