Odisha, August 22, 2014: The east Indian state of Odisha has been submerged again in floods. Over 23 districts were affected and around 1.8 million displaced from their homes; nearly 50 have been reported killed. The government mechanism has initiated relief measures for affected people.
As with the flood emergency last year in the state, the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) has mobilised its Emergency Relief Network for the welfare of affected animals.


Treating the first set of patients in the relief camp. Photo: Sabyasachi Rath/IFAW-WTI

Working in collaboration with AKSS (Anchalika Kunjeswari Sansrutika Sansad), a voluntary organisation, and post-graduate veterinary students of Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology, the ERN team are currently operating in Puri district, which is among the worst affected.
“The predictions of another bout of rain expected by 19th of August did not come true, fortunately,” said Rudra Prasanna Mahapatra, IFAW-WTI field officer. “While water is receding in most affected districts, one block – Kanas in Puri district has suffered rather badly, specially as this was unexpected.”


The team hard at work. Photo: Sabyasachi Rath / IFAW-WTI

He added that the floods usually affect the eastern bank of the river in Kanas, and preparations were made for that. “However, this year, there was a breach in the western bank, causing unprecedented flooding. What is more worrying is that the breach has created a sort of a lagoon in the region – causing stagnation of water, which can cause disease outbreaks. While the government is working on it, it may take sometime before the area will be drained.”
Coordinated by IFAW-WTI ERN team members Radhika Bhagat and Dr Piyush Shastri, the members of AKSS and volunteers including Madhumay Malik and Sabyasachi Rath, and veterinarians Drs Sripati Sethi, Sujit Prasad Das, Mandakini Sahoo, Chinmay Bhusan Mishra, Bikash Chandra Sethy, Prakash Chandra Jena, are currently carrying out-(remove) running relief camps in various villages of Kanas.
Yesterday, the team attended to over a 100 animals in three villages – Badas, Bidyanathpatna and Kakharubasta. The animals were treated for diverse ailments including worm infestation, chronic wounds, infections, dehydration, among others.


Providing the much needed care. Photo: Sabyasachi Rath/IFAW-WTI

“We will be continuing our work here for four more days, and will decide on further course of action based on how the situation turns out, as per recommendations from the field,” said Dr Piyush Sashtri.