Sivsagar (Assam): In some encouraging news for bird enthusiasts, a flock of more than 40 white-rumped vultures was spotted in the Panidihing Bird Sanctuary in Sivasagar district of Assam. This is the first sighting in three years of this critically-endangered species in such large numbers, here.
The white-rumped vulture (Gyps bengalensis), once the most common of the nine vulture species found in the Indian subcontinent, is now under grave threat. It has seen a population decline of more than 99% since the early 1990s.
The main factor implicated in the decline of vulture population is poisoning by diclofenac, a veterinary Non Steroidal Anti Inflammatory Drug (NSAID), formerly used to treat livestock. Diclofenac causes renal failure in vultures feeding on carcasses of animals treated with it before their death.
“Diclofenac causes renal failure in vultures, as indicated by the visceral gout seen in autopsy,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, WTI. “With the rapid decline in vulture populations, a search for an alternative non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug that does not cause this kind of damage led to the discovery of Meloxicam being non-lethal.”
Efforts were made by various agencies including NGOs as well as governments to advocate the use of Meloxicam and phase out diclofenac. An amendment in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, in 2008, brought about a blanket ban on the ‘manufacture, sale and distribution of diclofenac for animal use’.
“With the blanket ban being enforced by different state governments, the use of this drug legally in veterinary practices has literally come to a standstill. However, the drug is available for human use, and there are still cases of it being being used to treat livestock in certain areas,” added Dr Ashraf.
Lack of awareness, unavailability of Meloxicam locally or because of it being more expensive as compared to diclofenac, have been cited as among the reasons for continued use of diclofenac.
Since June last year, Seven Look, an NGO based in Sivasagar, has been carrying out a Rapid Action Project (RAP) for vulture conservation, supported by the WTI and Charities Aid Foundation. Various activities were carried out to spread awareness among the locals.
“Apart from the threats faced by vultures from diclofenac use, in Sivasagar there were several instances of vultures being poisoned. Recalling such instances, 21 vultures succumbed to poisoning in two villages within a week during April-May 2009. The RAP aimed at spreading awareness on the significance of vultures, threats to them, about the ban in diclofenac and the alternative available etc,” said Palash Ranjan Goswami, General Secretary, SEVEN LOOK who proposed and implemented the RAP.
Vultures are scavengers and play a crucial role in maintaining a healthy ecosystem. They clean up the environment by consuming openly discarded carcasses, and their digestive systems safely destroy pathogens that could cause pandemics.
“The decline in vultures allow for other animals like rats and dogs to be the primary scavengers. This can lead to disease pandemics, particularly in densely-populated country like ours,” said Dr Rahul Kaul, Chief Ecologist, WTI. “Such sightings of vultures in large numbers may point towards the ban on Diclofenac having had an impact, at least in some areas.”
 

Read More
Rapid Action Projects