In 2018, close to 20 elephants migrated to Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve and since then, the elephant population has increased to 46. Unfortunately, this move has not been received well by locals who are not used to these gentle giants at all since there was no population of the elephants earlier. Their existence in the region has resulted in damage to crops and houses leading to an increase in human-wildlife conflicts.
There was a need to sensitize the local villagers on the importance of conserving elephants and how to live alongside them. A RAP (Rapid Action Plan) was sanctioned to address this issue in 10 villages selected from the Pataur & Panpatha core range and Manpur buffer range. These were Bamera, Kaseru, Baghiya, Badhwani, Kothia, Kushmaha, Sejwahi, Gangital, Sehra and Lakhnauti.

Village meetings at Bandhavgarh TR, Photograph by Pushpendranath D
A primary response team (PRT) was set up in each village composed of 5 locals who were responsible for reporting elephant movement in the region to the respective forest department. The villagers were also provided with 50 torch lights to help them with their monitoring activities. further, a WhatsApp group was formed with 1130 villagers to share any updates of elephant movements with the department. Whenever an elephant was spotted near a village, an update in the form of a photograph or video was shared on the group and forest staff arrived at the spot immediately, thereby preventing any serious damage. The creation of this group was extremely useful in minimizing damage caused by elephants which in turn greatly reduced human-wildlife conflicts.

Asian elephant sightings by PRT_Bandhavgarh TR Photograph by Vrand Kumar Prajapati
As more and more elephants return to their old corridors in search of safe habitats, local villagers must work with Forest Department in order to manage conflict situations effectively. To aid the department with their work, a RAP has been extended to this year to provide 150 high power LED torchlights to the forest staff working in conflict prone villages.

Damage in Bamera village, Bandhavgarh TR, Photograph by Surendra Prajapati
Rapid Action Projects such as this, provide urgent critical support to local individuals and organizations to nip wildlife emergencies in the bud. A series of effective outcomes through a consistent approach contribute to a larger conservation impact. If you know of a deserving individual or organization that needs support to effect conservation action on ground, get in touch with us through rap@wti.org.in.