Guwahati, 16th October, 2023: Assam Forest Minister, Shri. Chandra Mohan Patowary formally released the “Conservation Strategy and Action Plan” for the State Bird of Assam, the White-winged Duck, on 16th October 2023. The strategy document was prepared jointly by the Wildlife Trust of India and the Assam Forest Department.
The White-winged Duck (Asarcornis scutulata), also known as “Deo hanh” in Assamese, is a unique and rare forest-dwelling duck of the lowland evergreen forests of Brahmaputra valley. With less than 1000 individuals surviving worldwide, the species has been categorised as “Endangered” in the IUCN RedList since 1994. The estimated population in India is about 300-400 individuals based on surveys in the early 1990s. The state of Assam has been historically a stronghold of the species with a significant population residing in the region.
Assam has a long history of conservation efforts by various individuals and organizations pursuing to protect this enigmatic species. At least three protected areas (Dibru- Saikhowa National Park, Nameri National Park and Dehing Patkai National Park) were established to preserve the duck and its habitat. In 2003, the Government of Assam declared White-winged Duck as the “State Bird of Assam” to encourage further conservation efforts. Many short-term studies and awareness programmes were conducted regularly in the state promoting the conservation of the species. Despite these interventions, the population of the duck has drastically declined over the years both in its numbers and the extent of occupancy. Further, in the absence of a formal conservation strategy and action plan, conservation initiatives have been either scattered or ad hoc without much conservation impact. Owing to such severe threats, and lack of any coordinated conservation action, a conservation strategy was urgently required for planning its recovery and securing its long-term conservation in Assam.
White-winged Duck in Nameri National Park | Photograph by Aftab Ahmed/WTI
This strategy document has been developed to address this need for a comprehensive formal guideline for the conservation of White-winged Duck in Assam. The strategy document is designed to serve as a guide to the decision-making authorities (principally governments and their agencies), conservationists, researchers, academics and regional stakeholders for implementing effective action and measures for the conservation of the species and its habitat in Assam. “This initiative of reviving our State Bird brings hope for a better future for the species and strengthens our resolve to revive and protect the natural heritage of our State”, says Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma, the Chief Minister of the state.
“I extend my best wishes to Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Environment & Forest Department, Govt. of Assam on this special occasion of publishing the action plan for the conservation of the White-winged Duck in Assam. I hope it is able to achieve its desired goals”, says Shri. CM Patowary. WTI’s founder and ED, Mr. Vivek Menon said “This duck is both the state bird of Assam and one of its most endangered avifauna. WTI is determined that with the state government, it will reverse the decline of this cultural icon of Assam and conserve both the endangered species and its habitat”. The document was developed based on available studies on the species and with the latest information collected through field surveys in the forests of Assam. Various national and international avian experts were consulted in the preparation of the document through a planning workshop and subsequent follow-up meetings. The document receives major contributions from (the late) Mark S. Price (IUCN SSC, UK), Dr Glyn Young (Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust Jersey), Dr Asad R Rahmani (Naturalist & Former Director, BNHS), Dr Anwaruddin Choudhury (Rhino Foundation, Assam), Dr Gautam Narayan and Dr Parag J Deka (Pygmy Hog Conservation Programme), Ms Megha Rao (Nature Conservation Foundation), Mr Ranjan Kr Das (Assam Forest Department) and the team from Wildlife Trust of India. The preparation of the document and related fieldwork was financially supported by the Oil and Natural Gas Cooperation of India (ONGC). WTI under its “White-winged Duck Recovery Project” is now developing a series of conservation initiatives based on the strategy document to revive the dwindling population of White winged Duck in northeast India. The project is currently supported by PFS (PTC India Financial Services Limited).
Click here to read/download the document.