Nichlaul, 4th February, 2023: Wildlife Trust of India, in collaboration with its funding partners: Tata Trusts and World Land Trust, has been working in Eastern Uttar Pradesh (UP) for almost the last one decade to protect and conserve the State Bird of UP, the Sarus Crane, as well as its key habitat – the Wetlands.
Before 2019, the project objective was to primarily conserve the Sarus Crane that resided in agricultural fields and in mosaics of wetland habitats, outside of protected areas. However, post 2019, the project had a broader and macro vision as the focal point became the securement of wetlands in Eastern Uttar Pradesh, that are not only a key habitat for the Sarus Crane but are also a critical ecosystem, supporting biodiversity as well as local communities.
R.K.tripathi, field attendant, noting the GPS points and weed infested areas at Hariharpur wetlands in Maharajganj_Sarus Project | Photograph by Arshad Hussain/WTI
Alongside celebrating World Wetlands Day, this year also marks the 25th year of WTIs operations; its silver jubilee anniversary. Forest and Police Officers, School Children, Members of the National Cadet Corps (NCC), Farmers and Sarus Mitras (friends of Sarus), all joined us and took part in the celebrations.
The celebrations started from 27th January 2023 onwards where one-day awareness programs were organized at the school level with the aim of promoting the conservation and importance of wetlands and wildlife among children. A total of three schools were selected in the town of Nichlaul, in the district of Maharajganj, Eastern Uttar Pradesh. General knowledge (environment) and drawing competitions were conducted on 27th and 28th January for the children. 516 students – 235 girls and 281 boys actively participated. The awareness programs ended with awarding the winners of the competitions: 13 girls and 5 boys with mementos and certificates, commemorating World Wetlands Day 2023.
Student showing their Drawing at Ramharsh Intermediate Collage, Nichlaul | Photograph by Arshad Hussain/WTI

On 2nd February, a rally was organized through all of Nichlaul town and culminated at the event venue. Students from three schools and the National Cadet Corps (NCC) actively participated in this road show. A student of St. Joseph’s High School also gave a speech on wetlands during this rally. In addition to this, farmers/Sarus Mitras and the members of Wetland Conservation and Management Committees were felicitated for their effort in the protection and safety of the Sarus nests and their chicks. A total of  34  farmers/Sarus Mitras and Wetland Committee Members from the entire project district were honored by giving them gifts and mementos.


Ramharsh collage NCC cadet children participate road rally show at Nichlaul | Photograph by Arched Hussain/WTI



What made this day more special was the commemoration WTI’s 25th Anniversary Year. Forest and police officers, school principals and local press/media groups graced the occasion. The need for wildlife conservation and WTIs work in this sector was shared with the gathering. The efforts of the forest staff and the local community in the protection of wildlife was acknowledged. The guests of honor, Mr. Surya Bali Yadav (Police Circle Officer, Nichlaul, Maharajganj) and Ms. Arshi Mallik (Sub Divisional Forest Officer, Nichlaul, Maharajganj) felicitated 4 forest field staff and 4 Wetland Conservation and Management Committees with mementos and certificates for their cooperation in wetland conservation and for preventing illegal wildlife hunting.



The Sarus Habitat Securement Project embodies community based conservation at its core. The people who live in the villages around the wetland are directly or indirectly dependent upon the wetland and its resources and therefore, they become the key stakeholder not only with respect to wetland conservation but also for the conservation of the tallest flying bird – the Sarus Crane. The villagers themselves wanted to protect the wetlands and in their search for a mechanism to do so, WTI facilitated their efforts by making the local people the focal points of the project related activities and outcomes. Together, with our funding partners, the Forest Department, other Line Departments and the farmers, WTI hopes to not only protect and preserve the fragile and critical wetland ecosystem, but also aims to conserve and support the biodiversity and the communities whose livelihoods depend upon the wetland and its resources.