WTI’s Dr RP Mishra, one of the trainers, addressing the participants

Barnawapara, September 2, 2015: Eighty seven frontline forest staff from Chhattisgarh Forest Department were trained under Wildlife Trust of India’s Van Rakshak Project (VRP). The training was jointly organised by Wildlife Trust of India and Chhattisgarh Forest Department in two batches from September 2 to 4 and September 7 to 9. The trainees were from Jagdalpur and Raipur Circles (both Territorial and Wildlife) that includes Indravati and Udanti-Sitanadi Tiger Reserves respectively.
In Jagdalpur, 46 staff from the territorial and wildlife divisions attended the training which was inaugurated by MT Nandi, CCF, Jagdalpur, and Suresh Chand, Senior Advissor, VRP. As requested by the CCF, 54 forest guards and foresters also attended the training. On the last day of the training, field kits and certificates were distributed by MK Panday, Dy. Director, Indravati TR.
Meanwhile, in Barnawapara, 41 staff from the territorial and wildlife divisions participated in the training programme which was inaugurated by Shri SD Badgaiya, DFO, Balodabazar. The field kits and certificates were distributed by Dr BP Nonhare, CCF (Wildlife), Chhattisgarh.
During the course of the training, the trainees learnt about Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and its various sections, anti-poaching patrolling techniques, crime scene investigation, intelligence gathering, interrogation techniques, and preparation of Preliminary Offence Report (POR). The training laid emphasis on the understanding of the various concepts of wildlife crime prevention and the common mistakes often committed by frontline forest staff while preparing the POR. They were also briefed about the importance of the independent witnesses during raid operations and crime scene investigation. Along all this, the various procedures for collection and preservation of evidences were taught during the training programme.


Trainees attending a session at Jagdalpur
The team of trainers from WTI included Dr RP Mishra, Jose Louis and Advocate Yash Kumar Soni, whereas the entire training programme was mentored by Suresh Chand. “We are thankful to the state Forest Department for their support and encouragement. I am certain that the joint efforts of the Forest Department and WTI can reduce wildlife crime related issues in the state in the near future,” said Dr RP Mishra, Regional Head WTI.
In a bid to equip and strengthen the frontline forest staff of the country, IFAW-WTI has been conducting Wildlife Crime Prevention Training Programmes, under the VRP since 2001. VRP follows a multi-pronged strategy with four thrust areas, abbreviated as TEAM: Training, Equipping, Awareness and Morale Boosting, to broadly facilitate capacity building and strengthen spirits of personnel in tough field circumstances. Till date more than 15,000 field staff have been equipped and trained in over 150 protected areas of India and Transboundary areas of Bhutan under the VRP.