Bandipur, February 6, 2015: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in partnership with Aircel distributed 45 D-Light Solar Lanterns to be used at anti-poaching camps at Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka. The solar lights were handed over were handed over to Mr HC Kantharaju, Director, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, in presence of  Mr AT Povaiah, Assistant Conservator Forests, Gundlupet; Mr Maradimani, ACF, Bandipur; and Ravi Shankar, ACF, Hediyala. These solar lanterns were handed over by Nagaraj Bhat, Field Officer, Enforcement Assistance & Law, WTI, in presence of all 13 Rangers. Later in the day, solar lanterns were also distributed to all 12 ranges Anti-poaching Camps. Mr Kantharaju thanked WTI and Aircel for equipping the forest staff with solar lanterns.


One of the solar lanterns distributed to the Forest

Department. Photo: Nagaraj/WTI

He said, “These solar lanterns would be of great help in dealing with poachers and poaching activities deep inside the reserve. We at Bandipur Tiger Reserve are thankful to WTI and Aircel for supplying 45 solar lanterns for the anti-poaching camps at Bandipur Tiger Reserve. Please receive out heart full thanks and gratitude.” The solar lanterns were provided by Aircel


Solar lantern being handed over to HC Kantharaju, Director,

Bandipur Tiger Reserve. Photo: WTI

“WTI has been working in Karnataka since 2009 primarily on wildlife trade control and has seen a multi-pronged approach which includes community meetings, anti-snare walks, monitoring cattle kills in order to curb secondary poisoning of tigers and surrender and declaration of guns. The anti-snare walks in Bandipur and Nagharhole National Parks have been instrumental in removal of more than 600 snares laid by local poachers along the periphery of the park,” said Jose Louies, Regional Head, WTI.
In South India, Aircel has supported WTI in anti-poaching drives and awareness campaigns in Meghamalai Wildlife Sanctuary, Tamil Nadu, including anti-snare walks as well. In Sathyamanagalm Tiger Reserve – Tamil Nadu, Aircel helped in equipping 278 forest department staff with anti- poaching kits and aided in refurbishing two Rapid Response Unit vehicles in Cauvery Wildlife Sanctuary.