Chattisgarh: With only a few hundreds left in the wild, the wild buffalos (Bubalus Bubalis) in India could soon turn extinct unless an urgent action for their conservation is initiated. Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in collaboration with the Chattisgarh forest department started a three year plan for its revival from the present small population in the state. 
The present study is being undertaken in Chattisgarh following a MoU with the forest department. The Wildlife Sanctuaries (WLS) and National Parks (NP), covering a geographical area of about 4200 sq. km. will be studied to identify threats and conservation strategies.
An estimate by the forest department suggests 120 individuals in the state. Udanti WLS is considered to hold the maximum number-about 60 individuals, followed by Indravati NP – about 49 individuals and Pamed WLS about 8 individuals. From the other two, Sitanadi and Baihramgarh Wildlife Sanctuaries considered extinct.
Previous home range of the species extended from eastern Nepal, India, Vietnam and south to Malaysia. During sixties much of their population was substantially reduced and eliminated from the greater part of its former range (IUCN). Now in India, wild buffalos are said to originate only in two states, Chattisgarh in central India and Assam in northeast India. Assam has the maximum number, about 3000 individuals.
According to Rahul Kaul, Director Wild Species WTI, “since it is a big bodied animal, their reproductive rates are slow. Thus annual recruitment in the population is small.”
Disturbances due to cattle rearing, depletion of grazing lands, scarcity of food & water and hybridization with the domestic breed have threatened their existence in the wild. Historically, they preferred low lying alluvial grass lands and their surroundings. Riparian and woodlands were also utilized (IUCN).
Though, plenty of rivers drain these sanctuaries, most dry up during summer, adding to the shortfall of water. Hence, large constructions of water tanks have been a traditional way of conserving these animals.
Another setback faced by these species in the wild has been the tradition of community hunting practiced among some tribes in Chattisgarh, mostly during the Parad festivities. A single kill provided sufficient meat to serve large gatherings. The practice is still continued in some places.
A wild breed weighs about 900 kg and could go upto 1200 depending upon their physical conditions and availability of enough food. They require vast grazing lands and water bodies to live. Buffalos like to wallow in mud pools and water bodies to release body heat. Wallowing also helps them to remove body parasites and other biting flies. Hence they are also commonly known as water buffalo.
IUCN in 2004 estimated that the total world population is certainly less than 4000 but it may be less than 200 and possibly no pure bred wild Asian buffalo left in the wild. Choudhury in 1994 estimated that the bulk of India’s wild buffalo population (about 90%) is in Assam.
Apart from recording their current population in the state, the project will also try to address some of the problems linked to their habitats. Genetic studies to determine the extent of hybridization with domestic breed and in addition, relationships of different populations and individuals will be studied.