Mehao, Arunachal Pradesh, December 25, 2014: International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)-Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department have captured and translocated the ninth family of stranded gibbons from Dello village to a viable habitat in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary. This is one of the 20 stranded families living in the Dello village that has fragmented habitat and is no longer conducive for the survival of these animals. With no contiguous forests, the gibbons are forced to descend on to the ground for movement which puts their lives in grave danger. Eight families have already been moved earlier with the last translocation being carried out in March 2014.


(Left) Rescuers climbing the tree; (Right) Female gibbon with new born baby.

Photo: Kuladeep/WTI

The translocated family comprised four individuals – one adult male, one adult female with a dependent infant female (less than 15 days old) and a sub adult male. “Our efforts in protecting this very vulnerable species are ongoing and we remain committed to their conservation. I am happy to see that our training programme on safety harness techniques for gibbon rescue was put to good use. The translocation of another gibbon family to a safer haven guarantees that these apes remain an integral part of Arunachal Pradesh’s wildlife,” said Ian Robinson, Vice President, Programmes & International Operations, IFAW.
The Eastern hoolock gibbon family was captured from the village on December 24, 2014 and released in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary the following day. The IFAW-WTI team will continue to monitor the animals post release.


(Left) Infant female with one of the rescue team members; (Right) Adult male put in a cage for translocation. Photo: Kuladeep/WTI

Kenjum Rina, Divisional Forest Officer, Mehao Wildlife Division (MWD), added, “Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department has been very pro-active in guaranteeing the safety and survival of these magnificent animals. With IFAW-WTI, we are ensuring the long -term survival of the Eastern hoolock gibbon in India and will continue to work towards creating a secure future for the gibbons in Arunachal Pradesh.”
Hoolock gibbons are the only apes found in India, with their distribution restricted to the country’s Northeast region. Two species have been identified here – Eastern Hoolock gibbon (Hoolock leuconedys) and Western Hoolock gibbons (Hoolock hoolock). They are protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.


The Gibbon family after their release in Mehao WLS.

Photo: Kuladeep/WTI

Sunil Kyarong, Regional Head of IFAW-WTI said, “When we kick started the IFAW-WTI Hoolock Gibbon Conservation Project as a component of the Dibang Valley Conservation Project, in November 2011, we knew that there was no alternative but to shift these animals to a safer habitat. Gibbons require contiguous canopy to survive and anthropogenic pressures have led to habitat degradation in Dello. This put gibbons at risk and led to identification of gibbon families to move to safer habitat.”
Experts from the Forest Department and IFAW-WTI then identified 20 stranded families of Hoolock gibbons and the decision was made to shift them to Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary which falls within the species’ natural distribution range, based on IUCN Primate Reintroduction guidelines.