The tiger hiding in the lantana undergrowth


Bandipur Tiger Reserve, July 9, 2015: Wildlife Trust of India’s Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) team at Bandipur Tiger Reserve successfully tranquilised a tiger on July 9, 2015, at HD Kote taluk of Mysuru district, under the guidance of Dr Nagaraj, Forest Department’s veterinarian. The tiger was frequently seen near human habitation for the last one week and had reportedly been feeding on cattle. Despite several attempts by the Forest Department, the tiger could not be trapped or caught.
On July 9, villagers from Telugumasahalli reported the presence of a tiger in a field nearby, and the MVS team, along with Forest Department personnel, rushed to the spot immediately.
The Forest Department and MVS personnel examined the area and made a detailed plan of approach. A hostile crowd of a 1000 people had already gathered and the situation was tense. The tiger was tracked to a remote location by the Forest Department personnel under the guidance of Nagaraj Bhat, Field Officer, WTI. The animal was then found to be hiding in a ravine with lantana undergrowth.
After a drive was conducted by the Forest Department, the tiger moved along the ravine, where WTI’s veterinarian, Dr Shantanu Kalambi, darted the animal in the thigh from a vantage point. The tiger continued to crawl its way through the lantana scrub until the sedative in the dart started to take effect. Finally, the tiger dozed off at one end of the ravine but had to be darted again. The animal was then netted and carried away to a cage that was brought in from Bandipur National Park.

 


The tiger was put in a cage before being taken to Mysore Zoo for treatment
“This is the first tiger rescue case being handled by the MVS unit that was launched on June 9, 2015, with support from Aircel. At around 4pm, after a coordinated effort, hampered by a large mob of locals, we managed to successfully dart and capture an adult tiger that had been reported injured,” said Dr Kalambi.

The caged tiger was then carried to a forest camp where a quick examination revealed injuries that required further care and veterinary management. It was then decided that the big cat be taken to Mysore Zoo for further treatment. Depending on the state of its injuries, once the animal makes a full recovery, it will released back into the wild.
“This is the first case of WTI’s Bandipur MVS unit handling a large carnivore. The tiger was reportedly preying on cattle and since a massive and hostile crowd had gathered, the veterinarian had no option but to dart the animal to ensure its safety. It is for the well-being of both the animal and humans. I am sure that the tiger will make a quick recovery and return to wild,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Senior Director and Chief Veterinarian, WTI.
MVS Bandipur is the ninth WTI MVS unit in India and the first in southern India. The MVS units currently stationed at Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Odisha have been phenomenally successful in carrying out rescue and release operations in their respective areas.