Baripada, Odisha, 3 December 2020:
On 23rd November 2020, an adult male sambar stuck in a water canal near Bangriposi forest range, Baripada forest division was rescued by WTI’s Vet on Wheels Team.
The distressed animal was first spotted by the forest department staff at around 6:30 am in the morning. Dr. Vishakha Vasuki, Veterinarian, WTI – Vet on Wheels Similipal promptly responded to the call on being informed by Ajay Kumar Das, Range Officer, Bangriposi range. She joined Dr. Piyush Soren, forest department veterinarian and Dr. Shyama Bharati, ACF, Baripada forest division and the joint team reached the site at about 10 am.
After discussing and assessing the situation, it was decided that a physical capture of the animal would be the best way to bring the animal out of the canal where it was stranded, since tranquilizing an animal inside water could prove risky. With some help of the local community members and forest staff, the animal was gently nudged on to a thick polythene sheet. Accordingly, a makeshift structure (sort of a sledge) was made using bamboo poles, rope nettings and a polythene sheet to secure the animal as it was gently shifted onto the structure.
Once the animal was out of the water, it was immediately sedated by Dr. Vishakha. After sedation, it was thoroughly examined by both the veterinarians for any injuries, and there were none.  The stag was found to be fit for transport and immediate release back to the wild. The team then transported the stag in WTI’s Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) vehicle to Similipal Tiger Reserve, where it was safely released after its vitals were checked and it recovered fully from sedation. The animal is currently being monitored by the forest staff for any post release complications.
Sambar stuck in Chattra Canal, Bangriposi forest range

Rescuing the animal using nets and ropes

Sedating the animal before transportation

Transporting the animal in MVS vehicle

Animal released in Similipal Tiger Reserve, near Chahala wildlife range
Till date, Wild Rescue, one of our core programme areas has rescued over 250 displaced wildlife in this landscape via our Mobile Veterinary Service units. WTI is currently operating six MVS units in the states of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Odisha.