Bhopal: With their successful rehabilitation in alternative livelihoods, 18 kalandars, who were dancing bears just a year ago, have vowed never to go back to their old profession. Earlier this year they surrendered eight captive bears to the Madhya Pradesh forest department, which are being kept in a special facility at the Van Vihar zoo in the city.
In a first of its sort, the kalandars were given a choice of choosing their rehabilitation package according to their abilities, and counselling and help were given at every step to ensure that they succeeded. Among the enterprises started were poultry units, plying three wheeler auto-rickshaws, passenger auto (bhatt) starting a scrap business, and vending furniture and clothes among others.
In fact 23 women from Kalandar families were trained in tailoring, embroidery and soap-making for six months so that their skills could then supplement family incomes. 13 women among these have already organised themselves into an embroidery unit to start a business and have started marketing their skills.
The rehabilitation and training were provided by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the World Society for Protection of Animals (WSPA) in collaboration with the Madhya Pradesh forest department as a part of WTI’s Integrated Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project initiated in 2005.
“ The training has been intensive and very practical in nature to give them skills that they can use with a serious business and market orientation,” Chandan Kumar, Assistant Field Officer, WTI, said. “We followed this by developing forward linkages for the product and contacted shops in New Market and Old Market of Bhopal which are ready to give work. One of the local Kalandars has taken the responsibility for mediating with the shops and get the work for the trained women,” he added.
At a small function on Thursday, marking the end of the training the trainees were provided with sewing machines, embroidery frames, and the necessary raw material to launch their business. A certificate was also given to each of them.
“For a long time we were only being shown the law and told what we were not supposed to do. This is the first time someone gave us the opportunity and the means to use it.,” Rafiq Mohammed, who is leading the embroidery unit, said.
“We are happy that this initiative has been able to provide meaningful alternative livelihoods to the kalandars, which was sorely needed ,” Dr H.S.Pabla, Addl. PCCF, MP Forest Department said. “Sometimes the government in doing greater good is unable to look after the interests of affected minorities. I am glad that responsive NGOs have been able to fill up this gap and this effort will go a long way in giving relief to the kalandars,” he added.
The function was attended by Mr H.S Pabla, Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Mr Aniruddha Mookerjee, Senior Director, WTI and Vijay Dasmana, Manager Communities for Conservation among others.
Those who work with performing bears, often called Kalandars, have been in existence for several centuries. Apart from providing entertainment, the community also practiced traditional medicine, besides selling amulets made out of bear hair, claws and teeth as good luck charms against evil or injury.
To stop the cruel treatment of the bears and to protect the animal, the sloth bear was declared as a Schedule I species of Wildlife Protection Act in 1972. State forest departments thereafter issued certificates of bear possession to Kalandars. Further, in 1998 performance of animals was made illegal and banned.
To address the issue of “dancing bear” holistically, WTI in collaboration with WSPA initiated the Integrated Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project in the year 2005. Entrepreneurship Awareness Camp were organized to identify the skills and interests of the Kalandars.
When WTI/WSPA began its project in Bhopal, 22 Kalandarfamilies were dependent on captive bears for their livelihood. There were eight bears in custody of these kalandars. Five kalandars expressed their willingness to surrender their bears and adopt alternative livelihoods. WTI/WSPA assisted them in choosing their alternative livelihood, based on their skills and capacities after a detailed assessment of the vocations. After the kalandars made their individual choices they were guided and supported in that business. WTI/WSPA made it a point to get involved in each and every step to make the transition process a smooth one.
The concerted effort of WTI/WSPA and the Forest Department especially under the guidance of the divisional forest officer, Mr Satyanand, enabled the rescue of bears and the rehabilitation of kalandars in Bhopal. “This effort would go a long way in stopping this illegal profession of dancing bears in India,” Programme Manager, Vijay Dashamana, said.