Karbi Anglong (Assam): A new born male elephant was rescued from a ravine in which it was trapped for at least four days with its mother, in Ouguri Range under Hamren Division, Karbi Anglong on Saturday. The mother died on Sunday, even as efforts to save her were in progress.
A rescue team reached the site to find the calf severely injured and unable to stand. The team comprised staff from the Assam Forest Department and veterinarians from IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), and two Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) units – the JTEF – supported MVS Karbi Anglong and the GAIL – supported MVS Central Assam.
“Once we got the information from the local people, we reached the site on Thursday. We deployed local people to break the rocks to create a wider passage and free the elephants. We later alerted WTI veterinarians as the elephants had injuries,” said Druno Hanse, Ouguri Range Officer.
“The calf was severely injured and vulnerable, so we began work to get it out first,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, IFAW-WTI veterinarian who along with  WTI veterinarians Dr Anthony Phangcho and Dr Abhijit Bhawal, were part of the rescue team.

Six members of the team led by Dr Abhijit Bhawal entered the ravine and identified a suitable exit point. They fit the calf on a sling and lifted it, while the rest of the team and some villagers pulled it from outside. The calf was carried down the hill on a stretcher and rushed to the nearest Range Office in Ouguri where it was treated for severe wounds, dehydration and starvation.
Meanwhile, efforts continued to save the mother. However, on Sunday evening, she succumbed to her injuries.
“The calf has been shifted to CWRC after consultation with JN Hazarika, DFO Hamren,” said Joyram Engleng, Chief Executive Member, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council. “We thank all the members involved in the rescue. A special mention must be made of the villagers who played a vital part in saving the life of this calf.”
The calf is stable and will be hand-raised along with three other calves, socialise with them, and eventually rehabilitated and released back to the wild. This is the second case of a trapped elephant mother and calf WTI has handled.
 

Read More
Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation
Mobile Veterinary Services 
Related Stories
Bear cubs admitted for long term rehabilitation
Separated from mother, clouded leopard cubs to be rehabilitated
Bringing Back Manas: Elephant calves moved to the wild
Asiatic black bear cub returned to the wild