Lakhimpur (Uttar Pradesh): Dilipo, a habitual wildlife offender belonging to the Bawaria community, was sentenced to five years and three months of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs 50,000 for illegal trade in tiger parts, by the Court of RK Shukla, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lakhimpur Kheri on Wednesday.
Dilipo was arrested in early 2007, following seizure of tiger parts from Lakhimpur in the northern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. Two kgs of tiger meat and bones were seized on January 7, 2007 by the Forest Department authorities. More wildlife articles were recovered a day later. This was followed by the seizure of a leg trap, mobile set, a device used to remove animal nails and a telephone diary from one Kalicharan on January 12. His statement identified Dilipo as one of the accomplices who had sold the skin of the same tiger for Rs 40,000.
The conviction was Dilipo’s third. The prosecution was assisted by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) advocates Rakesh Kumar Srivastava and Sanjay Kumar Rai.
“This conviction will go a long way as a deterrent to poachers who regularly indulge in wildlife crimes and will send a strong message to the public at large,” said Ramesh Kumar Pandey, Deputy Director – Northern Region, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.
Dilipo’s first case was in Pilibhit, 25 years ago when she was arrested for illegal hunting, and trading in tiger parts. A few days after the arrest, she absconded and changed her identity adopting the name of Shanti.
The second case was in Katarniaghat when Shanti (aka Dilipo) was arrested in 2005, also related to trade in tiger parts. It was later discovered that she was Dilipo. She was sentenced to nine months of imprisonment as she voluntarily confessed her crime.
The Bawarias are a nomadic community, traditionally bushmeat hunters,” says Jose Louies, Officer-in-Charge, Enforcement Assistance and Law division, WTI. “Presently, using the cover of being wanderers, some members of this community are involved in wildlife trade rackets within the country and also across the Indo-Nepal border. Women are involved as much as the men. There have been ample incidents of wildlife goods being recovered from them, concealed inside articles like plaster-of-paris idols, paintings, etc.”
 


Related Stories
Leopard trader booked 15 years after arrest
Two years imprisonment for Ivory trader
To serve with tea: wildlife articles