Pune: Theoretical classes, practical sessions, group discussions and a field trip marked the third annual wildlife rehabilitation workshop conducted under the aegis of the Wild Rescue programme of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Animals in Crisis and Distress (AICD) division of the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) here last week.The workshop was organised with the logistical support of the department of environment and forests, Maharashtra, Indian Herpetological society, and Uttara ARRC at the United Biblical Seminary here from February 25-28. The workshop consisted of theoretical sessions spread over two days, a day of practical sessions with seminars focussing on skills, and a one-day field trip to nearby forested areas for rehabilitation and release of two rescued crested serpent eagles.
The workshop attracted 45 participants from various nongovernmental organisations and governmental agencies from the states of Maharashtra and Goa, including 10 range forest officers from the department of environment and forests, Maharashtra. There were also two veterinarians working with the UARRC among the participants.
Six resource persons, including two trainers, Ms Karen Trendler and Mr Michael Jamieson from Wild Care Africa Trust of South Africa representing IFAW, conducted the training sessions. There were four invitees who shared their experiences with participants, including Mr MG Gogate, Chief Wildlife Warden of Maharashtra. There were 18 lectures, practical sessions and field trips spread over eight sessions. The practical sessions were held at UARRC campus, while the field trip was to the nearby Simhagarh fort.
The topics covered included the process of wildlife rehabilitation, rehabilitation centres and roles in conservation, care and management of rescued animals in captivity, which included handling and restraint of rescued wild animals, handrearing of wild orphans, feeding of wild animals during periods of rescue, rehabilitation and release, housing considerations and enclosure designs of rescued wild animals, enrichment for rehabilitation, rehabilitation and release of birds and confiscated reptiles, emergency treatment of wildlife patients, animal welfare issues and justifications and consequences of unwanted veterinary interventions, IUCN guidelines on wildlife reintroduction and confiscated wild animals.
The group discussion centred around feeding captive animals during rehabilitation, and a special session on regional rehabilitation experiences by participants themselves. The practical sessions dealt with handling and restraint of wildlife, handraising techniques for wild orphans. Participants were taught how to perform basic physical/clinical examination of birds, administer fluids to dehydrated birds, take care of oiled birds, bandage injured birds, handle orphaned young ones, handle, restrain, treat rescued and injured reptiles, especially snakes. The workshop culminated with the release of two rescued crested serpent eagles during the field trip.
The mayor of Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC), Ms Deepti Chowdhuri, inaugurated the workshop. Mr Yashwant Khaire, Superintendent of Gardens, PMC, presided. Mr Prakash Gole of Ecological society was the chief guest for the valedictory function at Bharatiya Vidyapeeth Deemed University on February 28 when certificates of participation were distributed.