Wayanad (Kerala): “It has come to us like a blessing from God,” claims Kenchan, referring to a Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) initiative that has helped her family relocate from their old settlement in Wayanad Elephant Corridor in Kerala to evade conflicts with wild elephants.
Kenchan’s family was one of the six, that earlier lived in Valiyaemmadi within the Wayanad corridor, and agreed for voluntary relocation offered by the WTI, supported by the Elephant Family (EF) and World Land Trust (WLT).
Troubled by frequent raids by elephants, these families agreed to move out of the corridor land. In exchange, each family was provided alternate land equal to what they had given up, with a newly-constructed house and other basic amenities at the relocation site – Panavally – outside the corridor. The long drawn out process of their relocation was completed last month when they moved in to their new houses.
The ‘voluntary relocation’ of Valiyaemmadi is a part of the WTI’s Elephant Corridor Securement Project. Through a pioneering concept of land purchase for securement, WTI, EF and WLT have been working towards securing critical corridors across India to ensure long-term survival of the endangered Asian elephants. The secured land is handed over to the state forest departments for protection and management.
India is home to about 25000 Asian elephants, the largest population in the world. Habitat degradation and fragmentation is among the main threats to their existence. One of the repercussions of elephant habitat fragmentation, due to encroachment by humans, is the increase in frequency and intensity of human-elephant conflicts.
“We were forced to remain indoors and quietly pray that the elephants go away soon,” said Kenchan, recalling the fear psychosis created by these conflicts.
Dr Sandeep Kumar Tiwari, Manager, WTI, explains, “Asian elephants require large home range with abundant resources. Most of their habitat across India is fragmented due to human encroachments and developmental activities. In many cases, these corridors are the only connecting link between elephant habitats and these too are degraded by humans. As elephants instinctively cross through these forests, they come in direct conflict with people living along their pathway. Both humans and elephants suffer casualties in such encounters.”
The opportunity to move out of the corridor land was a blessing indeed for the Valiyaemmadi residents.
“The Valiyaemmadi residents are not only relieved of the frequent conflicts with elephants, but are also heading towards a better lifestyle, by relocating to an alternate site of their choice. Education, medical facilities, and other basic needs are more accessible. From the viewpoint of elephants, we are a step closer to achieving our goal of securing the Wayanad Corridor. This will help facilitate movement and thus genetic exchange between otherwise fragmented elephant populations. So, here we have a win-win situation for both people as well as animals,” Dr Tiwari added.
Now, happily ensconced in her new home in Panavally, Kenchan breathes a sigh of relief. Her family no longer faces the risk of being in the way of elephants crossing the Wayanad Corridor. “These new homes will rid us of the constant threats from elephants that regularly visited our farm lands,” Kenchan asserted confidently.
Valiyaemmadi was the second of the six major settlements within Wayanad Corridor to be successfully relocated. In 2007, WTI and its supporters relocated the first settlement Thirulakunnu from the corridor.
“Residents of the third settlement Pulayankolly too have agreed to relocate and we have begun dialogues with the fourth settlement, Kottapady,” said Dr Tiwari.
Surveys have revealed an increase in wild animal activity within the evacuated corridor land. Once completely secured, the Wayanad Corridor will provide a safe passage for about 5000 elephants, between Brahmagiri WLS in Karnataka and Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary (WLS) in Kerala via Wayanad North Division forests, further leading to Bandipur National Park and Mudumalai WLS.
“Establishment of secure corridors is the nearest we can come to creating a contiguous stretch of wild lands for elephants and other animals, in the present Indian scenario with increasing human population and needs. Elephant corridors remain our only hope to sustainably address the issue of isolated populations of elephants,” said Dr Tiwari.
 
Learn more about National Elephant Corridor Project