Manas: “Know Manas, love Manas, save Manas” was the central theme that greeted the hundred years of Manas Wildlife Sanctuary in Assam. The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Assam Shri. Tarun Gogoi lighted the inaugural lamp to mark the opening of the celebrations from 12th to 15th December.
The Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) with support from the Department of Environment & Forest, Govt. of Assam organized the centenary celebrations.
Pradyut Bordoloi, Minister of Forests, Assam, led a tribute to the martyrs of Manas at the centenary celebrations.
Speaking on the occasion, Gogoi said that his government is committed to help restore Manas to its past glory. He also highlighted the efforts to promote Manas as a popular eco-tourism destination.
Another speaker Hagrama Mohilary, BTC Chief said that his council has plans to improve the living conditions of the villagers so that human pressure on the park could be minimized.
The pristine flora and fauna of Manas, now a world heritage site continues to inspire thousands of admirers from all over the world. Once known for its famous one-horned rhinos, the park has since lost its sheen, after the population dropped to near extinct.
In addition to sight seeing tours and debate and discussions, a public seminar on the above theme was organized to gauge people’s reactions to various plans such as the Forest Department’s rhino re-introduction in Manas.
Rathin Barman, Manager Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) said that the preparations for the translocation of the rehabilitated rhino calf from the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) in Kaziranga to Manas are in good steed and will coincide with the concluding ceremony of the Kaziranga Centenary, scheduled from 13th to 15th February 2006.
About one thousand people comprising conservationists, politicians, ex-rebels, reformed poachers, tourists and locals participated in the discussions.
WTI in partnership with the Assam Forest Department and support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) have set up a rhino rehabilitation station in Manas as part of the ambitious rhino conservation project in Assam. N. K. Vasu, Director Kaziranga National Park (KNP) and Project Leader CWRC have played a stellar role in the rhino project at Manas. Rhinos from Pabitora Wildlife Sanctuary and KNP in Assam would be translocated to Manas, to augment their population in the future.
Pix credit: Murali Pai /WTI