Itanagar: The Nyshis, a fiercely traditional tribe in north east India , with their open mind and willingness to adapt have proved to be a reprieve for the magnificent but fast vanishing species of the hornbill. For centuries, the Nyshi tribes people in India ‘s remote north eastern state of Arunachal Pradesh have hunted the hornbill. They used the birds’ huge beaks to adorn their headgear. Now as the outcome of a campaign launched by Wildlife Trust of India, the Nyshis are ready to defy tradition and replace the hornbill beaks with those made of fiberglass.
A hornbill headdress is mandatory for a Nyshi man, as a sign of tribal identity and manhood. Nyshis target four species of hornbills: the Great Indian hornbill, Oriental pied hornbill, Rufous necked hornbill and the Wreathed hornbill. The rampant decimation of these birds have so drastically reduced their population that Pakke wildlife sanctuary now remains the last stronghold for these birds in Arunachal Pradesh.
In 2001 Wildlife Trust of India began a cautious campaign among the conservative Nyshi asking them to stop killing hornbills and offering them artificial replacements. This project was supported by the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation. After a proposal was received from Arunachal Pradesh, WTI started developing artificial hornbill beaks using fiberglass, which became popular and has been widely accepted by the locals. While wooden beaks sell for Rs 150/- (US$3), fiberglass look-alikes cost one-third of the price of wood.
WTI, along with a local NGO of Arunachal Pradesh and the Forest Department have been providing the tribals with artificial hornbill beaks to be used instead of originals. These beaks were initially made in Delhi and sent to Arunachal Pradesh for distribution. When WTI started receiving frequent requests from Arunachal Pradesh, it became evident that this could not be sustained and that it was important to train the local artisans to produce this beak so that it could become a commercially viable activity.
At the training workshop conducted two months ago in collaboration with the National Museum of Natural History and a local NGO, Nyshi Indigenous Faith and Cultural Society, a Nyshi participant, Tana Taram Tara expressed satisfaction at the training. ”I appeal to all Nyshis to stop killing hornbills. I will teach the art of making artificial beaks to all those willing to learn. I hope that this training will go a long way in conservation of birds as well as preservation of tradition,” he said. The participants were taught how to make these artificial beaks from easily available materials that do not pose a threat to the environment. The artificial beaks are cast in moulds and finished by painting to resemble the real beaks. The final fitting of these beaks into headgear is done by local craftsmen.The workshop was inaugurated by Mr. Nabam Rebia, MP, Rajya Sabha. The concluding session on 3rd March was presided over by Mr. S.R. Mehta, PCCF, Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department.
After the Nyshis, led by their chiefs, took a public pledge three years ago not to kill this rare bird, billboards had begun appearing in the forest warning of a 5,000-rupee (US$108) fine on anyone found hunting hornbills. The hunters of this magnificent bird have now transformed into protectors, at the same time continuing with their tradition of beaks on their headgear. Only, this time, the fiberglass beak does not tear into the fragile ecosystem that already houses endangered species.