Students participating in the rally



Chamuagati Gaon, August 28, 2015: More than 400 people participated in a peace rally called by IFAW-WTI team at Chamuagati Gaon near Manas National Park in Assam to generate awareness on the need to protect wildlife in and around the park. The participants included students, teachers and non-teaching staff from three schools, members of local NGOs and some villagers.
Sanatan Deka, Project Lead, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), addressed the gathering first and broached the topic of a recent killing of a swamp deer near the village. “It is tragic to hear of animals killed around national parks. For villagers living in the vicinity of Manas – a UNESCO World Heritage Site that has been so painstakingly brought out of danger, such incidents can prove to be disastrous for the pride and identity of Manas NP. We should pledge that we will save Manas and strive to keep its status intact.”
The peace rally was inaugurated by DD Boro, ACF, Manas Tiger Project. Addressing the participants, he said, “If we see how much land is occupied by animals on earth and compare it to area occupied by human beings, we would know that we have left no space for animals. Can we not give some space to wild animals so that they too can co-exist? The peace rally organised by IFAW-WTI and its partners ONGC and Assam Forest Department is a reminder of a recent incident of a slain deer and why it should not happen.”


WTI experts adressing the rally

The rally covered about two kms around the village and finally all the participants gathered in an open field in front of Sri Sri Kamakhya Devalya, Chamuagati Gaon. All participants observed one minute silence and pledged to not kill wildlife and stop others from doing so in their respective area. Mr Ananda Prasad Das, Head Master, Nehru High School, said, “Today’s rally in which three schools participated should help in spreading the message amongst locals that wildlife should not be hunted.”
Mr. Kulenda Das, Head Master, Gati Nehru ME School said, “Our students will carry the message to their parents, which will help raise awareness and also pass on the message that we need to save wildlife to ensure Manas retains its pride.”
IFAW- WTI with the Assam Forest Department have successfully released rescued and rehabilitated elephants, rhinos, clouded leopards in Manas National Park, thus restocking it to bring back its lost glory and its status as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. WTI and the Assam Forest Department have also secured the support of ONGC to understand the ecology of the Eastern swamp deer and develop management strategies for conservation of their last surviving population in India. The project is now in the next phase of creating a second home for the Eastern swamp deer in Manas NP. Conservation initiatives will not see success without the help of local communities, hence, sensitising the youth to take positive action is the first step to secure our natural heritage.