Thimpu (Bhutan), October 8, 2014: The International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) starts its refresher training today for select forest rangers in Bhutan, under its ongoing trans-boundary conservation initiatives. 
Wildlife conservation is a challenging task even for a conservation champion like the tiger-range country of Bhutan, mainly because of the global nexus and cross border channels in illegal wildlife trade.


The rangers will be trained in four batches over two days each at Sarpang, Gelephu, Royal Manas NP and Samdrup Zongkhar WLD. Photo: Jose Louies./IFAW-WTI

“IFAW-WTI has previously trained 450 forest rangers last October of which a select 213 rangers from Phibsoo Wildlife Sanctuary, Royal Manas National Park and Samdrup Zongkhar Wildlife Division will undergo this refresher course,” said Jose Louies, the trainer on Wildlife Crime, who runs IFAW-WTI’s wildlife enforcement assistance operations.
“These refresher courses help the rangers with latest information and serves to motivate them creating a more effective crime prevention force,” added Krishnendu Mondal, IFAW-WTI’s training facilitator. Torches and raincoats will be distributed to all trainees, in keeping with their commitment to duty regardless of the time or weather.
The rangers will be trained in four batches over two days each at Sarpang, Gelephu, Royal Manas NP and Samdrup Zongkhar WLD.
The IFAW-WTI trainers on Wildlife Crime are joined by officials from the Wildlife Conservation Division of Bhutan led by Mr Ratu Wangchuk, the Deputy Chief who will impart the training on effective application of Wildlife Law and the team of Biology trainers, Ms Tshering Zam and Mr Kinley Rabgay.

The trainers’ team mentored by Mr Bhupen Talukdar from the north-eastern Indian state of Assam will ensure that all aspects of wildlife crime and trade control are covered to render the rangers most effective in discharging their duties.


213 rangers from Phibsoo Wildlife Sanctuary, Royal Manas National Park and Samdrup Zongkhar Wildlife Division will undergo this refresher course. Photo: Jose Louies/IFAW-WTI