Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary, June 6, 2014: To augment anti-poaching work in Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary, Kerala, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), through a Rapid Action Project (RAP) supported by CAF India and Lightorati, provided 61 field kits as well as four tents for the forest staff and anti-poaching watchers of the Wildlife Sanctuary.
The anti-poaching field kit consists of a sleeping bag, a backpack, a cap, a water bottle and a field torch. Vijayakumar, Conservator of Forests, Agasthyavanam Biological Park, along with the Wildlife Warden of Shendurney WLS, R. Lekshmi handed the kits. Radha Krishnan, Deputy Director (Research and Nature education), Agasthyavanam Biological Park and Asst. Wildlife Warden of Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary were also present for the distribution.


The kits being distributed. Photo: Sabu Jahas / WTI

Sabu Jahas, Project Advisor for WTI, commented on the initiative saying, “With monsoons just around the corner it was also vital that the forest department staff be equipped with water-proof kits so that they can carry out their patrolling activities with ease. Out of 61 kits, 16 were given to the frontline staff of Agasthyavanam Biological Park.”
Located approximately 75 km from Thiruvananthapuram, Shendurney Wildlife Sanctuary spread over 172 km2 in the Kollam District of Kerala, is home to a number of important faunal species of mammals, avians and reptiles. It also houses over 1256 species of flowering plants of which over 100 have been classified as rare and endangered.


“With monsoons just around the corner it was vital that the forest department staff

be equipped with water-proof kits.” Photo: WTI



Radhika Bhagat, Head of the Wild Aid division, further added on the need of the project saying, “With the area being home to key species like tigers and elephants along with many rare and endangered endemic plants, it is imperative on our part to assist in whatever way we can, including providing basic necessities, to help strengthen anti-poaching activities carried out by these guardians of the wild.”