Seijosa (Arunachal Pradesh): Continuing their effort to conserve hornbills in the northeast Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, the state Forest Department and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), distributed synthetic hornbill beaks to members of the local Nyishi community, last week.
The Nyishis have increasingly come to accept the artificial beak, that was introduced as an alternative in early 2000s to prevent persecution of hornbills for beaks to adorn the traditional headgear.
Distributing artificial hornbill beaks to the members of the Nyishi Elite Society among other local participants at the 2010 Nyishi Day celebrations held in Seijosa between April 18-22, Tana Tapi, Divisional Forest Officer, Pakke, said, “The Nyishi Elite Society represents the entire Nyishi community of the state. By handing out these artificial beaks to these members, we expect to reach a wide audience as these members have considerable influence over Nyishis in their respective areas.”
In addition to the participants at the Nyishi Day celebrations, artificial beaks were distributed in about 15 villages located around Pakke Tiger Reserve. The artificial beaks were produced with funds provided by Charities Aid Foundation (CAF) and WTI.
Along with the beak distribution, a survey was conducted to understand the impact of this project on hornbill persecution. The survey also aimed at assessing the attitude of the local people to this alternative.
“As we went about distributing the artificial beaks and interacting with the local people, it was evident that the Nyishis are open-minded about it (artificial beak). It is really admirable that the community rose up to the need for conserving hornbills, this way,” said Radhika Bhagat, Project Officer, WTI, who organised the survey with the help of local volunteers.
A traditional symbol of manhood and vigour, the hornbill beak-adorned headgear has been worn by Nyishi men for centuries. However, the increasing demand drastically affected the hornbill species found in the state, and also threatened hornbills in nearby states as people began purchasing the beaks.
Alarmed by these threats, the Forest Department and WTI, supported by the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF), collaborated in a Rapid Action Project (RAP) to popularise the artificial beak within the Nyishi community, at the request of Arunachal Wildlife & Nature Foundation and knowledgeable members of the Nyishi community. Following an early success of the initiative, in 2004, the implementers along with Nyishi Indigenous Faith and Cultural Society organised a training in synthetic beak fabrication for 20 local artisans, for sustainability. The training in beak-making imparted by experts from the National Museum of Natural History, New Delhi, was funded by DSWF.