New Delhi: Yeshi Dorje, a resident in the neighborhood of Lhasa’s central market, who had witnessed the March 10 burning of endangered animal skins in the Amdo province, said that the regular shops which sold tiger and leopard skins in Lhasa no longer display these items.  
Narrating his experience of the burning he said, “I travelled more than 1500 kilometers to take part in the programme called by the monks in Bora. Though most of the items burned belonged to the locals, people from other areas also joined in the burning event. I think there were about ten thousand people.”
Dorje who is a tourist guide by profession was aware of this passionate burning spree by the Tibetans across Tibet in the past two months. Recalling the incident he said, “About 10 million yuan (Chinese yuan) worth of skins were probably burnt on that day”
Informed sources say that in Barkor in central Lhasa about 25 to 30 shops mostly owned by the Chinese are still involved in the skin trade. However, these shops which sold tiger and leopard skins in the past, are now selling otter and other skins. They also say that there is an uneasy calm in the market for the fear of repercussions by the public upon display of animal skins in the shops.
Tension could also be felt in other provinces where mass burning took place. Since the first week of February, 2006, tiger, fox, otter and other skins were burnt in several places of Tibet, which included Rebgong, Kham, Labrang, Golok, Karze, Amdo, Ngawa, and Thankor.
In the Chando County of the Kham province during the Tibetan New Year – February 28, authorities forced people to wear chubas (garments made from animal skins) at the celebration. Sources also say that amid the public burning of chubas in other parts, authorities here prevented people from burning.
In Lhasa, the situation is more tense as compared to other regions. Following the public burning of animal skins here on March 10, the authorities have taken no chance, even arresting people and sending them behind bars.
Wildlife experts in India believe that the situation in Tibet particularly after the street demonstrations against the use of chubas brought some hope. Atleast one can safely say that the message of His Holiness the Dalai Lama has reached the people. Though, much of it could be assumed only from the areas where the burning took place. For instance, in the Kham province the use of chubas is quite popular, although a similar reaction was not seen here as in other parts.
Chubas are worn here mainly during the Gyantse (Horse racing) festival in June, and the Shoton festival during August and September, where opera, singing and dancing are organized. This is also an important festival throughout Tibet. Other important festivals include Chubacexi, Ganden and Yalong during July.
For the moment, His Holinesses message is accepted with due respect by the Tibetans in Tibet and in India. This was reiterated on February 21 by a group of five Tibetan organizations in Dharamsala, where they burnt chubas made of leopard and tiger skins. Caps and scarves made from fox and otter skins were also burnt.
The Tibetan Conservation Awareness Campaign was launched by His Holiness the Dalai Lama with the Wildlife Trust of India and the Care for the Wild International (CWI) in April last year. Following this initiative, several programmes were organized at different places among the Tibetan community to make them aware of the serious implications raised by the indiscriminate killing of rare species.
Barbara Maas, the Chief Executive of the CWI believes that His Holiness’s dedication to this issue and the honesty and open-mindedness of the Tibetans, will make a genuine difference by saving the lives of countless wild animals.
Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of WTI said that this joint initiative will be carried forward to different Tibetan settlements in the country in the future.