Greater Manas (Assam): Continuing its efforts to ‘bring Manas back’ to its former glory, IFAW-WTI has provided field kits to a local NGO to facilitate anti-poaching patrolling in the UNESCO World Heritage Site. 
The kits comprising jackets, shoes and tents were handed over to the NGO – Manas Sousi Khongkhor Eco-tourism Society (MSKETS) during an event held last week at Uttarkuchi in Baksa district. MSKETS is among the local NGOs that actively support the Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) authorities in wildlife conservation in Greater Manas along the Indo-Bhutan border.
“MSKETS is doing a great job protecting the Subankhata Reserve Forest under Batabari Forest Range on the Indo-Bhutan border of Baksa district and the buffer areas of Manas National Park which is an important habitat for elephants and tigers among other species. It is very difficult for the Forest Department to manage such a big area alone. We thank IFAW-WTI for supporting us and our local NGOs to protect this important habitat,” said Anindya Swargiary, Field Director, Manas National Park.
The kits were provided as part of IFAW-WTI’s Greater Manas Conservation Project, under the mandate of which five orphaned elephants have been successfully rehabilitated into the wild. Other conservation initiatives undertaken as part of the project include reintroduction of rhinos and rehabilitation of clouded leopards among others, capacity building, community-based conservation etc.
“Successful conservation can be achieved only when the local population is involved. Greater Manas is an area where community conservation has picked up and taken a firm rooting. Many local organisations like MSKETS have been working in association with each other as well as the authorities,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, Manager, WTI. “What IFAW-WTI is doing is helping them in their efforts to conserve their natural heritage.”
The project, through years of research and lobbying, had successfully mobilised political support for the creation of Greater Manas, effectively doubling the protected area system of Bodoland.
“We work to protect our forests and wildlife, particularly in Batabari and Kumarikata forest ranges, and have been able to reduce encroachment and poaching here,” said Bijoy Chowdhury, Chairman, MSKETS.