Kaziranga National Park, December 28, 2014: For the first time in India, a mass capture of Eastern swamp deer (Rucervus duvaucelii ranjitsinhi) for relocation unfolded in Kaziranga National Park. Popularly known as barasingha, the entire population of this sub-species of Eastern Swamp Deer is currently found only in Kaziranga NP. To save them from a point of no return, 19 Eastern swamp deer were captured in Kaziranga NP to be relocated to Manas National Park for augmentation. A team of experts from Assam Forest Department (AFD) , Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and College of Veterinary Science, Khanapara, Guwahati, Assam, monitored the entire process that is part of the ongoing project supported by Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC). The capture process was initiated on December 9, 2014, in presence of Markus Hofmyr of SANParks, South Africa, along with other experts.


Eastern swamp deer being translocated from Kaziranga to Manas on a truck.

Photo: Subhamoy/WTI

The animals will be released in a specially prepared boma in Manas NP which is secured by a two-line power fence installed over a bombax barrier to deter leopards from entering the enclosure. The boma was also flooded and short grass was brought from nearby areas for transplantation to ensure the well-being of the herd.
Expressing great happiness on the occasion, Rakibul Hussain, Hon’ble Minister, Environment & Forests, Govt. of Assam, said, “This is a great moment in the history of wildlife conservation in India when we have shown to the world a successful mass capture of Eastern swamp deer for the first time in the country. I congratulate the entire team for their commendable efforts for past twenty days.”


Eastern swamp deer captured for translocation.

Photo: Subhamoy/WTI

“The Assam Forest Department, WTI and the College of Veterinary Science teams worked as a cohesive unit and ensured that the entire exercise progressed smoothly. It is a moment of great pride for the Assam Forest Department and we are happy to be a part of this historic experiment,” said RP Agarwalla, Chief Wildlife Warden, Assam.
In 2010, AFD and WTI collaborated with ONGC to launch a three-year long ecological research programme – the ‘Eastern Swamp Deer Conservation Project’ in Kaziranga NP. The aim of the project was to understand the ecology of the Eastern swamp deer and develop management strategies for conservation of their last surviving population in India.
Findings on diet, genetic constitution and behaviour provided useful insight for the scientific management of the sub-species in Kaziranga NP, as well as propel the project into its current second phase of creating a second home for the Eastern swamp deer in Manas NP.


Eastern swamp deer being released in Manas.

Photo: Subhamoy/WTI

The support of ONGC was also crucial in making this effort a success story. “Environmental management and sustainability including issues of climate change are of utmost concern to ONGC. Considering the urgency of saving endangered Eastern swamp deer, ONGC has undertaken a specially designed CSR project in association with WTI and Assam Forest Department to help save the species from extinction. Today’s achievement is yet another noteworthy milestone in this long journey,” said Desh Deepak Misra, Director (HR), ONGC
“ONGC is fully committed towards protection of the environment and the same is reflected in its actions and programmes driven by its comprehensive policies. We have been privileged to actively contribute for ecological conservation and promotion. Our association in the efforts for saving endangered species of Eastern swamp deer is a reflection of our commitment towards the same,” said Alok Misra, Chief CSR, ONGC.
Post-capture, these deer for the first few months will be kept in the boma and would later be released in the park in batches. Some of them would be kept in the boma for breeding purposes. Since this would be the source population for Manas National Park, stringent arrangements have been made to ensure their welfare.
Renowned conservation and animal welfare biologist, Markus Hofmyr, was flown in specially from South Africa to support the capture exercise. Experts from WTI and the Assam Forest Department will also monitor the Eastern swamp deer population in Kaziranga NP to see if translocation has any impact on the population there.
The team that had worked day and night to ensure smooth capture of the herd was ecstatic at the success. “Repopulating Manas NP with Eastern swamp deer is yet another step towards fulfilling India’s commitment to UNESCO in restoring the pride of Manas NP. Four years of hard work by WTI and the Assam Forest Department with the invaluable support of ONGC resulted in this pioneering achievement today. This is a turning point in the conservation history of Eastern swamp deer in India and a step forward in the right direction,” said Vivek Menon, ED & CEO, WTI.