This must-read series by Wildlife Trust of India features 10 eminent wildlife experts who share their list of top 20 wildlife titles. This time we have Prerna Singh Bindra, India’s leading environmental journalist.

Ms Prerna Singh Bindra is a writer and wildlife conservationist with a primary focus on conservation of wildlife habitats. She has served on various high-level government committees such as India’s National Board for Wildlife and its core Standing Committee and Uttarakhand’s State Wildlife Advisory Board. Prerna is a prolific writer and has authored the critically acclaimed The Vanishing: India’s Wildlife Crisis  and two books for children including When I Grow Up I Want to be a Tiger. In 2019, she co-edited Wild Treasures, an anthology on Natural World Heritage Sites of Asia. She was a visiting fellow of Wildlife Institute of India-UNESCO Category 2 Centre. She is a director of Hathi-Sathi Foundation which works to enable safe shared spaces for people and elephants in north Bengal. After over 20 years of working in the field, she is back in college, pursuing her PhD at University of Cambridge.
Prerna is a voracious reader, compulsive traveller, loves elephants and is a dog’s best friend.
Here’s her list of top 10 titles about wildlife in India and another 10 on global wildlife topics.

Her pick of the top reads on wildlife of India:

Naturalist on the Prowl by EH Aitken
The Jungle in Sunlight and Shadow by FW Champion
The Wildlife of India by EP Gee
The Fall of a Sparrow by Salim Ali
Nature’s Spokesman: The Wildlife Writings of M. Krishnan – Edited By Ramchandra Guha
Tiger by Kailash Sankhla
A Life with Wildlife by MK Ranjitsinh
Indira Gandhi: A Life in Nature by Jairam Ramesh
Tipu: Sultan of the Siwaliks by Amirtharaj Christy Williams
Cheetal Walk by ERC Davidar

Her pick of the top reads on global wildlife topics:


My Family and Other Animals by Gerald Durrell
Silent Spring by Rachel Carson
A Naturalist and Other Beasts: Tales from a Life in the Field by George B Schaller
Underland by Robert Macfarlane
Tigers in Red Weather by Ruth Padel
Last Chance to See By Douglas Adams
The Forest Unseen by David George Haskell
Never Cry Wolf by Farley Mowat
The Great Soul of Siberia by Sooyong Park
Feral by George Monbiot

Also read the curated list by:
M K Ranjitsinh
Aasheesh Pittie
Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan
Tara Gandhi
Neha Sinha
Ananda Banerjee