Ram Terang, May 25, 2015: In a significant development, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) allotted houses to 19 families of Ram Terang Village in a lottery draw to set up a model Karbi village. These families had voluntarily decided to relocate from Ram Terang Village — located within the Kalapahar-Doigurung(KD) Elephant Corridor — to a site near Sar Kro Village, as part of community-based conservation initiatives undertaken to reduce dependence on the corridor. Voluntary relocation of Ram Terang villagers is the most important component of the WTI Project aimed at securing the KD Elephant Corridor.


Dilip Deori briefing those present about the lottery draw.

The draw was organised by WTI team in presence of Mr. Pradip Singnar, Executive Member in-charge of Environment and Forest; Mr. Khoi Terang, Headman, Ram Terang Village; forest officials of the area, and residents of the village. The 19 households will also be given additional land for agriculture, subsequently, to further minimise their dependence on corridor resources. “Lottery draw was initiated before the construction of the houses, so that villagers can actively participate in the construction phase and take ownership of these houses,” said Dilip Deori, Project Lead, WTI.
The exercise was conceptualized with an objective of bringing a strong belonging for the villages towards the relocation process, especially from the start of construction of their new houses. The process would strengthen the bond among all the 19 families and they would start dreaming of their life in the relocated area. They should inspect the process themselves, start planting trees around and be an integral part of the whole process.


A child picking a lottery on behalf of his family.

Village of Ram Terang, named after the head of the village, has been situated right in the middle of the corridor giving rise to frequent human-elephant conflict with regular loss of crops and property of the villagers, besides human casualties. Elephants, many a time, also lost their lives in retaliation by the victims of their predation.
Supported by Elephant Family, IUCN – Netherlands and Japan Tiger Elephant Fund (JTEF), this initiative will help secure the corridor used by elephants to move between Kalapahar and Doigurung Nambor Wildlife Sanctuary in the Kaziranga–Karbi Anglong landscape. Securing elephant corridors is a significant component of WTI’s Karbi Anglong Conservation Project.
At the outset, WTI team introduced the dignitaries, and briefed about the project concept and the lottery draw. Thereafter, a prayer service was organised to give this initiative an auspicious start. Later, the lottery draw was conducted wherein each of the 19 families were allotted a dwelling unit each by the lottery.


Mr. Pradip Singnar declaring the results of the draw

Mr. Pradip Singnar in his address mentioned that villagers of Ram Terang were lucky to have been chosen by WTI for relocation and rehabilitation. He added, “It’s not only WTI and government’s duty to save the elephant, it’s also the duty of every individual to come forward so that human-animalco-existence can be achieved.” In his speech, he further exhorted the villagers to maintain hygienic practices in their daily affairs. “WTI will do everything for the villagers, but it’s the duty of villagers also to keep their surroundings clean,” he said. He also thanked Elephant Family, JTEF and IUCN-NL for their kind support.
Mr. Khoi Terang then spoke and said, “WTI has helped these villagers a lot and I appreciate their efforts in relocating the villagers here. This will help them make a new beginning which would also mean a better living.” He also mentioned that villagers were happy with the draw of lottery.
The Ram Terang Village relocation plan will be endorsed by the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) for execution, thereby creating a model of rehabilitation for conservation in Karbi Anglong to be followed at other places in future. The design for construction of typical Karbi houses is being prepared by the local architect in consultation with the villagers. Once the houses and other amenities are provided at rehabilitation site, the villagers will move in their new dwellings.


A woman from Ram Terang talking about the relocation plan

A woman from the village said, “WTI is doing good work in providing new opportunity for the villagers, but we would be grateful if WTI could also build a prayer house and a school.” After the lottery draw, Mr. Pradip Singnar planted two saplings of Mesua ferrea (Nahar) in front of the community hall. Later on, he personally inspected the dwelling units.
The Kalapahar-Doigurung Elephant Corridor is located about 22 kms from Silonijan (Karbi Anglong) on Silonijan-Chokikhola tract, and connects Kalapahar with Doigurung-Nambor Wildlife Sanctuary and Kaziranga National Park.
“There are thousands of elephants in the Kaziranga-Karbi Anglong landscape and since this village falls within the corridor, there has been a lot of negative interaction between the animals and humans. To avert such situations, it becomes pertinent to secure this corridor, but with the express consent and willingness of the people of Ram Terang. And doing so was a challenge, but we successfully overcame it with the dedicated work of our entire Project Team. Hence, I would like to congratulate all the stakeholders including the forest department, villagers of Ram Terang, Hon’ble Mr. Singnar, and my project team for making this initiative a success,” said Dr Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor, WTI.