New Delhi: A report on the Markhor “Goats on the Border” which is jointly published by the Wildlife Trust of India, J & K Wildlife Department, Environment and Ecology Cell of the Indian Army and Nature Conservation Society was released by the Hon’ble Chief Minister of J & K Shri Mufti Mohammad Syed in the presence of a large gathering on 25 th June, at Sheri Kashmir International Convention Centre (KICC) Srinagar. The occasion was the opening ceremony of the Regional Workshop on Ramsar Site Wetlands of India’s Northern States, in Srinagar, Kashmir.Other prominent guests at the inaugural included Sofi Ghulam Mohi-ud-din, minister for Forests & Environment J&K and Thakur Puran Singh, minister of State for Forests & Environment, J&K.
The report is the result of an extensive survey conducted by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) along with Department of Wildlife Protection J & K, Nature Conservation Society (NCS) and the Environment and Ecology Cell, of the Indian Army, in a vast stretch of Himalaya from Padder-Kishtwar to Poonch in Jammu and from Hirpura in south Kashmir to Kaj-i-nag and Shamshabari in north Kashmir. This is also the first ever survey of markhor. The Kashmir Markhor (Capra falconeri cashmiriensis) is a high altitude mountain goat also known for its corkscrew horn.
According to Rahul Kaul, Director Conservation WTI, “Through the report we have made a series of recommendations to the state government for immediate action. One important suggestion was the amalgamation of Lachipora Wildlife Sanctuary, Limber Wildlife Sanctuary, Kaj-i-nag NP and Wildlife Sanctuary and Naganari Conservation Reserve under a single unit for conservation. This would enable us and the wildlife department of J&K to closely monitor the markhor habitats from encroachment and poaching”.
Referring to a report published by a popular English daily he further added, “I am pleasantly surprised from the media reports that the forests minister and the chief wildlife warden of the state has positively responded to our call. This is in itself a big step forward.”
The present dispensation on the part of the state government to constitute all markhor bearing areas under one unit for conservation of these species, a recommendation put forward by WTI is a positive response and has brought smile to many animal lovers in the country and abroad. WTI sees this opportunity as a big achievement in its endeavor to help conserve the endangered species.
The ceasefire between India and Pakistan early this year was one of the major reason that this two and a half month survey was possible, as most of the markhor bearing areas are near the LOC-long known for conflicts, disputes, shelling and causalities. This stretch along the LOC is a sensitive wildlife bio-sphere reserve and home to a large number of rare mammals like mountain ungulates and birds like pheasants. The musk deer, black bear, goral, western tragopan, cheer and monal, in addition to markhor, all considered to be threatened today.
“The Army has played a vital role during the survey in providing logistical support in the interior areas along the LOC and would continue to be an important partner for any wildlife conservation program in the region.” adds Kaul,
The markhor report was able to highlight several factors affecting the markhor habitat in the region – Limber Wildlife Sanctuary, Lachipora Wildlife Sanctuary, Naganari Conservation Reserve and besides various other catchment areas and forests in the vicinity. A number of startling facts were revealed of the little known Kashmir Markhor (Capra falconeri cashmiriensis). Though endangered due to habitat disturbance from the Indo-Pak thaw and large scale poaching of the animal during the late eighties and nineties for trophies (corkscrew horn) and their meat as a local platter, a sizable population of the markhor still exists. A conservative estimate, points out that there could be at least 300 individuals in the arid mountains of J&K. Degradation of their habitat and human encroachment are the major reasons for their gradual disappearance.
Other recommendations in the report include collaborative management of markhor areas with the Indian Army, Hirpura and Kaj-i-nag as priority areas for markhor conservation, education and awareness for the masses, capacity building of the local wildlife department in terms of man-power, resources and training to conserve the markhor needs, rescue and rehabilitation of markhor, control of livestock grazing in markhor bearing areas, need to understand the ecology of the species, promotion of eco-tourism, empowering non-wildlife agencies under the wildlife Protection Act and establishment of intelligence network on wildlife crime and trade.
The Kashmir Markhor (Capra falconeri cashmiriensis) is included in the schedule 1 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 and is considered nearing extinction in India. The current peace brings optimism not only to long standing bilateral issues between the two countries but also issues which has been long overlooked in the region. The current peace has brought relief and respite to wildlife in Jammu and Kashmir. Hopefully peace in J & K brings reform and development in Jammu and Kashmir and a meaningful commitment for protection and conservation of our precious wildlife.