The Improved Livestock Management Camp underway at the community centre, New Ram Terang
New Ram Terang, Karbi Anglong, January 30, 2017: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the Japan Tiger and Elephant Fund (JTEF) recently organised an awareness camp on improved livestock management practices for the villagers of New Ram Terang in the Karbi Anglong Hills of Assam. Experts from the Assam State Veterinary Department and WTI-JTEF conducted the camp, which was held at the village’s community hall on January 26.
The 19 families of New Ram Terang had, in March 2016, with assistance from WTI, Elephant Family and the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, completed the process of voluntary relocation from their previous habitation, which was located in the Kalaphar-Daigurung Elephant Corridor. The villagers had largely depended on slash-and-burn cultivation to make a living; introducing them to higher yield agricultural practices that are less harmful to the natural environment, and livestock rearing techniques that can improve economic returns, is an important component of their new lives in the relocated village.
Introducing village communities to livelihoods that promise better economic returns and are less harmful to the natural environment is of vital importance.
“It is vital that the villagers follow timely deworming and vaccination schedules as well as other livestock care and management practices for the animals they are rearing in their households. They should keep in touch with state veterinary units for the betterment of their livestock”, said Dr Janmoni Shyam from the State Veterinary Dispensary, Bokakhat. Dr Shyam, as well as Dr Brindaban Phangcho of Suguna Foods Pvt Ltd and Dr Daoharu Baro of WTI-JTEF were among the veterinary experts who led sessions on handling and care of livestock at the camp. Dilip Deori, Manager and Project Lead of WTI’s Karbi Anglong Conservation Project, and Borsali Terang, Project Officer also shared their expertise on improved livelihood opportunities for the villagers.
Women like Jelinea Terangpi, Pina Terangpi and Julia Rong Pipi raised questions about the pigs and poultry they are rearing at their homes in New Ram Terang. Khoi Terang, the village headman, thanked WTI-JTEF for organising the awareness camp, the first of its kind in the area. People from neighbouring Sar Kro and Ram Kiling villages also attended the camp.