Noida, NCR, 10 June 2020:
Wildlife Trust of India with its institutional commitment to address wildlife emergencies provided essential relief in 24 Parganas (south) district of West Bengal that bore the brunt of the cyclone Amphan.
The Sundarbans of West Bengal were severely affected by this super cyclone, with loss and extensive damage to homes, widespread breaches in embankments and a storm surge that flooded the fields with sea water rendering the land unfit for cultivation.
Wildlife Trust of India with its local partners provided immediate assistance to both the resident community and the fauna in distress.
Our Amphan relief efforts were focussed on the Kultali block of the 24 Parganas (south) district of West Bengal. WTI’s Wild Rescue division worked through the Emergency Relief Network (ERN) supported by partner IFAW and the Conflict Mitigation division worked through the Primary Response Team (PRT).
[acx_slideshow name=”amphan”]
Our PRT operates under the IUCN- KFW- supported Integrated Tiger Habitat Conservation (ITHCP) program and comprises trained local community members tasked to ease and manage wildlife conflicts. ERN is our larger network of skilled wildlife veterinarians and local NGO partners who help in addressing local wildlife distress calls.
The PRT members managed to reach out and provide essential rations assistance to a total of 800 families while the ERN member Sarisha Wildlife and Ecology Society (SWES) conducted three medical camps for both the community members and distressed animals (100 bird rescues), snake bite awareness and snakebite anti superstition workshops (attended by 200 community members) in Sundarbans, apart from a fish market survey to assess the landed fish stock quality post Amphan and distribution of tarpaulins to the 52 vulnerable community members.
“it was the primary response team’s dedication which could enable us to provide relief in this area. They helped immensely in being the first responders post Amphan” added Amitava Roy, Secretary, Lokmata Rani Rashmoni Mission (LRRM) who is WTI’s local partner working with communities on human tiger conflict mitigation in Sundarbans.
“In times like such emergencies when immediate action is needed, the ERN members across the country rise to the occasion. The panchayat, forest department and our local partners spared no effort in reaching out to the affected community whose well-being is critical to long-term conservation”, said Krishnendu Basak, Officer in-charge, WTI’s project lead in Sundarbans.
This year seems to be rife with emergencies needing urgent deployment of resources. We believe in being well prepared and equipped to deal with calamities before they occur and for this, we need resources. You can help our dedicated rescue teams continue their work.
Click here to Donate.