On 23rd July, a herd of elephants entered the Konhappa village, located in the Karra block of Jharkhand’s Khunti district. Anticipating the intentions of these pachyderms, local villagers gathered in an attempt to protect their property from any damage.
Simultaneously, Forest Department frontline staff Jasbin Salker Aind, Shashi Bhushan Sahay, Sandeep Kumar, Reshma Agnesh Guriya, and Devendar Kumar Sahu were on their way to the village after being intimated about the elephants. The team headed to the area in an attempt to provide safe passage to the elephants and prevent conflict. They were able to reunite two of the three separated elephants.
However, the villagers had also begun their misguided attempt to chase away the gentle giants by pelting stones and making noise, even before the team arrived. As a result, one elephant was provoked to chase the crowd. In this unfortunate incident, Shri Jasbin Salker Aind was attacked by the aggrieved elephant. Despite being rushed to hospital, the forest guard succumbed to his injuries on the very same day.
Shri Aind was honored under WTI’s Supplementary Accident Assurance Scheme with support from The Thin Green Line Foundation. An ex-gratia cheque for one lakh rupees (1300 USD) was provided to his family along with a Scroll of Honour commemorating his contribution to wildlife conservation.
Jasbin Salker Aind’sfamily and Forest Officers along with Shri Natesh Rajappa, CCF; Shri Kuldeep Menna, DFO Khunti, and Rudra Mahapatra, WTI representative; Photo by WTI
The handover took place at the Office of the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Ranchi in a small event organized by the Forest Department in the presence of Shri Natesh Rajappa, Chief Conservator of Forests (CCF), Shri Kuldeep Meena, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Khunti and WTI representative Mr. Rudra Prasanna Mahapatra.
A sapling was also planted on the office premises by Aind’s family honoring his memory. A certificate of appreciation was presented to the other frontline staff who were a part of the elephant depredation operation.
Joining the Jharkhand Forest Department in August 2017 as a forest guard. Shri Aind showed dedication and commitment to protecting India’s natural heritage. WTI grieves his untimely demise while on duty protecting villagers of Konhappa from elephant movements.