Coimbatore, 11th August 2023: India, boasting 60% of the world’s elephant population, plays a pivotal role in elephant conservation. Although these majestic animals roam freely across the country’s vast landscapes, they face challenges in their right to move across their natural habitats. Recognising the significance of these gentle giants, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), in collaboration with the Govt. of India and eminent scientists, has identified and surveyed 101 functional corridors across 11 states for the 29,000 Asian Elephants in India
Hon’ble Minister of Forests, Govt. of Tamil Nadu, Dr. M. Mathiventhan while visiting WTI’s stall at the Tamil Nadu Elephant Conclave 2023 | Photo by Rajan
At the heart of this endeavour lies our visionary campaign known as ‘Gaj Utsav.’ Since its inception in 2018, the campaign has raised awareness about safeguarding the future of India’s elephants, while also advocating for their essential Right of Passage. Over the past five years, Gaj Utsav has made a meaningful impact by engaging with 75,000 people across the country.
This World Elephant Day marked an exceptional milestone as the campaign extended its reach to Tamil Nadu. The state is home to the third highest population of wild elephants in Southern India, with over 2900 individuals spanning five elephant reserves and having 16 identified elephant corridors.
In a commendable endeavour to honour and safeguard its elephant population, the Tamil Nadu Government hosted a two-day conclave titled “Securing a better future for Gentle Giants.” In conjunction with this initiative, the Wildlife Trust of India in collaboration with the State Govt. and Whitley Fund for Nature, UK launched the campaign as “Yaanai Thiruvizha” (meaning Elephant Festival in Tamil ) in Coimbatore.
The event, scheduled from 11th-12th August 2023, was inaugurated by the Hon’ble Minister of Forests, Govt. of Tamil Nadu, Dr. M. Mathiventhan, and Addl. Chief Secretary, Environment, Climate Change and Forest, Tmt. Supriya Sahu, IAS alongside other esteemed guests representing the Legislation, District Administration, Forest Department and civil society. The conclave witnessed a remarkable turnout of over 400 attendees.
Yaanai Thiruviza’s official launch done by a symbolic baton handover from Hon’ble Minister of Forests, Govt. of Tamil Nadu, Dr. M. Mathiventhan | Photo by Rajan
Its official launch was marked by a symbolic baton handover from the Hon’ble Minister of Forests, Govt. of Tamil Nadu, Dr. M. Mathiventhan, and Addl. Chief Secretary, Environment, Climate Change and Forest, Tmt. Supriya Sahu, IAS  to District Forest Officer of Coimbatore Forest Division, N. Jayaraj, Founder, OSAI Environmental organisation, Mr. K. Kalidasan, and Director, Wildlife Trust of India, Dr. Sandeep Tiwari. This unique Public-Private Partnership will take forward the vision of bringing the Gajah (elephant) to the Prajah (public) through the elephant districts of the state, culminating at Chennai.
The Yaanai Thiruvizha campaign seeks to encourage collective action among policymakers, media, infrastructure agencies, legal professionals, and wildlife experts, fostering insightful discussions on challenges, conservation strategies, and sustainable development models for elephant protection.
Vivek Menon, Founder and ED, WTI during the launch of ‘Yaanai Thiruvizha’ at Tamil Nadu Elephant Conclave 2023 | Photo by Sreenanth K, WTI
Vivek Menon, Founder and Executive Director of the Wildlife Trust of India, expressed his enthusiasm for the campaign, emphasising the importance of passing on the message of elephant corridors and habitat linkages to the general public. Dr. M. Mathiventhan, Honorable Minister of Forests, Government of Tamil Nadu, emphasised the state’s commitment to wildlife conservation and its efforts to preserve elephant habitats.
Supriya Sahu, Additional Chief Secretary of Environment, Climate Change, and Forest, highlighted the essential role elephants play in maintaining forests and the imperative to safeguard their habitats. The establishment and protection of elephant corridors remain imperative, with the Tamil Nadu Government employing advanced technology to mitigate human-wildlife conflict and uphold a zero-tolerance policy towards wildlife offences.
During the event, Supriya Sahu, IAS released the the Tamil Nadu Elephant Corridor map
As we celebrate World Elephant Day, let’s applaud the tireless efforts of organisations, governments, and individuals working towards securing a brighter future for these gentle giants. The “Yaanai Thiruvizha” campaign exemplifies the power of collaboration in safeguarding our national heritage animal and its right to roam its natural habitats freely.