New Delhi: A book on “Commentaries on Wildlife Law – cases, statutes and notifications” by WTI (Wildlife Trust of India) was released today by the Hon’ble former Justice of Supreme Court, Justice Leela Seth at a function organized at the India International Centre, New Delhi.
The book is a first ever commentary on the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, it also includes compilation of the Supreme Court and High Courts judgments on Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, Indian Forest Act, 1927, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and other relevant statutes.
The book authored by Ritwick Dutta, Legal Advisor WTI and researched by Vyom Raghuvanshi of WTI is the result of a three-year intensive research of judgments and orders related to wildlife conservation.
“The orders and the judgments passed by the Supreme Court and the High Courts on wildlife conservation must reach to all those who are entrusted to safeguard India’s wildlife.” Dutta said at the function.
“Unlike other laws in India, wildlife law changes every Friday due to the ongoing interlocutory orders of the Supreme Court in the T. N. Godavarman vs. Union of India case which is being heard every week on that day.”
Vivek Menon, Executive Director of WTI inaugurated the function. About 30 guests including lawyers, conservationists, government officials and others attended.
Speaking on the occasion former Justice Leela Seth said, “Although I was in the legal profession, I did not had a chance to acquaint myself on the WPA Act. It was only after the retirement when I joined classes that I understood the different features of the Act.”
“The only case on wildlife that I handled was back in the 80s in Himachal Pradesh. Surprisingly today, many lawyers are still not aware of the Act. This book would help lawyers and enforcement officials immensely who are handling wildlife cases,” she said. “The work is useful since it contains important orders of the Supreme Court but often go unreported.”
“I was eagerly waiting for the release of the book. It was supposed to be completed in one year, but it took almost three years. This book is in response to a long-term need felt by enforcement officials, lawyers, NGOs and field staff dealing in wildlife offences.” Mr. Menon said.
“Prompt prosecution of wildlife offenders is greatly hampered due to lack of information on wildlife laws among the enforcement officials. The case laws and the commentaries on the Wildlife (Protection) Act in the book would equip the enforcement officials to take appropriate actions.” Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of WTI said.
Today, wildlife in India is facing one of its most severe crises. The disappearance of tigers from Sariska Tiger Reserve and the general trend of declining tiger numbers in Central India (as per the recent Wildlife Institute of India Report) characterize it. So does the surge in elephant poaching in Orissa, rhino poaching in Kaziranga and the lion poaching crisis in Gir.
The judiciary is seen as the last hope for saving India’s vanishing wildlife. Perhaps no judiciary in the world has devoted so much of its time as the Supreme Court of India on issues of wildlife and forest conservation.
The interest in conservation led the Supreme Court to pass a number of significant orders and judgments to save the endangered wildlife.
“We have researched significant judgments and orders on Wildlife Conservation in libraries of Supreme Court and Indian Law Institute for compiling the book.” Raghuvanshi said.
WTI welcome your Feed Backs/ Comments < Click Here>