New Delhi: The Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) formally declared today the formation of the Village Wildlife Reserve in Selbalgre village in the North-east Indian state of Meghalaya, a move which conservationists believe would help to conserve wildlife.
The village is located about 20 kilometers from Tura district headquarters, is an important Hoolock Gibbon habitat.
“This is a welcome move, and is quite unique, since the villagers themselves have decided to keep aside some of their land for wildlife conservation.” Dr. Rahul Kaul, Director Conservation of Wildlife Trust of India said.
Hoolock Gibbon is locally called as “Huro” and their presence is considered to be a good sign by the villagers.
These animals are also considered to be closer to human beings in the evolutionary history by the locals, and are therefore venerated.
The area comprises about 80 hectares of forests, which may be expanded in the near future, as villagers have shown willingness to donate more land to preserve Huro.
“Preservation of the fruiting trees and their habitat will be important for their survival in the future.” Sunil Subba, of WTI who has been spreading the message for conservation among the villagers said.
About 200 people, including Ebelson A. Sangma, Chief Executive Member of the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC), M. M. Momin, Central Forest Officer, GHADC, P R Marak, District Forest Officer, Territorial and Wildlife, Tura, Chairman, Tura Municipal Board C.T.D. Shira, Selbalgre Village Representative, Saljensingh Chandra Marak, WTI Trustee, Prof. P. C. Bhattacharjee and Sr. Director of WTI, Dr. P. S. Easa attended the official function.
“I am satisfied with the positive response from people, as this would not only help to preserve the flora and fauna but would also protect the A’ king land.” Sangma said on the occasion.
“Field surveys have confirmed that the Hoolock Gibbons are found in almost all the northeastern states. Preservation of these animals along with the natural forest and other existing wildlife would contribute to the development of eco-tourism in the region.” Prof. Bhattacharjee said.
Last year, the Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) by a notification constituted a Wildlife Monitoring Committee to suggest measures for wildlife conservation in areas which are under their jurisdiction.
“The committee had consulted the Nokma and the villagers to find out their opinion on the proposed reserve, which was willingly accepted by them.” Dr. P. S. Easa, Sr. Director of WTI said.
The Chief Executive of the 30-member GHADC Council is heading this seven member committee.
On April 12, after a final discussion between the GHADC and the villagers, it was decided that henceforth, the reserve will be managed by the Managing Committee of the Selbalgre Village, and the reserve has been registered by the GHADC, vide the office order no. CF/332/vill-RF/87/52-57/6-4-07.
This development has come, following a project initiated by WTI with support from the British High Commission to study the role of the District Councils for protection of forest and wildlife.
WTI has been working closely with the three Autonomous District Councils in the state to empower and strengthen them for protection of forests and wildlife.
One of the objectives of the project is to come out with a policy document which will help the councils to tackle contemporary issues on wildlife conservation.
Loss of forest land due to Jhum cultivation by tribes-people has disturbed the sensitive ecosystem, which could lead to serious ecological disaster in the near future.
The harmful consequences of this practice in the state are already visible. Lack of rainfall coupled with little forest cover to retain the under ground water has created water scarcity in many areas.
WTI has been collecting information on the forest resource extractions by the villagers and also produced forest cover maps to help in the study.
“The villagers have welcomed the move, since they understood that the improvement of vegetation cover will improve water retention in the area.” Dr. Kaul said.