Trivandrum, 26th March 2024: The local fisherfolk of Trivandrum have once again embraced their role as saviours of endangered Whale sharks. This month alone, they successfully rescued and released five whale sharks that were found entangled in fishing nets across Thumba, Vettucaud and Kovalam of Trivandrum district, Kerala.
These efforts were made possible, in part, due to the awareness raised by the ‘Save the Whale Shark’ campaign, spearheaded by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in partnership with the Kerala Forest Department and Fisheries Department.
An 11 metres long Whale shark caught in a seine net was rescued by fishermen in Vettucaud
On 19th March 2024, three Whale sharks got entangled in a single shore seine net in Thumba. Taking swift action, the fishers rushed to the rescue. While two whale sharks, each measuring approx. 4 metres were immediately freed, the operation took a challenging turn with the third whale shark, measuring approx. 9 metres. It took three long hours of concerted efforts to eventually cut through the net and safely release the massive fish back into the sea.
Following this incident, another Whale shark measuring approx. 11 metres got entangled in Vettucaud and it took three hours to cut the net and release the fish.
Last week, a group of 40 fishers successfully released a Whale shark ensnared in a shore seine net in Kovalam in a two-hour-long operation. This marks the 20th rescue along the Kerala coast in recent years.
40 fishers stepped in to help return this Whale shark into the sea in Kovalam
“The fishers have reported recent sightings of around 9 Whale sharks in these waters. With such frequent sightings, there is a heightened risk of entanglements along the Trivandrum coast in the coming days. Therefore, we need to exercise more caution during this period,” said Mr. Ajith Shankumugham, Fishermen Representative.
Recognised as a vital keystone species in our marine ecosystem, the Whale Shark is protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972 and listed as ‘Endangered’ in the IUCN Red List.
WTI’s ‘Save The Whale Shark’ campaign seeks to empower the fishing community to respond positively and become more vigilant in reporting sightings and incidents involving whale sharks. This shift is profound, considering that once upon a time, fisher folks along the west coast of India engaged in hunting Whale sharks at their aggregation sites, engaging in commercial trade. Today, accidental entanglements in fishing nets, collisions with boats, and rampant coastal pollution have emerged as major threats to the survival of these gentle giants.