4 October 2019, Manas National Park: Victory is sweeter when school children play a pivotal role in conservation action. Implementing the ban on plastic was an apt culmination of Wildlife Week 2019 in this UNESCO World Heritage Site thanks to the sustained efforts of team IFAW-WTI supported by the Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) and Assam Forest Department.
Seven years of sustained campaigning on inculcating pride in Manas was carried out in the fringe villages since Manas National Park was taken off the ‘In Danger’ list by UNESCO. School outreach, wall painting on the theme ‘Paint Manas Green’ and personal contact with visitors at the park gates were some methods but since 2017, our project team has been leveraging the customary opening day of the Manas National Park for the tourist season as an effective platform to spread awareness and enthuse positive conservation action amongst visitors and the local resident community.
 
[acx_slideshow name=”streetplay”]
 
When the park opened last week for 2019-2020, an event was organized in the presence of Deputy Chief Shri Kampa Borgoyary, Forest BTC; PCCF and HOFF of Assam Forest Department, Addl. PCCF and CHD Shri A Sworgowari, Mr A Sarma, FD Manas TR, officials from the civil administration, army, political parties and about 300 people from local communities at Basbari range of Manas.
Bahbari High School students performed the street play titled ‘Dwi-The Water’ on this occasion. The play was conceived by local artiste JP Das and WTI’s Head Veterinarian (North-East) Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, who also heads the IFAW-WTI Greater Manas Recovery Project. Eminent local theatre personality Siddhartha Mukherjee scripted and directed the play, that has assumed much popularity since it was first performed three years ago.
Thirty-two school students and two teachers participated in the play to spread the message of importance of water in people’s lives and how Manas Tiger reserve that supports 22 streams and rivers has enhanced wildlife and the life of people living on its banks. The skit also carried a message on rampant use and disposal of single use plastic in and around Manas and urged the authority to ban plastic/polythene inside Manas and its fringes. All the students participating in the skit visited the park on the day of inauguration.
The efforts of the students and the messages that they wanted to convey for the conservation of forest and water of Greater Manas landscape were very well appreciated by this influential audience of park authorities and civil administration. This was the last performance of ‘Dwi’ at Manas as the verdict of ‘No polythene in Manas’ by local, regional and Indian Government has been passed, for which this play has been staged.
A fitting recognition for the efforts of the school students came from the local member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) who offered a cash prize to the children for their performance and pledged to ensure plastic ban is implemented in true spirit.