Tiwari gaon, Lower Dibang Valley (Arunachal Pradesh), 20th January 2014: Mayodia model Village, a fringe village of Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary, with extremely irregular power supply, was empowered with solar energy equipment by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in collaboration with the Department of Environment & Forest, Arunachal Pradesh and Europaeische Tierschutzstftung (ETS) on Sunday. This is the first time an NGO has provided solar equipment to a village in the vicinity of Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary in Arunachal Pradesh.
Twenty five families received the solar energy-based lighting system, consisting of one solar panel, one chargeable multipurpose battery unit, one table lamp and an emergency light, during an event titled “Interaction for Conservation Awareness & Distribution of Solar Equipment” organised by WTI, ETS and the Department of Environment & Forest, Arunachal Pradesh on Sunday afternoon.


Twenty five families received the solar energy-based lighting systems

Photo by Subhamoy Bhattacharjee/WTI


According to Keijum Rina, Divisional Forest Officer of Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary, “This kind of initiative will strengthen the relationship between the Forest Department, wildlife conservation NGOs and villagers of the fringe area, which is the need of the hour for holistic conservation.”
Sunil Kyarong, Deputy Director and Regional Head, WTI, added, “The community living around any protected area is the first layer of the protection shield. In order to strengthen the shield, we need to understand the psychology and the needs of the people. The distribution of solar sets will deepen their support in conservation and their confidence in the ongoing Asiatic Black bear Rrehabilitation Project and the Hoolock Gibbon Translocation Project in Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary.”
The confidence building effort in Mayodia, also known as Tiwari gaon, was initiated by Ipra Mekola, member of the Wildlife Advisory Board, Arunachal Pradesh, through this Rapid Action Project of WTI.  “We have not had power supply since the inception of this village in the Mishmi hill ranges of Arunachal Pradesh,” said Napi Umpo, the village headman of Tiwari Gaon. “It is a great help to us, who have been suffering with no electricity for decades. The people of this village have been supporting wildlife conservation, despite such limitations, and this has given us the encouragement to continue to do so.” 
The distribution and awareness function was attended by Obian Jonkey, Range Officer Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary, Soumya Dasgupta, Assistant Manager of WTI, wildlife activists of the region, the beneficiaries and other WTI staff. Asha Meme, a beneficiary and worker of the local Anganwadi Centre said that the solar lamps will be a boon to the primary school students of the village, who previously did not have a suitable light source to study.


This is the first time an NGO has provided solar equipment to a village around Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary

Photo by Subhamoy Bhattacharjee/WTI
WTI along with Department of Environment & Forest, Arunachal Pradesh is trying to focus the conservation issues among the fringe villagers through this confidence building approach for the safety and wellbeing of nature and wildlife in the state.
In similar events last month, WTI and ETS distributed 50 solar lanterns to forest staff in Rajaji National Park, to facilitate effective anti-poaching operations of those posted in remote beat offices. A total of 19 beat offices were chosen and solar lamps were handed over by WTI field officers between 14th Dec to 17th Dec 2013.