Arunachal Pradesh: Following the formation of “Ghora Aabhe” a committee comprising heads of sixteen villages for protection of the Pakke Tiger Reserve in the Eastern Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh, the protection of the reserve has vastly improved, an official said.  “As a result of persistent efforts by the villagers, many poachers have surrendered their illegal arms that were used for killing wild animals in the reserve.” Tana Tapi, the Divisional Forest Officer who helped the villagers to form the committee said.
In the last six months, 32 illegal country made guns were seized from poachers and many of whom had also promised to work for protection of the reserve, experts are hopeful that repeated seizures would act as deterrent for offenders.
In a significant move in September 2006, heads (Gaon Burahs) of sixteen villages had passed a resolution listing various penalties for wildlife violations and following which, the villagers have been keeping a strict vigil in the reserve.
Penalties ranging from rupees 200 to rupees 30,000 were imposed, covering 17 different wildlife species. Penalty for poaching an elephant is rupees 30, 000, for poaching a tiger is rupees 20,000 and rupees 200 for fishing for commercial use, although villagers are allowed to catch fish only for their food.
The 16-member committee in conjunction with the forest department has been working for protection of the Pakke Tiger Reserve.
“This initiative will help to strengthen intelligence networks, enforcement activities and creating awareness among people” Tapi said.
“The honorarium for the first six months for the Gaon Burahs was supported by the Project Tiger Fund which is now being given by WTI for undertaking various conservation actions.” Dr. Rahul Kaul of WTI said.
The 862 sq km, Reserve, is situated in the East Kameng District of the state and is home to many rare and endangered wildlife.
Tiger, leopard, clouded leopard, jungle cat, wild dog, jackal, Himalayan black bear, elephant, gaur, sambar, hog deer, barking deer, wild boar, flying squirrel, civets, rhesus macaque etc. are found in the reserve.
Though, the forest staff is vigilant of the illegal activities, many areas remained unmanned due to difficult terrain and vast area of the reserve.
“Encroachments by villagers in the fringe areas for minor forest produce and illegal hunting of wild animals threatened the existence of many endangered species. Members of the committee went to each village to sensitize people on wildlife conservation through various activities such as discussions and film screenings.” Dr. Sandeep Kr. Tiwari, Asst. Manager of WTI who is supervising the project said.
 
“Since, people respect the Gaon Burahs for their wisdom and traditional values, their role is important who can persuade people for sustainable use of natural resources” Prof. P. C. Bhattacharjee, of the Guwahati University and a Trustee of Wildlife Trust of India said.
Village committees in the state help the government to maintain law and order and also have the power to legislate and penalize offenders. Recently, a person in Seijosa was fined with rupees 5000 for fishing by dynamite blasts in Pakke River.  The amount was shared amongst the women group who provided the information.
 
In the recent past, WTI had initiated several projects for conservation of wildlife in Arunachal Pradesh. The Center for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) was set up by WTI and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) with support from the forest department for rescue and release of wildlife.
Save the Hornbill campaign was initiated to protect the bird from poachers who kill them for their beaks which is used in making traditional head gears, food grains were supplied to villagers as compensation whose crops were destroyed by wild elephants and protection kits were supplied to forest guards who help to keep wild elephants away from entering into human habitation.