Winners of various competitions posing with their prizes. Photo: Subhamoy Bhattachaarjee/IFAW-WTI

Bokakhat/Guwahati, October 7, 2015: Celebrating the Wildlife Week, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) – Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) organised various fun filled activities for school students in Assam to raise awareness about wildlife conservation. The week kicked off with the IFAW- WTI team honouring two wildlife enthusiasts on October 1st for their pro active contribution. The team followed it up by conducting two awareness programmes in Bokakhat and Guwahati to ensure that the future generations are aware of our natural heritage and become stakeholders in wildlife conservation.
The IFAW – WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) felicitated two individuals – a five year old schoolboy and a senior journalist, five decades older.
Suraj Sahu, a five-year-old student, from Sapjuri area of Bokakhat was honoured by Dr Biswajit Boruah. This young boy had rescued Schedule 1 specie (spotted pond turtle) during the recent floods in Kaziranga and handed it over to CWRC. He was presented a traditional Assamese Gamosa, a certificate and a richly illustrated book on fauna.
The other individual was Mr Bhabananda Kalita, a senior journalist, who has been actively writing on conservation for more than 15 years. He was duly recognised for having documented all published reports about CWRC in an Assamese vernacular with old photographs. He was presented with a letter of appreciation signed by Vivek Menon, ED & CEO of WTI. Dr Rathin Barman, Deputy Director and Regional Head, IFAW-WTI, honoured him in the presence of the IFAW- WTI team at CWRC.
On October 5, 2015, the team organised a popular science talk followed by a quiz at the Regional Science Centre, Khanapara (RSC) as part of the four day Wildlife Week celebrations targeted at schools around Guwahati.
Children from different schools of the city participated in the interactive talk on species by Dr Rathin Burman and the quiz champions walked away with attractive prizes. The Regional Science Centre authorities conducted an on-the-spot drawing competition followed by an exhibition on popular wildlife species. Screening of documentaries on environment including the IFAW- WTI Animal Action Education films was also organised. More than 2000 students from different schools and educational institutions of northeast took part in these activities.
Mr Prem Dhar Das, Education Officer of RSC, appreciated the efforts of IFAW-WTI for this collaboration while Dr Barman thanked the RSC authorities for partnering in this event.

Students participating in a rally during the Wildlife Week celebrations. Photo: Rathin Burman/ IFAW-WTI

Earlier on October 3, 2015, the IFAW-WTI team celebrated Wildlife Week at Bokakhat, near Kaziranga National Park. More than 200 school students from Shankadev Shishu Niketan (SSN), a renowned educational institute of Bokakhat, participated in the daylong exercise. The celebrations kicked off with an awareness rally wherein students carried banners, placards and messages to create awareness about wildlife conservation amongst locals.
SK Seal Sharma, DFO, Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, which covers Kaziranga National Park, flagged off the rally and appealed to the people to come forward for the conservation of Kaziranga. He also appreciated IFAW-WTI’s efforts for organising such a unique rally which was followed by various competitions pertaining to wildlife issues in the school premises.
School children, teachers, parents and IFAW-WTI officials participated in the rally at Bokakhat. Students from Class I to X took part in different competitions which included painting and speech on the theme ‘Our Kaziranga’. Several others took part in the art competition on the theme — Wildlife and Kaziranga.

Five year old Suraj Sahu proudly displaying the certifcate and the gift provided by IFAW-WTI. Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee/IFAW-WTI

Dr Barman, while addressing the gathering said, “It is always worth the effort to have such conservation awareness programmes aimed at creating awareness amongst children.” Students who participated in these competitions enjoyed these activities. The winners were given prizes to appreciate and motivate these young minds for their contribution to wildlife conservation.
Nilu Acharjee, Secretary, SSN, appreciated IFAW-WTI’s interest in organising the wildlife week events at their school. He mentioned that this will not only encourage the students but also involve their parents to think about wildlife conservation. IFAW-WTI also donated a water filter for the welfare of the students of the school.
These events around Kaziranga and in Guwahati build hope in the next generation that is sensitised to protect its natural heritage and empowered to take action and we hope to see more positive action like five-year-old Suraj has demonstrated.