New Delhi, June 11, 2013: Wildlife conservation in India is all set to receive a new supporter over the next few days as Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) ties up with the acclaimed UAE band Point of View. The new association ensures part proceeds of album sales being donated to the NGO.
This partnership is an unprecedented one for both WTI as well as the band, making it a unique amalgamation of concern for wildlife and excellence in music. To add to this already promising new venture, Hard Rock Café has pledged their continued support for WTI’s cause as well. 
“In the past HRC had supported our successful anti-snare campaign in Bandipur Tiger Reserve and Rajiv Gandhi National Park, Karnataka, which resulted in the removal of hundreds of snares and saving precious lives of many tigers and other wildlife. This time they tuned in to support WTI’s project on control of the wildlife trade in the same state,” said Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor, Policy and Programme Implementation, WTI.
Fewer than 2000 tigers are believed to roam India’s wild; safety of the country’s national animal and a symbol of pristine wildlife across the world is being compromised by threats such as habitat loss, poaching and ever increasing conflicts with people. Illegal wildlife trade has also become a bane of existence for the big cats and other wild animals across the country, with many of the losses attributed to them. 
“It is important that awareness be spread on such matters as much as possible, especially amongst the youth and with a medium like music and stalwarts like Ron ‘Bumblefoot’ Thal and Point of View involved it becomes easier to spread the message to their innumerable fans,” remarked Anisha Banerji, Vice President, Marketing of JSM Corporation who is the exclusive master franchisee for Hard Rock Café.
This special initiative kick-starts with a 5-city India tour of Point of View, featuring Ron ‘Bumblefoot’ Thal, the lead guitarist of Guns N’ Roses. The tour begins with the band performing in HRC in Hyderabad, Bangalore, Mumbai and Delhi from June 11-14, 2013, and in Kolkata on June 15.
HRC Mumbai and Delhi will also see an exclusive auction of two guitars, signed by the GNR guitarist.
Nikhil Uzgare, lead vocalist of Point of View and Managing Director of Hook Line and Sinker commented on this new relationship saying, “I personally, always wanted to do something for animal welfare on a macro level and WTI seems like the perfect start.”
“This is a unique venture and we’re quite happy to see that there are people in the music industry who care so much about the status of wildlife in India,” commented Rupa Gandhi Chaudhary, Chief Marketing Officer of WTI.