Roing (Arunachal Pradesh): Four orphaned Asiatic black bear cubs have been moved to Mehao Wildlife Sanctuary for rehabilitation in the wild. This brings the number of this species rehabilitated through a soft-release protocol in northeast India to 26, beginning in 2006.


They follow 22 other cubs that were hand-raised and similarly rehabilitated by the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) in Pakke Tiger Reserve and Greater Manas, Bodoland, assisting the state Forest Departments of Arunachal Pradesh and neighbouring Assam, respectively.
The bear cubs, three males and one female, were hand-raised at the CWRC (Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation) near Kaziranga National Park. Two of the cubs were found in jhum cultivated area in north Tripura. The third was found in Medo, Namsai, Arunachal Pradesh, and the fourth in Sonai Rupai in Sonitpur, Assam.
“Mehao WLS was found more suitable as a release site as compared to Kamlang WLS that was also short-listed as a potential release site during site selection,” said Soumya Dasgupta, Field Officer, WTI.
The cubs will be taken for daily walks in the forest to gradually acclimatise them to the wild beginning this week, Dasgupta added, talking about the soft-release protocol. They will be accompanied by caretakers who are based at the release site in Roing. Once the cubs are able to fend for themselves, they will be radio-collared and monitored remotely to confirm successful survival in the wild.
“This is the first time that this rehabilitation is being carried out in Mehao WLS. I am hopeful that the cubs will be able to adapt here and return to the wild successfully,” said Subhash Singh, Ranger, Mehao WLS Division.
The Asiatic black bear (Ursus thibetanus) in northeast India faces threats including frequent cases of displacement, conflicts with people and poaching.
“Currently there are 13 Asiatic black bear cubs being rehabilitated by our teams. These include five released in Pakke TR in June this year, and four that were recently moved to Greater Manas area and are being walked in the forest for acclimatisation in the wild,” said Dr NVK Ashraf, Chief Veterinarian, WTI.
“Our staff members have been trying to spread awareness among locals to prevent displacement and mitigate other threats to the species, whenever such cases emerge. We call for like-minded organisations, individuals and media to help spread this awareness, so that the species remain safe in the wild.”