Sutrapada, July 3, 2014: It was around 10 am in the morning when Wildlife Trust of India’s sociologist Farukhkha Husenkha and field assistant Prakash Doriya were informed of an injured adult dolphin beaching at the Sutrapada coast. WTI team reached the site immediately and found that the mammal was still alive, and was struggling against the strong waves of the sea. RFO Veraval, Mr. N B Dodiya was informed and Veterinarian Dr M R Barad from Sutrapada Government hospital was immediately called at the site. 
Dr M R Barad found that the mammal had a minor injury on the dorsal fin and said, “The accident might have happened because of dolphin coming in contact with heavy waves and as Sutrapada coast has rocky beaches, it might have crashed in to a rock.” The Forest Department, fisher folks, community youth and WTI team made the united effort and took the dolphin into the deep waters and helped it swim away deeper.


The effort being made to help the dolphin back into the water. Photo: Farukhkha Husenkha/WTI

It was later identified as a humpback dolphin which is a near threatened species under IUCN red list.

Farukhkha, Sociologist, WTI said, “The local community around the area has been involved in conservation of whale shark from last ten years and lately they have developed interest towards the whole concept of marine conservation. They have been dedicatedly informing the Forest Department and WTI regarding beached turtles, dolphins and other marine species. We consider this as an achievement towards marine sustainability.”


The beached humpback dolphin. Photo: Farukhkha Husenkha/WTI

Wildlife Trust of India has been working in Gujarat for over ten years. The organisation has done successful whale shark conservation campaigns for which they have been recogonised by Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF) and United Nations Development Program (UNDP) .This year they have been awarded the Indian Biodiversity Award 2014, in collaboration with TATA Chemicals Limited, Gujarat Forest Department and community participation, and the TATA Innovista – Dare to Try Award for longest live coral transplantation from Lakshadweep to Mithapur reef in Gujarat.