Ahmedabad, Gujarat: Vhali, the inflatable model of the whale shark caught the eye of the international participants at the Education for Sustainable Development(ESD) International Conference, between 18th to 20th January 2005 at Ahmedabad.
This Conference was organized to mark the launch of the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable Development (DESD), Centre for Environment Education, India and was planned as a forum for the international community to share the understanding, current status and needs of Education for Sustainable Development(ESD), to showcase best practices for ESD from different parts of the World.
Some of the issues and concerns expressed by the participants during the introduction were related to rehabilitation, coastal zone regulation and disaster preparedness, which came into focus after the recent Tsunami and how education should be channelized to create a concrete action for ocean conservation. The participants also discussed that Island specific issues must be given priority and scientific research should be linked to communicating messages to concerned stakeholders.
The whale shark campaign was featured in the panel presentation and discussion on best practices as Mr. Dhiresh Joshi, Manager, Wildlife Trust of India(WTI) shared his experiences of whale-shark conservation campaign on Gujarat coast. “With the help of CEE’s educational materials we have organized many school programs,” he mentioned.
He also discussed how WTI, its partner the International Fund for Animal Welfare(IFAW) brought together the well known religious leader, Shri Morari Bapu, the corporate houses, Tata Chemicals Ltd and the Gujarat Heavy Chemical Ltd into an unique partnership to launch the Save The Whale Shark Campaign.
“Morari Bapu vowed to use his discourses to spread the message of ‘ahimsa hi param dharma’ and ‘atithi devo bhava’ among the fisherfolk to create awareness about the plight of the whale shark, known to be a regular visitor to the state’s coast,” said Joshi
“A street play on the theme preached by Morari Bapu was conceptualized to spread awareness and build sensitivity among the fishing community on the coast of Gujarat about whale sharks. The story touched popular sentiment because the message of the immensely popular spiritual leader, Morari Bapu which likened the Whale Shark visiting the shores of Gujarat to a daughter visiting her parents was presented through a medium that the audience identified with,” Joshi added.
The performers traveled along the coast of Gujarat and staged 16 performances in 12 towns. The group carried the play through major fishing harbors and ports, such as Beyt, Dwarka, Somnath, Veraval, and Okha and Diu.
In addition to this Joshi also spoke about the 40 feet life sized inflatable model of the whale shark which draws crowds at events such as Vibrant Gujarat and at each performance of the street play.
The unique methodology followed by the Whale Shark Campaign to reach out to a wide cross section of the Gujarat populace through street plays, inflatable model, a forthcoming short film and events with schoolchildren caught the interest of the participants at the international Conference. They left with the message that such unconventional methods work well in imparting education and awareness which was amply demonstrated when school authorities vied to display Vhali, the whale shark model at their schools in a bid to provide knowledge through novelty.