Coimbatore, Feb 1, 2019 : Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) is delighted to announce the launch of Gaj Yatra in Tamil Nadu, in association with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
The event is organised by WTI with support from TATA Chemicals Limited (TCL) and will be held with the Western Ghats National Conference being conducted by OSAI, a Tamil Nadu based NGO. Open to the public, the event will see active participation from senior forest department officials, eminent conservationists, influencers from the world of entertainment, the citizens of Tamil Nadu and college students who will come forward to show their support for our national heritage animal- the Asian Elephant.
When? Feb 2, 2019
Where? Sri Krishna Arts and Science College, Palakkad Main road, Kuniyamuthur, Coimbatore.

The daylong event will start with a flag off ceremony by Shri Dindigul C. Sreenivasan, Minister of Forests, Tamil Nadu. The event will then be proceeded by a rally within and around the venue majorly participated by school students, NCC cadets and scouts, government representatives, forest officials, celebrities and people at large. This will be followed by the inauguration of an elephant themed photography exhibition and a workshop where eminent conservationists will talk on elephants and elephant conservation. This will be followed by the inauguration of an elephant themed photography exhibition and a workshop where eminent conservationists will talk on elephants and elephant conservation.
Gaj Yatra is a signature campaign undertaken by WTI in association with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).  The campaign, in the form of a road show covering all the elephant range States of India. We aim to enhance the profile of Asian elephant, emphasising our efforts in securing safe and free passage for the gentle giant thus contributing to its conservation and welfare.