Achanakmar TR (Chhattisgarh), July 24, 2014: To safeguard the health of frontline staff deployed to protect and save wild tigers in Chhattisgarh, the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) in consultation with the Forest Department have provided 21 sets of water purifiers, pressure cookers and torch lights, for each of the 21 antipoaching camps within Achanakmar Tiger Reserve. 

Achanakmar TR is a part of the critical central Indian tiger landscape that houses more than 6% of the world’s wild tigers. It is connected to the landscape through Kanha TR and Bandhavgarh TR in Madhya Pradesh.
Tapesh Jha, CCF Wildlife and Field Director, Achanakmar TR said, “This RAP by IFAW-WTI will go a long way in helping improve our field camps. Particularly the water filters, which are a crucial necessity, especially during summers and rainy seasons when getting clean water is a challenge for our staff based in these camps.”


Handing over the water purifier and pressure cooker to the forest officials. Photo: WTI

Clean water and healthy food are basic necessities that still elude many in India. According to World Bank estimates, “21% of communicable diseases in India are water-related, with over 1600 deaths attributed to polluted water sources.”
While nature provides for fresh water source for frontline staff living in forests in the protected areas, precaution is not unjustified.
“In Achanakmar TR, many frontline field staff (mostly casual workers) have fallen sick specially in summer and rainy seasons due to consumption of unclean water,” said Dr Rajendra Prasad Mishra, IFAW-WTI Regional Head in Central India. He added, “The frontline staff guarding India’s natural heritage live in remote parts, isolated from their families and without access to luxuries of a comfortable family life. We intend to ensure safe drinking water and safe food for the antipoaching staff to keep them fit and healthy.”
The assistance was granted as a Rapid Action Project under the Central India Tiger Conservation Fund set up by IFAW-WTI to address diverse needs for tiger conservation in the region.
Each of the 21 camps in Achanakmar is manned by a minimum of three frontline staff, who patrol their respective areas. Patrolling more than 900 sq km area, they protect a wide range of fauna including tiger, leopard, gaur, flying squirrel, hyena, and many others.
“During my visit to the Achanakmar TR in April 2014, in connection with the evaluation of the management effectiveness initiated by the NTCA, I was highly impressed by the presence of the antipoaching staff in difficult areas of the TR, but was also equally distressed by the absence of basic facilities like availability of potable water, cooker and battery torch in the antipoaching camps. I carried my concern home, and discussed the matter with the ED, and the Wild Aid team of the WTI, who readily agreed to help. I am happy that IFAW-WTI has been able to do its bit in making the life of the hardworking antipoaching staff of Achanakmar a little better by providing them with water purifiers, pressure cookers and battery torches”, said Dr Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor to the ED&CEO, WTI.
Apart from this support in Achanakmar, IFAW-WTI will also be providing over 30 cots and mattresses for antipoaching camps in the newly declared Bor Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra.