Orang National Park (Assam): An adult male tiger found critically ill in Orang National Park, Assam on Tuesday, succumbed to its illness. 
The tiger was sighted by a Forest Department patrol team in the southern part of park between Singbati and Nichlamari camps on August 18. Range Officer Joyonto Deka immediately informed the DFO, and veterinarians from the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC), based near Kaziranga National Park, were called in to treat the animal.
Dr Prasanta Boro, IFAW-WTI veterinarian, said, “When we reached the site, the condition of the tiger was critical. It was in lateral recumbency, and showed symptoms of nervine disorder such as shallow breathing and seizures (in the form of intermittent paddling of the front legs). The tongue was hanging out and eyes were open and glazed over…”
After preliminary in-situ treatment, the mildly sedated tiger was moved to the Orang Range office and further treated. However darkness and inclement weather hampered medical interventions and the tiger was relocated to CWRC for further care at night. Wildlife veterinarians Drs Phulmoni Gogoi and Abhijit Bhawal, worked through the night to revive the animal. However, it died on Wednesday morning.
Post-mortem was conducted in the vicinity of CWRC, in the presence of senior forest officials and a representative of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.
“We have collected tissue samples of its liver, kidney and intestine, along with samples of its vomit and urine. These samples will be sent to the laboratory, to confirm if the tiger died of poisoning,” Dr Boro added.
Rajiv Gandhi Orang National Park spreads over 78.80 sq km along the north bank of Brahmaputra River. It is a rich island of wild habitat with great species diversity. However, it is surrounded by human habitation; increasing illegal immigrant settlements and  cultivation further add to the biotic pressure in and around the park. There are also reports from villagers of cattle-lifting by tigers.
A preliminary camera trap survey of the park by Guwahati-based wildlife NGO – Aaranyak last year had revealed the presence of seven tigers, including two males. Other species too thrive in this Park but face the grim challenge of long-term survival in an island of wilderness.
 
Learn more about Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservatio