Bokakhat, Assam, 22 September 2021: The biggest ever stockpile of rhino horns comprising 2479 rhino horns was consigned to flames by the Assam government in a massive public ceremony on World Rhino Day today. This event is a culmination of a long and thorough process of reconciling the rhino horns in possession of the Assam state government that involved experts from diverse fields including forensic science, veterinary sciences, biologists, government agencies, civil society, media personnel, policy makers and bureaucrats.
The Chief Guest the Honb’le Chief Minister of Assam Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma accompanied by a formidable line-up of Guests of Honour that include Shri Parimal Suklabaidya, the Honb’le Minister for Environment, Forests, Fisheries and Excise, with several state cabinet ministers and the Chief Executive Members of the Karbi Anglong Territorial and Bodoland Autonomous Councils.
[acx_slideshow name=”RathinBarman”]
Credit- Rathin Barman/WTI
Speaking on this occasion, the Honb’le Chief Minister said, “As a signatory to CITES, we are committed to stop illegal trade of wildlife derivatives. Just as we don’t keep any body parts of our near and dear ones, we should not keep any of the rhino too.” Emphasizing the fact that there is no medicinal value or any value to a rhino horn, he asserted that any preservation of these horns would imply our indirect support to this myth. “Today on World Rhino Day we took a bold step to destroy all these rhino horns following our own ritual and traditions. We believe only in the conservation of rhino in its habitat and not those horns of dead rhinos. We shall henceforth annually destroy all rhino horns that we get from naturally dead rhinos”, he added.
Congratulating the government on this bold decision, Vivek Menon, Founder and ED of WTI and Senior Advisor IFAW and the recently elected South and East Asian Regional Councillor IUCN said, “I am thrilled that the AFD is taking this bold step to burn rhino horn stocks. This public event is a strong message to potential traders on the futility and criminality of this trade. Kudos to the Assam government for this bold decision! We are proud to work with the Assam Forest Department to save the rhino for over 20 years.”
[acx_slideshow name=”LiveEvent”]
Credit- Screen shots from live event coverage
Dr Rathin Barman, Regional Director North East, WTI participated in the process of reconciling rhino horns as a member of the committee that was formed for the purpose under the Chairmanship of the Chief Wildlife Warden of Assam. “We have been waiting for this day. After a meticulous planning process all 2623 rhino horns were examined with forensic experts, each one measured, weight taken, each horn was photographed from different angles. Genetic samples were collected for each rhino for any future DNA studies”, said Dr Barman. After verifying all horns, 94 horns with unique characteristics were earmarked for future preservation at museums and for academic purposes.  Few horns with some legal issues were also not considered for destruction“.
[acx_slideshow name=”Credit”]
Credit- Subhamoy Bhattacharjee/ IFAW-WTI
“Assam takes pride on a rhino and not the horn of a dead rhino. Destruction of these horns will clearly send a strong message on our commitment for conservation of rhinos in Assam”, added Dr. Barman.
The one-horned rhinoceros (Rhinoceros unicornis) is the pride of Assam, protected under Schedule 1 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 in India. According it the respect it deserves, the 2479 horns, each from a poached rhino, were accorded a 21-gun salute and ceremonially consigned to flames with floral tributes at this vast gathering of 10,000 people in the Bokakhat Stadium marking an epic commemoration of World Rhino Day 2021.