New Delhi: The Samrakshan Trust presented the first Simha Mitra (Friends of the Lion) awards to three forest guards and two range officers of the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary in Village Agraa, Vijaypur subdivision, District Sheopur, Madhya Pradesh.The Madhya Pradesh forest minister, Mr. Harvansh Singh, who presented the awards, lauded the sacrifice made by the Sahariya tribals of 24 villages, who had given up their homes inside the sanctuary to make way for reintroduction of a pride of Asiatic lions from Gir in Gujarat. Kuno is being prepared as a second home for the endangered lions, and it is likely that with 23 out of 24 villages now relocated outside the sanctuary, work on the lion reintroduction project would get fresh momentum.
Three forest guards and two range forest officers who received the awards are: Gayalal Dhakad, Sushil Kumar Parashar and Ramkrishna Narwaria (Forest Guards) and Rajeev Kaushal and Late Ramlakhan Singh Kushwaha (Range Forest Officers). Each award consists of Rs. 15,000 in cash and a plaque. The awardees have been selected for their exemplary performance in the rehabilitation of villages outside the sanctuary, and preparation of the Kuno forest for lion reintroduction.
In addition, the medical officer of the local primary health centre, Dr. Lalaram Shakya also received a special appreciation award from the minister for his tireless services to this backward and remote tribal region.
Apart from the awards for frontline personnel of the forest department, an award has also been instituted for members of the local community. The community award consisting of Rs.50,000 in cash is to be used to construct a community centre for the displaced villages. The minister laid the foundation stone of this centre.
In addition to the Simha Mitra Awards, Samrakshan is also equipping the entire frontline staff of Kuno with anti-poaching kits. These kits are meant to ameliorate the trying conditions under which the frontline staff members carry out their duties. The DFO of the sanctuary received the kits from the minister on behalf of the sanctuary personnel.