Udanti (Chhattisgarh), December 1, 2013: Adding another individual to the critically low population of the State Animal in Udanti Wildlife Sanctuary, the lone female wild buffalo gave birth to her fifth male calf this week, since the initiatives began in mid-2000s to secure their future here. The latest birth brings the total number of wild buffaloes in Udanti WLS to 10.
The latest addition to Udanti WLS

Photo by Rajendra Mishra/WTI

Once found in large populations across the northern India and Central India, the species Bubalus bubalis arnee is now confined to northeast India and Chhattisgarh state. They have been declared as endangered by the IUCN Red List and is listed as a Schedule I under the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972.
In 2006 the Wildlife Trust of India initiated the Central India Wild Buffalo Conservation Project to assist the Chhattisgarh Forest Department to help save the species. It began with the population estimation in four wildlife sanctuaries, which revealed that no buffaloes remained in Sitanadi and Bhairamgarh. Indravati National Park had a relatively larger population of about 30 individuals and Pamed Wildlife Sanctuary had 5-8 buffaloes. Udanti WLS had only seven individuals with just one female.
The lone female wild buffalo Asha with her new born calf

Photo by Rajendra Mishra/WTI

WTI with the forest department prepared a five – year Conservation Action Plan for recovery of Wild buffalo in Udanti. The plan approved by the Governing Council of the project comprised of three basic goals – ensuring zero unnatural deaths of the remaining population, habitat improvement and population augmentation.
“As part of the conservation initiatives, the lone female has been confined in a 22 hectare enclosure in the sanctuary to facilitating breeding with the adult males. Over the past eight years, she has given birth to five calves – all males,” said Dr RP Mishra, Regional head – Central India and in-charge of the Project.
The Forest Department and WTI have also been working on newer alternatives to secure the population including cloning, cryopreservation and assisted reproduction.