New Delhi, June 5, 2014: Today saw the launch of Indian Mammals- A Field Guide, by the Executive Director and CEO of Wildlife Trust of India, Vivek Menon. The much-awaited guide was launched by Shri Prakash Javadekar, the Hon’ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, at an event by the Ministry on the occasion of World Environment Day at the Ashoka Hotel, New Delhi.


Shri Prakash Javadekar calling Vivek Menon on stage as he launched Indian Mammals.

Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee / WTI

The book is an updated, superbly illustrated guide to more than 400 species of mammals found in India.

Vivek Menon, commenting on the effort that went into writing the book said, “This book has been the culmination of many years of hard work and I am pleased at the result in shape of the book. My thanks to International Fund for Animal Welfare for its support and also to the publishing house Hachette for this impressive product.” He further added, “Wildlife Trust of India has been an intrinsic part of conservation work in India for many years and it was an honour to have the Hon’ble Minister launching the book in front of such a distinguished crowd.”


Shri Prakash Javadekar launched Indian Mammals on the ocassion of World Environment Day.

Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee / WTI

Covering the rich diversity of mammal species in India, from tigers, elephants, rhinos and whales to primates, rodents and bats, Indian Mammals is a comprehensive and field-ready illustrated guide for use by all wildlifers.
Accompanied by superb full-colour photographs and distribution maps and based upon impeccable scientific research reviewed by experts, the guide records details of virtually every mammal known to exist in India.
“I am proud of the high quality field guide on mammals that my colleague and college alumnus Vivek Menon has produced,” said Dr Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor Wildlife Trust of India and Former ADG (Wildlife).


Shri Prakash Javadekar congratulates Vivek Menon as Prof. Swaminathan looks on.

Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee / WTI

The in-depth, up-to-date text by Vivek Menon, one of India’s leading naturalists and an authority on Indian wildlife, describes key identification features, biometrics, behaviour, social strategies, habitat and distribution of the mammals.
Encyclopaedic in sweep yet accessible in approach, Indian Mammals includes the majestic and most sought-after as well as the extraordinary and elusive mammals.
See more photos of the event here