Kaziranga, Assam : Two poachers were shot dead by park rangers yesterday, following tight security in Kaziranga National Park where poachers killed six rhinoceros in a span of two months, prompting officials to ask for more security.
Two accomplices managed to escape, following an intensive gun battle with park rangers in the Agoratoli range of the park in the eastern Indian state of Assam.
“Following a tip-off given by a villager on the whereabouts of the poachers, the patrol team had been on their trail since midnight,” an official said.
Last week, two rhinoceros carcasses with bullet holes were found from the same area and officials are trying to find out whether these poachers were involved in the killings. The search is on for the other two.
After six cases of rhinoceros poaching came to light, people are angry with the government for not doing enough to protect the rhinos.
The local media has been criticizing the government for not filling up the vacancies in the park management who are responsible for its security. However, this is not the only reason.
“At present, most of the vacancies for guards are already filled in by the casual workers. We need close cooperation from the villagers living on the fringes of the park, who can give us information on the movement of the poachers, so that we can apprehend them.” Chief Wildlife Warden, M. C. Malakar said.
“If we help them in their problems such as education, health, livelihood, roads etc. they would help us to protect the park. We are in the process of preparing a budget, for this purpose.”
A sudden rise in rhino poaching in Kaziranga – six cases between March and April, this year – has surprised conservationists. In 2006, there were five cases, while, in 2005, six cases were reported.
“Recent incidents have indicated that the body parts of rhinoceros are still in great demand and there could be involvement of international poaching gangs. After authorities in Nepal tightened its security to stop the massive killings of rhinoceros from their famed Royal parks, it appeared the pressure might have shifted towards Assam.” Prof. P. C. Bhattacharjee of Guwahati University, and a Trustee of Wildlife Trust of India, said.
Rhino horns are used in preparing aphrodisiacs and traditional medicines in East Asia. It is also used for making prized ornamental handles for daggers.
In the recent past, conservation efforts helped to increase the rhino population from 1,672 in the year 2000 to 1,855 in 2006.
“Increase in their numbers may have resulted in some of the rhinos straying out to the periphery of the park and becoming easy targets of the poachers.” Dr. Rahul Kaul of WTI said.
“New range areas adjoining the 430 sq. kms of the park also need to be developed for protection. Pobitora and Orang, the other two important rhino areas also need similar protection.” Prof. Bhattacharjee said.
Now, the forest department has requested the police to provide armed home guards to beef up security in the park.