New Delhi: Animals killed in road accidents in the northeast Indian state of Assam is worrying conservationists. Last month speeding vehicles hit two captive elephants on the busy highway connecting the northern and southern districts, killing one and seriously injuring another.
“The injured animal was hit in the early hours of November 28, when it tried to cross the highway in Kothia Toli, Nagaon. It had been unchained for foraging at night by its owner,” Dr Anjan Talukdar, Veterinarian of Wildlife Trust of India who attended to the calf, said.
The highway that passes through several animal corridors adjoining the Kaziranga National Park has also seen accidents involving wild animals in the past.
Panbari, Haldibari, Kanchanjuri and Burapahar areas on the highway are prone to accidents, Talukdar said. The problem gets worse at night – especially between midnight and dawn, when animal activity is at its heaviest. Vehicles, especially trucks, due to lack of visibility, tend to hit animals crossing the highway.
In the first incident on November 2, an adult female elephant was killed on the Highway 37 near Panbari Reserve Forest. Another elephant – a two and a half-year-old calf was hit on the Highway 36, paralyzing its hind legs.
“Currently, the injured elephant is under the care of the Guwahati Veterinary College in the state capital. WTI has been providing medical expenses to the team of experts monitoring the calf.” Dr. N.V.K Ashraf, of WTI said.
Dr Ashraf said that a large number of captive elephants in the state were idle, raising welfare concerns due to the lack of funds for their upkeep. Owners are forced to set their elephants free at dusk to forage in nearby forests – increasing the risk of accidents, a member of the rescue team said.
A recent survey conducted by WTI found a total of 1139 captive elephants across 23 districts in the state. This initiative was a part of the Captive Elephant project in partnership with International Fund for Animal Welfare(IFAW) for the welfare of an estimated 5000 captive elephants in the country.
Assistance for health care, keeping records of their status (through micro-chipping), and reflectors to be fitted on their back (allowing motorist to spot them at night) has been provided to elephant owners under the project.
Earlier, filmmaker Gautam Saikia’s documentary, Jaws of Death highlighting the plight of animals crossing the highway – won the prestigious Vatavaran Award in 2005. The film showed the hapless wildlife mowed down by speeding vehicles on the highway.