Kaziranga: A two month old female leopard cub was rescued from the Doom Dooma forest near Tinsukia, affected by the recent floods in the Brahmaputra river in India’s north-eastern Assam state. It was brought to the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) on the morning of July 18.
The cub, which was rescued three days ago, was emaciated and weak due to diahorrea. The Wildlife Trust of India’a (WTI) Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) veterinarian decided to shift it to CWRC for better care and nursing.
Meanwhile, a third wave of floods has hit upper Assam, according to the latest reports coming in from the CWRC. The water is already chest high at the forest bungalow at the Dibru-Saikhowa National Park. “This is the highest water level seen since 1950,” an officer calling in from there said.
Animals, especially deer, are moving in large numbers looking for higher ground. Two hog deer were found dead on the road after being hit. As the situation worsens the road traffic has come to a stop near Nowgong severing the main link to Kaziranga. “The situation might worsen in the next few days,” CWRC manager, Rathin Burman said.
The CWRC has been actively involved in the rescue and rehabilitation of wild animals during the floods. The CWRC is run jointly by WTI and the Assam forest department with the support of WTI’s partner, the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
“The leopard cub seems stable at the moment, but does not seem capable of feeding itself,” CWRC veterinarian, Dr Bhaskar Choudhary, said. “We are force-feeding her with the help of a pipe with Lactogen. A two-month old cub should be able to lap up milk from a bowl, but this one can’t even suckle,” he said. “Maybe it is scared and disoriented and will settle down in while.”
Meanwhile, the four-month-old female greater one horned rhino calf, which was rescued a week ago, is doing well and responding to treatment. The calf, which was injured, was kept under intensive care and has still not been put out in the open.
Project Officer, Kadambari Mainkar, who joined the rescue effort last week, said: “When I went in to feed her yesterday, she was trying to open the door. She walked out of the room today, looked around and seemed confused by her surroundings.” However, the inquisitiveness is being taken as a sign of recovery.