Bhutan, 20th October 2023- Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in collaboration with the Nature Conservation Division (Department of Forests and Park Services) and Ugyen Wangchuk Institute for Forest Research and Training organised a snake rescue training workshop at Gelephu, in Sarpang District from 18th to 20th October 2023 with support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and Bhutan for Life.
The workshop brought together 48 participants from across 24 forest divisions of Bhutan including senior officials – Mr. Gem Tshering of the Nature Conservation Division, Mr. Sangay, Principal Forestry Officer, Ugyen Wangchuk Institute for Forestry Research & Training and Mr. Phub Dhendup, Chief Forest Officer Sarpang.
Snake rescue session hosted by Mr. Vivek Sharma | Photo by Sukanya David
The 3-day workshop commenced with a session by Mr. Vivek Sharma, a Jabalpur-based biologist with over 15 years of experience in rescuing snakes. He covered a theoretical talk on snake biology, identification, and snake bite management,  equipping participants with essential knowledge and skills.
A practical session on snake rescue and handling techniques was also conducted. Participants had the opportunity to apply their knowledge and practice safe and effective snake-handling methods. The WTI team also distributed 30 rescue kits among the officers to help enhance their snake rescue capabilities.
 
A hands-on training session was conducted during the workshop | Photo by Sukanya David
A WhatsApp group has been formed with all the participants to share experiences, seek advice, and exchange valuable insights. Many participants have already shared photos and accounts of snake-related incidents from their work, fostering a collaborative and educational platform, stated Sukanya David, Program Officer, Wild Aid, WTI.
Mr. Gem Tshering of the Nature Conservation Division, DoFPS, Bhutan expressed that the training was very helpful, especially for the field officers who most of the time attend to snake rescue cases.
Ms. Dechen Choden forest officer of Paro Forest Division expressed her gratitude to WTI-IFAW for their role in conducting this training workshop. She further stated that it was a great opportunity to learn from the team and their passion inspired the participants to become better snake rescuers and handlers.
Snake rescue kits were distributed to the officers by WTI-IFAW | Photo by Sukanya David
Such initiatives play a crucial role in promoting the coexistence of humans and wildlife and safeguarding the biodiversity of Bhutan.
One of WTI’s oldest initiatives is the Rapid Action Project (RAP) which originated from the urgent recognition that Indian wildlife faces numerous threats. This initiative addresses human-wildlife conflict mitigation, support for frontline forest personnel, endangered species rescue and rehabilitation, community conservation support, and habitat protection.
Read more about the outreach arm of WTI, Wild Aid.