CWRC, Kaziranga National Park, June 23, 2016: An adult female Asian elephant, suspected to be feral, was treated by the Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) unit of IFAW-WTI’s Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) on the afternoon of June 20, with a follow-up visit on June 22.

Earlier, on June 19, responding to an emergency call from the forest department, the MVS team led by Dr Samshul Ali had reached the injured animal on the slopes of Diffloo Tea Estate, an area that falls under the Bokakhat forest beat of Kaziranga National Park. The female elephant was alone, though a herd could be seen observing her from the top of the hill she was found on.





The female elephant was found in the Bokakhat forest beat of Kaziranga NP with injuries and inflammation on both forelimbs

Forest staff said that about 12 elephants habitually roamed the Kaziranga-Karbi Anglong landscape along this route. While this particular elephant was always observed with a herd, she was also perceived to be at a distance from the other elephants.

The MVS team determined that the injured elephant could not move around much. Joymala, a trained ‘kumki’ elephant of the Assam Forest Department was brought to the scene and placed with her overnight. The team returned to the spot the next day and the ‘kumki’ was used to bring the injured elephant to a flat area, also keeping her calm while Dr Ali, the attending veterinarian, administered a sedative and provided the requisite treatment.


 

Dr Samshul Ali administers a sedative to the injured elephant, using the forest department’s trained ‘kumki’ elephant as a shield



Dr Ali said that while the team had given the animal immediate relief, its injuries seemed to be have a deeper cause. “The inflammation seems to be chronic. I suspect that the elephant has fractures or dislocations in both forelimbs”, he opined.

When the MVS team conducted a follow-up visit on June 22 the elephant was found to be more mobile and the inflammation in her legs had reduced considerably. She is still roaming the hill ranges of Diffloo Tea Estate alone. A team of forest guards is monitoring her and the MVS team will be alerted in the event of an emergency.