Bhopal: Four former bear dancers, being rehabilitated by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) with the support of World Society for Protection of Animals (WSPA), were recently felicitated for their unfaltering commitment to excel in their respective alternative livelihoods.
Zamir, Rais, Samimmudin and Wasim, all based in Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, are among the 21 Kalandars (bear dancers) in the state, who gave up bear dancing at the behest of WTI-WSPA’s Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project (SBCWP). They were provided alternative livelihoods of their choice after they voluntarily surrendered their bears to the Forest Department.

“One of the key requirements to aid sloth bear welfare and conservation efforts in India is to free Kalandars of their dependence on the animal. Once they surrender their bears, SBCWP works with them to establish alternative livelihoods providing a new and sustainable form of income,” said Neil D’Cruze, Programmes Manager, WSPA.

To ensure that the rehabilitated Kalandars have no reason to relapse to bear dancing, their progress is monitored regularly, and they are provided with additional support as and when necessary.
“Kalandars had been performing bear dancing for over four centuries before it was banned in India. It is understandably easy for them to relapse if they are not satisfied in these alternative livelihoods, and that’s why we keep in constant touch with them, ensuring that they get all the support and encouragement they need,” said Sudipto Chatterjee, Head of Communities for Conservation division, WTI.
“Zamir, Rais, Samimmudin and Wasim were chosen for the felicitation based on their performance in their respective alternative livelihoods,” he added.
 
With the support of WTI-WSPA, Samimmudin and Wasim are no longer dependent on their bears as a source of income. Samimmudin now runs a garage to service two-wheelers and has recently purchased his own space for the garage, while Wasim owns an auto rickshaw which he gives out on rent and additionally works as a driver.
Rais owns a vehicle which he uses to ferry school children and transport goods. Zameer owns a goods transport vehicle.
The four Kalandars were awarded at an event organised to obtain feedback of SBCWP beneficiaries as well as to provide them a platform to share their experiences with other Kalandars. The event held in Kotra Sultanabad, Bhopal, around mid last month, was attended by local leaders and members of Kalandar Sangathan – a body of Kalandars.
 
Learn more about Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project 
Related stories:
From ‘Bear’ing the cross to a better future: Mittu Chacha