New Delhi: WTI has trained and equipped wildlife guards in 12 Protected Areas (PAs) namely: Corbett Tiger Reserve and Sonanadi wildlife sanctuary (situated at the edge of the Corbett Tiger Reserve)in Uttaranchal; Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka; Balphakram, Nokrek Ridge, and Nongkhyllem National Parks in Meghalaya; Orang National Park in Assam; Pakhui, Itanagar, Sessa Orchid, and Eagle’s Nest Wildlife Sanctuaries in Arunachal Pradesh and Sunderbans Tiger Reserve in West Bengal; by August 2001.
These activities, which began with the Sonanadi Wildlife Sanctuary in August 2000, have been conducted under WTI’s Van Rakshak project (VRP), which aims to create a strong, motivated, and well-equipped field force of wildlife guards and wardens. With coverage of the Sunderban Tiger Reserve in West Bengal and Assam’s Pobitara Wildlife Sanctuary on the anvil, this figure will rise to 1,275 men.
The most recent VRP (consisting of a training programme and distribution of personal anti-poaching kits to the wildlife guards who participated) was conducted in the Sunderbans Tiger Reserve between 3rd and 10th July 2001. When WTI approached the Directors of the 12 PA and offered to help in tackling poaching problems, they were receptive to the idea. WTI therefore designed composite personal anti-poaching kits for wildlife guards, comprising a rucksack, torch and batteries, a raincoat, a winter jacket, sturdy hunter boots, a ground sheet, a sleeping bag, and a water bottle.
In each VRP, the distribution of kits is typically preceded by a training programme that is more comprehensive than any training previously imparted to wildlife guards, who lack formal training in wildlife laws and the detection of wildlife crimes. The training largely covers wildlife laws and crime, firearms handling and gun discipline for those who are authorised by their State Forest Departments to carry and use arms. It also educates wildlife guards about the powers entrusted to them under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. Firing practice is usually carried out at the firing ranges of the Police and the Armed Forces.
The training comprises an intensive course for Range Officers and foresters; and a general course (a simplified version of the intensive course, plus field patrolling techinques) for lower-level staff.
The first day is taken up by class-room lectures on wildlife law and crime by WTI’s legal consultant, and a talk on effective field patrolling techniques by another WTI expert. Several forest guards have queries on wildlife law, while senior staff seek advice on specific cases they are handling. On the second day, firing practice and gun handling takes place. The field patrolling capabilities of forest guards, their observation powers, and ability to track animals, are tested by sending groups (each accompanied by a WTI resource person) on a trek, and evaluating the reports they submit on their return.
Forest Department officials and wildlife guards in the PAs covered acknowledge that this was the first time that training was imparted to field forest staff in an integrated form, combining all aspects of the task of protecting wildlife. WTI, they agreed unanimously, is the first and only NGO to have conducted such programmes. Participants have also suggested that VRPs held at regular intervals would enable them to keep their knowledge up to date. The guards have told WTI personnel that they found the composite anti-poaching kits very useful, since these were designed after consulting them, keeping their patrolling needs in mind.