Bhagalpur (Bihar): Eight years after being rescued from poachers, a captive-reared smooth coated otter is being returned to its natural habitat in Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary in Bihar.
The otter, a male named Ganga is undergoing acclimatisation as part of its soft release, being carried out by a team from TM Bhagalpur University with help from Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
The release site, Moujma Diara near Sonbarsa village along the Ganga River, was selected by the rehabilitators Sunil Kumar Chaudhary and Sushant Dey after a month-long study. Sightings of wild otters and their dens, to allow Ganga sufficient opportunity to interact with them during the acclimatisation, was one of the determining factors in the site selection process. A den was constructed to house Ganga; the team including Dey, senior researcher, along with Karelal Manadal, a local fisherman and two support staff Lilo and Raman camped nearby to record his behavioural changes and interactions with wild otters.
“We had been thinking of Ganga’s rehabilitation since his rescue in 2000. He was a month-old pup then and we had to wait for him to reach adulthood for a successful rehabilitation. Also, the number of wild otters was quite low then, as we observed only a single family of about five individuals during an ongoing River Dolphin Conservation project. This project had a positive impact on the population of otters and now there are three families with more than 20 individuals living near the rehabilitation site, making it suitable for his release,” says Chaudhary, principal coordinator of the Vikramshila Biodiversity Research & Education Centre.
The soft release began on April 11. During the first week, Ganga was allowed to explore the new habitat. Supplementary food was provided to support him until he could fend for himself. Although, Ganga had been taken for visits to the selected site while a den was being constructed, he refused to enter it for the first two days despite the food kept as lure. However, by the third day he was at ease in his new home and also began fishing in the river and interacting with his wild conspecifics.
After more than three weeks’ observation from a close distance, the researchers left Ganga and camped on an adjacent island in order to distance themselves from the animal. They visited Ganga daily, but only for about 30 minutes. During this period, the supply of supplementary food that was provided to him earlier was gradually decreased and eventually stopped.
“We are still monitoring the movement of ‘Ganga’. There are no natural predators of adult otters in Vikramshila Sanctuary but the threats from the resident otters cannot be ruled out. Ganga has been involved in fights with the resident males and though badly injured, has survived,” said Chaudhary. Friendly interactions between Ganga and the wild otters have been observed too. He was once seen mingling with five wild otters without hostility, indicating perhaps their acceptance of Ganga. The gathering that lasted about three minutes, dispersed after being disturbed by an approaching boat.
“He is interacting well with the wild otters. He goes with the wild pack and remains with them for hours, but comes back to his territory which has increased considerably since the beginning of the programme, to cover a rather wide area around the rehabilitation site. He is also fishing efficiently,” Chaudhary added.
The nearby villagers have been informed about the project. Chaudhary said, “We have observed that Ganga does not respond to calls from people other than the two who looked after him during his upbringing. Nevertheless, we have instructed the villagers not to approach or try and feed Ganga, for their safety as well as that of Ganga. They are quite excited about Ganga’s release and have assured their support”.
Smooth coated otter (Lutragale perspicillata) is listed in schedule II of the Indian Wildlife Protection Act (1972). Trapping for pet trade is one of the pressing threats faced by smooth coated otter in Vikramshila Gangetic Dolphin Sanctuary. Other threats to its survival include poaching for fur, hunting for sport, encroachment of habitat and rise in pollution levels.
“Very few successful attempts on otter rehabilitation have been made in India and abroad. Despite being told by experts that the project is unlikely to succeed, we went ahead. Sushant is maintaining the detailed record of the changing behaviour of hand-reared otter being rehabilitated in its natural habitat. I believe that scientists, researchers and wildlife conservationists will be benefited by the success of this rehabilitation,” said Chaudhary, confident about the project’s outcome.