Phura (Mizoram):A rare Asian brown tortoise (Manouria emys) was rescued from a resident of Phura Village in the southern district of Saiha in Mizoram, and released into the wild by the members of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) – Emergency Relief Network (ERN).
The members, belonging to the Mizoram branch of the Samrakshan Trust, found the tortoise, restrained with a rope, while holding a conservation education and awareness programme for local students and elders.
The owner was identified, and on questioning, he reportedly revealed that hunting tortoise with the help of dogs was commonly practised by the local villagers. The ERN members then counselled him on the legal implications of capturing and possessing wild animals. He finally agreed to surrender the tortoise after being persuaded by the members along with those of a local youth association Mara Thyutlia Py (MTP).
The Phura Village Council president was informed about the incident. Following the president’s suggestion, the tortoise was released in the forest near Palak Lake, an Important Bird Area (IBA) about five kilometres from Phura.
“Manouria emys is one of the three species of tortoise recorded in the Palak Lake area during a study conducted in 2001,” says Nimesh Ved, leader of the Samrakshan Trust – Mizoram Field Office. It is the largest tortoise found in Asia and is listed as ‘endangered’ in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Threats to the species include excessive hunting for food or pet trade.
“We hope to build on this (rehabilitation), to conserve wildlife in Saiha district in collaboration with the forest department of the Mara Autonomous District Council,” Ved said. Manuna, who attended an ERN training workshop in February this year, accompanied Ved during the rescue.
NVK Ashraf, Director, Wild Rescue, WTI, says, “Fresh water turtles and tortoises are being traded throughout the country in local markets. Regional ERN members with easy access to local markets are ideally placed to address these issues in conjunction with the respective forest departments.”
ERN is a network of wildlife rehabilitators based in India and abroad. With about 300 members, the network aims to act as an information base for wildlife rehabilitators, to educate and train them in rehabilitation processes and use their expertise to mitigate wildlife disasters in the areas of reach. Members include veterinarians, NGO personnel, students and wildlife enthusiasts who have contributed to wildlife conservation or possess the potential to do so.