New Delhi: Action speaks louder than words is what a group of Tibetans demonstrated in the Amdo and the Rebkong area in the far eastern Tibet by burning stack of leopard, otter and fox skins. As a mark of support for His Holiness the Dalai Lama’s call to end the cruel practice of using wildlife derivatives in Tibetan attires. 
From February 7 to 12 during the Great Prayer Festival of Molam Quinmo, people from the Huangnan Rebgong area launched a campaign of burning Tibetan garments made from animal furs. The festival is organized on the first month of the lunar year. This noble gesture, what may be termed as first of its kind in this remote Tibetan region, poised to send a strong signal to fellow Tibetans to give up products made from endangered animals.
According to Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), “villagers Tsetenjia and Gungbaojia from the Rebgong Siherji village who launched this campaign placed their own otter, fox and other furs on exhibition in the big Lungwu Monastery Square and heartily explained to the people on the spot of their reasons for taking such actions. Thereupon, just in half an hour’s time, three families at once joined in to burn their fur edged clothes. People on the scene started to donate money, offering ‘Khata’ to express their support to these families.”
“They sincerely hoped that everybody will work hand in hand to change the current mood of the villagers of competing increasingly with one another in dresses and jewelries.”
The incident occurred in less than two months, when His Holiness appealed to his Buddhists devotees at Kalachakra (empowerment initiation) in Amaravati to refrain from wildlife products. This event brought together Tibetans from places as far as Amdo, Lasa and Rabgong in Tibet besides Tibetans from other parts of the world. About one lakh twenty-five thousand devotees joined by His Holiness in the fortnight-long event of prayers and empowerment initiation.
While addressing the gatherings at Kalachakra, His Holiness asked to inculcate love and respect towards all living beings and to conserve wildlife. “I am ashamed and don’t feel like living when I see all those pictures of people decorating themselves with skins and furs.” He pleaded.
Pasang Lhamu Bhutia, Project Officer of WTI said that after hearing His Holiness many Tibetans were in tears and promised to destroy Chubas and animal skins if they find any.
His Holiness started a crusade against the immoral use of wildlife products by launching a Tibetan Conservation Awareness Campaign (TCAC) in conjunction with WTI and the Care for the Wild International (CWI) in New Delhi in April last year. Following this Barbara Maas the Chief Executive of the CWI made several trips to India organizing various activities in partnership with WTI to promote this campaign.
The TCA campaign organized an awareness stall at Kalachakra to supply information on the plight of the endangered animals of the region. Films made in the Tibetan Language and in English were shown to the public to bring into focus the plight and the message of His Holiness for wildlife conservation. Dr. Mass was also invited to deliver two talks on the role of Tibetans in the protection of endangered species, which was attended by more than five thousand Tibetans many of whom were from the Amdo region. One important result of this initiative was the signing of pledges by three thousand devotees in support of the campaign.
“From the feedback we received, it was evident that the message of His Holiness and that of the video presentations had been received loud and clear, as more and more pilgrims crowded around our stall.” said Maas.
“Thanks to His Holiness’s dedication to this issue and the honesty and open-mindedness of the Tibetans, there is no doubt in my mind that this Kalachakra was not only a deeply meaningful Buddhist event, but will also make a genuine difference by saving the lives of countless wild animals,”
The current initiative of the Tibetans showed that it is not too late if the collective will prevail upon the doom, we could still save our endangered wildlife from the jaws of death. By nipping the demands at its source, the historic injustice suffered by these rare animals at the hands of butcher and the illegal wildlife trade would bring respite to our threatened species.