A veterinary team led by CWRC veterinarian-in-charge Dr Panjit Basumatary (centre) attended to the leopard’s injuries


CWRC, Kaziranga National Park, May 12, 2016: On the night of May 9, officials of the Bokial Forest Beat, Golaghat Forest Division trapped an adult male leopard that had created a panic among the populace in Bokial Tea Estate. In its efforts to escape the trap cage the leopard sustained several injuries, whereupon forest officials decided that it should be brought to CWRC (the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation; IFAW-WTI and the Assam Forest Department’s wildlife rescue, treatment and rehabilitation facility near Kaziranga National Park) for treatment before its eventual release back into the wild.
“The leopard will remain under close observation for a week. Its release into the wild will be planned in accordance with established protocols.”
The leopard was brought to the centre on May 10. Its body morphometry was recorded while it was under sedation: a full-grown adult male weighing 66kg and that had not been previously microchipped. CWRC veterinarian-in-charge Dr Panjit Basumatary and Dr Janmoni Shyam of the State Veterinary Department (Bokakhat) attended to the animal with the assistance of veterinary expert Dr K Devkishore Singh, Assistant Commandant, 30th Battalion, Sashastra Seema Bal (Arunachal Pradesh).
“The animal had sustained severe external injuries, while inside the trap cage, especially to the facial area. This was possibly due to the chain link mesh that was attached to the sides of the cage”, said Dr Basumatary. “It also had an injury to the right foreleg. The wounds have been closed and the requisite treatment provided. The animal remains under close observation and will be monitored for at least a week. Its release into the wild will be planned in accordance with established protocols.”
Today, 48 hours after it was operated upon, the animal has shown signs of improvement. It is hoped that it will be deemed fit for wild release within the coming week.

The injured leopard in the trap cage in which it was brought to CWRC