Sondlagondi, Gondia, December 22, 2014: In a major achievement, as per Rule 23(10) of Maharashtra Biological Diversity Rules 2008, the first People’s Biodiversity Register (PBR) for the state of Maharashtra has been prepared under the technical guidance of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in Gondia district.


JTEF members being welcomed to the event.

Photo: WTI

The Biological Diversity Act (2002) mandates implementation of the act through decentralized system with the NBA focusing on advising the Central Government on matters relating to the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilization of biological resources; advising the State Government in the selection of areas of biodiversity importance to be notified under sub-section (1) of section 37 as heritage sites and measures for the management of such heritage sites.
WTI along with its partners the Ecosystem Alliance, Japan Tiger and Elephant Fund (JTEF) and International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) has been working with the communities and State Forest Department for the conservation of the corridor between Nagzira and Nawegaon Tiger Reserves in the state. WTI started its intervention in the conservation of the corridor in 2011 after the corridor occupancy survey was completed on the presence of wild animals. The survey revealed that the dependence of communities on the corridor forests for fuelwood, grazing, besides collection of minor forest products was posing a major threat to the long-term sustainability of the corridor.


Villagers at the event.

Photo: WTI

WTI with its partners initiated “Working with Communities to Conserve Wildlife” programme under the Central India Tiger Conservation Project in Gondia district. Presently, the project is covering 13 villages out of 54 priority villages of three tehsils. Under the initiative, the first activity undertaken was providing Improved Cook Stoves (ICS) for each household, followed by promoting “Artificial Insemination” for breed improvement of the livestock. Sustainable harvesting of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and awareness programmes are also being carried out at regular intervals.
To make people aware of the importance of the natural resources, WTI initiated the formation of Biodiversity Management Committee (BMC) at Gram Panchayat Murdholi in Gondia (first in the district) as per the guidelines and rules of Biological Diversities Act 2002. “Post-formation of the BMC, consultation meetings were held with the BMC on preparing the PBR document and its importance. WTI organised first PBR initiation workshop with the BMC, Maharashtra State Biodiversity Board (MSBB), villagers and subject experts on the documentation process. The PBR will help in sharing the benefits to the communities who for long have been conserving the natural resources but have never been given their justified share,” said Anil Kumar, Asst. Manager & Project Lead, Central India Tiger Conservation Project, WTI.


Dr Rahul Kaul handing over a copy of PBR to

Murdoli BMC. Photo:WTI

Once the documentation process of PBR was initiated, WTI worked with the district administration for the formation of BMC district of Gondia (10th in the state).

Subject experts on flora along with two researchers and experts on other subjects and fauna were hired by WTI under the project. WTI also helped in recognition of BMC Murdholi with SBB (State Biodiversity Board) which provided Rs. 20,000 to the committee for PBR and meetings. The final draft of the PBR has been finalised in consultation with MSBB and being handed over on December 22, 2014, at Sondlagondi village, Goregaon tehsil, Gondia. The document is first Model PBR for the state of Maharashtra.
“WTI’s role in helping prepare the first People’s Biodiversity Register for Maharashtra is a landmark feat. Our work in Central India is a testimony of the fact of how committed we are to the cause of conserving corridors that are crucial for the well-being of wild animals. We are and would continue to work with the communities to ensure that their dependence on forests is brought down significantly with interventions that are acceptable to all,” Dr Rahul Kaul, Chief Ecologist, WTI.

Of the four meta-populations of tigers in the Central India Tiger Landscape, WTI has thus far focussed on the Kanha-Nagzira-Nawegaon-Tadoba meta-population which includes the four PAs mentioned and the forest patches between them under the Central India Tiger Conservation Project with support from Maharashtra Forest Department, JTEF, Ecosystem Alliance and IFAW.