Leh: The Wildlife Trust of India(WTI) and the Department of Wildlife Protection, Jammu and Kashmir join hands once again to conduct a survey on the endangered Tibetan antelope popularly called the chiru. The survey on the chiru follows a successful attempt at a rapid survey on the status of Markhor in the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
The survey on chiru seeks to confirm the present status of the animal with respect to population, birthing sites, migration routes, male/female ratio, herbage preference, poaching, etc. The present survey is a continuation of the survey conducted last year by the Department of Wildlife Protection, J&K and is expected to continue for three years.
Two teams will trek the high altitude Cheng Chenmo and Daulat Beg Oldi regions of Ladakh in J & K close to the Aksai Chin region. The teams will access the survey sites only after crossing the high crossing the high mountain-passes, Marsmik-la near Cheng Chenmo and Sasser-la near Daulat Beg Oldi.
Although chiru surveys were instituted earlier by several people including the wildlife department in the state, the present study is considered a first ever comprehensive survey of the animal. The previous surveys were generally of short duration that resulted in limited information on their actual status and were not sufficient to formulate a comprehensive work plan on conservation of this species. The current survey aims to cover wide ranging issues impacting their habitats in Ladakh that may provide useful information for a long term conservation of this animal.
The survey in Ladakh assumes an important significance in the light of intensive poaching of the animal for it’s under wool. A Field Guide to Indian Mammals, written by Vivek Menon, Executive Director (WTI) in 2003, estimates their population at 200-500 individuals in the Trans-Himalayan deserts of Ladakh.
Tibetan Antelope (Pantholops hodgsonii) has caught the attention of conservationists worldwide. Thousands of chiru have been killed in the last few decades to feed the illegal shahtoosh trade across continents.
Multiple seizures of shahtoosh scarves over the last five years in Switzerland also point towards the existing network of traders dealing in shahtoosh that provide ample evidence of continued killing of the animal in recent history. Investigations into the illegal import of chiru derivatives by Swiss authorities also revealed that in the last five years, 537 illegal imports of shahtoosh scarves have been made.
According to Rahul Kaul, Director Conservation, (WTI), “For a long term conservation plan of the chiru, both enforcement as well as adequate information of their present status is vital as they complement each other and provide a comprehensive frame work for conservation. The current surveys in Ladakh will hopefully continue for a longer period since we need to collect data on wide ranging ecological aspects of the species. These aspects of the species can only be understood over a period of time”
“The Army will be assisting us in both the places since the two areas fall near to the LoC and both places involve long treks and hostile weather conditions”, he further adds.
Trade in any parts or products of these animals has been prohibited by various international trade monitoring organizations such as CITES, IUCN etc, besides upholding the ban by various other regional collaborations in Asia and Europe. In India , the animal is listed on the Schedule 1 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972, the highest degree of protection accorded to endangered species in India .
The Jammu and Kashmir government also instituted a similar ban on shahtoosh in the year 2002, prohibiting use of shahtoosh wool. Since then, trade in shahtoosh has somewhat reduced in the state.
However, illegal trade continues through various clandestine routes in India and abroad, creating an urgent need for enforcement. Trade control is vital for protection of this endangered species.
The survey in Ladakh hopes to provide information on the abundance and habitat requirements of chiru in the Ladakh region of India . WTI hopes that the information generated as a result will translate into meaningful action plans for the long term conservation of this species.
Pix credit: IFAW