Uba Raj Regmi, Chief Warden, Parsa Wildlife Reserve (PWR) of Nepal

receiving the tents

Parsa Wildlife Reserve, Nepal, June 2, 2015: In the wake of extensive damage to wildlife security posts in Nepal, the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), World Land Trust (WLT) and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) provided 100 field tents to Nepal’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation.
The Forest Departments’ check posts suffered major damage when a series of earthquakes and aftershocks struck Nepal. In the midst of this great crisis, the frontline forest staff had to gear up to ensure that poachers do not take advantage of the ground situation. Therefore, maintaining staff at guard posts became even more critical to protect the flora and fauna of this landscape.
The IFAW-WTI and WLT team handed over 100 field tents of different sizes to the Nepalese authorities in two batches. The first batch included 69 tents while 31 were handed over later at the Parsa Wildlife Reserve (PWR) office in Nepal. “I would like to thank WTI, IFAW and WLT for providing these tents for the field staff of Nepal’s protected areas, especially in the upper reaches of the country. This will help us in protecting Nepal’s rich biodiversity. After the devastating earthquake, we are in need of such tents for the temporary accommodation of the field staff on duty. The recent earthquake has resulted in massive loss of strategic security posts in the region,” said Uba Raj Regmi, Chief Warden, PWR.




Shri Tikaram Adhikari,DG, Department of National Parks and Wildlife

Conservation, Nepal, inspecting the tents

These tents will be used in the protected areas in the Himalayas that were damaged during the calamitous earthquake in Nepal. “India and Nepal have been closely working for a long time to safeguard wildlife and to strengthen transboundary conservation. In times of crisis like this, we are therefore committed to stand by each other. The IFAW-WTI Disaster Response team is geared to address such emergency needs in the region and will continue to provide support to one of our closest neighbours and allies,” said Radhika Bhagat, Head, Wild Aid, IFAW-WTI.
Sonic Gurung, Major, Durga Dall Gulm, one of the units of Nepal Army deputed in PWR, echoed the sentiments of gratitude pervading the forest officials and the Nepalese army, “On behalf of the protection force of Nepal, I would like to thank WTI, IFAW and WLT for providing these tents in this hour of great crisis. These much needed tents will help us perform our duties efficiently.”
In these sensitive areas, it has become increasingly difficult to resume work and even patrolling in the absence of shelter for the staff. Some of these tents will be house makeshift offices of the forest force in the mountains where earthquake and avalanches have wreaked havoc.


The tents being used by Nepal Forest Department

Abhishek, the IFAW-WTI Emergency Relief Network (ERN) member, who was assigned to hand over the two consignments of tents to the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation, Nepal, commented, “As an ERN member of IFAW-WTI, I am happy to be a part of this mission during this crisis in Nepal. I know that the resilient Nepalese people will put this tragedy behind them and start working on rebuilding their beautiful Himalayan nation.”
Rebuilding the nation will certainly not be an easy task and to restore normalcy will be even more difficult. However, the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation in Nepal is committed to providing protection to the fauna and flora of this nation that has suffered one of the deadliest natural disasters in recent history.