New Delhi, January 22, 2015: This year couldn’t have had a better start. Soon after Prakash Javadekar, Minister for Environment and Forests & Climate Change, on January 20, 2015, announced that tiger numbers have seen a jump of 30 per cent in the past four years, conservationists across the country began rejoicing. The latest study on tiger population put the number at 2226 as compared to 1706 in 2010 and even experts who were part of the study were pleasantly surprised with these numbers.


Tiger in Central India.

Photo: Aditya Joshi/WTI

Though International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW)-Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has not been directly involved in the tiger estimation survey, but the rise in tiger numbers is certainly worth celebrating. IFAW-WTI has been actively involved in many tiger reserves across the country and trying to minimise wildlife crime by strengthening the capabilities of wildlife protectors, while also looking after their welfare. In Central India, IFAW-WTI has been working towards strengthening the corridors that act as an important conduit for the tigers of the area.
The estimated tiger numbers in the states where IFAW-WTI is working are as following; Chhattisgarh (46), Madhya Pradesh (308), Maharashtra (190), Assam (190), Karnataka (406), Kerala (136) and Bihar (28). Overall, IFAW-WTI has had anti-poaching training programmes in more than 13 tiger reserves. Apart from these training programmes, anti-snare walks are being conducted in Bandipur TR in Karnataka and efforts were put for strengthening the corridors between Nagzira-Nawegaon TR in Maharashtra.


Tigress resting in a pool in Nagzira.

Photo: Aditya Joshi/WTI

“It is a proud moment for all conservationists working towards protecting the tiger and its habitat. IFAW-WTI has been consistently working in tiger reserves throughout the country to ensure that our frontline forest staff is geared for the threats that poaching poses. We are also ensuring that corridors are secured for free movement of tigers between different habitats. Our efforts in protecting this magnificent species are certainly translating into success at ground zero,” said Vivek Menon, Regional Head – South Asia for IFAW.
In 2001, IFAW-WTI initiated the Van Rakshak Programme (VRP), also known as ‘Guardians of the Wild’ project, to minimise wildlife crime by strengthening the capabilities of wildlife protectors throughout the country, while also looking after their welfare. VRP follows a multi-pronged strategy with four thrust areas, abbreviated as TEAM: Training, Equipping, Awareness and Morale Boosting, to broadly facilitate capacity building and strengthen spirits of personnel in difficult field circumstances.
Till date, over 9320 personnel have been trained on ‘wildlife crime prevention’ while 9195 have been equipped with field gear. The project has also provided free insurance cover to 20,000 frontline staff in the country. Victims of accident or death on duty and their families receive up to Rs 1,00,000 under this unique scheme.