New Delhi: Rohit KR of S.B.O.A. School & Junior College, Chennai and Prachurya Baruah of Maharshi Vidya Mandir Senior Secondary School, Guwahati have been declared winners for the nationwide school-level wildlife painting competition organised by the International Fund for Animal Welfare-Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI). The two ‘IFAW Young Achiever Award’ winners were chosen from a total of 1,109 top entries from across India.
The competition was a part of the annual topical IFAW-Animal Action Week (AAW) celebrations observed simultaneously in schools of 16 countries including India, the US and the UK. It is scheduled during the first week of October to coincide with the wildlife week.  AAW-2009 with the theme ‘Under One Sky – Why Animals Matter’ was kicked off on October 4 by Leonardo DiCaprio, hollywood actor and environmentalist. In India, it drew a participation of 725 schools.
Activities like quiz competitions, group discussions, eco-investigations among others were organised following instructions in the free activity packs provided to each school. Yet the highlight of the AAW was the painting competition.  Of the 1,109 best entries selected and sent by different schools, 30 were shortlisted as finalists. The winning entries were chosen from the finalists, by Soumen Bhowmick, a visual artist, and lecturer at the College of Art, Delhi and Amity School of Fine Arts.
“Paintings by both Rohit and Prachurya were really good… very imaginative… they used appropriate colours to depict wildlife. They are well above average in their skills. I would strongly suggest them to join art institutes and develop their skills further,” said Bhowmick.
Rohit KR, whose painting was awarded the first prize, is a standard VI student of SBOA School. He has won awards and consolation prizes in over 50 painting competitions at district, state, national and international levels. A proud Indian, Rohit hates people who mistreat animals, and aspires to be a ‘famous Indian personality’.  The runner-up Prachurya Baruah studies in standard VI in Maharshi Vidya Mandir SS School. With several awards for painting in his kitty, Prachurya aspires to be  a scientist as well as an artist.
“IFAW AAW is an annual affair aimed at promoting conservation awareness among young students and moulding their young minds to care for our natural heritage. We thank the schools for taking interest and being a part of this initiative. Our heartiest congratulations and best wishes to the 2009 IFAW Young Achievers – Rohit and Prachurya,” said Subir Ghosh, Coordinator, WTI.
The IFAW Young Achiever award comes with a certificate and a cash prize.