Koilamati, February 2, 2015: Semelangso FC, one of the popular village football clubs in Assam, won the ‘Elephant Football Cup 2015’. The tournament held in Koilamati village in Karbi Anglong district of Assam was jointly organized by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), Japan Tiger and Elephant Fund (JTEF), Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council (KAAC) along with Assam Forest Department (AFD).


Fans cheering the players during the match.

Photo:Subhamoy/WTI
Universally, football is deservedly known as the ‘most beautiful game’ which attracts people from all quarters of life, especially youngsters. Keeping this in mind, the theme of the Elephant Cup was ‘Playing to save the wildlife’. The tournament helped immensely in creating awareness amongst the young and the old about the need for protecting the wildlife of the state.
The final match of the two-week long tournament was played between Rongdo Ingti FC and Semelangso FC from Koilamati. Semelangso FC won the trophy with a 3-2 win over their arch rivals Semelangso in the finals.


Semelangso FC players with the winner’s trophy. 

Photo:Subhamoy/WTI
Sarmen Rongpi, village headman, Koilamati, and the chief guest of the final match, said, “We are happy to be part of WTI’s conservation initiative in Karbi Anglong. I feel that relaying message of elephant conservation through a medium like football in this district will bring a fruitful result.”
A total of 32 local football teams from nearby villages of Kalapahar Daigurung elephant corridor participated in the tournament which followed the knock-out format.

Bhaskar Choudhury, Regional Head, WTI (Assam), said, “We are happy to be part of this popular sports event where our aim is to enlighten the communities about wildlife conservation in Karbi Anglong. We seek whole hearted cooperation and support of the communities for elephant conservation in this part of Assam.”


Players in action during the finals. 

Photo:Subhamoy/WTI
Dilip Deori, Project Lead, Karbi Anglong Conservation Project, WTI, expressed gratitude to the local village administration, Koilamati Young Star Club and other young volunteers for their support.


Trophies at display during the finals. 

Photo:Subhamoy/WTI
WTI is actively engaged in elephant corridor securement in Karbi Anglong district of Assam for the last few years with a suitable relocation plan for the inhabitants of corridor villages. The relocation work is on for the residents of Ram Terang village. Already one community hall, a well and electric fencing have been erected under the elephant corridor securing initiative. This initiative falls under WTI’s Karbi Anglong Conservation Project which is being run jointly with support from Elephant Family, JTEF, IUCN (NL), KAAC and AFD.