Noida, April 22, 2015: On the occasion of world Earth Day
IFAW-WTI announced the winners of National Level Painting Competition organized as a part of International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India – Animal Action Education (AAE) programme. Paintings of 10 students have been selected from 12000 participants across the country. Out of the 10 selected three are winners and seven others are runners-up for the theme “Paint your world of animals! More than 85000 students participated in the AAE in India last year.

The winning students from India are Divya Sharma of St. Joseph’s Convent Senior Secondary School, Bhopal, Arun Raja G. Relekar of Parikrama Centre for Learning, Bangalore and Ayushi Surange of Bhavan’s B.P. Vidya Mandir, Nagpur who bagged the first, second and third prize respectively. Seven other students from different states including National Capital Region were awarded consolation prizes for their efforts.


Frist prize winning painting 

Rupa Gandhi Chaudhary, Programme Lead – AAE India, said ‘’ A broad based topic for competition was chosen this year and we were amazed at the creativity of the entries. We’d like to thank all the schools and supporter NGOs that took the initiative to send us feedback and competition entries this year. “


Second prize winning painting 

An initiative of IFAW, AAE – the world’s largest animal themed educational activity – draws participation from millions of children from over 22+ countries, including India. The programme provides free activity packs to participating schools comprising information and guidelines for coordinators along with a short film relevant to the theme. The schools are free to conduct relevant activities through the year, beginning with the Wildlife Week, using these packs.


  3rd prize winning painting

AAE programme is conducted on a new global theme every two years. However, the themes on tigers and elephants remain evergreen for India and WTI keeps receiving requests for these activity packs from new schools each year. Numerous agencies and volunteers help conduct AAE in their respective localities.