Veraval: Thousands of people from the Kharva fishing community today pledged to protect the whale shark in Veraval in the Western Indian state of Gujarat – in an event marked by several important declarations.  
About 5,000 people including fishermen, school children, representatives of NGOs, and government officials participated in the Whale Shark Vhali Utsav 2007, organized at the Kharva Samaj Cricket Ground.
Well-known spiritual leader, Shri Morari Bapu was the Guest of Honour.
Gujarat Forest Department, the Kharva community (Samaj) in Veraval, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), Tata Chemicals Ltd. (TCL) and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) organized the event.
Two forest guards, two fishermen and three school children were honoured for their contribution for conservation of the whale shark.
The State Forest Minister, Mangubhai Patel announced the “Kartak Amas” as the official date for the Whale Shark Day, to be celebrated every year in Gujarat.
Kiranben Bhimjiani, the President of Veraval Nagarpalika (Local administration) adopted the whale shark as the mascot of Veraval.
Besides the Kharva community, Principal Secretary of MoEF, P. N. Raichaudhary, CCF and Chief Wildlife Warden, Pradeep Khanna, Dr. M. K. Ranjitsinh, Chairman of WTI, and politicians took part in the event.
The event is the result of continued efforts by Gujarat Forest Department and its partners for conservation of the fish.
A cheque of rupees 25,000 was handed out to each fisherman by Vivek Talwar, Business Excellence Head, TCL – to honour them – for cutting their nets to save two whale sharks in two separate incidents last year.
Two forest guards were also honoured for their help in the rescue and release of the fish.
Three school children were awarded for their best paintings on the whale shark – selected from the painting competitions organized in 103 schools across the state between 2003 and 2006.
Trophies and certificates were given to them. About 4300, students participated in the competition.
The Kharvas’ constitute the largest fishing community in Gujarat – spread across all major coastal towns and ports.
“This laudable act by the fishermen is a big step forward for conservation of the fish.” Dhiresh Joshi of WTI, said.
“People living close to the shore should come ahead to save the whale shark. In future eco-tourism can be brought about which will provide livelihoods for people.” The forest minister said.
The event was kicked-off with a rally by school children from the Indian Rayon School to the cricket ground.
A photo exhibition, a street play and a prayer in honor of the whale shark was also organized.
The fish was in danger of becoming locally extinct, due to its extensive hunting in the 80s and 90s for trade in Gujarat.
“There is perhaps no such example of a community which abide exploitation of a species for commercial profit, being converted to the conservation and total protection in such a short span. This is a change of heart brought about by public awareness and arousal of public sentiment.” Dr. Ranjitsinh said.
“The street plays to create awareness among people have achieved good results. The Kharva Samaj is a strong society who has taken up this cause to protect the fish.” Morari Bapu said.
Milestones of the Whale Shark Awareness Campaign
The fish was brought under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act in 2001, after the documentary “Shores of Silence” by Mike Pandey highlighted the plight of the fish in India.
The following year, due to the persistent efforts by India and Philippines, the fish was included in the Appendix II of the CITES, which gave protection to the fish worldwide.
For the first time on December 25, 2006, government announced compensation for fishermen to boost their confidence (whose nets were destroyed for rescue of the whale shark).
The Campaign was jointly launched by WTI, IFAW, TCL, Forest Department and Gujarat Heavy Chemicals Ltd. in the year 2004.