Arunachal Pradesh: An extensive survey to assess the distribution and population status of the endangered Mishmi takin has begun in the northeastern Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh. The survey will also cover parts of Sikkim from where the species has been reported, and assess threats faced by the takin in both states. The information generated by the survey will ultimately be used to formulate a conservation strategy for Mishmi takin in India.  
The survey along the Tibetan and Myanmar borders of Arunachal Pradesh is being jointly done by the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and is funded by the Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE). The survey area covers four broad regions, namely the Dibang Valley, Siang, Subansiri and Lohit-Changlang, encompassing Namdapha and Mouling National Parks among other protected areas.
Teams headed by field biologists, will traverse existing forest trails in the survey area and record direct as well as indirect signs of Mishmi takin. Questionnaire surveys will also be conducted among locals to gather the available local knowledge on the species. The interaction with local people will also help estimate the number of Mishmi takins extracted from the forests; the locals hunt takin for meat. Similar surveys will also be done in takin habitat in Sikkim.
Mishmi takin (Budorcas taxicolor taxicolor) is a species of goat-antelope found in the hills of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim at an altitude of 2000-3000 metres. It is listed under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and is also classified as endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Yet, only scant information exists on the population, distribution, ecology and behaviour of this endangered species.
Dr Rahul Kaul, director, WTI, said, “This is the first time, a survey of this sort is being carried out. We are sure it will throw up many new facets on the distribution and ecology of this species.”