Srinagar, May 31, 2014: The Jammu and Kashmir book launch of Vivek Menon’s Indian Mammals- A Field Guide took place in the picturesque valley of Srinagar where Vice Chancellor of University of Kashmir, A N Shah launched the book. 


The book was launched by A N Shah, Vice Chancellor of University of Kashmir.

From left to right: Prof Ulfat Jan, Prof Zaffer Rishi, A R Wani (Rtd CWW), A K Singh (CWW),

A N Shah (V C), Prof Mustafa Shah and Vivek Menon. Photo: WTI

A N Shah praising the book said, “The sheer effort and knowledge which has gone into writing and compiling a book of such precision is highly commendable. I wish Vivek Menon all the success that he deserves with this book.” He further added, “We are trying to develop a superior learning infrastructure for our students at the university and invite achievers from various fields, people who by sharing their experiences can inspire our students to think big. This shall in turn enable the students to achieve excellence in their life. The efforts put in by Mr Menon need all kinds of encouragement”.
Indian Mammals- A Field Guide is a must have for wildlifers, eco-travellers and nature lovers, and those who just love reading anything and everything will be awestruck by the facts, data and rich pictures of some of the most exotic mammals in India. Pages from his field diary, which have been included in the field guide, will leave a lasting impression on the reader.


A N Shah after launching the book. “I wish Vivek Menon all the success that he deserves with this book.”

Photo: WTI

About the book the author Vivek Menon remarked, “The book has been culmination for many years of hard work and I am pleased at the result. My thanks to International Fund for Animal Welfare for its support and also publishing house Hachette for this impressive product.” He further added, “Wildlife Trust of India has been an intrinsic part of conservation work in Jammu and Kashmir for many years and I am glad that University of Kashmir is hosting the launch of this book.”
Covering the rich diversity of more than 400 mammal species in India, from tigers, elephants, rhinos and whales to primates, rodents and bats, Indian Mammals is a comprehensive and field-ready illustrated guide to the mammals of India.
The Chief Wildlife Warden of Jammu and Kashmir, A K Singh present at the launch said, “It is special privilege for me to witness the launch of Indian Mammals – A Field Guide. This will be a very handy and useful book for conservationists all over including the forest officials.”