Bokakhat, Assam: The morning dew had rendered the ground at Borsapori tea estate with slippery earth and treacherous trenches. On that fateful day, an elephant calf was found trapped in one of the trenches of the tea estate.
According to Anjan Talukdar, wildlife veterinarian at the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) Kaziranga, the divisional forest office at Bokakhat had informed CWRC about the trapped elephant. The deep trenches that served as irrigation canals and as estate boundaries are now posing a biggest threat to unsuspecting visitors and particularly the elephants.
Consequently, a team of forest officials and staff at CWRC had rushed to the spot for rescue.  The two-year-old elephant calf was found in a state of trauma.
On finding the trapped elephant in the trench, the villagers informed the forest officials, sensing danger that the natal herd would reappear on the scene to take back the desolate calf. Such situations in the past have caused panic among the villagers that often led to mayhem due to the presence of wild elephants.Talukdar said that the rescue situation was similar to that of an adult female in Numaligarh Tea Estate in the year 2004, when the elephant had died due to suffocation. In this case, the animal was much younger and had to be lifted out soon to avoid suffocation. He said that the trench was 15 feet deep and two feet wide. It took them more than two hours to bring the animal back to the surface.The rescued calf exhaled noisily with relief and to the wonder of the cheering crowd. The crowd that had gathered in thousands was thrilled by the several momentous hours of work that went in rescuing the calf. The calf was finally pressed towards a herd on the hilltop that they believed was the natal herd with the hope of reuniting the calf. The calf slowly disappeared into the forest and had not returned since. This led to the conclusion that the calf indeed found its herd.Talukdar said that the rescue area is being monitored closely for the return of the calf to the scene. He said that the calves in the abandoned state would generally shout when they do not find their mother and linger around the spot where they were abandoned.The Divisional Forest Officer, Eastern Assam Wildlife Division, supervised the rescue operation along with the staff of CWRC and the forest staff of KazirangaNational Park. Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) initiated the mobile wild rescue operations in the region since 2001, in collaboration with the Assam Forest Department and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
Pix credit: Anjan Talukdar / WTI 












			
						
							
					 
		
	

Share Post:












Previous NewsNext News












	
	Recent Publications			




































		Recent Articles			



The gallant guardians of the wild
Kerala Forest & Wildlife Department takes official charge of ‘HAWK’ to Combat Wildlife Crime
Markhor and Hangul Watchers undergo training and capacity building in Kashmir
45-day-old Asian palm civet undergoes care and treatment at CWRC
WTI provides equipment support to base camp watchers in Sathupally Forest Division, Telangana
WTI participates in the 1st-ever Indian Wildlife Ecology Conference 2024, Bangalore




			





		
	

		
	
				
										
					



DOWNLOAD BROCHURE
				
										
					Site MapOur Projects
Milestones
Why Us
Publications
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
Refund and Cancellation
				
										
					Recent Works				
										
					
CONTACT INFO
Address: F-13, Sector 8

National Capital Region (NCR)

Noida 201301

India

Contact Details: 
+91-120-4143900 (30 lines)
+91-120-4143933 (fax)

Email: info@wti.org.in				
									
		
				
				
			
				
					   
				
				
					WILDLIFE TRUST OF INDIA © 2021 | ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. | DESIGNED & DEVELOPED BY BAREFOOT				
				
			
		
			
		
	

	
		
			
				You are donating to :
				Greennature Foundation
			
			
			
				How much would you like to donate?
				$10
				$20
				$30
				
				
				
								
							
			
						
				Would you like to make regular donations?
				I would like to make 
				
				donation(s)
				
				
					How many times would you like this to recur? (including this payment) *
					
				
				
				
				
								
			
						
			
				
					
						Name *
						
					
				
				
					
						Last Name *
						
					
				
				
				
					
						Email *
						
					
				
				
					
						Phone
						
					
						
				
				
					
						Address
						
					
				
				
					
						Additional Note
						
					
						
				
					
			
			
								
			
			Loading...