New Delhi, 22nd February 2024: Poacher, a compelling crime drama by Emmy Award-winning filmmaker Richie Mehta and executive producer Alia Bhatt unravels the largest ivory poaching ring in Indian history. Based on real-life events of “Operation Shikar” that unfolded between 2015 and 2017, “Poacher” sheds light on the courageous efforts of Indian forest service officers, the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), police, and others who risked their lives to unearth India’s largest poaching syndicate.

The fast-paced, eight-episode series, featuring Nimisha Sajayan, Roshan Mathew, and Dibyendu Bhattacharya is a fictional dramatisation of a well-planned enforcement response against a predominant elephant poaching and ivory trade network operational in the forests of Kerala and Delhi’s concrete jungle. WTI’s ‘Wildlife Crime Control’ Division provided technical support for the creation of this, MUST-WATCH, impactful Series, premiering on 23rd February on Amazon Prime.
“While working on a project in 2015, I received a video of the largest raid on ivory poaching in the history of India from the folks at Wildlife Trust of India, which completely shook me and I called them back to understand it. And just then I knew this subject needed the right context to fairly and accurately depict the gravity of wildlife poaching. I spent the next few years researching and writing the story in a way that not only does justice to the altruistic efforts of the wildlife crime fighters but also spreads awareness through an engaging and entertaining narrative,” said creator, director, and writer Richie Mehta.
Vivek Menon, Founder & Executive Director of the Wildlife Trust of India, lauded the series, stating, “Poacher is a visually compelling series highlighting some of the horrific consequences of wildlife crime, which plays a huge role in driving species to extinction.”
Integral to the success of Operation Shikar was collaboration between WTI and the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), providing technical and resource support at every stage of the case. The investigation led WTI and IFAW to initiate HAWK, a centralised intelligence management system in Kerala. Today, HAWK is fully operational, providing real-time information to officials about various wildlife crime-related incidents. As a result, no targeted poaching for ivory has been reported since 2015. Despite these preventive efforts, experts continue to fend against the persistent threat of cunning leaders re-establishing networks.
“It is vital we break down silos in the world of intelligence and security forces that may impede the swift sharing of information, ultimately deconstructing criminal networks and stopping crime before it occurs,” added IFAW President and CEO, Azzedine Downes. “The point is to protect elephants—not to protect the ivory after it’s already too late and the elephants have died.”

“Poacher” promises to be a must-watch series, offering viewers a gripping narrative that merges suspense, action, and a profound message on conservation. With its compelling storyline and powerhouse performances, “Poacher” is set to make a significant impact on audiences worldwide. Know more about WTI’s association with POACHER: https://poacher.wti.org.in/