Wildlife Trust of India launched the ‘Save the Whale Shark Campaign’ along the coast of Karnataka, Kerala and Lakshadweep in Mangalore on 30th August, celebrating International Whale Shark Day. The event was hosted at Milagres Hall Complex, Mangalore, with an audience of 250 people including students, fishermen community members, forest department representatives and bureaucrats. The chief guest of the event was Mr. Angara Sullia, the Hon. State Minister for Fisheries, Ports and Inland Development. Other dignitaries on the dais included Mr. Vivek Menon (Founder, Trustee and Executive Director, WTI), Mr Clifford Lobo (ACF, Mangalore Division), Mr Subbaiyya Naik (DCF, Mangalore Forest Division), Dr. H N Anjaneyappa (Dean, College of Fisheries, Mangalore) and  Mr. Ananda Banerjee (Director and Chief of Campaigns & Communications, WTI).
Minister of fisheries Mr. Angara Sullia addressing the audience, Photo by Madhumay Mallik
Vivek Menon, Founder Trustee and Executive Director of WTI, recapped the legend of Matsydevata, the god who would release the fish every time it would grow out of its vessel. It is the one humane thing to release a fish, caught by accident. Hon. Minister Mr Angara Sullia addressed the crowd acknowledging the need for sensitisation drive. The minister appreciated WTI-ORACLE for their initiative, and stated the Fisheries department’s support towards the project. Mr Chetan Bengre, Trawl Boat Fisherman Association President, Mangalore, addressed the crowd sharing the traditional knowledge of sustainable fishing. Since there is no economic benefit from whale sharks, he supported the cause and urged all fishers to cut the net and save the whale shark. Mr. Clifford Lobo took to the stage and stated Forest Department’s support for the campaign. He talked about the importance of sensitization can help the conservation of the fish. He added that in the last decade fishers have not voluntarily hunted or caught Whale Sharks but this initiative could help keep the trend. The forest department will lay emphasis on the marine debris removal to keep the ocean cleaner. All panelists were felicitated with a painting of whale shark by Vivek Menon.
Dignitaries in front of  our inflatable mascot, Meenu
Dr. H N. Anjanayappa further educated the crowd about the ecological value and the keystone status of the whale shark. Mr Balamurugan, Trawl Boat fisherman who had released a whale shark by cutting the net in 2022 was acknowledged for his contribution towards the conservation of the species with a shield of appreciation. A campaign kit that is a jute bag comprising of notepad, sticker, badge, cap and bookmark was distributed to dignitaries and members of the audience.
A skit was performed by the Applied Biotechnology students of the College of Fisheries. It was a short and simple performance portraying the impact of pollution on Marine Life and loved by all.
Students of Mangalore University_Photo by Madhumay Mallik
Whale sharks are the gentle giant of the seas that travel hundreds of kilometres to congregate around the western coast of India. The WTI- Oracle venture aims to give the species a safer sanctuary in our waters. The launch witnessed a mass support and promised a bright conservation journey. Please join the campaign to be a part of the conservation effort.