Kokrajhar (Bodoland, Assam): Continuing to strengthen conservation of Greater Manas landscape, aid was provided to various stakeholders under the Greater Manas Conservation Fund (GMCF) at an event held today in Kokrajhar.


Instituted by the Assam Forest Department, Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) and the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI), GMCF supports diverse conservation initiatives in the UNESCO World Heritage and neighboring areas that constitute the 1500 sq km landscape approximately.
“Conserving Greater Manas is not just about the wildlife but also about the people of Bodoland. Welfare of both is interconnected. GMCF therefore takes a holistic view and supports activities that promote the well-being of people as well as animals” said Kampa Borgoyary, Deputy Chief, BTC, and a member of the GMCF panel, who chaired the event.
“Kuklung Range, Amteka Range and Batabari Range are comparatively less protected than the core areas of Manas. We have appealed Government of Assam and Government of India to include these important Ranges to Greater Manas”, he added.
The support provided today included facilities to improve protection of the landscape by the Forest Department and Community-based Organisations (CBOs), and promote green livelihood in fringe villages.
The Forest Department was given a set of solar lighting and charging systems to help in patrolling.
“The charging system will help tele-communication and coordination between our men in the various anti-poaching camps,” said Dr. C Ramesh  DFO, Haltugaon, who had proposed this support.
Support to CBOs included field equipment – bicycles, search lights, binoculars, tents, cameras, shoes among others for Raigajli Ecotourism and Social Welfare Society. CBOs New Horizon and the Bodoland Forest Protection Force were supported to monitor green livelihoods provided to Rangijora, Sisubari, Dwiswmjora and Kumursali villages in Chirang and Nabin Nagar and Takampur I villages in Kokrajhar, respectively.
“Our effort to bring back Manas has been a long-drawn affair that began nearly a decade ago. The efforts continue and will be continued as long as it is required,” said Vivek Menon, Regional Director – IFAW and Executive Director, WTI. “It has been a very rewarding experience with the reinstatement of Manas as the World Heritage, revival of the wild faunal species here, and overall improvement of this unique landscape, and particularly encouraging for us now with the pro-active participation of our friends (the CBOs and locals).”
The event also saw provision of relief to human-elephant conflict victims in the area.