Guwahati (Assam): Senior officials of the Assam Forest Department, Northeast Frontier Railway and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), met yesterday at the Assam State Zoo to formulate strategies to mitigate elephant deaths in railway accidents in the northeastern Indian state of Assam.
The meeting was organised by WTI to present the findings and recommendations of its study funded by Elephant Family, which was initiated in mid-2008. Based on the recommendations, the authorities decided upon several action plans including joint patrolling in crucial sections, installation of signage, and training and awareness generation for train drivers, among others. Strategies on improving visibility in blind turns and problems created by steep embankments along the track were also discussed.
The detailed study was similar to the one conducted by WTI and its partner, International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) in Rajaji National Park, Uttarakhand in 2001, and was a follow-up to the preliminary rapid survey done by WTI-IFAW in Assam in 2006. The study in Rajaji, and subsequent combined effort of the Uttarakhand Forest Department, Northern Railway and WTI in implementing the mitigation measures recommended by it, has ensured zero elephant deaths due to train accident since 2002. About 20 elephant deaths in train accidents were recorded between 1987 and May 2002.
With about 47 deaths reported since 1985, Assam has the highest rate of elephant mortality due to train accidents, among Indian states. The latest case occurred early this week when an adult male elephant was killed in the stretch between Krishnai and Dudhnai railway stations, in Goalpara Division. Likewise, on October 16, a pregnant elephant had succumbed to its injuries caused by an accident involving a goods train in Deepor Beel.
“The joint patrolling along the railway track in Deepor Beel was started immediately after the latter incident. Meanwhile, we continued our study along the railway network in Assam,” said Anil Kumar Singh, Coordinator, WTI. “Through our study, we identified 10 areas in eight divisions in Assam that requires immediate attention.”
MC Malakar, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) who chaired the meeting, stressed on the need for a joint approach.
Baldev Singh, Deputy Chief Engineer, Northeast Frontier Railway, also expressed eagerness to work together with the Forest Department and WTI to avert such incidents.
Rahul Kaul, Director, WTI, said, “To replicate the success that we achieved in Rajaji NP, cooperation of Forest Department, Railways and WTI will be absolutely critical. It is heartening that there is unanimity on this among the three parties.”
A state level joint committee has been constituted to monitor the implementation of mitigation measures. Division-level committees will also be formed by the Forest Department and the Railways to implement the mitigation measures.



Related stories:
Authorities speed up project to mitigate elephant deaths due to train hits in Assam
WTI-IFAW project ensures zero elephant death in Rajaji railway track