On the occasion of 68th Wildlife Week, Wildlife Trust of India launched “Save the Whale Shark” campaign along the coast of Kerala. The campaign was launched in Thiruvananthapuram on October 7, 2022, in the Apollo Dimora Hall. The campaign is launched with the aim to conserve Whale Sharks in Kerala in collaboration with the Kerala Forest Department and supported by Oracle India Pvt. Ltd.
Whale sharks are the filter feeders who migrate across the tropical and warm temperate seas, and are regular visitors along the Indian coastline. Unregulated fishing practices, collisions with the boats, and extensive coastal pollution are major threats to whale sharks. The global status of the Whale Shark population is “Endangered” and conservation measures are needed to reduce the pressure on the species.
Sajan John, Co-PI, Marine Projects addressing the gathering; Photo: Saleem ifocus
To address these threats, WTI launched the campaign in Kerala. The campaign is launched in the southern district of Thiruvananthapuram, the state capital with a footfall of around 150 people and 18 media representatives. The campaign was launched by Shri. Ganga Singh IFS, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests & Chief Wildlife Warden, Kerala Forest Department. The chief guest at the event spoke about the need for the conservation of our natural resources, especially the whale shark. “These magnificent creatures play an important part in our ecosystem, and we should do everything we can to protect them. I urged everyone to support the cause and actively participate in the Whale shark conservation,” he said. Shri Ganga Singh also inaugurated the campaign mascot in Kerala.
From Left to Right – MR. SAJAN JHON (WTI), DR. BIJU KUMAR (PROFESSOR- UNIVERSITY OF KERALA), SHRI. GANGA SINGH IFS (PCCF – CWLW), FISHERMEN 1, FISHERMEN 2, DR. NVK ASHRAF (WTI), DR. AKHILESH KV (SCIENTIST CMFRI), MR. AJITH SHANKHUMUGAM (FISHERMEN REPRESENTATIVE); Photo by: Saleem ifocus
Six fishermen from Malappuram, Trivandrum and Calicut along with their group who had rescued and released the whale sharks were felicitated during the event. These fishers cut their fishing net to release Whale Sharks during the year 2018- 2020.
Dr. N V K Ashraf, Senior Advisor & Chief Veterinary Officer, WTI; Dr. Akhilesh KV, biologist and member of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN); Dr. Biju Kumar, aquatic biologist and Mr. Ajith Shankhumugam, fishers’ representative spoke during the event.
“The campaign which started in the year 2004 along the coast of Gujarat was to put an end to the hunting. Now decades later that pressure has reduced but there are still threats to these gentle giants. These docile creatures are filter feeders and pose no threat to humans. However, they often faced the threat of accidental entanglement and are dragged to the shore by fishers. I urge the fishers to release the Whale Sharks and save the species from extinction.” Dr. NVK Ashraf said. “Kerala is of immense importance since the congregation of the Whale Shark is along the Kerala- Minicoy coast (southernmost island of Lakshadweep). In such efforts, all of us have a role to play, let us pledge to make a safer place for the Whale Shark,” he added.
Dr. Akhilesh KV in his speech mentioned the significance of Whale Sharks. He said that their importance lies in the ecosystem as a pollution indicator. Gujarat Government’s take on providing support to the fishers has been exemplary, to incentivize the community conservation effort the Kerala government also should consider a similar model.
Mr. Ajith Shankhumugam, addressed the crowd and spoke about the importance of traditional knowledge. He spoke about the misconception with the presence of Whale and Shark in the name develops a lot of confusion and leads to hysteria. Now, most of the fishers are aware of the Wildlife Protection Act, of 1972 but they are unaware of the monetary loss as a fine. He stated the support of the fishers for the cause.
Media Coverage on WTI’s Life Size Whale Shark Inflatable; Photo by WTI
WTI launched the “Whale shark Rescue Application,” an exclusive application developed for fishermen for the documentation of the safe rescue and release of whale sharks during their fishing activities.
After the formal launch, the life-size inflatable Whale Shark was moved to the Shankhumugam beach in Trivandrum to meet the community. This initiative saw a huge appreciation from the local community irrespective of age. The team interacted with the crowd dissipating information regarding the species, threats, and ways to help in the conservation effort. Approximately 1500 individuals experience the evening in presence of the life-size fish.