Dachigam National Park : Unknown to the media, an initiative taken by Wildlife Trust of India at the grass-roots level in Dachigam National Park has infused fresh hope for protection of the habitat of the hangul in the north Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir.
A rapid action project taken up by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in Upper Dachigam National Park (NP) constitutes engaging watchers for putting a check on entry of livestock into Dachigam NP to ensure reduction of grazing pressure.
WTI Field Officer Riyaz Ahmed Shah has just returned from a recent field visit to the site. “The upper reaches of Dachigam NP are exposed to heavy grazing. The huge grazing pressure was difficult to control with the field staff of 45 people (including temporary workers) posted in Dachigam,” reported Riyaz. The rapid action project involved engaging 10 more watchers specifically to combat the grazing problem and control the grazing pressure in the NP.
Dachigam NP located about 21 kms north-east of Srinagar, the capital of Jammu and Kashmir, covers an area of 141 sq. km and ranges in altitude between 1642m to 4289m, is. The two sectors of Dachigam, lower and upper Dachigam incorporate a variety of vegetation like riverine forest, grassland, broad leaved woodland, coniferous forest, bare rock faces and alpine pastures. Dachigam houses the only known truly viable population of Hangul (Kashmir Stag) Cervus elaphus hanglu, the world’s most endangered red deer (the only red deer species found in India ) along with some 15 other known species of mammals. These include leopard, black bear, brown bear, Himalayan musk deer, serow and long tailed marmot.
The project was taken up at the behest of the Wildlife Warden of South Kashmir and supported in the form of a rapid action project by WTI. The National Park is facing degeneration of the indigenous ecosystem, mainly due to overgrazing by livestock belonging to the Gujjars and Bakarwals who enter the NP during summer. Gujjars and Bakarwals constitute a significant proportion of the population of the state. In general, they have nomadic character and largely depend on flocks and cattle keeping for their livelihood. Bakarwals are Gujjars who rear sheep and goats.
After a severe winter, wild fauna of Dachigam NP expand their range during the summer months, spending the period from June to mid September at an altitude of 3000m. Most of the high areas of Upper Dachigam including the areas of Dagwan, Nagaberan and Marsar are today occupied by vast herds of livestock during summer and wildlife seems to have disappeared from the summer range.
The overgrazing results in the degradation of the habitat, destruction of germinating trees, shrubs and grasses and their saplings. Overgrazing reduces the vegetation quality and quantity. In Upper Dachigam National Park the fresh water, which flows down from Marsar Lake through Dachigam Nallah, is an important source of water for people of Srinagar city and faces a serious threat from these graziers. Thousands of live stock feed on lush green high pastures of Upper Dachigam bordering the stream course downwards from Marsar. Due to overgrazing, erosion becomes apparent and heavy silt load down the stream poses a problem not only to the water supply but to the Dal Lake .
Riyaz Ahmad explains the idea behind the watchers scheme, “the ten watchers who are at present engaged under the RAP Project are based at three locations to keep a check on the graziers. One group is based at Hajin. It is one of the base camps and is easily accessible to the graziers because it is the entry point. This is the route taken by the graziers to reach Upper Dachigam . However this year the watchers and wildlife guards were more successful than previous years to stop graziers to take this route. The Wildlife Department has helped in setting up the tents in which the watchers and wildlife guards are staying.”
“The other group is situated at Hakwan, which is also located in Hajin CR. This area is also used by the graziers as a route to reach Upper Dachigam . The watchers are staying in a Gujjar Kotha (shed) with some wildlife guards. Already they have had a few clashes with the Bakerwals. In one instance a group of six Bakerwals with thirty horses had come to this area but the watchers and the wildlife guards managed to stop them from going to upper Dachigam. On another occasion, ten Bakerwals with almost 250 goats were heading towards the area. However the watchers and the wildlife guards managed to stop them.”
The third group of watchers is located in Nagebaren, in Upper Dachigam . A considerable segment of the Bakerwal and Baniyari population occupies the fringe areas of this park and has previously used the Aru Wildlife Sanctuary to enter this place. A constant vigil is kept here as these people can sometimes poach on wildlife.
The watchers are provided with data sheets to record events at Upper Dachigam . The watchers would hopefully be able to put a check on the grazing pressure by local and migratory livestock, thus preserving the habitat for wild animals and preventing spread of any diseases from domestic to wild animals.