New Delhi: In one of the quickest convictions two rhino horn traders were today sentenced to four years imprisonment and a fine of rupees 10,000 each in the eastern Indian state of West Bengal.
The accused Ganesh Oraon and Nando Kumar Ghosh were arrested in October last year on the Palashbari – Sonarpur road in Jalpaiguri district in North Bengal with a rhino horn, 2 Swamp deer skins and many pieces of elephant tusk.
“A tip-off was given to us by an informer on the whereabouts of the accused. We soon struck a deal by posing as a decoy customer, and a meeting was arranged at Salkumar for the wildlife articles.” Jayanta Mandal, Probationary Range Officer of the Jaldapara East, who led the undercover team said.
“We caught them red handed with the articles as soon as they reached the designated spot on a motor bike, which was also seized from them.” he said.
The two accused were booked under Sections 49 B and 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 and were convicted and sentenced today by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate of Alipurduar.
The final arguments on behalf of the prosecution were led by Samir Majumdar, the Addl. Public Prosecutor who was assisted by WTI lawyer Saurabh Sharma.
Search for the two other accomplices, Amal Balo and Ganesh Barman, is on.
“The two convicts had applied for bail in the trial court after their arrests, which were repeatedly rejected. Last month, they moved to the Calcutta High Court which also rejected their bail.” U. K. Nag, Addl. Divisional Forest Officer said.
In November last year, another noted wildlife trader Ratiram Sharma was convicted by the same court in record time –four months – setting an example even for the fast track courts of the country.
“The present case has also been concluded in a record time of less than five months. This was one of the rare cases, since convictions on rhino horn trade are difficult and very few get caught.” Ashok Kumar, Vice Chairman of Wildlife Trust of India said.
In the last 12 months, 8 major wildlife seizures took place in North Bengal – near the Indo-Bhutan border. With this judgment, the accused in two of these cases stand convicted.
Saurabh Sharma, Advocate of WTI who made several trips to Cooch Behar and assisted the forest department in prosecuting these cases against the accused said, “The West Bengal Forest Department has done a commendable job in apprehending all the accused with their persistent efforts, which would help to save our valuable wildlife and prove as a deterrent to offenders.”
“All these recent successful seizures were the result of efforts by alert officers under the guidance of P. T. Bhutia, Conservator of Forest and DFO, M. C. Biswas.” Sharma said.