The Emergency Relief Network (ERN) stands on the notion that rescue efforts are most successful when preparedness is a priority. To achieve this, ERN periodically organizes training and workshops on capacity building for the members and organizations and makes them capable enough to address and act accordingly in an emergency situation.
Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) along with The International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) conducted a two-day regional workshop in Godibadi, Bhubaneshwar for the Eastern coastal region comprising of three coastal states of West Bengal, Odisha, and Andhra Pradesh on June 28 and 29, 2022.
A total of 19 participants from different NGOs attended the workshop. The primary aim of the two-day workshop was to build the capacity of the ERN member’s emergency response while addressing an emergency in the eastern coastal region, which are vulnerable and has been affected by eight cyclones during the last five year resulting in huge havoc.
These regions of India have varied terrain including rocky and elevated landscapes, the workshop thus particularly focused on the practical exercises of rope rescue techniques and water rescue techniques which can be practiced during rescue operations on the requirement.

ERN regional workshop Odisha 2022
Day 1
The workshop started with an introduction to WTI and ERN. This was followed by a short introductory discussion by the guest of honor Dr. Indramani Nath on primary techniques of handling distressed animals during and after rescue. The theory session was concluded by a PowerPoint presentation by Rudra Mahapatra which briefed on the scopes of rope rescue techniques and water rescue, suitable situations during which these techniques can be a savior for rescue purposes.

Rudra Mahapatra’s presentation: Photo by Deeya Bhattacharjee
This was followed by the practical session where expert trainers demonstrated different equipment used during rope rescue procedures and also the different types of knots and hitches for tying and securing during an emergency rescue operation. By following all the safety protocols, the participants also practiced and performed the demonstrated techniques under the expert’s guidance.

Demonstration of ‘How to use a rope effectively while climbing down.’ : Photo by Deeya 
Day 2
The demonstration of securing an anchor on a base and water rescue techniques on the bank of the Mahanadi river, Odisha was carried out on the second day of the workshop. During the first half of the practical session, participants were provided with hands-on training on anchoring techniques, which could come in hand for them while crossing a gorge or a water body using equipment such as a single pulley/double pulley. Water rescue techniques were introduced to the participants by the experts and the participants were also involved in the practice on a kayak under the guidance.
With the fruitful and adventurous two days in Bhubaneshwar, all the 19 participants were happy and pumped up for resuming their roles back in their respective project sites. Bhaskar Choudhury Deputy Director and Head of Wild Rescue and Rehab, WTI said that the workshop aims to improve the capacity of grass-root NGOs and individuals who has a passion to work toward the welfare of animals. “Through the regional workshops, we strive to make the participants capable of executing their valuable work during a natural and manmade disaster.” He added.
Over the years the ERN in partnership with the local forest departments has responded and provided immediate relief to distressed animals during several natural, as well as man-made, disasters. Owing to India’s unique geo-climatic conditions, we have to be well-prepared and equipped with the right training and knowledge to deal with natural disasters all year round. Technical rescue practices are hence important as it plays a key role in the safety of the rescuer and the animal during the rescue operation.