Kochi, 26th November 2023: In an initiative to spread awareness of the threats faced by Whale sharks, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in collaboration with Cochin Collective organised a 10K and 5K marathon as part of the 2nd edition of the Fort Kochi Heritage Run at Parade Ground.
The festivities commenced with a Zumba session, providing participants with an opportunity to limber up for the forthcoming run. The race was flagged off at 6:30 AM by N. Ravi, DIG and Commander of the Coast Guard in Kerala and Mahe, alongside Mrs. Poonghuzhalli IPS, AIG Coastal Police, Kochi. The event continued until 10 AM, encompassing the spirit of community and conservation.
Over 1300 participants joined the run to show their support for the world’s largest fish
 
A remarkable turnout of 1300 participants, hailing from diverse corners of the nation and beyond, rallied together in a united stride to safeguard the world’s largest fish, with the youngest participant being Darsh, a 2.5-year-old toddler. Mr. David Roe, an esteemed Australian marine conservationist and PADI-certified diver, lent his support by actively participating in the marathon.
The ‘Run for Whale Shark’ marathon had participants from all age groups
 
Adding an artistic flair to the proceedings, a Customs Officer and avid caricaturist, sketched cartoon images of the runners, adding a delightful and personalised touch to the event.
To amplify the visual impact and awareness, a striking mural crafted by local artist Sanjay (Dhruva Arts) adorned the iconic Vasco House. This mural not only became a focal point for tourists but also captivated the interest of the locals visiting the 16th-century architectural gem which was prominently featured in Mammootty’s blockbuster film, “Big B.” The mural vividly depicted the campaign’s crucial message, leaving an indelible mark on all who encountered it.
A beautiful mural depicting the threats to Whale sharks helped spread our campaign message
Since 2018, the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has been actively engaged in its ‘Save the Whale Shark’ campaign along the coastlines of Kerala, Karnataka, and Lakshadweep. Listed as ‘endangered’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the Whale shark is threatened by accidental entanglement in fishing nets, ocean pollution, and is often hunted for meat, fins and oil etc.
The run concluded with a prize distribution ceremony, during which the Chief guest, Mr. KJ Maxi, MLA, Kochi expressed his admiration for the initiative taken by WTI and Cochin Collective in organising the marathon, where participants ran with the aim of saving the world’s largest fish. Mr. Maxi expressed the hope for more such events in the future.
Mr. N.Ravi, DIG, Commander of Coast Guard, Kerala and Mahe lauded our campaign and mentioned receiving past reports on crimes related to protected species and highlighted the potential of this marathon, focused on saving whale sharks, to inspire various groups, including the fisher community, students, and the public.
Sajan John, Marine Specialist at Wildlife Trust of India emphasised the crucial role played by the magnificent whale sharks in the ecosystem and urged collective efforts for their protection.
WTI is grateful to the Kerala Forest Department and VST Industries Ltd for supporting our ‘Save the Whale shark’ campaign.