New Delhi: An Indian veterinarian is joining an elite international team going to Iraq to rebuild the devastated Baghdad zoo.
The zoo, which was known to be a favourite of Saddam Hussein, was vandalized during the war with traumatised animals left without food or water.
Dr N.V.K. Ashraf, National Programme Coordinator of the Wild Rescue programme of the Wildlife Trust of India, will be a part of an international team being put together by the US based International Fund for Animal Welfare to save the animals and help restore the infrastructure at the Zoo. The six-member team of logistics experts and zoo management specialists, will help put in place a medium to long term plan to ensure the welfare of the remaining zoo animals. The team has members from South Africa, UK, China and USA among others.
“Animal welfare is an integral part of Islam, which prohibits cruelty against animals and I am delighted to be a part of this historic effort,” Dr Ashraf, who leaves for Baghdad on Tuesday, said.
He will specifically address the issue of providing behavioral enrichment options to the animals and also renovating the enclosures to suit the animals’ behavioral requirements. If necessary, the entire zoo may be renovated and this will be a long term commitment. “Since this will be my first work experience in a semi-arid environment, it will be both challenging and interesting to lay out a master plan for the Baghdad Zoo”, Dr. Ashraf said.
The International Fund for Animals Welfare(IFAW), which is Wildlife Trust of India’s partner, works to improve the welfare of wild and domestic animals throughout the world by reducing commercial exploitation of animals, protecting wildlife habitats, and assisting animals in distress. IFAW and the American Zoo & Aquarium Association (AZA) are collaborating to put together a long-term plan for the zoo and are also rehabilitating the animals of the Kabul Zoo in Afghanistan.
Adept at planning and designing zoological parks, Dr. Ashraf has been managing wildlife rescue operations and establishing/supporting centers of excellence in wildlife rehabilitation across the country. He is an Executive Committee Member of the World Association of Wildlife Veterinarians and a Member of the Captive Breeding Specialist Group and Veterinary Specialists Group, of the International Union of Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the Species Survival Commission (SSC). He will be working at the Baghdad Zoo for a month or more, if need be.
“So far the rescue effort at Baghdad Zoo has been almost entirely led by South Africans,” said IFAW’s Director of Emergency Relief, Sarah Scarth, who is based in Cape Town. “The first person there to help was Lawrence Anthony of Thula Thula Game Reserve in KwaZulu-Natal who has been there since April 23. He received permission from the US military to close a smaller zoo where animals were living in dreadful conditions and to move them to the main Baghdad Zoo where they are now being cared for.
“Lawrence and his team have done an amazing job under extremely difficult circumstances and have organized daily supplies of food and water for both the animals and the zoo keepers. IFAW offered to help and Lawrence requested we send in a team of logistics, veterinary and zoo management specialists to help determine what changes and improvements need to be made to give these animals the best quality of life and ensure that supplies of food and medication are secured into the future,” said Scarth.
Animals being cared for at the Baghdad Zoo include 19 lion, tigers, brown bears, wolves, foxes, jackals, camels, ostrich, badgers, and some primates. Following the recent strife in Iraq the animals were left severely traumatized and without food and water. Looters stole most of the zoo equipment and zookeepers were unable to provide any support for
the creatures in their care.
“Baghdad’s infrastructure has completely broken down so our team will be taking in everything we need – from sleeping bags to MRE’s (meals ready to eat) and even lavatory paper,” a team member said. Freight has been sponsored by the airline Emirates, who are supporting the IFAW ER team on this operation.
“Once in Baghdad we will do an initial assessment and, based on that, we will extend our initial team to include more help if necessary. My job will be to provide logistical support in terms of sourcing and establishing a steady food supply for the zoo animals, looking after the needs and safety of our team and supporting the zoo staff in getting a
practical system in place to ensure the zoo will run smoothly during the months of transition ahead,” Scarth said.