Investigation team examining the artefacts inside kingpin Umesh’Aggrawal’s house


Delhi, 2 October, 2015: In a carefully planned operation, a kingpin of the ivory trade was apprehended by an enforcement team comprising the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) and Kerala forest officials during an early morning operation at Delhi today. The suspect whose involvement in the ivory trade as the main buyer of ivory and maker of various artifacts came to light from the detailed analysis of call records of middlemen and poachers from Kerala, where wild elephants were poached. The suspect was taken to Kerala where several cases are registered against him.


The entire operation which was code named as ‘Operation Shikar’ was initiated soon after the discovery of organized elephant poaching in Kerala in the month of June. The investigation team used human and digital intelligence to track the movement of suspects and build the linkages. Actionable intelligence was handed over to the strike teams who conducted the covert operation through which the suspects were nabbed. The State Forest Department ensured that the investigation did not limit to the state, and that the kingpin was arrested to have a logical end to the case.



Umesh Aggrawal being questioned at Shakarpur Police Station, New Delhi


The trader, Umesh Aggrawal a well to do businessman dealing in art and collectibles was operating his business from a three storied house in a posh locality of Delhi. A fully equipped carving unit was operational at the basement of his house where the authorities suspected the artisans turned ivory into high valued ivory articles to be exported. The suspect confessed his involvement in the illegal trade of ivory from the 90s. He used his company ‘Art of India’ which dealt in various artifacts from India to other countries and mixed ivory and ivory articles along with sandstone and resin statues to avoid detection. He also openly manufactured and displayed articles which looked and felt like ivory in various art exhibitions to attract customers for genuine ivory products. His involvement in preparation of fake ownership certificates for ivory goods are also under investigation. Currently lodged in a jail in Kerala, he will be handed over to the investigation team, after which he will be interviewed by investigation officers in detail to understand the quantum of trade and networks involved. From the initial assessment and findings it is clear that he was purchasing ivory from most of the elephant bearing areas across India including North East.
The IFAW- WTI team member who assisted the enforcement agencies during the entire operation says,” this is just the beginning of a legal battle as his highly placed lawyers are already around with his family members exploring possibilities to secure his bail. The operation team met today and we have discussed the next few days action which involve detention and possibly apprehending a couple of more suspects”.





Artefacts found in Umesh Aggrawal’s house 


The final operation was conducted over 24 hrs like a movie potboiler – replete with missed flights alternate booking of tickets, vanishing acts, altercations with the suspects’ lawyers about the arrest procedure and some high drama. To counter his lawyers who were confident of getting him bailed out locally, the team managed to fly him out of Delhi, to Kerala where all the other cases are registered against him and other suspects.
IFAW-WTI provided the much needed technical and field support to the Kerala State Forest Department from the start of the investigation. The team will also be ensuring legal support to the case through our expert lawyers to ensure pro-conservation judgments in this case.