Veraval in Gujarat came alive on September 23 as members of the Kharva fishing community came together to take part in a traditional event to mark the birth anniversary of Ramdev Maharaj, their deity. 
Traditionally, this event marks the beginning of a new fishing season as celebrations carry on through the night before the procession the next day. So ancient is this tradition that even the older members of the Kharva community do not remember its origin.
Preparations for this annual event, locally called Ramdevji Maharaj Dhwaj Ghruh, started well in advance as tableaus were decked with palm leaves and flowers. A spirit of gaiety prevailed as devotees gathered to pay obeisance or darshan to the silver statue of Ramdev Maharaj, the main attraction of the procession.
This year, however, was different. For the first time ever, members of the Kharva community insisted that Vhali, the life-sized model of the whale shark, be part of the procession from the community hall at Veraval to the Jaleshwar Temple along with the idol of Ramdev Maharaj.
Despite a dull morning that threatened to dampen the festivities, Vhali took part in the event. Vhali, the inflatable model was on display for all to see, drawing interest from young and old.
Vhali was first displayed in the town of Mithapur as part of a campaign to save the whale shark. It proved to be an instant crowd puller as both young and old flocked to it and in turn, learn more about it and the need to save it from extinction.
The campaign to spread awareness about the whale shark is an initiative by Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL) with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and its partner, the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
The campaign owes a lot of its success to popular spiritual leader, Morari Bapu who formally launched it in Gujarat as an ambassador for the whale shark. Morari Bapu likened the whale shark visiting the shores of Gujarat, to a daughter visiting her parents and said, it was indeed sad that fishermen hunted this gentle giant instead of protecting it.
Though the fishermen in this part of Gujarat were once hunters of the whale shark, the scenario has changed with locals referring to the whale shark as a daughter.
When asked why the Kharvas wanted the whale shark to be part of their religious celebration, Jitubhai Kuwhada, the head of the community said, “This fish is like a daughter to us now, Morari Bapu has made her our daughter and we would like our daughter to be a part of our celebration.”
As the long procession snaked through the narrow lanes, it was clear that the participation of Vhali in such an event reflects the positive change as well as the involvement of a community to ensure that their daughter returns their shore safe, year after year.