Coimbatore, 4th July, 2023: The 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation (ATBC) is being held at Kumaraguru College, Coimbatore between the 2nd and 6th of July 2023. The theme for this year’s meeting is “Balancing Science, Conservation and Society”. The event will see the participation of 400+ scientists/researchers across the five-day program. More than 200 symposia presentations, 190 poster presentations and 100 sessions are organized across 3 pavilions. Together with the researchers and leaders of tropical biodiversity and conservation, ATBC 2023 aims to explore and illustrate the options and opportunities for balancing science, conservation and society around the world of tropical biodiversity!
Panelists at Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation | Photograph by Dr. Kamalika Bhattacharyya
The 3rd day of the conference, started with a plenary session on “Conserving Asia’s tropical forests”. Dr. Mahesh Rangarajan, an environmental historian and one of WTI’s Trustee led the session as the keynote speaker. A parallel session on “Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve” included talks from Mr. Vivek Menon (Founder and ED, Wildlife Trust of India), Dr. Raman Sukumar (elephant expert and WTI Trustee) and Dr. Krishna Kumar (ex PCCF, Tamil Nadu). The session was moderated by Dr. K Ramesh, organising secretary of ATBC 2023.
“If you google the USP of Nilgiri, you can see the place is important for eucalyptus oil, tea and chocolates. This is the only value we have placed according to popular perception. It’s time to change the mindset. Nilgiris is a place that encompasses huge biological and cultural diversity. Looking at the overlay, it should be a place should be protected for its mixed cultural and natural heritage”, says Mr. Menon. Summing up the session, Dr. K Ramesh (Scientist Wildlife Institute of India) says, “I think one of the key points that we’re trying to put onto the Coimbatore declaration is this case of Nilgiris. Restoration needs to be seen not just about rebuilding the land. Filling the gaps between science and society is key, and we know there’s a problem and we need to constantly work towards it for that”.
59th Annual Meet of Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation
The five-day conference will see similar discussions on topics like “Bioacoustics tools and techniques for conservation and ecology”, “Working at night with mammals: what is never considered and how to improve research output”, “Corporates for Conservation” and more.
ATBC aims to brings together early career professionals and experts from around the world towards science and conservation of tropical habitats. Given that there is increasing call for nature and culture-based solutions in conservation, the theme for the 2023 has taken this shape. The event in India would expand the scope and would inspire diverse young generations and would facilitate advancing the science and management of tropical systems. The current conference-cum-workshop intends to provide a space where the most recent research findings and opportunities related to the meeting’s theme can be presented and discussed.