Delhi: August 30 has been declared as the International Whale Shark Day by the host of the Second International Whale Shark Conference, National Commission of Natural Protected Areas (CONANP), Mexico.
A day dedicated to the whale shark and its conservation already exists in India. This was a part of the much acclaimed Whale Shark Campaign in Gujarat, a joint venture of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), International Fund for Animal Welfare, Gujarat Forest Department and Tata Chemicals Limited.
The declaration by CONANP, representing more than 40 countries including India, comes as a significant step in the conservation of the species whose wide-ranging behavior necessitates international cooperation.
Vivek Menon, executive director, WTI, who attended the conference this year in Isla Holbox in Mexico, expressed satisfaction at the declaration. “It will definitely have positive outcomes for the whale shark by uniting like-minded organisations advocating its cause. In addition to increasing awareness, it will facilitate stronger lobbying for international protection of this magnificent species,” he said.
Alka Talwar, Head, Community Development, Tata Chemicals Limited, said, “Whale shark is now a concern worldwide. The declaration will help our campaign grow bigger and more people will look at it in a positive light. We hope that this will result in a concentrated effort in conserving this wonderful species.”
Whale sharks were hunted in hundreds with impunity along Indian coastal states, especially Gujarat, till 2001. In May that year, whale shark hunting was banned by the Government of India, following its listing in the Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. India also played a major role in getting the whale shark listed in the Appendix II of the CITES in 2002. However, whale shark hunting continued due to lack of awareness and high economic returns from whale shark hunting. The whale shark campaign was initiated in January 2004 to combat this issue.
With its multi-pronged approach targeting varied strata of stakeholders, the campaign successfully converted Gujarat into a role-model state for whale shark conservation. With a spiritual leader as an ambassador, the campaign transformed the fishing community in Gujarat from hunters to ‘conservationists’ of the whale shark. The state of Gujarat eventually designated the Whale Shark Day to be celebrated each year coinciding with the Kartak amas festival.
The recent declaration by the CONANP will help in whale shark conservation by increasing mass awareness on this species on an international level. It is also likely to provide a major boost in the whale shark conservation through benefits to the eco-tourism sector.
“The International Whale Shark Day will reinforce our efforts to popularise its conservation in other states in India where whale sharks are found. This will also lead to greater cooperation for its conservation and research at the regional and international level,” said Dhiresh Joshi, manager of the Whale shark campaign and coordinator, WTI.