New Delhi: The Additional Sessions Judge of Alipurduar in the eastern Indian state of West Bengal today dismissed a bail application of notorious wildlife trader Ratiram Sharma.
The Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate of Alipurduar on November 24, 2006 convicted him for five years imprisonment.
Pending his appeal, Sharma sought bail from the Session court.
After hearing the matter, the court rejected his bail application through a detailed order.
The court observed that “wanton killing and destruction of wildlife and environment pose a great threat. Wildlife preservation and preservation of ecology have moved into areas of National priority.”
“Thus considering the gravity of offence and all other facts it appears that it must be dealt with effectively. Accordingly, no leniency be shown to the appellant.”
The hearing on Sharma’s appeal will take place shortly.
Earlier, Sharma was arrested from his hideout in Jaigaon by a team of forest officials led by U. K. Nag, Addl. DFO, Cooch Behar, West Bengal.
125 pieces of tiger bone, a tiger skull, 140 pieces of rhino skin and 4 leopard skins were seized from Sharma.
Close on the heels, on August 9, 2006, his son in-law Rajender Joshi was also apprehended by forest officials. 2 pieces of elephant tusk and a Hog deer skin were recovered from him. The case is pending in the trial court.
Saurabh Sharma, Advocate of Wildlife Trust of India is assisting in the case.
Two other bails rejected
The Calcutta High Court today rejected bail applications of two other wildlife traders.
The accused, Nanda Kumar Ghosh and Ganesh Oraon were arrested by forest officials on Tursha River Bridge in Cooch Behar, on October 26, 2006.
Two swamp deer skins, pieces of elephant tusk and a rhino horn weighing about 600 gms. were seized from them.
“The accused were apprehended by officials when they were crossing the bridge on a motorcycle.” Saurabh Sharma, Advocate of Wildlife Trust of India said.
Earlier, their bail plea was rejected by the Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipurduar.
Aggrieved by this rejection they moved to the High Court, which too rejected their bail.