NOIDA, October 13, 2014: While officially Wildlife Week happens from October 2-7 every year, we at Wildlife Trust of India cannot get enough of celebrating our natural heritage! With awareness programmes ensuing throughout the country, our field staff from Kerala to Assam have been enthusiastically spreading the message about wildlife conservation in India.
Today saw workshops happening in the Regional Science Centre, Khanapara, Guwahati where several school children from Guwahati came together to express their love for wildlife. Last week workshops were also held in North-Bank, Assam, where Wildlife Trust of India runs a Mobile Veterinary Service on the importance of keystone species like the rhino, elephant, tiger and bear in the ecosystem.



Wildlife Week celebrations in Guwahati! Photo: Subhamoy Bhattacharjee/IFAW-WTI


Wildlife Week celebrations in North Bank, Assam. Photo: IFAW-WTI

WTI also took part in an ‘Eco-Fest’ held from October 2-7, 2014 at Kallarakkal Ground, Kumili, Idukki (District), Kerala near Periyar Tiger Reserve. The inaugural ceremony of wildlife week celebration was conducted at Thiruvananthpuram on October 1, 2014, by the Minister for Forest, Environment, Transport, Sports and Cinema Shri. Thiruvanchoor Radhakrishnan. The Eco-fest was inaugurated by Idukki MLA, Smt Bijimol.
The WTI stall had multiple displays dealing with a range of themes like illegal wildlife trade, elephant corridor securement and perils of snares. A quiz competition organized by WTI became a major draw and brought in participation from audiences from different walks of life.


Families gathered for the wildlife week quiz at the stall in Kumili. Photo: WTI

“There were many stalls over there and a rally was also organised by the Forest Department in which various schools, colleges and clubs participated. Such an effort by the Forest Department helps a lot in bringing the message of conservation to the public and making them aware of how they can also help the wildlife in their area. Most of the people went back with not just a sense of pride in their natural heritage but also with a heightened sense of responsibility towards it,” said Jose Louies, Regional Head of South India.