Date: 4th Feb, 2022
Rare and critically endangered Himalayan brown bears (Ursus arctos isabellinus) are found in the Drass, Suru and Zanskar region of Kargil district. These bears have been straying into human habitats due to easy access to food from dumping sites and even kill livestock. A Rapid Action Project was sanctioned to provide bear deterrent lights (known by the brand name as Foxlights) to mitigate conflict situations on a short-term basis.
The project was implemented in Holiyal and Mushkow villages of Drass (100 households each) which are the two areas most affected with the issue. 7 Foxlights were installed in Holiyal and 9 in Mushkow and their effectiveness was monitored via camera traps and feedback from locals. While the camera trapping data was not reliable in determining the usefulness of the Foxlights, feedback from local residents suggested that the devices were successful in curbing bear intrusions. 70% of residents reported a reduction in bear visits as a result of the Foxlight installation.

Bear proofing by locals – Pic Courtesy: Roots Ladakh
While the Foxlights have proved effective as a short-term solution for reducing conflicts, it must be noted that bears can become habituated to the lights over time. Furthermore, this new foraging behaviour of bears is being transferred to their cubs thereby making it a multi-generational problem. These conflict cases need careful and long-term planning to prevent a permanent change in bear behaviour.

Himalayan Brown bear with two cubs – Pic Courtesy: Roots Ladakh
Muzammil Hussain, the RAP proponent working on the project has approached the Department of Wildlife with the project results as well as some mitigation measures that can be taken up as the first step of this larger strategic plan. Based on this, the Department has sanctioned the installation of 10 streetlights in Holiyal and Mushkow. They are also employing 20 field staff to report conflict cases and monitor bear sightings. These staff are also assisting with depredation compensation and processing of the same. The compensation amount has also been increased to ensure fair settlement to the staff. Villagers have also taken steps, such as using barbed wires and cementing windows and doors of their sheds and storage spaces. While these measures have proved useful, the department needs to work with the community and develop a multi-pronged approach to mitigate further human-wildlife conflicts in the future.

Holiyal stream and local dumping ground – Pic Courtesy: Roots Ladakh
Rapid Action Projects such as this, provide urgent critical support to local individuals and organizations to nip wildlife emergencies in the bud. A series of effective outcomes through a consistent approach contribute to a larger conservation impact. If you know of a deserving individual or organization that needs support to effect conservation action on ground, get in touch with us through rap@wti.org.in