He was recognised for making a positive change to the world’s wildlife 
New Delhi, 19th November 2019: Vivek Menon, ED and CEO, Wildlife Trust of India won the Excellence Award at the ninth edition of Condé Nast Traveller Readers’ Travel Awards, held at ITC Maurya, New Delhi on 19th November. Vivek Menon was felicitated for his exceptional contribution towards wildlife conservation and his decades of work on anti-poaching, including undercover operations.

Vivek Menon has made a huge impact on wildlife, in India and across the world. Over the past 30 years, his work has saved hundreds, even thousands of animals from death. He has gone undercover and busted several poaching rings. He has trained officers in over 50 countries in wildlife crime prevention. Vivek Menon is also on several committees of the IUCN. He has founded five environment and nature conservation groups, including Wildlife Trust of India, which now runs over 40 conservation projects across the country. The WTI is turning whale shark hunters into protectors in Gujarat, relocating Hoolock gibbons in Arunachal and hand-raising orphaned rhino calves in Assam. In Delhi, he has also served as Delhi’s Honorary Wildlife Warden for over 20 years.

Speaking on his prestigious achievement, Excellence Award winner Vivek Menon said, “I want to accept this award on behalf of 65% of the world’s tigers present in India, 75% of elephants in Asia, 85% of the rhinos of the world and 100% of the Asian Lions, apart from 1300 species of birds. We work throughout the country and I am extremely proud to receive this award. We owe this conservation of India’s natural heritage to the 25,000 forest guards who are protecting our wildlife every day of their life. Let me dedicate this award to them.”
Hosted by the vivacious Bhumi Pednekar, the Condé Nast Traveller Readers’ Travel Awards saw the attendance of industry leaders, influencers, and recognized names from the travel and tourism sector including government bodies.
The awards further recognised the efforts of other distinguished individuals who worked towards bringing pride to our country. Heritage Conservation Architect Aishwarya Tipnis, for their sustainable food practices the restaurant AnnaMaya at Andaz Delhi and Actress Sobhita Dhulipala were awarded with Excellence Awards for their noteworthy work and making positive strides in their respective fields.

Like every year, the Readers’ Travel Awards, are chosen through a readers’ voting process spanning two months sans any nominations and recognises the best in the travel and hospitality industry across hotels, destinations, airlines, spas, websites, apps, cruise lines and more.
The ceremony witnessed the attendance of several eminent personalities such as political leaders, bureaucrats, diplomats, corporates and the who’s who of the travel industry.
Divia Thani, Editor, Condé Nast Traveller India said, “The Condé Nast Traveller Readers’ Travel Awards are considered the ‘Oscars of Travel’ in Indian travels and hospitality industry for good reason. Our readers are the most discerning travellers out there and they recognise the best of the best. In addition, our Excellence awards reflect the fact that travel is impacted by so many different forces—art, culture, the conservation of our nature and heritage.
This year, our 9th Anniversary issue and our RTA have a theme of sustainability, making them even more timely and relevant. The environment is a major concern for travellers and the industry and every effort matters. We are on the cusp of a major movement and are really proud to be recognizing people who are championing the cause in such an important way.”