Srivilliputhur (Tamil Nadu): Aiding efforts of the Tamil Nadu Forest Department to protect the endemic grizzled giant squirrel, the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) supported by the David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF), has equipped the Srivilliputhur Sanctuary staff with field gear including tents for use during anti-poaching patrolling operations.
The support was provided as a Rapid Action Project (RAP) proposed and implemented by the Wildlife Association of Rajapalayam (WAR) – an NGO that has been assisting the Forest Department in its conservation initiatives.
The Srivilliputhur Grizzled Giant Squirrel Sanctuary is spread over more than 470 sq km in four forest ranges of Virudunagar, Tamil Nadu. Apart from being home to the largest surviving population of grizzled giant squirrels (Ratufa macroura), it also hosts other endangered species like the lion-tailed macaque, the Nilgiri tahr, the Royal Bengal tiger and the Asian elephant.
The sanctuary, that includes high altitude grasslands, is guarded by a 39-member strong team of the Tamil Nadu Forest Department frontline staff.
“Majority of these guards belong to local tribes and don’t even have basic field gear,” says Vishnu Raja, WAR. “During such situations, there are opportunities to keep them motivated through these small gestures. They brave all kinds of weather, camped inside forest without proper shelter, carried their provisions in plastic or cloth bags, and yet, continued to protect wildlife.”
Accordingly, 10 four-man tents, sleeping mats, all-weather jackets, backpacks, torches, and caps were provided. In addition to providing these equipment through the RAP, WAR also organised a training on tiger conservation and research, and on the status and distribution of Nilgiri tahr.
“These are basic necessities, and yet, we have observed that such provisions can have a major impact on the morale of our country’s frontline staff. This will not only help them in their duties but will also show them that their work is well appreciated, not just nationally but internationally… as is indicated in the support provided by the DSWF,” said Radhika Bhagat, Assistant Manager, WTI, adding that DSWF has been a constant support for wildlife conservation in India. “The DSWF has helped us implement a number of such RAPs to address various wildlife emergencies through support for anti-poaching activities, human-wildlife conflict mitigation, rescue and rehabilitation, awareness generation among others.”
Related story:
Threats spur project to protect the grizzled giant squirrel