May 15, 2024: The first-ever World Species Congress, hosted by Reverse the Red was a 24-hour event, launched to foster an exchange of ideas to accelerate species recovery and enhance success through cross-sector learning and insights from non-traditional conservation practices. The Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) actively participated in this inaugural global event, which united conservationists from around the world who are committed to taking concrete steps to safeguard endangered species.
Keys Speakers representing WTI on this global platform
Key speakers representing WTI included Mr. Vivek Menon, IUCN Councillor, Founder and Executive Director of WTI, who spoke at the IUCN Council Meeting, along with a message from WTI’s Ambassador Ms. Dia Mirza Rekhi, an Actor, Producer, UN Environment Goodwill Ambassador, and SDG Advocate. Speakers from WTI covered topics such as “Creative & Multi Tactic Strategies to Recover Whale Shark” by Mr. BC Choudhary, Advisor, Marine Realm, and “Strategies for Collaboration to Recover Markhor” by Dr. Rahul Kaul, Director, Centre for Species Survival. Additionally, WTI hosted 5 satellite events focused on Amphibians, Gharials, White-winged Duck, Wild Buffalo, and Markhor in their respective field sites.
To commemorate the occasion, our team based in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir hosted a nature walk and painting competition in the Hirpora Wildlife Sanctuary. The aim was to foster awareness and encourage participants to actively engage in conservation efforts for the Markhor and other wildlife species. Over 90 local school children, community members, representatives from the Department of Wildlife Protection, J&K, district administration, army officials, and local police enthusiastically participated in the event.
Nature walk and art competition hosted in Hirpora WLS | Photo by Tanushree Shrivastava
Meanwhile, down south, our Amphibian Recovery Project team organised an awareness program in collaboration with the Kerala Forests and Wildlife Department at Eravikulam National Park in Munnar.  Titled “Exploring the Croaks: An Introduction to Amphibians of Munnar”, the program involved over 200 local stakeholders in meaningful discussions about Munnar’s endemic and endangered frogs, emphasising their conservation significance. The event also sought to inspire a sense of stewardship among protected area staff and visitors, encouraging them to actively contribute to conserving these lesser-known species. 
Awareness program on amphibians of Munnar hosted in Eravikulam National Park| Photo by Abhijth
In Bihar, the Gandak Gharial Recovery Project team hosted a presentation at the Divisional Forest Office, Motihari Forest Division located in the East Champaran district. The presentation focused on the exploration of gharial breeding and nesting habitats in the Gandak River. Participants actively engaged in discussions regarding the project’s objectives and shared significant stories related to gharial recovery in collaboration with the Bihar Forest Department.
Satellite event hosted by WTI & Bihar Forest Dept to highlight the success of the Gandak Gharial Recovery | Photo by Subrat K Behera
Moving to the northeastern region, our team collaborated with a local NGO, Art for Nature and the Assam Forest Department to host a nature walk and art workshop in the Dehing Patkai National Park in Tinsukia. Participants, including local schoolchildren, youth, and villagers, had the opportunity to learn about Assam’s state bird–the White-winged duck, its habitat and the importance of its conservation.
Rock painting workshop to raise awareness about the endangered White-winged duck | Photo by Aftab Ahmed
Lastly, in Barnawapara Wildlife Sanctuary, located in Balodabazar, Chhattisgarh, our team conducted an awareness program on the conservation of the Asiatic Wild Buffalo, emphasising the implementation of a conservation breeding plan in collaboration with the Chhattisgarh Forest Department.
As the World Species Congress and the satellite events concluded, the resounding message was clear: united action and shared knowledge are critical to ensuring the survival of endangered species. The initiatives and insights gained from this congress will undoubtedly catalyse future conservation successes, inspiring continued dedication and proactive efforts across the globe.