Arunachal Pradesh, 28th December 2023: An 8-month-old, male Asiatic black bear was rescued by the Sagalee Social Forestry department  earlier this year and despite attempts to find its mother, she could not be located. As the cub was too young to survive on its own in the wild, it was admitted to the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) in Pakke for nursing and care.
Jointly run by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and the Department of Environment and Forest Arunachal Pradesh, CBRC is the only facility in India, dedicated to hand-raising and rehabilitating bear cubs.
The CBRC team ensured the bear honed his instincts and skill to survive in the wild | Photo by WTI
After months of care and specialised rehabilitation provided by the dedicated team of veterinarians and keepers at the centre, the cub underwent a soft-release procedure. This process involved daily walks into the forests where the WTI-IFAW keepers guided the bear to develop essential survival skills. Over time, the cub started to exhibit signs of independence and adaptability and was deemed fit to be released.
The successful rehabilitation was conducted earlier this week at Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary and Tiger Reserve by Satyaprakash Singh, DFO, Pakke Tiger Reserve, Vivek Menon, Founder and ED, Wildlife Trust of India, Azzedine T. Downes, President and CEO, International Fund for Animal Welfare, and Nima Phuntsok, Circle Officer, Seijosa, Arunachal Pradesh. To gain a more thorough understanding of the bear’s ranging behaviour after its release, the bear was fitted with a GPS-cum-VHF collar.
The bear was released by WTI, IFAW and the Department of Environment and Forest Arunachal Pradesh in Pakke |Photo by Subhamoy Bhattacharjee
More than 50 orphaned Asiatic black bear cubs have been successfully reintroduced into their natural habitat by the CBRC team since its establishment in 2002. Additionally, the team has assisted the state forest department in the rescue and translocation of 35 Gibbons and the rehabilitation and release of 107 other wild animals.
The WTI team radio-collaring the cub before its release back into the wild| Photo by WTI
 
Mr. Vivek Menon, Founder and Executive Director, WTI, said, “Our team of dedicated veterinarians and keepers provide shelter, food and veterinary care to cubs that have been orphaned or displaced due to habitat destruction and human-wildlife conflict, with the aim of eventual wild rehabilitation.”
Mr. Azzedine Downes, President and CEO of IFAW, said, “It was heartening to witness this bear cub get a second chance at a life in the wild. Apart from rescue and rehabilitation, the CBRC team also works closely with the community to raise awareness about the issue and aims to stop the illegal hunting of the species.”
The Asiatic black bear (Ursus thibetanus) is categorised as ‘Vulnerable’ by the IUCN Red List and is protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 in India. This species is threatened by climate change, habitat loss, habitat degradation and poaching for body parts.












You can choose to contribute to our efforts aimed at rehabilitating rescued wildlife and reintegrating them into the wild by making a donation.