Redakhol (Sambalpur, Orissa): Cricket fever has gripped the entire nation and wildlife conservationists have jumped on to the bandwagon too, using this popular sport to benefit their cause.



Residents of Redakhol gathered over the weekend to cheer local teams in a cricket tournament organised as part of the Sloth Bear Campaign, an initiative of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) supported by the World Society for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) to spread awareness on the plight of sloth bears in the country.

The Campaign attempts to reduce trade in sloth bear cubs, and body parts, by educating and alerting people residing near sloth bear habitats, using street plays, and cultural programmes that the local people can relate to.
“The cricket World Cup is currently in progress and cricket having the kind of popularity that it does in the country, serves as a great platform to get people together,” said Duriyodhan Behera, Divisional Forest Officer, Redakhol, who was the Chief Guest at the closing ceremony.

Eight teams from Redakhol sub-division participated in the two-day tournament held at Kadampadia grounds, and was organised in collaboration with the state Forest Department. Madhav Chandra Baria, Sub-Collector, Redakhol was the other Chief Guest for the event.

“Apart from the eight teams, the tournament was attended by a 3000 member-strong audience who was informed on conservation issues and also witnessed a street play on sloth bear conservation,” Behera added.
Saying that the tournament was special, the captain of the winning team from Subalaya, Rajan Kumar Pradhan said, “As elsewhere in India, the people of Redakhol are also passionate about cricket. We have played many matches before, but this one is special as it is for a noble cause. There were so many things that we learnt and I hope the youngsters remember in the future.”

The match was followed by a photography exhibition and a signature campaign to save the sloth bears.

The Sloth Bear Campaign is one of the components of WSPA-WTI’s holistic Sloth Bear Conservation and Welfare Project, being currently implemented in Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Chhattisgarh, apart from Orissa. The Project works to conserve sloth bears by promoting effective anti-poaching efforts through specific trainings to frontline field staff, trade control, providing alternative livelihood to Kalandars and targeted public campaigns.

“Sambhalpur district of Orissa was once a major hub for sloth bear cub trade. The project has been successful in preventing trade within the district over the past two years through various community initiatives and assisting the authorities to identify and monitor bear dens to prevent poaching of the cubs,” said Rudra Prasad Mahapatra, Field Officer, WTI. “However, any conservation effort can be truly a success only when it becomes a way of life for local people to protect their natural heritage on their own initiative. And that has been the objective of this sustained campaign.”




 

Read More
Kalandar Rehabilitation Project 
Related Stories
Sloth bear cubs seized, indicates shift in trade hub
Dancing to a different tune
Second phase of WSPA-WTI sloth bear campaign begins
Refresher training to protect sloth bears
4 sloth bears readied for Indian Kalandar market seized in Nepal