Kokrajhar (Assam): In a move to facilitate wildlife rehabilitation in Bodoland, the local government and the Forest Department have finalised setting up of a transit camp to temporarily house displaced wild animals. The camp will have facilities to attend to displaced or injured animals, before they can be moved to the IFAW-WTI run Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) near Kaziranga National Park, for long-term rehabilitation, if required. 
“In lower Assam, the number of wild animal rescues, including many young animals, is relatively very high as compared to other regions. It was Dr NVK Ashraf, Director of Wild Rescue programme, WTI, who suggested establishing a well-equipped satellite station to CWRC, to handle this large inflow of displaced wild animals,” said Sonali Ghosh, Divisional Forest Officer, Kokrajhar.
The establishment of the transit camp is being funded by the Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC). The foundation stone at the construction site in Choraikhola was laid by Kampa Borgoyari, Deputy Chief, BTC, on July 11, during an event that marked the end of the annual week-long ‘bon mahotsav’ (forest festival).
While speaking of the need for biodiversity conservation at the event, the Deputy Chief had commended the efforts of the International Fund for Animal Welfare – Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) to ‘bring back Manas’ to its former glory.
IFAW-WTI has been working with the BTC and the Forest Department in Bodoland since early 2000s. Over this period, in collaboration with the Forest Department and the government, IFAW-WTI reintroduced the locally extirpated greater one-horned rhinoceros back in Manas. This period has also seen rehabilitation of hand-raised Asiatic black bears and Asian elephants among other endangered animals in Manas. Five years of extensive research by IFAW-WTI supported by the British High Commission has also provided a strong base to lobby for declaration of Manas Reserve Forest as well as Ripu and Chirang Reserve Forests as protected areas.
The event also marked the formal inauguration of the Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) unit supported by the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, to be used in rescue and treatment of displaced wild animals in Lower Assam region.
“As of now, the rescued animals are being kept at the MVS field station,” Ghosh said.
Among the animals currently in the field station is a pair of rare clouded leopard cubs, which is being rehabilitated jointly by the BTC, Forest Department and IFAW-WTI.
“Once constructed, the transit camp will provide temporary accomodation to the rescued wild animals. Depending on the condition of the individual animal, they may be released in the wild or transported to CWRC for long-term care,” Ghosh added.
Professor PC Bhattacharjee, Trustee, WTI, said, “Effective wildlife conservation requires active participation and support of the local people and a strong will of the government and the Forest Department. Bodoland is fortunate to have both.”
“Rescue and rehabilitation is a rather new yet valuable tool in wildlife conservation. This new initiative will go a long way in conserving the wildlife of Bodoland,” he added.