Raimona National Park, Assam, 22 September 2021: While the Assam government’s bold decision to destroy rhino horn stockpiles was implemented in Bokakhat near Kaziranga, another conservation milestone was reached by the Bodoland Territorial Region in the newly notified Raimona National Park in Western Assam. Fifty-seven poachers surrendered their weapons and wildlife derivatives they possessed to start afresh in a life of dignity.
At a ceremonial event under the leadership of Mr. Ranjit Basumatary the Executive Member, Forests (Bodoland Territorial Council) in which the Chief Executive Member Mr Pramod Boro initiated the rehabilitation of the 57 poachers who surrendered 40 arms (Handmade gun), 11 antlers of Sambar, Spotted deer, Hog deer and 2 tusks.

After the Raimona National Park was notified, a wave of sensitization programs started from June 2021 led by its political leaders, forest officers, frontline forest staff, NGOs and the continuous role of IFAW-WTI in the entire process that actually dated back to preparing the proposal to notify the park. Several meetings with the local political leaders jointly with Forest Department in the fringe areas followed by timely aid to staff of Forest Department and the NGO members in Jan 2021 motivated the forest staff to enhance patrolling and to stop further encroachment attempts by the fringe villagers to occupy forest land. More than 15 strategic meetings were held with the Range Forest Officers of Raimona NP under Kachugaon led by IFAW-WTI on handling the various conservation challenges, one of which was dealing with the hunters.

The Chief Executive Member distributed Rs. 50,000/- in cheque to each poacher who surrendered arms and offered rehabilitation support to start a fresh life with dignity and respect for wildlife. He has also assured to set up two weaving clusters for the women from fringe villages of the park to promote their traditional skill and engage them in income generating activities.

The BTC Chief during his address to the people said that rhinos will soon be reintroduced to the park and some other key species will also be translocated for augmentation of population. For an area that was once the hunting ground for the Kings of Cooch Behar during 19th and early 20th century, this was a historic day for the fringe villagers of the newly created park that has proved the significance of communities in securing the forest and wildlife with other stakeholders.