Manas Tiger Reserve:  Domesticated animals in villages skirting Manas Tiger Reserve, Assam were susceptible to diseases like Foot and Mouth disease(FMD), Haemorragic septicimea(HS) and Black Ouarter(BQ) after the flash floods hit the area during October, 2004. In a bid to treat these animals and further stop the spread of the disease among the wild animals situated in the Park, Dr. Prasanta Kumar Boro from the department of Veterinary Epidemilogy & Preventive Medicine, Veterinary College Guwahati in conjunction with Wildlife Trust Of India(WTI) conducted a protective emergency vaccination program for domesticated live stock in selected villages around Manas Tiger Reserve.
A total of 4600 animals were vaccinated between 29 th November to 4 th December. The vaccination program was held in Barangabari, Mayongpara, Palsiguri, Lahoripara, Kahibari, Kahitema and Sangumari villages. “Parasitic infestation was found to be a major problem and the animals which were severely infested with parasitic problems were provided anthalmentics,” said team leader Dr. Prasanta Kumar Boro.
Manas Tiger Reserve houses a diversity of wildlife such as capped langur, golden langur, assamese macaque, rhesus macaque, common langur, slow loris, tiger, black panther, leopard cat, clouded leopard, wild cats, civets, mongoose and sloth bear.
The proposed vaccination and treatment camp was organized with the aim of developing an ‘immune belt’ of vaccinated, healthy livestock in and around the Manas Tiger Reserve, to reduce the risk of spreading infectious diseases in and around the Manas Tiger Reserve, particularly Foot and Mouth Diseases (FMD). The camp also helped generate awareness on protection and conservation of wildlife among the villagers and also served to continue the outreach activity of WTI. Keeping these objectives in mind, vaccination of the cattle, goat and pigs against FMD, HS and BQ, treatment of the animals suffering from any disease condition, de-worming of animals, general health checkup of the animals and encouraging community participation towards conservation of wildlife were the activities that were carried out during this week.
“One hundred and fourteen surgical cases, thirty two gynaecological cases and four hundred and fifty eight medicinal cases were done during this program,” said Boro. “The response from the villagers was quite overwhelming since no such program was held previously in this area and the visit by the Range officer, Basbari Range also helped in spreading the awareness about the program among the villagers,” he added.
Encouraged by the participation of the villagers the team hopes to conduct more such programs in the near future to keep both domesticated and wild animals free from diseases like FMD, HQ and BS in this area.