CWRC, Kaziranga National Park, August 13, 2017: Four rhino calves were rescued today and brought to the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) – IFAW-WTI and the Assam Forest Department’s wildlife rescue, treatment and rehabilitation facility – as a second and more devastating wave of monsoon floods hit the iconic Kaziranga National Park.
[acx_slideshow name=”CWRC Rhinos 13082017″]
Glimpses of the rhino rescue conducted in Haladhibari Forest Beat
Rhino Calf 1: Haladhibari Forest Beat

A male rhino calf, about a week old and with its umbilical cord still attached, was rescued through the joint efforts of the CWRC Mobile Veterinary Service (MVS) unit and the Kaziranga Forest Rescue team early this morning.
The calf was found in a severely stressed condition, having been separated from its mother during the sudden rise in water levels on the fringes of the national park. The MVS team led by CWRC veterinarian Dr Daoharu Baro reached the area in response to an emergency call from the Kaziranga Forest Authority. Dr Baro examined the calf and decided that it should be transported to CWRC for its betterment.
The calf is currently under close observation at the centre’s Large Animal Nursery. It has been provided oral rehydration, which it seems to be responding to.
“The four rhino calves admitted today are all stressed due to the trauma they have undergone, what with being caught in the floodwaters and separated from their mothers.”
Rhino Calf 2: Baghmari area, Bagori Range

A female rhino calf, about five to six months old, was found stranded in a flood-hit household in Baghmari. It was rescued by a Kaziranga Forest Rescue team led by veterinarian Dr Debabrata Phukon and, given its condition, transported to CWRC for stabilisation and care.
Rhino Calf 3: Mihimukh area, Kohora Range

A male rhino calf, five to six months old was rescued by a Kaziranga Forest Rescue team as it was struggling for survival near the inundated Interpretation Centre building at Mihimukh in the Central Forest Range of Kaziranga.
CWRC MVS veterinarian Dr Samshul Ali conducted the rescue operation with the forest department team. The calf was transported to the nearest road by boat and later brought to CWRC for further care.
Rhino Calf 4: Agoratoli Range

A male rhino calf, nearly two months old, was rescued by frontline forest staff of the Agoratoli Range and brought to CWRC this evening.
“The four rhino calves admitted today are all stressed due to the trauma they have undergone, what with being caught in the floodwaters and separated from their mothers”, said Dr Panjit Basumatary, lead veterinarian at CWRC. “They are being provided the requisite care and are under round-the-clock observation at the Large Animal Nursery.”
The CWRC team handled 23 rescue cases, covering both the south and north banks of the flooded Brahmaputra River, on the second day of the 2nd phase of Kaziranga floods today.