Bhopal: Four Kalandars who have jointly set up a poultry farm last November in Bhopal, are excited over their prospects this New Year as they had good profits in the first month of their venture.
“We first started with 500 chickens in the farm and bought three similar lots after every 15 days. We sold the first lot in less than 45 days,” said a thrilled Samimuddin, one of the partners in the venture.
“Slowly we will try to increase the number of chicks from the current 2000. We hope to do good business this New Year too,” another proud member said.
These are among several other Kalandars in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh who have taken up alternative livelihoods under a scheme launched by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and the World Society for Protection of Animals (WSPA).
“A business feasibility study was carried out in other types of livestock before we zeroed down on poultry. It was best suited for the Kalandars,” said Vijay Dhasmana of WTI monitoring the project.
“We consulted the state Animal Husbandry Department to get a clear insight of the projects since there are different types of risks and skills involved,” Dhasmana said.
“To minimize the risks of epidemics – mainly from diseases – recurring in poultry farming – we advised them to start a joint venture so that they can stand the losses.”
After the government put ban on street performance of bears in 1998, Kalandars who were hosting bear shows for a living became unemployed – turned many into destitute.
Some Kalandars continued to host bear shows illegally, fearing criticism and hunger as a result of their unemployed status.
“The current initiative is to rehabilitate the Kalandars by providing alternative livelihoods, and to rescue their bears under the safe custody of the forest department,” a member of the project team said.
WTI has helped these Kalandars in procuring bank loans, facilitated meetings with government officials and advice from experts in poultry enterprise.
“As more Kalandars become successful in their business (alternative livelihoods), it will draw others to form self-help groups, which will itself explain the progress of this initiative.” Aniruddha Mookerjee, Sr. Director of WTI said.