New Delhi: Since July 2001, WTI’s enforcement assistance unit has been associated with at least 30 seizures: seven in July, three each in August and September, two in October, five in November, and six in December. Most seizures have taken place in U.P, Uttaranchal, and Himachal Pradesh. Several seizures have taken place in Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, and Delhi. Trade Control
Since July 2001, WTI’s enforcement assistance unit has been associated with at least 30 seizures: seven in July, three each in August and September, two in October, five in November, and six in December. Most seizures have taken place in U.P, Uttaranchal, and Himachal Pradesh. Several seizures have taken place in Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, and Delhi.




Species / Item
 

Total Number / Quantity
 

Remarks
 



UP-Uttaranchal Wildlife Trade Study:
In September 2001, WTI was awarded a contract, by the UP and Uttaranchal forest departments, to undertake a comprehensive wildlife trade study in those states. This project is well underway, and will be completed by June, 2002. WTI is currently seeking funding for an extended trade study, to cover UP, Uttaranchal, West Bengal and Bihar, as well as Nepal.
 Legal Work:
WTI has either filed, or provided important assistance on numerous legal cases and several Public Interest Litigations. Some notable examples include:
Ashok Kumar Vs. State of Bihar & others: Filed in the Supreme Court on October 18, 2001, this petition asks the court to intervene to ensure the timely release of funds from the State government to Valmiki Tiger Reserve. Earlier, the Reserve’s entire field staff had deserted Valmiki in protest against non-payment of salaries for 14 months.
Ashok Kumar Vs. State of J&K: Filed in July 2001, this petition asks the J&K High court to intervene to ensure compliance of its earlier order, passed in May 2000, which had asked the State to regulate the Shahtoosh trade.
WTI Vs State of Karnataka: Filed in February 2001, this case resulted in the landmark order (delivered in September) directing that the CISF Firing Range adjoining Bannerghata National Park be shifted within 6 months.
CITES:
Mr. Vivek Menon attended the Standing Committee meeting of CITES as a member of Indian Govt. delegation held at Paris, France between June 19 and 22, 2001.
Mr. Ashok Kumar attended the Animals Committee meeting of CITES held at Hanoi, Vietnam from July 30 to August 3, 2001 as a member of Indian Govt. delegation. The main issue was to oppose commercial sale of tiger parts from captive breeding facilities in a number of countries. Though tiger was not mentioned by itself by the proponents, a general proposal for sale of products of Appendix I species from captive breeding was suggested. We were able to avoid an unfavorable decision by this meeting. The issue will come up in future meetings and will have to be opposed again.
At the Global Tiger Forum International Symposium and 2nd General Assembly, held in New Delhi from November 6 to 10, 2001, IFAW/WTI played a crucial role in having a resolution passed urging that tiger parts should not be traded internationally. Such a proposal is pending before the Animals Committee meeting of CITES. IFAW is a member of GTF and was represented in the General Assembly by WTI.