Manas, January 6, 2013: Working in the field is always a challenge for all those who brave the harsh conditions of the forest striving to protect the wildlife within, and this effort is not one without its own set of problems and dangers. Often facing property losses due to extenuating circumstances, furnishing the frontline forest staff with necessities becomes essential to the job getting done. On December 13, 2013, International Fund for Animal Welfare-Wildlife Trust of India (IFAW-WTI) through a Rapid Action Project, made provisions for the Manas Maozigendri Ecotourism Society (MMES) such as cycles, blankets, mattresses, mosquito nets etc. to help the patrolling team of the Panda camp resume their duty after their camp was burnt down by miscreants on October 30.
Sonali Ghosh, the Deputy Director of Manas Tiger Reserve commended IFAW-WTI on stepping forward to help the patrolling team get back on their feet.
Chandrakanta Basumatary, the President of MMES remarked, “IFAW-WTI has been helping us in the field of conservation for a long time and we are grateful for always being there when needed. A similar incident had happened last October as well and even then they had stood by us, providing much needed and valued assistance.”
 
Officials from MMES recieving the cycles as part of the RAP.

Photo: Anjan Sangma / IFAW-WTI 


Anjan Sangma, Field Officer of WTI in the region, spoke at the event which commemorated the 10th anniversary of their Foundation Day, which culminated in a cultural programme, about various work being done by IFAW-WTI in the area with both the Forest Department as well as the Community-Based Organisations (CBOs) of the area, which not only includes providing support during difficult times like these but also rehabilitating rhinos and elephants in Manas, running a Mobile Veterinary Service for emergency rescue and relief, providing alternate and green livelihood opportunities to reduce dependency on forest and making locals economically independent- all in an effort to bring Manas back to its former glory.
In 2011, with the main aim of reducing anthropogenic pressure on the Greater Manas landscape, a weaving centre to make traditional cloth products was opened by the IFAW-WTI team in Kachugaon, supported by the Forest Department and 60 women were chosen from the fringe villages of Manas National Park based on consultations with the Village Councils. In October of this year, in bid to maximise on the retail prospects of their products a souvenir shop was also opened in a prime spot in the fringes of Manas National Park. The team and the beneficiaries are extremely careful about maintaining a high standard in operations with stringent checks being made a priority to ensure the quality of packaging, of the product itself, maintaining accounts etc.
The Greater Manas Conservation Fund of IFAW-WTI has also helped install improved cooking stoves in local households in the region, to reduce felling of trees. 600 such stoves have been installed in 54 fringe villages with fuel consumption reduced by about one kg per person per day. Fabricated using local raw material – soil, cow dung, rice husk and iron bars, these stoves are designed to maximise fuel efficiency.
 
Performers during the cultural event.

Photo: Anjan Sangma / IFAW-WTI
“We have been working in Manas for almost a decade now and no effort is too big or too small when it comes to conservation in this area. We’re happy to be of any assistance to CBOs in the area who are constantly under attack by agencies which ultimately hurts the wildlife of the area. MMES was formed 10 years ago at a time when conservation in Manas had taken a hit and organisations like them were sorely needed. It’s heartening to see them never give up their fight for wildlife against all odds,” said Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, the Regional Head of WTI for Assam.