Sutrapada: Parbatlala Fulbaria was surprised to find a whale shark entangled in his fishing net in one of his daily trip to the sea. The fishing boat named ‘Parasmani’ in which he was traveling looked diminutive in contrast to the giant whale shark, estimated to be 45 feet long.
According to the DFO of the Junagadh forest division, S. K. Mehta, “The incident occurred on March 12 at about 50 km south of the Sutrapada coasts. The fisherman communicated to the local forest office about the trap and without delay, Babaria, the Regional Forest Officer (RFO) was asked to conduct the rescue and release operation.”
Mehta said that the RFO and the two foresters B. A. Mahida and N. K. Chudasama were joined by 25 volunteers to conduct the operation. It took them about four hours before the fish was released from the warped knots.
Dozens of colorfully clad fishermen and forest officials boarded the fishing boats Jashwanti and Jaidulari to undertake the rescue mission. Fishermen in coastal Gujarat identify their boats with pet-names which are often cherished fondly at every successful fish catch.
Fulbaria, who’s fishing net valued at Rs. 40,000/- had to cut loose his net for making way for the fish. “I received great satisfaction in releasing the fish and was not worried about my damaged fishing net” he exclaimed with joy even as the supporters joined him to appreciate this noble gesture.
The sacrifice made by the fisherman showed his determination to protect this magnificent species even though it could keep him temporarily out of work.
Last year in December, in a similar incident, another whale shark was released by the fishermen off the Sutrapada coasts. One of the forest guard and some volunteers were also present in the last year’s rescue mission.
Dhiresh Joshi of the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), who is managing the Whale Shark Campaign in Gujarat, said that the mood among the fishermen here is very encouraging and are concerned for conservation of this species. They are aware of its endangered status and are keen to help.
WTI has been running this campaign for the past three years in Gujarat and has covered all the major coastal towns and fishing communities to create awareness about this world’s largest fish. The recent initiatives by the fishing community would go a long way ensuring protection and long-term conservation of the species in Gujarat.