Mangalore, 7th February, 2023: As part of an intensive campaign to save the world’s largest fish, WTI followed up their community outreach in Karnataka by installing permanent signage with a message urging for conservation action. Thirty signboards in key fishing harbours along coastal Karnataka carry key information for fishers on whale shark conservation.
Karnataka’s coast stretches across approximately 320 km covering the districts of Dakshin Kannada (62 km), Udupi (98 km) and Uttara Kannada (160 km). Eight talukas adjacent to the coast have 22 urban agglomerations and 1,044 villages as per State ENVIS Centre, Karnataka.
“Free the Whale Shark” signboard at a fishing harbour in Karnataka
WTI’s campaign with support from ORACLE aims to reach fishing communities and mobilise the community towards active protection of the gentle giant of the sea. A total of 30 such signboards installed at 22 major fishing ports of Karnataka state has made a strong base to introduce key conservation information related to the whale shark on ground. The placement of these signboards were done through the co-operation of fisheries departmental representatives at respective fishing ports after acquiring the necessary permissions. During the installation work on the field, approximately 5000 active fishers interacted with the installation field team of WTI. “The interaction has motivated them to be part of Save the Whale Shark programme”, observed Bharat Kumar of WTI who has been conducting campaign activities in Karnataka. “The key heads of the communities and fishermen union head of respective fishing ports also supported us during the signage installation which helped us get greater acceptance among the rest of community members, “ he added.
Save the Whale Shark campaign has been extensively visible in targeted locations in Karnataka through this conservation action on field. The permanent signage visible round the clock to active fishers at their respective fishing port would further reinforce the conservation message and knowledge about the legal status of this fish protected under Schedule 1 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
Read more about the “Save the Whale Shark Campaign” here.