Srinagar, 1st July 2024: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) in collaboration with the Department of Wildlife Protection (DWP), Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) has been working on Markhor (Capra falconeri) and Hangul (Cervus hanglu) recovery projects in the landscape for over two decades. Various anthropogenic activities like the construction of roads, linear intrusions, power lines, army settlements on the borders, heavy livestock grazing, and poaching have caused a disastrous impact on the habitats and populations of both these species. Endemic to Kashmir, the Markhor is categorised as Near Threatened, whereas, the Hangul is Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List. Both species are also listed under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
Dr.Tanushree Srivastava addressing the Markhor and Hangul Watchers during the workshop | Photo by Junaid Bin Hussain
One of the ways in which we work to reduce these threats is by conducting regular capacity-strengthening workshops for Markhor and Hangul Watchers and training frontline staff to effectively monitor the critical Markhor habitats in the Hirpora Wildlife Sanctuary, which covers an area of 341 sq km. Through these efforts, we aim to enhance monitoring capabilities and ensure better protection for these endangered species against various anthropogenic pressures like habitat degradation, poaching, and other disturbances.
Earlier this week, WTI in partnership with the Department of Wildlife Protection, J&K imparted training to 45 frontline staff on important facets of anti-grazing patrolling and wildlife monitoring data collection techniques. The participants were identified based on the training needs and skill gaps through a systematic approach, utilising methods such as surveys, questionnaires, and focus group discussions. This program was supported by the Astral Foundation and the Serenity Trust.
The participants were trained in the use of GPS | Photo by Junaid Bin Hussain
The ‘Markhor and Hangul Watchers’ are instrumental in monitoring animal movements, and detecting and addressing any illegal activities in their respective areas. They have been trained extensively in wildlife tracking techniques, including identifying key indicators such as hoof marks, scats, pellets, and other indirect signs that indicate the presence of species during their patrolling surveys. These sessions also help motivate the participants, reinforcing their commitment to maintaining constant vigilance over the Markhor, Hangul, and other threatened wildlife species in their rugged habitats across the Kashmir valley.
Read more about our ‘Big Idea’ Species Recovery