Manguraha, 4th February, 2024: Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), in collaboration with DoEFCC, Govt of Bihar, organised a meeting for the Primary Response Team (PRT) members from local communities surrounding the Valmiki Tiger Reserve in Manguraha Forest Range. PRTs, being the first responders in human-wildlife conflict cases, act as a bridge between the locals and forest department and are consequently crucial to minimize negative interactions in such situations. The meeting was aimed at strategizing proactive measures to reduce the conflict between humans and large carnivores such as tigers and leopards.
WTI has successfully formed PRTs in seven villages within the Manguraha Range, with thirty individuals, including five women, volunteering to contribute to this noble cause. These villages include Dhumatand-Jasauli, Pachrauta, Purainiya, Ekwa, Parsauni, Rupauliya, and Dumari. The initiative empowers local residents, enabling them to play a pivotal role in conflict mitigation efforts.
Meeting of Primary Response Team (PRT) members in Valmiki Tiger Reserve | Photograph by Chhathu Kumar
The meeting witnessed the participation of 25 enlisted PRT members, who were briefed on their roles and responsibilities by Mr. Subrat Kumar Behera, Project Head, WTI. Mr. Sunil Kumar Pathak, Range Forest Officer of Manguraha Range, emphasized the importance of public support in mitigating human-wildlife conflicts. Additionally, Pankaj Ojha, Field Biologist at Valmiki Tiger Reserve (Division-1), provided insights into the ecological aspects of conflict situations.
Prominent members, including Chhotan Shah (Mukhiya, Rupauliya GP), Rambihari Mahto (Mukhiya, Dhamaura GP), Ashok Ram (President, Dhumatand-Jasauli EDC), Mohan Panjiyar (President, Purainiya EDC), Jitendra Shah (President, Dumari EDC), and other local leaders, attended the meeting. Short films including Kinara and Indian’s Wild Anthem were also screened as part of the event.
The formation of PRTs has been a proven tool that establishes the success of collective effort and commitment of the local communities and conservation organizations towards mitigating human – large carnivore conflicts across various tiger reserves.
The “Living with Large Carnivores – Integrative coexistence through community Empowerment” project, in Valmiki Tiger Reserve is supported by the Chester Zoo and the Darwin Initiative.