Pakke: A pioneering project initiated by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) along with the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department that began from a single room in 2002 has evolved into a unique scientific rehabilitation centre for displaced and injured Asiatic black bears.
The Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC) expanded to accommodate more animals who suffer injury and separation. An eight member team from the WTI comprising veterinary doctors, field biologists, animal keepers, project managers along with support staff along with officials from the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department manages the centre. The project is supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and British High Commission.
Speaking at the inaugural function of the newly expanded rehabilitation facility at Pakke on 28 th February, Arunachal Pradesh Forest Minister, Newlai Tungkhatra said, “This pioneering project at Pakke which was first initiated by WTI in March 2002 has made valuable contributions to wildlife care in the state. CBRC’s continued efforts in rescuing and rehabilitating bear cubs and other wild species since then mark a new beginning towards wildlife conservation in the region.” He thanked the CBRC staff for their unfailing support in maintaining the program despite inhospitable terrain.
Other prominent guests at the function included the MLA, Techi Hamu, from the 12 th Pakke Kessang Constituency, Vivek Menon, Executive Director, Wildlife Trust of India, S N Namsoom, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Arunachal Pradesh and Chief Warden Wildlife, Dept of Environment and Forests.
At the function Vivek Menon handed over a six-seater boat to the forest officials of the Pakke division. The boat will be used by the forest guards in the Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary especially in the Tipi range for rescue of animals and anti-poaching operations. In the last couple of years, WTI was instrumental in providing additional support to forest officials involved in anti-poaching raids and rescue of animals. Training programs for forest officials and equipping them with rescue gear from time to time were also part of the WTI initiatives in the region.
Vivek Menon who is at the forefront of wildlife conservation in India is optimistic at the response from the local administration. He said, “I am positive that a favorable support for wildlife conservation could be generated with adequate awareness programs among the locals.”
The newly built enlarged facility at CBRC is now capable of holding 11-16 bears annually for rehabilitation. At present CBRC has six bear cubs in the facility. According to Dr. N. V. K. Ashraf, Director of the wild rescue program of the Wildlife Trust of India, “two of the six bears that were undergoing rehabilitation at the centre were released on the 28 th of February 2005 after radio-collaring. Four more bears, if found adequately rehabilitated will be released over the following months”.
Techi Hamu said, “The local administration has extended all support to CBRC in its endeavor towards wildlife conservation and care. The CBRC will receive all necessary help from the respective agencies in the state and will monitor closely with WTI from all possible threats to wildlife.”
Recalling WTI’s involvement in wildlife conservation in the state Senior Field Officer Prabal Sarkar, who has spent a number of years working on WTI programs in the region says, “Elephant Conservation Project was the first project initiated by the WTI at Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary to study the human-elephant conflict arising because of crop damage by the elephants. It was also a good site for wildlife researchers to study wild elephant behavior.
Sarkar says, “Though many of the old programs are still on going today, the need for the CBRC was felt due to the increasing number of wild species falling ill or injured and needed immediate medical attention. The Itanagar Zoo was also felt inadequate for the large number of rescued animals that are brought for treatment and rehabilitation.”
He said, “for the purpose of the study, the Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department initially donated a small space at the Pakke Wildlife Sanctuary to WTI. With positive results and inputs from the field study, this humble beginning was soon rewarded and it was then that the concept of CBRC was mooted with support from Arunachal Pradesh Forest Department”.
“Degradation of forests and wildlife habitats, crop depredation and human-elephant conflict are the core issues” Sarkar further said. Due to continuous human presence near to their habitats bears, hornbills, elephants, flying squirrel and a variety of bird species came under immediate threat. Bears are poached for their meat or bile to prepare traditional medicines. The magnificent hornbills were poached to craft headgear for Nyishi tribes. Wild boar, birds and deer are also hunted by locals for their meat.
CBRC aims to contribute significantly to conservation, specifically of Asiatic black bears by following international protocols for rehabilitation and release.