New Delhi, October 4, 2010: More than five million school children from 15 countries including India will learn about the plight of tigers through fun-filled educational activities organised as part of the Animal Action Week (AAW), an annual animal-focussed event coinciding with the wildlife week. A global initiative of the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW), AAW in the country is coordinated by the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
IFAW-AAW 2010 with the theme ‘Born to be Wild: Saving the majestic tiger’ focuses on spreading awareness on tiger conservation. Habitat loss and poaching have reduced wild tiger populations from about 100,000 wild tigers in 1900 to a few as 3,000 worldwide today.
“Education is so important to our work saving animals, like tigers, in crisis around the world,” said Fred O’Regan, IFAW President and CEO. “The future will be brighter for both animals and people if we can educate and inspire our children to take action on these issues.”
The participating schools have been provided free activity packs including a documentary film and information booklets that describe the world of tigers, threats faced by them in a number of tiger range countries including India and conservation initiatives being undertaken. These activity packs are available in English as well as in Hindi.
“We have sent these activity packs to over 2500 schools across the country, and many people have volunteered to help organise these activities in the schools in their respective areas, for which we are thankful. Apart from activities like discussions, essay-writing, quiz, etc, students can participate in the nation-wide painting competition; two of the best entries will be selected to be awarded the IFAW Young Achievers Award,” said John Kunju Kunju, WTI.
This year’s tigers theme coincides with the Year of the Tiger on the Chinese lunar calendar and the UN International Year for Youth, which aims to give young people a voice in global issues.
As part of the Youth Year, IFAW is launching a global Youth Voices for Tigers campaign to bring the voices of the world’s children to the Global Tiger Summit in St. Petersburg, Russia this November. A mosaic of messages from young people worldwide will be presented at the summit, comprising a collective roar for action to ensure that the next generation does not grow up in a world without tigers.
A multi-lingual website (ifaw.org/youthroar) offers the opportunity for public participation by uploading video messages and images from children around the world, such as a call to action, question, thought, poem, song, painting or even a simple but passionate growl of support for protecting the last wild tigers.
IFAW AAW 2010 is the 18th Animal Action Week globally and is the eighth in India since the project was launched in India in 2003.
 
Learn more about Animal Action Week