Conservation is a multi-dimensional approach. Wildlife conservation requires not only expert knowledge in some specific disciplines but also relevant perception of many other broad subjects. An integration of all these essential knowledge inputs in a single course-work is still lacking at least from Indian perspective.
Wildlife conservation has a rapidly expanding horizon – in both national and international at Government and Non-Governmental organizations such as Wildlife Trust of India, World Wide Fund for Nature, ATREE, WII, IUCN, etc. – as environmental and extension educator, researchers as well as managers. The multidisciplinary foundation prepares the student to pursue a career in a variety of conservation related jobs and produces a broad based scientist who can utilize this knowledge to further an academic career through a Ph.D. program. It also provides opportunities for people who are already working in the field to further their career through a formal Diploma course that can be upgraded to a Masters.

 
Click here to enlarge the Brochure



Click Here to know more about the course

 



Considering this, Wildlife Trust of India and Bharati Vidyapeeth University (Pune) have jointly implemened various courses in Wildlife Conservation Action since July 2014. The course has a multidisciplinary approach that integrates the science of wildlife conservation with social issues in managing and mitigating wildlife conflict and natural resource management. The course provides in depth knowledge of ecosystem and biodiversity conservation and management along with wildlife rescue and rehabilitation as well as legal instruments for wildlife conservation.
It includes the cognitive aspects and technological skills necessary to further a career in the wildlife field. It trains the candidate in skills required for assessment and monitoring of biodiversity as well as wildlife management through a combination of course work, intensive field work and internships.


The course will be held in BVIEER (Pune). The duration of this course is two years consisting of four semesters. The medium of instructions and examination will be only English.