Dudhwa Tiger Reserve (Uttar Pradesh): A researcher with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) has identified 81 butterfly species in Dudhwa Tiger Reserve, Uttar Pradesh, adding 38 new species to the previous record of 43 species (http://www.dudhwatigerreserve.com/butterflies.html).


“The diversity of life is the most striking aspect of our planet, and insects are the most diverse group of animals,” says Subrat Kumar Behera, who carried out the study as an ancillary to the US Fish & Wildlife Service supported WTI survey for prevention of elephant mortality due to train hits in the Tiger Reserve.
“Butterflies have always fascinated me, for their beauty and their value to conservation as they are excellent bio-indicators, being highly sensitive to climate change. While working on this project, out of my own interest, I started collecting information on the butterflies. At the end, I was pleasantly surprised. Did I find 38 new species here?” he wonders jokingly. “Perhaps, the problem lies in very little study being done on species other than on the charismatic big animals.”
India is believed to host about ‘2500 species and subspecies of butterflies’ (Kunte, 2010)*. Presence of 81 species in Dudhwa TR represents a good richness, believes Behera. Four of the identified species are listed in Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 – the Common Mime (Chilasa clytia), Danaid Eggfly (Hypolimnas misippus), Common Hedge Blue (Acytolepis puspa) and Common Pierrot (Castalius rosimon).
“Two of the species recorded has been listed as rare in Kehimkar (2008)**. These include – Spotted Angle (Caprona agama) and Pale Wanderer (Pareronia avastar). Also drawing a comparison from Kehimkar (2008)**, there seems to be a range extension of Bush Hopper (Ampittia dioscorides), Giant Redeye (Gangara thyrsis), Dark Pierrot (Tarucus ananda), One Spot Grass yellow (Eurema andersoni) and Pale Wanderer (Pareronia avatar),” Behera added
Currently working on publishing his findings, Behera ends, “I just went about recording the butterflies here collecting their photographs and even with this I found so much. Who knows what surprises await us if a detailed planned study is carried out”.
*, Kunte, K. 2010. Diversity, endemism and conservation of Indian Butterflies. 3rd Asian Lepidoptera Conservation Symposium and Training Programme, Zoo Outreach Organization.
**, Kehimkar, I. 2008. The Book of Indian Butterflies. Bombay Natural History Society and Oxford University Press.