Tura, 21st December 2022: The Garo Hills Autonomous District Council (GHADC) on 21st December 2022, recognized the efforts of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and its supporting partner, the HCL Foundation, for their conservation efforts in the Garo Hills. Mr. A. Marak, Chief Executive Member, GHADC presented the certificate of Appreciation to HCL Foundation – which was received by Mr. Rahul Kumar, Associate Manager, HCL Foundation.

In collaboration with GHADC and the State Forest Department and support of its partners, WTI has been working in Garo Hills landscape for almost two decades now to protect the Garo Green Spine and secure the corridors. This region and landscape is part of an ecological hotspot and the corridors are extremely vital for the safe passage for elephants and other wildlife in the region. WTI aims to continue conserving the wildlife of the region and empowering and sharing the benefit of conservation with the local community.
GHADC Chairman, A. Marak along with GHADC Deputy Secretary and CFO, Mr. Rangku Sangma, handing over the certificate to Mr. Rahul Kumar from HCL Foundation. (From L to R: Mr. Rahul Kumar (Associate Manager, HCL Foundation), Mr. A. Marak (Chairman, GHADC), Mr. Rangku Sangma (Deputy Secretary and CFO, GHADC), Dr. Sandeep Kumar Tiwari (Director & Chief of Conservation, WTI)
With support of the HCL Foundation, WTI has been working in the South Garo Hills for securing the Baghmara – Balphakram corridor and biodiversity for the last four years. The project aims at securing the corridor by notifying about 1000 hectares of corridor land as Village Reserve forest and restoring 150 hectares of degraded habitats in the corridor forests with a target of ensuring 1,50,000 standing trees. It is also working at empowering and strengthening the livelihoods of the community members, sensitize people on the Garo culture and on conservation practices and identifying and nurturing young conservation champions to protect the natural heritage of the region .
Felicitating HCL Foundation and Wildlife Trust of India, Mr Rangku Sangma, Joint Secretary and Chief Forest Officer, GHADC said “It has been two decades of fruitful partnership with WTI and its partners that has made immense contribution in the management of our forests resulting in community participation and renewed enthusiasm towards conservation. I look forward towards many more decades of this partnership.” Dr Sandeep Kr Tiwari, Chief of Conservation, WTI thanked GHADC for their continued support to WTI to undertake the wildlife conservation initiatives in Garo Hills and hopes to continue its long term association with the region, its biodiversity and the people.