Mudumalai, 8th January 2024: The Tamil Nadu Forest Department in collaboration with the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) hosted a two-day media exposure trip from 6-7 January 2024 in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve, Tamil Nadu. Supported by Rohini Nilekani Philanthropies (RNP) and Whitley Fund for Nature, this workshop brought together journalists, experts, and ecologists for an immersive experience to deepen the understanding of Asian elephant ecology, migration, and the challenges of harmonious coexistence with human communities.
Building on the success of WTI’s Gaj Utsav campaign, dedicated to honouring the cultural and ecological importance of the Asian elephant, the workshop strongly emphasised promoting responsible journalism practices when reporting on human-elephant conflicts and conservation initiatives.
Interactive simulation workshop chaired by P. Oppili , Environment Editor, Times of India and Jeemon Jacob, Associate Editor, India Today | Photo by Sreenanth K
Key figures in the field, including, Dr. PS Easa, Elephant expert and chairman, Aryanakam Nature Foundation,  Shri Vivek Menon, Founder and ED, WTI,  Dr. B Ramakrishnan, HoD, Department of Wildlife Biology, Government Arts and Science College, Udhagamandalam, Ms. Upasana Ganguly, Manager & Head-Right of Passage (Wildlife Corridor Projects), WTI and several veteran media personnel including Shri Padmanabhan Oppili, Environment Editor, Times of India(TN) and Shri Jeemon Jacob, Associate Editor, India Today contributed their insights and expertise during the workshop.
Over the course of the two days, 20 journalists from Kerala and Tamil Nadu, along with 3 from Karnataka, representing various leading media organisations engaged in enlightening sessions, interactive discussions, and practical workshops. On the first day, participants delved into topics such as Elephant Ecology, Behaviour, and Connectivity, Landscape Ecology and Population Estimation, as well as Wildlife in Public Perception. A panel discussion titled “Arikomban – Crossing Borders, Shared Conflict” provided valuable insights. Cultural and literary portrayals of elephants were also examined. The second day, included discussions on promoting coexistence, and sessions on responsible journalism in human-wildlife conflict zones. The day culminated in a workshop on responsible reporting, an interactive reporting simulation, and a recap of key takeaways, with the sharing of valuable resources.
Journalist Virat Singh talked about the collaboration between media and the Forest Dept to curb the human-leopard conflict in Sanjay Gandhi NP | Photo by Sreenanth K
Since its inception in 2018, the highly acclaimed ‘Gaj Utsav’ campaign by Wildlife Trust of India, has been making waves across elephant range states. This unique campaign encourages collective action among policymakers, media, infrastructure agencies, legal professionals, and wildlife experts, fostering insightful discussions on challenges, conservation strategies, and sustainable development models for elephant protection.
The workshop brought together journalists, experts and ecologists | Photo by Sreenanth K
Shri P. Oppili, the Environment Editor at Times of India, expressed that the workshop proved to be highly beneficial. He highlighted that participants gained valuable insight and connected with experts in the field of conservation and journalism during the event.
Vivek Menon, the Founder and Executive Director of Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), expressed his satisfaction with the diverse participation of both seasoned media professionals and young journalists in the nature reporting workshop. He conveyed his belief that the interactions between the participants and experienced nature conservationists not only enriched their knowledge but also supplied ample material for their future reportage.