Mehboobnagar (Andhra Pradesh): The bail petition of six people accused in the Nagarjuna Sagar Tiger Reserve poaching case was dismissed yesterday by the Judicial Magistrate – I Class, of Kalwakurthy, Mehboobnagar district in Andhra Pradesh. The petitioners, including three police personnel and a national level shooter, were apprehended for hunting deer, key prey species for tigers, within a designated Tiger Reserve.
Ashok Kumar, vice-chairman, Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) who rushed an adept trial court lawyer to assist the prosecution authorities, said, “Hunting wild animals belonging to any schedule in the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 is punishable by law and the degree of punishment varies with the severity of the crime. The petitioners are accused of hunting deer; however, their offence is more serious than it seems, as the hunting took place within a protected area and that too within a Tiger Reserve. We are determined to ensure that all the accused, including the police personnel who have abused their authority, are punished severely.”
About 13 people have been accused in this case of game hunting. Among the accused is an expert shooter with a lifetime membership in the Indian Rifle Association, a home guard, a police constable and a sub-inspector. A sambar deer and a spotted deer, both listed under Schedule III of the WPA were killed.
The arrest was spearheaded by C Manohar, Forest Section Officer, Kondanagula Section, Achampet Range of the Tiger Reserve. His alert response to a tip-off on the hunt led to the red-handed arrest of the six hunters on May 1, soon after the gunshots were heard. Two vehicles and six cell phones were seized from the accused. An empty cartridge, a used bullet and two unused bullets were recovered from the scene of crime. Carcasses of the hunted deer were also recovered.
The police personnel and the shooter, were arrested after interrogation of the six apprehended persons. The sub-inspector reportedly facilitated escape of the accused persons who evaded arrest on May 1. Three of the accused are still absconding while the remaining are currently under judicial custody.
A Shankaran, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Achampet Wildlife Management Division, who supervised the operation, said, “Nagarjunasagar TR has a good tiger population of about 60-70 tigers, including about 14-15 in Achampet, and a good prey base comprising spotted deer, sambar, nilgai, chausingha, etc. There is no excuse for the accused who have disregarded the law and hunted, that too in a Tiger Reserve. Bail plea of six accused were dismissed yesterday. The four other accused in custody filed their bail plea yesterday. We are countering it with our plea.”
Saurabh Sharma, the assisting WTI lawyer, said, “Hunting any animal within a Tiger Reserve attracts a minimum punishment of three years along with a fine. The jail term, as in hunting of Schedule I animals, can also go up to seven years.”