Mayurbhanj (Odisha), July 29, 2013: Ten Ho tribesmen living in and around Simlipal Tiger Reserve have put down their traditional hunting weapons vowing to not hunt wild animals again.


The surrender of bows and arrows to the Forest Department was brought about through intensive awareness drives carried out as part of a Rapid Action Project (RAP) implemented by Honorary Wildlife Warden, Mayurbhanj, Satyanarayan Das and Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and was supported by David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation (DSWF).


Ten members of the Ho tribe voluntarily surrendered their hunting weapons to the forest department. Photo credit: Satyanarayan Das

 Simlipal TR, also a UNESCO biosphere reserve, is spread over 845.7 sq km in Mayurbhanj district of Odisha. Including tigers, Simlipal is home to over 42 species of mammals, 1076 recorded species of plants, including 96 species of orchids. Around 15 villages, predominantly comprising Ho tribesmen, inhabit within the bounds of the reserve; the Ho tribe is incidentally one of the most populous in India. 
“The villagers here have been dependent on forests for livelihood and sustenance for generations. It would be unfair to stop them from doing so without providing them alternatives,” said Das.


Long conversations were held with tribesmen, trying to understand their problems, and explaining to them the benefits of living sustainably.

Photo credit: Madhumay Mallik/WTI

 Accordingly, the Forest Department has been striving to provide them alternative means of livelihood, he added. “Roads have been constructed in the village and solar street lights have been erected, employing the locals, under various government schemes. There are also plans to better their irrigation systems and find other ways to ensure they have sufficient water and electricity supply.”
Earlier this year, Das approached WTI for the RAP to help spread awareness on the significance of wildlife and its conservation. The RAP was initiated in April and went on through June to coincide with the tribal hunting festival – Akhand Shikar.
Since April, more than 10 awareness drives have been conducted in the villages. Long conversations were also held with individual hunters as well as with groups. 


Simlipal National Park, also a UNESCO biosphere reserve, is inhabited by 42 mammals. Photo credit: Rudra Mahapatra/WTI

“It was disheartening initially; it is a difficult choice for them, but they are beginning to understand that it is not sustainable,” said Rudra Mahapatra, Field Officer – WTI, who is helping out with the awareness drives. Rudra added that the change would have been impossible without proactive action of the Forest Department authorities, specially Divisional Forest Officer, Karanjia, Asish Kumar Behera, who met the villagers on several occasions, trying to understand their problems and find solutions.
“More such weapon surrender is expected,” added Das.


Apart from the talks, banners and signboards were put up around the villages, to ensure people had enough information about legalities, and ways to protect the forest. Photo credit: Madhumay Mallik/WTI

The villagers have also formed a small but efficient informer network, to check on activity of poachers. At least 15 cases of poaching has been stopped by the Forest Department with the help of this local body.