Pakhui: Hornbills are especially vulnerable in North-east India due to the traditional value of these birds for their feathers, casques, medicinal value of their fat and flesh among many tribal groups. Many areas especially in eastern and central Arunachal have such high hunting pressure that the great hornbill has become extremely rare or locally extinct.
The Nishi tribals used the hornbill beak to symbolize manhood and valour. “Earlier only the village priests used to wear the hornbill beak as a symbol of their authority. But slowly, male members of the Nishi tribe began wearing it as a symbol of their valour,” says C Loma, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), Pakhui Wildlife Sanctuary, also a Nishi himself. Nabum Tadab, another Nishi and founder of the Arunachal Wildlife and Nature Foundation (AWNF) began lobbying with the Nishis to switch over to fiberglass replicas. The Wildlife Trust of India responded to a request from the AWNF and manufactured the fiberglass replicas. About 96 fiberglass hornbill beaks have been distributed and WTI is sending another 100 beaks to Pakhui.
Today, hunting of hornbills have been banned in all Arunachal’s wildlife parks and signboards to that effect have been put up by WTI. The village development councils have also announced a fine of Rs 5,000 if any person is caught hunting the hornbills.
WTI has recently started a poster campaign to save the hornbill in association with AWNF and the sate forest department. The poster urges the people to protect the hornbill.
All these conservation efforts have helped the hornbill. According to Mr Loma, the last census of hornbills done in the park based on nesting sites had a count of 1,000 hornbills of all the species present in Pakhui.
India is home to nine species of hornbills with the doubtful occurrence of a tenth species, the plain-pouched hornbill (Aceros subruficollis) now believed highly unlikely. The northeastern region has the highest diversity of hornbill species within India. Five hornbill species are found here, with the northeast being the exclusive habitat for three of them, the wreathed hornbill (Aceros undulatus), the brown hornbill (Anorrhinus austeni) and the Rufous-necked hornbill (Aceros nipalensis). The other two species, the great hornbill (Buceros bicornis) and the Oriental pied hornbill (Anthracoceros albirostris) also occur in other parts of India. All species except the Oriental pied hornbill are listed under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act (1972). The Rufous-necked hornbill is listed as ‘rare’ in the IUCN Red Data Book (1990).
The great hornbill is also the state bird of Arunachal Pradesh and is the most valued and hunted by tribal groups, followed by the Rufous-necked hornbill.
Great hornbills inhabit the canopy of tall evergreen forests from sea level to 2,000 meters elevation. The species is limited by nest sites, naturally occurring cavities in large diameter trees emerging from the canopy in mature forest. There are no current figures for population size. Estimates of population density of 2-4/100 sq. km., for non-degraded habitat, have been used. Accurate measurement of remaining habitat is not available. However, the fact that tropical forests are disappearing and being degraded throughout the species range is incontrovertible. What data is available indicates continuing decline of populations.
This species is entirely dependent on forest habitat and as a key seed disperser, may be critical to forest survival and restoration. The birds primarily consume ficus fruits, with additions of small amounts of oily fruits and animal prey. The nesting habits of hornbills are unique and exemplified by the great hornbill. The nest site is a natural cavity in a large diameter tree, which extends above the forest canopy. Such sites are rare and limiting to Hornbill populations, even in pristine forests. In areas that have been logged, birds may persist for years without reproducing.
While Nishis use the upper beak for the traditional ceremonial headgear, Wanchos adorn themselves with the feathers, particularly the tail feather of the great hornbill. Tribal women often wear the feathers of the Oriental pied hornbill in their ears.
Hornbill feathers are a matter of prestige, not everyone can possess them. Among the Wanchos, only the chieftain and other important people in the tribe’s hierarchy can wear the feathers. At current market prices, two body feathers can be purchased for Rs. 260, while a single tail feather can cost up to Rs.700.
Apart from the ornamental value, hornbills are also killed for their meat. Some of the tribal groups also use the fat of hornbills for medicinal purposes. Some tribal traditions are cruel. The Wanchos boil the whole bird in water without skinning or even removing the feathers, then a slit is made in the stomach and the fat is taken out and left to boil in the water. This process is supposed to give pure oil, which has medical properties. Mishmi women are allowed to eat only rat and hornbill meat.