Kaziranga, August 6,  2013: Quick and proactive  action by the Assam Forest Department officials  and local people saved  an elephant calf from being displaced from its natal  herd in Golaghat  district. The calf stuck in a tea garden ditch was immediately  rescued  and reunited with its natal herd.
The incident occurred last week. The month-old male calf  fell into a  ditch in the Numalighur Tea Estate, as  its herd comprising 38  individuals were crossing through the garden.
Rajib Hazarika, Assistant Manager of Numalighur Tea Estate  informed  the local Forest Beat office, who in-turn alerted the IFAW-WTI team at   the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) to save  the  elephant calf.







File photo: A calf being guided towards its herd in a tea estate in August 2012.          

            Photo credit: Abhijit Bhawa/WTI




“I was in the tea  garden and monitoring the plucking that day,"  recalled Hazarika.  "Suddenly I heard two elephants were shouting and a  big herd was waiting  quite far. I saw an elephant calf was stuck inside  the drain near section 9 of  our garden. I immediately alerted the  authorities and instructed the tea  pluckers to go to a safe distance."
A team of forest guards and officials led by Pratap Saikia,  the Beat  officer of Numalighur Beat under Golaghat Territorial Division rushed   to the spot.
Saikia said, “As we reached the spot, we saw that the elephant  calf  was just inside the drain and unable to move. The herd was waiting at a   distance and shouting. To disperse the herd, we used whistles, fire  crackers  and fired one round of bullet in the air.”
The herd left the site and waited at a distance in the garden. Wasting  no time,  despite the risk of the herd returning, the forest guards and  officials  immediately lifted the elephant calf from the channel.
The herd continued waiting. After examining the  calf for injuries,  and on finding none, the team left the calf where the herd could  see  it. They kept a watch on the action of the herd.
After a while, the mother along with a few other elephants  approached  the calf. They reportedly sniffed the calf, seemingly tried to   reassure the young one, and returned. A while later, the entire herd  approached  the calf, and took it along.
“Elephants pass  through our garden regularly and we consider this as  normal as our garden is  located next to a reserve forest. There is a  standby instruction in the garden  to record any kind of elephant  movement and not to disturb them unless they charge. That nearest forest   office was informed about the incident immediately, and we could save  the calf. I was personally present at the location  to take a stock of  the situation,” said Vikas Joshi, General Manager, Jorehaut Tea Limited,  who is also a passionate naturalist, who has reportedly  helped in  elephant calf rescues in the past.







File Photo: A calf is helped out of a ditch and reunited with its mother (right) in Assam in August 2011.        Photo credit: Sashanka Barbaruah/IFAW-WTI




  Dr Rathin Barman, Deputy Director, WTI and CWRC-in-charge,  said,  "This is absolutely wonderful. Many elephant calves have been  displaced  unnecessarily and this is one of those rare instances where this was   effectively avoided by prompt action of the authorities and people  present  there; our heartiest congratulations to the team for saving  this young elephant  calf."
Every time a young animal is found alone, CWRC promotes  reunion with  their mothers or groups as the case might be, as the primary  response.  Only when reunion is unsuccessful is the individual admitted to CWRC   for hand-rearing and long-term rehabilitation. 
Till date, IFAW-WTI staff from CWRC has assisted the Assam  Forest  Department in reuniting 14 elephant calves and their natal  herds. And  seven permanently displaced calves have been hand-reared and  released  the wild. Currently, six elephant calves are being hand-reared at  CWRC  for rehabilitation.