NOIDA, July 31, 2013: When people talk about wildlife they agree on the need to protect them, how they need to be kept safe from all those determined to profit from them. Not talked about often, however, are the people trying to do exactly that – the frontline staff of the Forest Department. These are people who have dedicated their lives to ensure that another poacher doesn’t shoot a rhino, that one more tiger doesn’t get trapped in a snare, that a new elephant is not poisoned to death, that more sandalwood is not illegally traded. They are the ones who brave the cold biting winds in Kashmir, the floods of Kaziranga, the scalding winds of Rajasthan’s deserts, the searing heat of central India, the extreme humidity of the Western Ghats. Often without basics such as jackets, they look at neither their comfort nor their convenience when it comes to doing their duty. They have only one aim, one thought in their mind- making sure that they protect the forests and the plants and animals within.









On World Ranger Day, we express our deepest gratitude towards these brave guardians of the wild (Van Rakshak) 







Today on World Ranger Day, we express our deepest gratitude towards these brave guardians of the wild (Van Rakshak), who battle it out with poachers and natural elements every single day of their lives.
Any conservation effort without their support would be futile. Through our Van Rakshak Project, we have been, for over a decade, trying to make their journey at the frontiers of our jungles more secure, more comfortable by building their capacity through trainings, equipping them with basic field gear, and boosting their morale by privately insuring them against injury or death on duty.
We bring to you the stories of two of these unsung heroes: Leela Bai, who has been in service of nature for 28 years in central India, and Lankeswar Lahkar, for 27 years in northeast India. 
 We also bring you the words of the people who have been working directly or indirectly with them for years, who wish to acknowledge and express their appreciation for these rangers.
“While World Ranger Day was celebrated for the first time in 2007, it seems that it still hasn’t caught up in India in a big way,” comments Dr Jagdish Kishwan, who recently retired as Additional Director General of Forests (Wildlife) and is currently the Chief of Policy Division & Programme Implementation in WTI. “We have many heroes of the Forest Department of different States of our country who have laid down their lives in protecting our precious natural heritage. There are many instances of forest guards, foresters and rangers getting killed in the line of duty, trying to stop poachers, illicit removal of timber and other valuable forest produce. Today the least we can do is pause for a while and salute these fallen saviours and heroes of the forest and bio-diversity of the country.”
“I have worked with front line staff for many years now and I have seen the paradigm shift in the way front line staff protect our forests. The mobile phone and motorbike have completely changed their methods, and things are much easier. Of course, this is not to say that their work is any less. It’s just that now they have a multitude of more ways to fight poaching, trade and assist in protecting our forests, and as long as they have their goals clear, these technologies, and of course – organisations like ours – are always there to help and support them in any way that they need,” says Dr R P Mishra, the Regional Head of Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra for WTI.
Dr Bhaskar Choudhury, the Regional Head of Assam for WTI makes a heart-felt statement as he says, “Our front line staff is the lifeline of any protected area. The dynamics of wildlife conservation has changed dramatically today, with very little space left for wildlife. Animals are living in a mosaic dominated by people, and cornered in islands. In this context, our forests rangers’ roles and responsibilities have become more complex than ever. We may have a number of acts, rules, protocols and plans for wildlife conservation, but when it comes to defending wildlife in their habitat, we completely depend only on these front line rangers.”
He adds, “The poaching industry has seen a huge change from sustenance to organised gangs with sophisticated weapons and large fortunes being made overnight. But it is these warriors in the remote parts of the country that – without basic comforts – lend all their time and effort to fighting this tough battle. I salute their dedication for wildlife conservation on this auspicious day.”
Dr Anil Singh, WTI’s Regional Head of Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, talks about the need to boost the staff’s morale. “We are proud of these guards at the frontline and we need to encourage them, support them in every way possible. They should not only be well equipped but also well trained, knowing that they have the full support of organisations like ours. For conservation to be successful, communities need to be involved and the participation of the forest guards in this also, to spread awareness, is invaluable. We are proud to have such dedicated people and hope that more support continues to pour in for them from all corners of the country.”
“Frontline staff across the country face tremendous and numerous challenges in their duties. The equipment kits we provide periodically are basic requirements that could improve their work conditions at least a little,” sagely says Sunil Kyarong, the regional head of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagaland for WTI. “It is heartening to see that any effort helps to make a substantial difference in their operations.”
Dr Rathin Barman, Deputy Director of WTI gets straight to the point as he remarks, “Forest guards form the backbone of conservation in India. They fight all sorts of challenges in our forests, and are responsible for executing all the plans and theories discussed at the top level. They make and keep our forests beautiful. On the occasion of World Rangers Day, I salute each one of them for their sincerity and dedication for securing our future”
 
As Jose Louies, the Regional Head of South India and the lead of the Enforcement and Law Division in WTI simply puts it, there would be no conservation or protection of our natural heritage without these unsung heroes.