Kaziranga, April 2, 2014: In a bid to boost conservation efforts amongst the locals of Wokha district, an exposure visit to Kaziranga was organised in March 2014 by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) for the members of the village council, representatives of Natural Nagas (NGO), and those of ‘Ranpen-Ranri Okho’ and fishermen community.
Renchimo Shitiri, the Chairman of the Pangti Village Council commented on the importance of the trip and remarked how it helped not just him but everyone who visited the National Park, saying, “Nagaland does not have the kind of biodiversity that Kaziranga enjoys and it was extremely exciting to be able to watch nature at work in such proximity! I am extremely grateful to Wildlife Trust of India for bringing us here.”


At the national park. Photo: yuri Pator/WTI

Obemomo Jami and Nyamo Odyou, the Gaon Burahs (Village Heads/Elders) from Pangti also conveyed similar feelings when asked what they felt about the necessity of such a visit. They also added that this was a once in a lifetime experience which should be and will be shared with all the villagers back home, who should also benefit from their newly gained knowledge.
‘Ranpen-Ranri Okho’ members, Mhonbemo Shitiri (also the Gaon Burah of Village Aasha) and Renchio Jami expressed appreciation on being able to visit the IFAW-WTI Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) and learning the importance of rescue and rehabilitation, in addition to being able to incorporate it in their lives to help save animals. Yankorao Kikon and Yimtse Jami, two fishermen, were visiting the park for the first time and expressed awe at the beauty and vastness of the national park.
“We’ve been working with the local communities of Pangti, Sungro and Asha villages for a year now to conserve the Amur falcon, with support of Nagaland Forest Department and local NGOs like Natural Nagas. They deserved a well-earned exposure to the wild animals living in their natural habitat. Visit to Kaziranga and CWRC must have whetted their appetite and commitment for saving and conserving not only Amur falcon, but also other wild animals and birds of Nagaland. Such visits are very helpful in raising awareness and motivation level of local communities for wildlife conservation,” said Dr Jagdish Kishwan, Chief Advisor to the ED, WTI.
Sunil Kyarong, the Regional Head of WTI for the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Nagalad, was happy at the positive response garnered with the visit. “With hunting seeped so heavily in the traditions and cultures of these tribes/communities in Nagaland, it’s refreshing to see such an impact being made through awareness that the locals themselves are now coming forward saying that they want to protect these animals. Many of them were visiting an area like Kaziranga for the first time and seeing wildlife like the greater one-horned rhinoceros, the wild buffalo or even a herd of elephants roaming freely in the wild is an experience that leaves you with nothing short of respect for mother earth and her wards.”
You may read more about the Amur falcon conservation work here.