New Delhi,: A large quantity of seized wildlife products were destroyed on 26 th April 2005 at National Zoological Park New Delhi, by burning them in a closed incinerator, in the presence of wildlife officials from the Central and Delhi government and representatives from the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI).
The seized items included various herbal and cosmetic items containing Saussurea lappa, an endangered plant species placed under Schedule VI of Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972. Roots of  Saussurea lappa contains resinoids, essential oils, alkaloid, inulin, a fixed oil and other minor constituents such as tannins and sugera and are used to make various cosmetic and herbal products.
Products such as Shaneem antiseptic cream, Mahnarayan oil, Punarnavamandoorvati, Cough syrup, Purim tablets etc are found containing S. lappa as one of the ingredients. Sea shell products such as bangles made from Trochus niloticus, Lambis spp and Fasiolaria trapezium were also destroyed. The market value of all these products would be approximately six lakhs.
Officials present at the venue included K. N. Singh, Assistant Director, Wildlife Preservation (MoEF), Aarti Singh Wildlife inspector (MoEF), V. Bharti Dasan, Wildlife inspector (Delhi government) and representatives from WTI.
Assistant Director K. N. Singh said, “All the items were seized under the Schedule IV and Schedule VI of Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972 and violation of exim policy CITES.” He said, “Many of the manufacturers are not aware that the ingredients used to make these items are banned under the Wildlife Act. They are ignorant that these plant species are protected and are included in the Schedule VI of the Indian Wildlife Act. They are also ignorant about legal implications if they are caught.”
Normally the Deputy Director of MoEF is empowered to hear cases on items seized under Schedule IV or Schedule VI of the Wildlife (Protection) Act 1972.
Referring to this case, Assistant Director K. N. Singh said, “With regard to these seizures, the offending parties have requested us to get it compounded. We have imposed the maximum penalty and all the cases are now compounded. Had these cases been referred to a court it would have lingered around two to three years more and the penalty would have been a paltry three to four thousand.”
Referring to a recent court hearing on a leopard skin case he said, “The petitioner simply got away by paying a paltry sum of rupees 3000/-. Even the case was dragged for several months. Therefore for us, the best way is to get it compounded with maximum penalties if the articles are Schedule IV or Schedule VI items.”
The present seized items were recovered from the IGI Airport, Karol Bagh area of New Delhi and Dilli Haat market in south Delhi.
Pic: Amlan Dutta /WTI