Borjuri, Kaziranga , December 28, 2014: The foundation stone of CWRC Interpretation Centre was laid by RP Agarwalla, PCCF (WL) and Chief Wildlife Warden, Assam, in presence of Ruth Powyes, CEO, Elephant Family, Ram Boojh, UNESCO India and Vivek Menon, Executive Director & CEO, Wildlife Trust of India, at Borjuri near Kaziranga National Park on December 28, 2014.


Unveiling of the Foundation Stone of the CWRC Interpretation Centre.

Photo: WTI

The CWRC interpretation center will have three sections– Mark Shand Asian Elephant Wing, Kaziranga World Heritage Wing and IFAW-WTI Animal Rescue Wing — which will focus on key conservation issues facing KNP, besides highlighting the work done by WTI and its partners on the various conservation initiatives in Assam.
The interpretation centre will not only educate students and youngsters on the challenges in conserving Assam’s natural heritage, but would also appeal to the senses of intellectuals in Assam as some of the interpretive graphics would highlight the historical and cultural significance of animals, especially elephants. For instance, innovative plans are there on the cards to educate the masses on the Assamese treatise on elephants.

The aim is to make all exhibits interactive to keep the visitors engrossed. Some of the topics on Asian elephant would include basic elephant facts, elephant ecology, human-elephant interactions, habitat and corridor securement, WTI projects on elephant conservation in Assam, and most importantly, an exhibit on Mark Shand, Founder Director, Elephant Family, who passed away recently. This section will also have a ‘treatment kraal’ for providing medical treatment to captive elephants.



A photo op with the delegates and locals after the Foundation Stone

was unveiled. Photo: WTI



The Kaziranga World Heritage Wing will have exhibits on the history of Kaziranga National Park, efforts of Assam Forest Department in conserving the Brahmaputra Valley, its recognition as UNESCO World Heritage site, besides interactive outdoor activities for school children. The main purpose of this wing is to spread awareness among various stakeholders, especially locals, on the status of Kaziranga NP as UNESCO world heritage site.
The third section IFAW-WTI Animal Rescue Wing, will showcase the rescue and rehabilitation activities of the adjoining rescue centre CWRC. Since 2002, the centre has been involved in rescue and rehabilitation of displaced animals in Assam. The centre has handled over 3,500 cases of animals in distress so far, over a period of 12 years. Through this Animal Rescue wing, the visitors will for the first time get access to live feeds of animals being nursed at the centre at the Audio-Visual presentation hall that has been planned as well.
The site is located opposite the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) run since 2002 by IFAW-WTI and Assam Forest Department.