Kaziranga: An injured flying squirrel was rescued by the villagers at Koliabor in Naongaon district of the north eastern state of Assam and was brought to Center for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) on 18 th April. The velvety brown squirrel-tentatively an Assam grey giant flying squirrel (Peaurista elegans) had sustained severe injuries in the fore and hind legs after an unsuccessful attempt to glide over a tree trunk.
The flying squirrel does not truly fly, but glides through the air, up to 80 yards or more, from the top of one tree down to the trunk of another. It flies with its legs outstretched and the fold of the skin between the fore and hind leg acting as a combination parachute and sail. It can turn while gliding and lands very lightly on all four feet. It scurries around to the other side of the tree trunk, in case a predator has followed its flight.
Anjan Talukdar, the veterinarian at CWRC said, “The squirrel was hit by a branch of a tree. We found numerous cuts on its skin fold. We dressed her wounds and gave her fluids to treat dehydration.”
The flying squirrel was released a day later, a few kilometers away from CWRC at Kanchanjuri after successfully treating him of the injuries. CWRC is a premiere facility for rescue and rehabilitation of injured and distressed animals from Kaziranga and other adjoining areas in Assam. The center was set up by the Assam Forest Department and the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) with support from the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).
In India, all flying squirrel is a rare species and is placed under Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. The rescued flying squirrel at CWRC was about a meter long and is rarely spotted in certain forested areas of Assam. They are nocturnal and feed on most types of vegetation. They also like nuts, seeds, fruits, insects, spiders and birds eggs.
Rathin Burman, the centre manager commented, “People living adjoining the park are gradually beginning to realize the importance of wildlife and they report to us any instance of distressed and injured animals. This particular incident occurred, some 78 kms away from CWRC and it was the villagers who brought the squirrel to us.”
According to Burman, “A number of rescue cases were reported at CWRC during mid-March and April. Two hog deer, one sambar, one elephant calf and yet another palm squirrel were rescued and rehabilitated at the center. Moreover, the number of such cases goes up during monsoon as the water level in most parts of the park rises and with it, the occurrence of disease outbreaks.”
At CWRC these animals are provided with round the clock medical attention, with adequate diet and care, under the supervision of qualified and efficient staff. CWRC follows strict protocols of rehabilitation in accordance to the best international practices.
Pic : Rathin Burman/WTI