It is good news that the tiger population in the country has recovered from the worrisome level it had reached four years ago. The latest tiger census places the big cats’ number at 2,226, 30 per cent more than in 2010 and about 50 per cent more than about a decade ago.

ADVERTISEMENT That is remarkable, considering that the tiger has been fighting a grim battle for survival against many odds. Obviously, the emergency measures taken after the numbers touched an alarming low in 2006 have had a positive impact. A tiger protection force was formed, anti-poaching measures were tightened and efforts were made to involve local communities in the conservation plans. 

The National Tiger Conservation Authority did a good job of co-ordinating these initiatives. The surge in numbers has happened in all tiger reserves in all states, but the southern states, including Karnataka, and Uttarakhand have done better than others. 

But there should not be complacency as the picture may not remain rosy in future. After Project Tiger was launched in 1972 when the tiger count was above 1,000, there have been slides and recoveries. The twin threats to tigers from shrinking or unsuitable habitat and from poachers are still real. 

There were 66 tiger deaths in the country last year, just two less than in the previous year. Only a few of them were natural deaths and poaching accounted for many more. This year has seen seven deaths already, including four in Karnataka. Of these two cubs are believed to have died of starvation! Of the 46 animals which died in Bangalore’s Bannerghatta park, four were tigers. 

Deaths due to poaching should be brought down to nil by further improvement in security measures. There should be more forest staff with better skills and motivation, equipment should be upgraded and community-based efforts should get more attention. 

A major concern is over habitat loss. Reports have indicated substantial shrinkage of tiger habitat because of deforestation or degradation of forests. This will lead to concentration of tigers in small areas, resulting in shortage of prey and increase in man-animal conflict. 

The green corridors connecting the reserves are disappearing. This will prevent the movement of tigers across forests and increase inbreeding. Loss of genetic diversity can affect the health of the animals. These are important considerations when only a few thousands of tigers are left in the country. Efforts should be made to increase the forest area, or to keep it at the same level. The decision to set up new tiger reserves should also be pursued.