If someone asks you for a bribe in a public office, don’t refuse. Instead, do a ‘setting’,” the Aam Aadmi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal had said in his swearing-in speech at Ramlila Maidan in December last year, promising corruption-free rule in Delhi.

ADVERTISEMENTSince that speech, the former chief minister gave at least a dozen calls to sting the corrupt. His party claims that corruption had come down during their 49-day term in the city. Is there any proof of it? Can there be any tangible proof?During the AAP period, there were people running high on adrenalin. 

They were looking out for a shootout with a band of bribe-takers, and the AAP was willing to broadcast them.

While posting a video shot by a “vigilante near Lal Quila”, the party on its official Facebook page had said, “Here is another such video. Not only does the video clearly shows Delhi police’s inhuman behaviour but also the urban legend of police extorting money is caught on camera.”

The video released on January 23 – which is two day after the ‘anarchist’ CM ended his protest against the city police – showed three men in uniform mercilessly beating a man before taking money from his wallet. Even though the police claimed that the man was a pickpocket, all the three cops seen in the video were suspended.

AAP sympathiser Suraj Kumar says, “I have many AAP supporters in my friends’ list. So every other day I was being tagged in some sting video, mostly targeting corrupt policemen.”

After Kejriwal had called off his protest, his AAP government had put out statistics to justify their campaign for demanding executive control of a force they had called “highly compromised and corrupt”.

The government’s anti-corruption helpline launched a fortnight ago, AAP claimed, received about 1,200 `stings’ by people, out of which 930 were linked to policemen. 

One may question the veracity of their claim, but it fits well with the theory that many more are willing to expose the corrupt cops. It also explains why the newly-launched WhatsApp helpline of Delhi police is flooded with complaints against people of their own ranks.

The AAP tapped the public ire against corruption to claim to score big in Delhi Assembly elections. So no wonder the party endorses ‘sting operation’ as an important tool to ensure probity in public life.

‘Trap corrupt cops’

In a bid to garner support from the one of the party’s trusted vote bank, Kejriwal about two months ago urged autorickshaw drivers in Delhi to trap policemen who demanded bribes by recording their voice on mobile phones.

“An auto driver has to pay Rs 5,000-10,000 per month in bribes. I had announced during my 49-day tenure as chief minister that if an official asks for a bribe don’t say no. Record it and send it to me,” the AAP chief had said, promising to act against corrupt policemen if and when his party returned to power in Delhi.

The party has itself relied on a sting operation – allegedly showing attempted poaching of their party MLA by a senior BJP leader – to ward off BJP from forming the government in Delhi. 

It is too early to say whether this will help AAP to stage a comeback.