The State Congress on Saturday decided not to shift its corporators-elect to resorts. Instead, the party has issued a set of dos and don'ts in order to ensure that they do not fall prey to poaching by the rival party.

ADVERTISEMENTAvoid receiving calls from unknown numbers, try to record calls if the BJP tries to lure, be in constant touch with local party leaders and do not leave the town for the next one week - are some of the dos and don'ts issued at a meeting chaired by Transport Minister Ramalinga Reddy. All the Congress MLAs from Bengaluru and almost all the Congress corporators-elect were present in the meeting held at Congress Bhavan on Race Course Road. 

Sources in the party said Reddy asked the corporators-elect not to get carried away with big money being offered by the BJP. All the members will get a chance to become members of BBMP standing committees. 

Besides, the government can nominate some of the corporators to Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) and various boards and corporations, he is learnt to have said. 

He is learnt to have said there was no need to shift the corporators-elect to resorts as it would send across a wrong message to people. The media projects it as resort politics and the party image will be dented, he added. All the city MLAs are learnt to have agreed with Reddy.

Earlier, speaking to this paper, the minister charged the BJP with continuing to lure the Congress corporators-elect by offering money.

He said an independent MLC who is close to a BJP leader has made calls to about seven corporators-elect, including those elected from Vijayanagar and Chamarajpet Assembly constituencies, and offered money for them to remain absent at the mayoral election scheduled on September 11. 

The minister, however, refused to reveal the names of BJP leaders and the Congress corporators-elect who received the offer. Husband of Congress corporator-elect from Hemmigepura, Amarnath, on Friday claimed that a BJP leader had offered Rs 2.5 crore for his wife to remain absent at mayoral election. 

Reddy, who is also Bengaluru in-charge minister, further said the MLC had been making phone calls at the behest of the BJP leaders. Similar offers were made to some of the JD(S) corporators-elect. The MLC is operating from Brigade Millennium hotel. The BJP wants to defeat the Congress-JD(S) alliance at the mayoral election by hook or crook. But it will not succeed, he said.

Sources in the Congress said the party has asked all the corporators-elect to take part in the KPCC office-bearers' meeting on Monday. KPCC president G Parameshwara, Chief Minister Siddaramaih and other senior leaders will participate and appraise them about the alliance with the JD(S).