All eyes will be fixed on the crucial Congress Legislature Party (CLP) meet on Friday as this will be the crisis-ridden party’s first attempt to bring its legislators under one roof amid fears that those leaning towards the BJP may not show up.ADVERTISEMENTCLP leader Siddaramaiah has threatened his party MLAs with the anti-defection law if they skip the meet. “Your absence will be viewed seriously. It will be considered as your decision to voluntarily quit the membership of the Indian National Congress and action will be taken as per the Tenth Schedule of the Constitution (anti-defection law),” Siddaramaiah has stated in the meeting notice.The Congress has 80 members in the Legislative Assembly, including Speaker K R Ramesh Kumar. BJP legislators huddled in a luxury hotel in Gurugram will take a call on returning to the state after the CLP meet. Their stay in Gurugram may be extended for a few more days if a section of the Congress MLAs do not attend the CLP meet, a scenario the BJP wishes will come true. If that happens, the BJP will wait for the party power brokers to rope in disgruntled MLAs by getting them to resign, it is learnt.Also, the BJP has asked its MLAs not to succumb to any poaching efforts by the Congress-JD(S) combine.“Our MLAs will go wherever they want. Who are they (Congress-JD-S) to ask us? Why do they fear if we keep our MLAs together? The Congress has convened an emergency legislature party meeting. Their true colours will be exposed based on how many show up. Your MLAs are disappointed and disgruntled. Don’t pin that on us,” BJP state president B S Yeddyurappa told reporters.On Thursday, Shivaram Hebbar (Yellapur) held talks with KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao. However, Congress sources are wary of former minister Ramesh Jarkiholi (Gokak) not showing up. Also, B Nagendra (Bellary) has sought an excuse citing a court case.There is speculation over whether or not Umesh Jadhav (Chincholi) and Mahesh Kumathalli (Athani) will attend the CLP meeting.