The protesters ridiculed the Congress party saying it’s senior leaders were incapable to handle their legislators and were launching a protest against BJP for the resignation of their MLA. While, the JD(S) stooped to new low facilitating the hopping of BJP legislators from one resort to the other. The behaviour of two political parties was anti-democratic, MLC Ashwath Narayana Gowda said. 

District BJP president Honnappa, secretary H P Mahesh, president of women’s unit of the party Prema, CMC members Ayesha Tabassum and Nanjundapa were present. 

In Hassan

Meanwhile, the party activists in Hassan submitted a memorandum to Governor through the Deputy Commissioner urging him to act tough against Congress and JD(S) parties.

 They claimed that the opposition parties were not cooperating in the implementation of developmental works.

The protesters took out a rally from N R Circle to Deputy Commissioner’s office. They alleged that the acts of two parties were unconstitutional. They have belittled the honour of the State Assembly creating a ruckus during the trust vote and now indulged in street protests, they said. 

State executive committee member Navile Annappa, city president and CMC member D Prasanna Kumar, Manjunath Sharma and others were present. 

Congress protest

The District Congress unit staged a protest against the state government for re-launching the ‘Operation Kamala’ to lure the MLAs of opposition parties into their partyfold, in Chamarajanagar on Wednesday.

The protest march began from the party office and they staged a demonstration at Bhuvaneshwari Circle. They raised slogans against Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa. 

The protesters said the government has been under pressure due to recent political turmoil with eleven BJP legislators quitting the party. 

Hence, to stabilise the party, BJP is indulging in the ‘operation Kamala’ to lure the MLAs of other parties by offering them crores of rupees. It was a mockery of democracy, the agitators claimed.

They condemned the CM and his men for creating rift in other parties and also for arresting the Congress leaders who had laid siege to the chief minister’s house. 

They also warned of intensifying the protests if the government fails to stop the ‘Operation Kamala’ immediately.

They also alleged that the mine czars are funding money for poaching legislators of other parties’. 

The so-called ministers were looting natural resources to save their power. The government was treading a wrong path and insulting voters, they said.

ZP Vice-President S Shivakumar, TP president M Chikkamahadevu, leaders B K Ravikumar, Rathnamma Basavaraju and others were present. 
ADVERTISEMENT