A reply provided to a query filed under the Right to Information (RTI) Act has revealed misuse of crore of rupees in the works taken up to protect the rich flora and fauna in Chikkamagaluru district. 

ADVERTISEMENTIt has also come to light that fake vouchers have been created to withdraw money to pay watchmen at anti-poaching centres that do not exist at all. 

The Forest Department is spending crores of rupees to construct percolation pits in Malnad to ensure that the rain water is not wasted. The department wants the rain water to get into the ground to ensure that forests stay green all round the year. 

Pits to be dug
The government had directed to dig 19 percolation pits each hectare of mangroves. The department pays Rs 740 to dig a percolation pit and Rs 44 is given for the pits dug for planting saplings.The use of earthmovers  is banned inside the ecologically sensitive Western Ghats. However, the Koppa division of the department has dug percolation pits using machines violating the rules. As a result, saplings of many species and trees are being destroyed while using the machines. 

A lower level staffer said, “The range forest officer (RFO) pays us only Rs 150 for digging percolation pits. Though the government has directed to dig at least 19 pits per hectare of mangrove, the senior officials ask us to dig only 15 percolation pits and eight to nine pits for planting.We are also not given bike allowance for the last six months. The RFO and other senior officials get salary on time. Vouchers and bills worth crores of rupees are passed in Koppa office within a day.” 

Fake appointments
The Koppa forest division has opened anti-poaching centres at several locations and has appointed watchmen. But their appointment is only on record. In reality, there are no watchmen, it is said. 

It has come to light that fake vouchers, worth lakhs of rupees, have been created to draw money in the name of watchmen at an anti-poaching centre at Kuduregundu Yadagere Circle near Koppa. Fake documents have been created even on the supply of food to watchers, it is learnt.  

When contacted, the forest department officials said watchmen have not been appointed and point at a piece of land levelled for the construction of an anti-poaching centre two years ago. 

Deccan Herald is in possession of some fake bills created at Kabbinamannu in Balehonnur and Chikka Agrahara forest divisions.  

Minister for Forest and Ecology B Ramanath Rai, when contacted, said “I will collect information on how much money has been realeased to Chikkamagaluru district and will seek complete information on illegality from the senior officials.”
DH News Service