Remember that Airtel advertisement that whipped a maelstrom by reinforcing stereotype that even if a woman, who is a boss at work, comes back home and cooks dinner for her husband? 

It had merely reflected the reality of modern India where a woman is still the boss in the kitchen, whether she likes it or not. Her liking doesn’t matter because the role has been “reserved” for women who have been dutifully doing it generation after generation, without questioning the system. Times have changed, but despite living in a progressive, modern Indian society, some rules haven’t. 

However, there is a growing army of men who are ready with their weapons and tools, and are enthusiastically entering sacred premises of kitchen to cook for their wives, children, friends and family. They understand the fact that if they have a working wife, they ought to share house responsibilities and what better way of serving her tea in the bed and preparing delicious meal when she has a hectic day at work.

“With changing times, progressive thinking and premium lifestyles, cooking is no more a woman’s survival domain. It is a man’s forte too and the role reversal is peeping in fast with new age working couples and nuclear families. I think knowledge of basic cooking skills is the need of the hour for every man,” Rajneesh Wakhloo, who works in F&B industry, tells Metrolife.

“Gone are the days when men were treated like kings with sumptuous platters prepared by their wives. Now if a man has to live happily, pleasing his wife with good food tops the list. And my pals understand this too,” he adds.

Eggs are Wakhloo’s first love and he loves making them three style: poached, omelette and fried with the silicon moulds, set of knives and whisker. He cooks often, especially on weekends for his family, including wife, mother and daughter. 

“It’s important to break the age-old shackles and change perspectives with men and women working shoulder to shoulder. Men ‘must’ cook and serve their wives a meal in bed,” he says.

When Swarup Mukhuty was around 10 years old, he cooked the first meal for himself. “It was roti and aloo ki subzi. I was down with jaundice and was craving for food so I just wanted to eat something good. As there were many food restrictions, so I had no other option,” recalls Mukhuty, senior manager, BSES Yamuna power limited.

While it was one-of-those-rare chances, he would often see his father cooking delicious meals for the family. Cooking came naturally to him and he had no inhibitions when it came to cooking for his family. “I love eating and when I try something out, I like to try that dish in the kitchen. I love to experiment basically. It is a great experience to cook for my daughter who loves khichdi prepared by me,” he says.

The shift in perception has given many wives a breathing space. The idea of cooking with your husband when hosting a party, they feel, is the key for lasting companionship and a great way to bond. “When it’s a big occasion or the house guests are around we usually cook together or else if I am travelling he pampers our daughter with delightful goodies for dinner or breakfast. Weekends are usually the days to ‘indulge’ as all of us in the family wait for the moment when the “chef is at work” either in the morning or for the evening snack,” Ruchi Wakhloo, wife of Rajneesh, tells Metrolife.

“It is a great way to be together as the cooking we do together becomes really memorable,” she says.

This is just the tip of the iceberg, as the Indian audience is exposed to global cookery shows, cooking no more looks a boring activity. It is another form of creativity and a smart weapon to keep arguments at bay, if you are married and a great way to show your 
metrosexual side.