The BJP launched a major offensive against the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) on Thursday and slammed the party for spreading rumours about horse-trading attempts by the saffron party to form a government in Delhi. 

ADVERTISEMENTA BJP MLA even filed a defamation suit of Rs 1 crore against Kejriwal. The AAP, however, stuck to its allegations against the BJP and party leader Arvind Kejriwal tweeted in the morning: “Sources (claim)- Despite public outcry, LG likely to invite BJP to form government today. BJP will accept it...BJP still does not have nos.”

Home Minister Rajnath Singh countered Kejriwal’s allegations on attempts to poach of MLAs and said: “The BJP has never done any horse-trading, nor will it do so in future. The question does not arise at all.” 

By evening, the saffron party demanded an apology from Kejriwal for scandalously tweeting about Jung’s so-called plan to invite the BJP to form the government. 

“The LG-BJP meeting did not happen, so will Kejriwal issue a public apology,” asked Delhi BJP chief Satish Upadhyay.

He said the AAP party leader is in the habit of making false allegations and even people know he is unreliable.

MP and incharge of Delhi BJP, Prabhat Jha, said: “Kejriwal’s party is sinking, therefore he is levelling baseless charges.”

BJP legislator from Rajender Nagar, R P Singh, filed a defamation suit of Rs 1 crore against Kejriwal claiming that the AAP leader defamed his party and this also amounted to his personal defamation.

R P Singh said Kejriwal alleged that BJP is trying to buy the support of MLAs for Rs 20 crore each to form the government in Delhi but this was a baseless claim. 

AAP leader Manish Sisodia stuck to the allegations made by Kejriwal against the saffron party and said how can the BJP claim that it would examine the situation if the Lieutenant Governor invites them to form the government.

“They have plans to woo MLAs of other parties, otherwise, how can they even think of exploring government formation with just 29 legislators,” said Sisodia.

He claimed none of his party legislators was planning to help the BJP form the government. The AAP also called a meeting of its MLAs to discuss the future course of action.

AAP sources said Kejriwal sought an appointment with Jung to seek early elections in Delhi, but the latter refused to give him time due to his preoccupation with the city’s Budget.