Brimming with confidence while flaunting their outfits, fashionistas from different colleges added myriad hues to the first edition of Deccan Herald Metrolife Fashion Show here on Thursday.

ADVERTISEMENTSashaying down the runaway at Shankar Lal Auditorium, Delhi University, student models and designers from 21 colleges put up their best show.

From popular Delhi University colleges like Lady Irwin, Hindu, Ramjas and Shri Ram College of Commerce to private fashion institutes like National Institute of Fashion Technology, JD Institute of Fashion Technology and Pearl Academy, they came up with different themes and creative ideas, giving a competitive edge to the show.

Maitreyi College bagged the first position and won Rs 50,000 in cash and vouchers for their theme ‘Lord of the wild-Tiger’. Dressed in tiger-striped outfits, the girls presented a fine show on the theme against poaching. 

The second prize of Rs 35,000 was won by Lady Irwin College, which presented a collection of dazzling western outfits, titled ‘Contemporary Cleopatra’s Eviction’.Footwear Designing and Development Institute took the third prize of Rs 25,000.

They walked the ramp in golden outfits embellished with sequins. Mahima from Inter National Institute of Fashion Design, West Patel Nagar bagged the Best Female Model prize. 

It was judged by designers Shelly Jyoti and Manish Tripathi, Bharatanatyam dancer Geeta Chandran and popular MTV Roadies contestant Khushi Bhat.

It wasn’t just a women's show. Boys too, with their sartorial elegance and attitude, won the hearts of the audience as well as the judges. Anuj Singh, Trinity College, Dwarka, won the ‘Best Male Model award. Boys from JD Institute of Fashion Technology walked the ramp in their crisp and stylish kurtas. Adding uniqueness to their outfits were the bandgalas in printed style. 

The GD Goenka University boys showcased a collection on the Banaras theme. They had donned kurtas and dhotis with a touch of royal elegance. 

The show wasn’t merely about attire and attitude. It was also about social themes and innovative ways to recycle material. Bharati College presented a collection created out of waste plastic, newspapers and CDs.

The event was held in association with Monte Carlo. It was powered by Da Milano, and gift vouchers were from Vega and online clothing store Gritstones.com.