For the first time in a century, tiger numbers in the wild have risen. According to conservationists, there are 3,890 tigers in the wild today, up from 3,200 in 2010. The latest figures are heartening asthey signal that strong efforts at conservation of endangered species can yield positive results. A section of wildlife experts warn that tiger numbers being cited may be inflated; their numbers may have ‘increased’ because of improved technologies and methods for tracking and counting tigers rather than an augmentation in their population itself. It is too early to celebrate as the tiger remains an endangered species. The present tiger population is still small especially when compared to the roughly one lakh tigers that roamed the forests a century ago. Much remains to be done to pull tigers out of the danger zone. For one, most of the threats that pushed the tiger into the category of endangered species remain potent. While the killing of tigers for sport may have declined over the past decades, poaching continues as the demand for tiger parts is on the rise. Importantly, tiger habitats are being lost to industrialisation, urbanisation and development or getting fragmented. This is a major problem in India, which is home to 70% of the world’s tigers in the wild. 

Extension of National Highway-7, for example, is seriously fragmenting India’s Kanha-Pench tiger corridor, destroying this lifeline for the long term survival of the tiger. If these forest corridors vanish, so will the tiger and other wildlife. While India, Russia, Nepal and Bhutan have done a commendable job in bringing the tiger population back from the brink, this is not the case with many Southeast Asian countries. Cambodia has lost all its tigers in the wild. Inspired by the successful translocation of tigers in the Panna tiger reserve, conservationists plan to translocate Indian tigers to Cambodia. Indian experts are warning against it as Cambodia lacks the required prey-rich, people-free habitat that is necessary for tigers to survive. It may do tiger conservation more harm than good.

Studies reveal that human beings are more willing to work to conserve animals that are powerful and handsome or cute and cuddly than creatures that are less appealing to the human eye. In this respect, the tiger is fortunate. Its majestic appearance drew conservationists’ attention. Certain species of spiders and frogs that are on the brink of extinction have been less lucky. Their un-endearing appearance won them few supporters and they slipped into extinction. This selective approach to animal conservation must change.

ADVERTISEMENT