The Aam Aadmi Party today accused BJP of poaching its legislators saying the party should stop "low level politics" and demanded immediate dissolution of Delhi Assembly and announcement of fresh polls.

ADVERTISEMENT"BJP tries to lure opposition MLAs unethically. AAP MLAs refuse," the party tweeted.Later in the day, the party called a meeting of its MLAs, chaired by party chief Arvind Kejriwal and senior leaders Gopal Rai and Kumar Vishwas to take a stock of the situation.

"BJP has been trying to lure our MLAs by offering money and posts for the last few days. A leader of Shiromani Akali Dal and a person identifying himself as a lawyer and an active BJP member have been instrumental in this. These people have been contacting AAP MLAs but to no avail. All the MLAs reported the matter to party's central leadership," a resolution adopted by AAP said.

Earlier in day, AAP MLA from Rohini, Rajesh Garg alleged that he was approached by some BJP men thrice since the last three days to quit the party.

"On June 15, when we were holding a dharna against government's drive against e-rickshaws, a man approached me and asked me to join BJP. The next day, another man claiming to be an official of a leading spices company contacted me to join the party.

"On June 17, again an old man came to my office and wanted to speak to me in private. He asked me to join BJP. This conversations were recorded by a television channel," Garg told PTI.

AAP MLA from Trilokpuri Raju Dhingan also levelled similar allegations.

"I got a call some 20 days back asking me to join the BJP in return of money and a ministerial berth," Dhingan said.

AAP's resolution also condemned "low level politics" of BJP and said that it was beyond comprehension why the BJP was shying away from dissolution of assembly and declaring elections.

"We demand that the BJP should immediately stop its low level politics. The Assembly should immediately be dissolved and elections should be declared," resolution also stated. 

Earlier, in an interview to a television channel last week, party chief Arvind Kejriwal had alleged that BJP was luring AAP MLAs.

In the 70-member Delhi Assembly, BJP had 32 MLAs, including one of its ally Shiromani Akali Dal, AAP 28 and Congress has 8.

After the Lok Sabha polls, three BJP MLAs - Harsh Vardhan, Ramesh Bidhuri and Pravesh Verma - have been elected as MPs, bringing its tally down to 28.

To form the government, any party needs to have support of 36 legislators.

The party also gave a clear indication that it stood firmly with former Delhi Law Minister Somnath Bharti in the midnight raid at Khirki extension case.

"Bharti had raised his voice against ongoing sex and drug trade in Khirki extension area and had launched a struggle against it. Party respects the judicial system. We shall respect the court verdict in this matter. At the same time, we shall also go to the people of Delhi with issue and will respect their verdict on the issue," the resolution said.

It also targeted the BJP over inflation and said AAP had managed to contain inflation within 10 days of coming to power."AAP government had immediately brought down the water and electricity tariff. Corruption was also brought down substantially during this period.


"The BJP had promised during elections that it would bring down inflation and corruption soon after coming to power. We demand that the BJP should immediately fulfill its promises," it also stated.