Located in a small lane in Indiranagar, this place calls out to all noodle lovers to experience something unique and taste 'Ramen' noodles in a new avatar. ‘Pot-O-Noodles’ has an array of options in their menu to choose from and each dish has an interesting twist added to it, in terms of the ingredients and taste.  

ADVERTISEMENTA small place with about five to six tables spread across, this place has a very romantic set up and is quite pocket-friendly considering the portions that are served. If you are a Chinese cuisine lover, visit this place just for the experience of the food. From soups and dim sum to noodles and fried rice, the menu covers every possible part of the cuisine. 

For starters, ask for a bowl of  ‘hot and sour chicken soup’, which has the right proportion of spices with a perfect combination of sweet, sour and chilli taste, and will surely make you feel refreshed. While you are slurping it, ask for a plate of ‘poached chicken wontons’(dim sum) and a ‘grilled teriyaki chicken skewers’. If you are not a dim sum lover, be careful as you might not like the taste of the sweet and sour sauce that is served with it. However, the chicken skewers are delectable; they are soft and have the right amount of spices and flavour. 

For the main course, you can go for their ramen burgers. The interesting part is that they have used ramen noodles as the burger bun and layered it with either teriyaki chicken or pork with a poached egg or any vegetarian patty. If you are not a burger fan, try out their noodles or rice items and you will not regret it. Ask for a plate of chicken or a prawn fried rice or taste their chilli garlic noodles. Everything in this section is just right for an empty tummy. They also have a healthy section in their menu that serves whole wheat noodles or stir-fried flat rice noodles. 

This place is good either for a quick bite or for those days when you just want to eat some good food without spending much. Though the service can be a little faster, the ambience is pretty clean and quirky. ‘Pot-O-Noodles’ is located at 777/U,13th Main road, Indiranagar 2nd Stage. For details, contact 49653507.