While again seeking dissolution of Delhi Assembly, the Aam Aadmi Party on Monday asked the Lieutenant Governor Najeeb Jung to hold fresh polls as soon as possible.

ADVERTISEMENTAAP leader Manish Sisodia said after meeting Jung along with party convenor Arvind Kejriwal: “We told LG that we want Delhi Assembly to be dissolved. He (Jung) said other parties want the same.”

He added that polls in Delhi should take place in the same phase as that of Jharkhand and Jammu & Kashmir election (14 December or December 20). 

The LG during the day also met representations from both the BJP and the Congress as part of his consultation process over government formation in the national capital.

Kejriwal, who has repeatedly accused the BJP of trying to poach its legislators to form the government in Delhi, after his meeting with Jung doled out congratulatory messages to ‘people of Delhi’ and party MLAs.

“In last 8 months (since he resigned as chief minister in February after spending 49-days in power), every effort was made to buy our MLAs. They withstood all pressures n lived upto ppl’s expectations. Salute to them,” he said on Twitter.

“Finally….. Congratulations to the people of Del,” he said in another Tweet.

Jung had not favoured dissolution of the Assembly as recommended by the council of ministers headed by Kejriwal and kept it in suspended animation.

 The AAP on Monday evening also took a dig at the BJP. “If they wanted fresh elections, why did they create all this suspense for all these months?” Sisodia said.

The AAP leaders meeting with the LG took several dramatic turns.

Early in the day, Kejriwal in a letter to Jung asked him to make public the “formal” stand taken by BJP – which is the single largest party in the hung Assembly – while requesting to reschedule his 2 pm appointment.

 “It is already 12.50 pm. I already have prior commitments, which I am unable to reschedule despite my best efforts... Meanwhile, I am sure you already have had a discussion with BJP. I would be grateful if you could tell us what is their formal stand on this issue,” the former chief minister in the letter said.