The BJP’s central leadership has 'clearly instructed' its state president B S Yeddyurappa not to make any moves aimed at destabilising the Congress-JD(S) coalition in Karnataka.ADVERTISEMENTWith this, the BJP has virtually drawn curtains on any talk of conducting Operation Lotus to the poaching of rival party legislators.Yeddyurappa, who returned from Delhi after attending Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s swearing-in ceremony and holding talks with senior leaders, told reporters that the BJP would perform its duty as the opposition party in the state.“Our Delhi leaders have asked us not to try anything to destabilise the Congress-JD(S) government,” Yeddyurappa said. “We’ve been clearly instructed not to bring on board any legislators of the Congress and the JD(S),” he added.The BJP, he said, was not in a hurry to come to power. “We are capable of working as the opposition party. So long as the government focuses on the development, we won’t have a problem,” he said.Curiously, Yeddyurappa claimed that Congress Legislature Party (CLP) leader Siddaramaiah was “plotting” to get some legislators to defect. “He is plotting to send us some MLAs just to gain personal mileage. We’re aware of his political gimmicks. For now, we’ll be silent. Let them do whatever they want fighting amongst themselves,” he said.Independents in Cabinet?The Congress-JD(S) coalition is said to be leaning toward the idea of inducting into the Cabinet two independent legislators - R Shankar (Ranebennur) and H Nagesh (Mulbagal) - as an immediate measure to prevent them from extending support to the BJP. At present, there are three vacant Cabinet berths - two of the Congress and one JD(S).Sources said the regional party was considering keeping its one berth vacant for now. However, a final decision on whether just the existing berths should be filled up or if some ministers should be asked to resign to make way for disgruntled legislators will be taken by Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy and Congress Legislature Party (CLP) leader Siddaramaiah, sources said.