Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has rightly expressed his concern over the dwindling numbers of tigers in India’s forests and decided to write to state chief ministers to take more effective steps to protect the national animal. Reports of continuing tiger deaths are disquieting. A week after parliament was told that there were 1,411 tigers in the country, discoveries of dead tigers have reduced that number to 1,399. Even this figure is disputed. It is thought that there are only about 1,000 tigers left in the country. The number is less than when Project Tiger was launched in 1972. Last year saw the death of over 100 tigers, the largest in recent years. This year there are fears of a worse situation because this is the Year of the Tiger in China, which might increase the demand for tiger parts in that country.

Both the Centre and state governments are responsible for the maintenance of the tiger population as conservation is a state subject. But their actions and policies sometimes do not agree. In Sariska, while Central and state officials blamed each other, the tiger became extinct. The forest department in most states are understaffed. Some have not recruited guards for many years. The guards also lack the best equipment and arms and are no match for poachers who use the most modern devices and arms. The changes periodically brought about in habitat specifications by states have sometimes led to loss of connectivity between tiger habitats, constricting their movements. As Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh has noted, many states have not notified the buffer zones in protected areas. They should be persuaded to do so, so that there is no disruptive construction activity near the forests. The nexus between the poaching mafia, local politicians and forest dwellers should also be broken, but this is easier said than done. The relocation of families from tiger reserves has not made much progress for various reasons. There also needs to be better collaboration with the authorities in Nepal, Myanmar and China to prevent the smuggling of tiger parts.

If there is effective action in these areas, it is not difficult to maintain the tiger population. This is proved by indications that the number of tigers has not decreased in Karnataka’s Bandipur and Nagarahole parks and may perhaps have gone up in the terai region in the Himalayas. But the overall outlook is grim and that should spur concerted and sincere efforts everywhere.ADVERTISEMENT