The unwavering commitment of D V Girish, who was awarded the RBS ‘Protect the Tiger’ Award, has played a crucial role in protecting the Bhadra Tiger Reserve, says Arundhati Pattabhiraman.

ADVERTISEMENT“When I encounter a problem, I won’t rest till I find a solution,” says D V Girish, environmentalist and conservationist, who recently won the Royal Bank of Scotland’s Project Tiger Award. It is with this attitude and determination that Girish managed to give a new lease of life to the Bhadra Tiger Reserve, which is now one of the country’s best wildlife sanctuaries. 

“I’m a simple farmer in Chikmagalur. I couldn’t have done all this without the support of the Wildlife Conservation Society and the expertise of a lot of other people, who strove to make this forest what it is today,” he says humbly. 

Girish’s passion for wildlife and his love for forests was not something that happened overnight. His childhood experiences played a key role in shaping his views on conservation. 

“I was exposed to wildlife pretty early, as I lived just 12 km away from the Bhadra reserve. Moreover, I come from a family of animal lovers. My mother would tend to injured animals and then release them back in the wild, while my grandfather would rescue snakes. So in a way, I found my true calling pretty early in life,” he says. 

“My biology teacher Shadakshari further kindled my love for the forest. My first real visit to the forest was in 1982 for a school camp. After that, there was no stopping me.

 During the course of several visits to the reserve, I met like-minded people. However, my meeting with tiger expert Dr K Ullas Karanth proved to be a turning point. An interaction with him made me realise how much I loved this place. And our plan to save the reserve took shape in 1987-91,” he explains. 

Speaking about the Bhadra Resettlement Project, Girish says, “There were 16 villages inside the reserve and anti-forest activities like mining, deforestation, poaching etc were rampant. In 1978, Dr Karanth conducted a survey and submitted it to the government, following which a proposal was designed in 1992. We were firm that the forest should be inviolate. We kept monitoring wildlife and lifestyle of the villagers. There were two aspects to the resettlement plan — acquisition of land and actual rehabilitation. I interacted with the villagers and in 2002, 13 villages were shifted out of the reserve.”

However, despite having won several awards after the success of the project, Girish has not hung his boots. He continues to track the well-being of the rehabilitated families. He has also served as the honorary wildlife warden of the Bhadra sanctuary.

“The best moment of my life was when anti-forest activities stopped in the reserve. Now, even the animal numbers have improved. Bhadra rehabilitation was probably the best phase of my career. Every morning, I wake up to the mountains and it gives me peace,” he says.

This passionate conservationist had to face a lot of challenges during the course of his work. He recalls one of the lowest points of his struggle, “There was large scale bamboo extraction happening in Bhadra and I worked very hard to protect these trees. But in 2004, when the bamboo shoots were in full bloom, there was a big fire, which was allegedly started by some thugs, in connivance with the Forest Department. It broke my heart. But after a year, fresh shoots appeared. That is the magic of nature. Now, when I see the bamboo trees, I get a sense of fulfillment.”

At a time when wildlife reserves in the country are battling the dwindling number of big cats, conservationists like Girish have a long struggle ahead.

“Personally, I have lot of hope. What we have done in Chikmagalur in the last 20 years is tremendous. Challenges will always be there. Lack of awareness, however, is a major setback,” he says.

Man-animal conflict is another issue that has been plaguing our country. “Conflicts are not going to end. Issues like forest fragmentation and encroachment will continue. But the basic solution is to put as much space as possible between people and the forest. In reality, our country has only 3 per cent of protected area left. 

“We need to maintain forests without disturbing them. Western Ghats are the most ecologically diverse and fertile areas in the country. We need to change our attitudes or lifestyles to protect them. We need to reduce consumerism with more action and less talk.”

Any word of advice for aspiring conservationists? “We need to be sincere in our approach. Focus and contribute in some way. Be aware, vigilant and sensible. That is the mantra. A lot of youngsters have formed WildCat-C to deal with the issues in the forest. I get a sense of fulfilment when I see them in action. I’ll run all my life, but I will pass on the baton. When we started, we were just a couple of friends, and now, we are a movement.”