The spotted deer that was found dead in Omkar forest range of Bandipur National Park has died of bullet injuries, according to the initial post mortem report.

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to the report, the bullet has ripped through the wild animal making a four-inch entry wound and 19-inch exit wound.

Six persons, including Deputy Superintendent of Police (CID), Mysore, T K Dharmesh, had allegedly entered the forest unauthorisedly and opened fire on five spotted deers. While one deer succumbed to bullets, the other died after it fell into a well on the periphery of the forest. The carcass was retrieved on Saturday and according to the officials, it bore no bullet wounds.

The incident came to light after the Forest officials on patrol in Kottanahalli block heard gun shots on Thursday night. Suspecting attack by wild jumbos, the staff on patrol contacted their colleagues in Hosapura block, who denied any such incident. However, they again heard gunshots and suspected poaching.  All the six were arrested during a combing operation.

According to a Forest official, Dharmesh claimed that he had received information on naxals hiding in Bandipur and hence had entered the forest to hunt them down. But, senior officials said all the six do not belong to Anti Naxal Force and they have concocted the story to escape legal action.

Prior permission from the Forest department is mandatory before launching any operation against naxals in national parks, tiger reserves and wildlife sanctuaries. However, Dharmesh had not obtained any such permission, the officials said.

DySP hospitalised

DySP (CID) T K Dharmesh arrested on charges of poaching a deer in Omkar range of Bandipur National Park on Thursday, has been admitted to Sri Jayadeva Cardiovascular Sciences and Research Centre in the Mysore.

 Head of Mysore unit of the hospital Dr Sadanand told Deccan Herald, “Dharmesh is suffering from heart and respiratory-related complaints. He is advised treatment for two days.” Dharmesh and five others arrested for poaching were produced before JMFC court in Nanjangud on Friday. They were remanded in judicial custody till February 15. Following his (Dharmesh) health complaints, the court granted permission for treatment at the said hospital.

 According to preliminary investigation, five others - Ateeq Ahmed, Mohammed Hamid, Farid Harimiya, Manjaiah and Raghu from Mysore, arrested along with Dharmesh, have no criminal antecedents. Mohammed Hamid is a licensed double-barrel gun-holder as per the records available at KR police station. They have been lodged in Nanjangud sub-jail.