Four tigers have died mysteriously, in the forests of Lakhimpur-Kheri and Pilibhit districts in the past three months, dealing a body blow to the tiger conservation efforts in the state.

ADVERTISEMENTA six-year-old tiger was found dead in a canal inside a forest in Pilibhit district on Sunday making it the third victim of suspected poaching in the past three months.

While some officials suspect that the big cat might have slipped into the canal and died, many others rejected the possibility as the tigers do swim. 

The body has been sent for post-mortem examination to the Indian Veterinary Research Institute in Bareilly district.

Earlier also, a tiger had been found dead at the Haripur forest range in the same district in May. Another tiger was found dead barely metres away in the same forest a day later triggering panic among the forest officials.

The officials then suspected poisoning as the cause of deaths though the autopsies remained inconclusive. 

According to the experts, the autopsies were not likely to reveal poisoning as the cause of death if they are performed several hours after death. Five persons all suspected poachers were arrested in connection with the deaths.

A tiger was found dead in the Dudhwa National Park in Lakhimpur-Kheri district in May. The forest officials had suspected it also to be case of possible poisoning.

On Monday, suspected poachers attacked some villagers and opened fire at them injuring two, including a minor, in Pilibhit forests, according to the police sources here.

According to the forest officials, the poachers plant poisoned baits in the forests to kill tigers. 

Many a times, the villagers also try to kill the tigers as they consider them a threat to their cattle. The cattle, which graze on the edge of the forests, are often preyed upon by the tigers.

Tigers also sometimes stray into the villages and even into the big towns. A tiger had recently strayed into the outskirts of Lucknow. The officials caught it after several days with great difficulty.