Congress leader and Water Resource Minister D K Shivakumar, who is gearing up to get anticipatory bail (following threats of his arrest), said on Sunday that he isn't scared of being investigated.ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking to reporters at his Sadashivanagar residence, Shivakumar, who was on his way to New Delhi on Sunday to meet with senior counsels, claimed that he hadn't committed any crime.Accusing the BJP and the media of trying to "malign" his name, Shivakumar stated that he was a seasoned politician and ready to handle any curveball that comes his way."Politics is not football. It's chess, and I'm well versed in it. Why should I be scared when I haven't done anything wrong? I'm clean, honest and dedicated. I'm being hounded by the media, which has been repeatedly broadcasting that I will be arrested. I'm not a criminal. I don't possess any ill-gotten wealth. But this doesn't mean that I am naive. I came to Bengaluru to be in politics. I entered Vidhana Soudha at the age of 27," he added.Shivakumar, also stated that he would cooperate with Central investigation agencies, as he had nothing to hide. He claimed that he neither had offshore accounts nor properties abroad."But yes, I have two properties in New Delhi. However, I haven't stashed any money there. I have declared all my assets and filed the Income Tax returns. So far, I haven't got any notice from the Income Tax department. In case I do, I am willing to face any probe," he declared.Stating that he was consulting 80-odd advocates, Shivakumar said that it was common for rivals to target powerful politicians.Shivakumar alleged that the BJP was making desperate attempts to destabilise the coalition government by poaching ruling party MLAs. "Those MLAs have informed me. But, I know the number game," he said.BSY is a friendShivakumar rubbished BJP state president B S Yeddyurappa's claims that he hadn't written to the Income Tax department urging it to take action against him and his brother and MP --D K Suresh."Yeddyurappa is my friend. But I don't know why he is denying that he wrote to the IT department. Politically we might differ - the basic principles of both our parties is different. But we have mutual respect for each other. Ironically, Yeddyurappa too is facing many charges," Shivakumar pointed out.Not trying to topple govtReacting to Shivakumar's remarks, Yeddyurappa said that the BJP was not making any attempt to topple the coalition government."God knows why the Congress is so apprehensive. Many Congress leaders will soon join BJP. The party is gearing up for the Lok Sabha polls," he added.