Celebrity, award-winning chef from ‘Amaranta’, The Oberoi, Gurgaon, Tejas Sovani is visiting Bengaluru for a week to promote his new summer menu. It is a signature four-course set menu with choices under each course for lunch and dinner.ADVERTISEMENTThe chef has curated a delectable fiesta of modern progressive Indian cuisine. The course starts off with an amuse-bouche that included a choice of a compressed melon tartare or a cured salmon tartare with lemon gel and a mustard cream. A glass of Sauvignon Blanc, The Broken Fishplate 2015, pairs well with the hors d’œuvre.The second course has two options: A cheeky combo of a spiced potato bao injected with a ‘Khatti Meethi Teekhi’ chutney or a perfectly poached 63-degree egg perched on a bed of quail roast and kurma gravy. The next course offers a vegetarian option of ‘Birbal Ki Khichdi’ with delicious ‘Corn Tikki’, ‘Achar Gajar Gobi’ and ‘Rice Chiwda’. The non-vegetarian choice is ‘Khichdi’ with a succulent ‘Lamb Galouti’, ‘Achari Gosht’ and ‘Rice Chiwda’.However, the showstopper is the sixth course. Diners can choose from ‘Pickled Vegetables with Homemade Cottage Cheese’ and ‘Lehsuni Palak’, ‘Black Cod Scallop and Lobster Trail with Kokum Curry’ or a ‘Five Spice-crusted Lamb Loin accompanied with Fried Bacon and Coriander and Baby Root Vegetables’. The course is cleverly paired with a Cabernet-Merlot, Grover Zampa Vijay Amritraj Reserve.A delightful ‘Chukundar Halwa Samosa’ with a mango foam and fruits of the season forms the seventh and last course.Says Chef Tejas, “ The food we are serving is offbeat and unique. My aim through this course was to help diners personally connect with the dishes. Our country needs ambassadors who can showcase our cuisine to the world. These dishes have been overshadowed by the more prominent ones. Everybody knows what is a vada pav and not a dabeli. That is what we are trying to change.”The menu will be on offer under the supervision of Chef Nimisha Verghese until May 30. The pricing options are - Rs 1950 plus 18% GST(food only), Rs 2,250 plus 18% GST (with a glass of house wine or a pint of beer of a soft beverage) and Rs 2950 plus 18% GST (for the four-course meal and three glasses of wine, paired with relevant courses).