The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has submitted a report to the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) pointing to the irregularities at Anshi-Dandeli Tiger Reserve (ADTR).

ADVERTISEMENTAccording to the report, the youngest tiger reserve in Karnataka is in a pathetic condition.

The report was submitted to MoEF in August 2014. A copy of which was sent to the State government, but the State government has refused to act on it. This has now raised questions on its tiger reserve tag. If things do not improve, the Anshi-Dandeli Tiger Reserve can lose the tag which it had earned in 2007. 

This will not augur well for the tiger population in the State, which is presently not keen on declaring Kudremukh National Park as a tiger reserve, despite NTCA and MoEF giving clearance for it. 

Karnataka has five tiger reserves and is home to over 300 tigers, the highest in India, pointed out a NTCA official. 

NTCA conducted a field study of ADTR based on a written complaint filed by a team of conservationists from the region lead by Shankar S, in June, 2014. In the complaint they had questioned the construction and condition of anti- poaching camps (APC), illegal construction of roads and resorts and forest encroachment. 

As per NTCA report submitted to MoEF, funds were misappropriated in the guise of construction and maintenance of anti- poaching camps.

The APCs at Diggi and Phansgali were not newly constructed but old structures of Mysore Minerals Ltd were being used as camps. There is no APC at Gal, Kumbarwada Range. The report also points out that the salaries being paid to anti-poaching watchers are not in compliance with NTCA guidelines. Further, the ADTR lacks protection and management. There is a need to carry out a detailed investigation on deployment of minimal watchers and staff.

Also, the tiger conservation foundations have not held executive committee meeting for the past two years and the funds allocated to the reserve have been spent without consulting the committee. 

Castle Rock Range presently is not a part of ADTR and is also not declared as a buffer area. This should be done immediately to ensure that funds of the foundation are used appropriately and wages are  paid to the staff properly.

The report has also questioned the style of functioning of the field directors.