A deserted Vidhana Soudha has become a common sight in the last few years, thanks to the political shenanigans. Saturday was no different with the administrative work in the corridors of power coming to a grinding halt.

The majority of the meetings scheduled at the Vidhana Soudha and the Vikasa Soudha were cancelled due to the bundh call given by the ruling BJP. With the Governor sanctioning the prosecution of Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa, it is being feared that the preparation of the annual budget, too, would be hampered.

Politics in Karnataka has been characterised by instability since 2004. Three different Governments have come to power in the last six years: The Congress-JD(S) regime headed by N Dharam Singh, the JD(S)-BJP combine rule led by H D Kumaraswamy, and now, the Yeddyurappa-led BJP government. The State was under the President’s rule for a brief period. The quick succession of the governments obviously indicates that the netas are bent on holding onto power at the cost of issues concerning people’s welfare.

Not a smooth sail

It wasn’t a smooth sail for all the three dispensations. Dharam Singh, under the probing gaze of JD(S) supremo H D Deve Gowda, always feared losing his throne. Gowda always found fault with Singh and dashed off missives on a daily basis. Singh’s fear came true in 2006 when Kumaraswamy staged a coup and became the chief minister by joining hands with arch-rival, the BJP. The 20-month tenure of the BJP-JD(S) combine was also tumultuous. Cracks developed in the coalition and the partners had almost walked out on each other. 

While Kumaraswamy wanted the government to take over the Bangalore-Mysore Infrastructure Corridor project from NICE, Yeddyurappa, as deputy chief minister, opposed it. Most of the time was spent on speculation over transfer of power to the BJP according to the power-sharing agreement. The denouement came with the JD(S) snapping ties with the BJP, leading to imposition of President’s rule. The consequent elections held in 2008 saw none of the political parties securing an absolute majority. 

‘Operation Lotus’

Yeddyurappa, being the leader of the single largest party, managed to form the government with the support of six independent MLAs. The BJP consolidated its position by poaching the Opposition legislators through ‘Operation Lotus.’ Byelections were necessitated as MLAs shifted their political allegiance. The independents and defectors were given ministerial berths, causing heartburn among senior BJP legislators.

Hardly one year in power, Yeddyurappa faced a revolt from his party legislators — the Bellary Reddys — in 2009. He managed to retain the seat by sacrificing some of his close aides. However, things have not been smooth since then, with MLAs raising the banner of revolt time and again.

The year 2010 proved to be stormy for Yeddyurappa. The government was embroiled in controversies as a surfeit of scams were ‘exposed.’ The very survival of the BJP regime was in jeopardy at one point of time with the government being asked to prove its majority on the floor of the House. The barrage of allegations of nepotism and illegalities in land allotment and denotification further tightened the noose.

The Chief Minister and Governor Bhardwaj have always been at loggerheads with each other. The BJP, on several occasions, billed the Governor a Congress agent. The Governor’s salvos became unpalatable for the BJP. A war of words soon ensued between the Constitutional head and the ruling party. In his all-out efforts to stick to power, the Chief Minister hardly reviewed the performance of his ministerial colleagues. The survival tactics came at the cost of good governance and development.

Adverse effects

The continuing political instability has cast adverse effects on several mega infrastructure projects. DLF, a private entity, which evinced interest in investing in the Bidadi township project, backed out as the government failed to take crucial decisions at an appropriate time. The High Speed Rail Link project to Bengaluru International Airport, cleared in 2006, is yet to see the light of the day.
ADVERTISEMENT