No-frills carrier Indigo Airlines today said it will increase frequencies on the domestic and international routes this summer as it adds nine aircraft to its fleet by the year end.

ADVERTISEMENTThough IndiGo has no plans to expand its international footprint as of now, "this year, we are concentrating on increasing our frequencies in the international and domestic routes in the summer schedule," the airline's President, Aditya Ghosh, said on the sidelines of an AIMA function here.

IndiGo, the only airline which has reported profits in the past few quarters, is further enhancing its customer experience with the launch of 12 new flights on its network. At present, it operates 307 daily flights connecting 31 destinations across the nation and abroad.

He said the airline plans to add nine aircraft to its fleet this calendar year, taking the total fleet size to 60.

On the government allowing direct import of aviation turbine fuel, Ghosh said it is an interesting proposition.

"We are waiting for oil marketing companies (OMCs) to come back with a propsal on how they are going to implement it. Sounds like an interesting proposition, but the devil is in the details," he said, adding that the rise in fuel prices was affecting profit margins of all airlines.

Last month, the government allowed airlines to directly import aviation turbine fuel instead of buying from local refiners if they wanted to. Besides, it has also approved a proposal to allow foreign carriers pick up stake in their Indian counterparts. 

The IndiGo President said, "We are not looking for investment so it does not matter to us. Where the money comes from, whether India or abroad, it does not matter to us, what matters is how the money is utilised."

He, however, added that any avenue which brings in new technology and new ideas is always welcome.

"It encourages competition, keeps airlines on the toes, its good," Ghosh said.

On reports that Indigo was poaching staff from beleaguered carrier Kingfisher Airlines, Ghosh said, "We have as many freshers joining us as many new recruits. We are not targetting anyone. So, anyone who meets our criteria, has given the right notice period, etc, is free to join us. Now, we are a growing airline."
The airline has about 5,000 employees.