Post-repo rate cut to 6.5% by the Reserve Bank of India, there has been a misplaced euphoria and dilemma among the borrowers of housing and other loans. The RBI, to reduce the asset liability mismatch and to facilitate seamless transmission of rate cuts to borrowers, made banks move to the new lending rate system – marginal cost of funds-based lending rate (MCLR) – with effect from April 2016. 

Under MCLR, the lending rate is based on the fixed deposit rates of different tenures. Earlier, the variable lending rates on loans were linked to the base rates and not benchmarked to the deposit rates. The MCLR is decided on the cost of deposits plus premium loading, depending on the tenure of the type of loans - housing, mortgage, corporate or vehicle loans.

For example, most banks have linked the MCLR to their one year fixed deposit rates. Presently, the MCLR of many banks is in the range of 9.20-9.50%. By adding tenure premium spread of 25 – 40 bps,  the variable interest rates charged by these banks on housing and other loans would now be in the band width of 9.45-9.90%. Since the variable lending rates are linked to the deposit rates, all these loans, post April, will have a “reset” clause in the loan contracts. The lending rates will come down if the FD rates get reduced and vice versa. This yearly process of reset will be tedious with the Damocles’ sword of increase in the loan rates hanging on the borrower  till the pendency of the loan.
The periodic changes in the equated monthly instalments (EMI) will also affect the standing instructions of EMI deduction mandated by the customers to their bankers / employers.

Fear has replaced cheer: It is pertinent to note that only the variable/floating rate loans such as home loans, LAP (loan against property), corporate loans and vehicle loans will be linked to MCLR and not the fixed rate loans. The borrowers are now in a piquant situation whether to borrow or not to borrow and whether to go by the fixed or the variable rates, specially the housing loan clients whose loan tenure varies from 5 to 30 years.

The new borrowers under the MCLR will straightaway benefit by getting the best and the least rates less than 10% for housing loans. For mortgage loans, the rates will be between 10 and 12%. For vehicle loans, the rates will be in the range of 10-12.5% and linked to the variable 1 year fixed deposit rates.

The conservative borrowers and salaried class, who are comfortable in allocating a fixed amount of their salary towards the housing loan repayment, can opt for “fixed rate” housing loan products which will be normally 1.5-2% higher than the least of the variable rates offered in the market. Presently, it can be in the range of 11.5-13%. Care must be taken to ensure that the fixed rate is truly fixed for the entire tenure of the loan and has to be properly inked in the loan agreement without any ambiguity. Otherwise, borrowers will experience “rate fixing!”

Viable options

The real dilemma is for the existing borrowers who have availed housing loans prior to April 2016 and are at different periods in their loan tenure cycle. But there is no need to panic as these borrowers are also having viable options which can be explored but to be exercised carefully.

Option 1: Borrowers with good repayment track record without cheque returns of their EMIs and credit rating score of CIBIL (Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited) above 800, should negotiate with their present bankers and housing finance companies (HFCs) for substantial reduction in the rate. Such rate can be in the range of 10.5-11% as against the new rates offered to fresh borrowers at less than 10% under the MCLR. 

This option is advantageous to borrowers who have completed more than half their loan tenure where most of the interest component would have already been paid. There will be a nominal fee for such “reset” advantage which is worthwhile instead of undergoing the rigmorale and the trauma of the entire loan process with a new bank. The existing banker is better than the untested angel.

Option 2: In contrast, for existing borrowers who have completed repayment less than 5 years, the ideal solution is to switch over the loans to banks which are offering MCLR rate at 9.5% or less. There is further concession of another 25-50 bps for women borrowers who are joint owners of the property. For switch over of loans, banks/HFCs cannot levy any pre closure charges as per the RBI/NHB regulations.

It is ironic and strange that the MCLR rates are applicable only to the commercial banks and not to the HFCs which are directly coming under the ambit of National Housing Bank (NHB), a wholly-owned subsidiary of the RBI. This anomaly can witness peculiar scenes in the market. Existing borrowers with HFCs will migrate to banks which are offering less than 10% on housing loans. 

New borrowers who are conservative and risk averse, would prefer HFCs (HDFC, LIC HFL, Can Fin Homes, GRUH, REPCO,DHFL), whose floating rates are also in the range of 10-10.5% but not on MCLR. This situation leads to “flight” of loans, poaching and market cannibalisation. Intelligent customers will choose to invest in fixed deposits in HFCs with long tenure with higher returns and avail loans under the MCLR with lower rates from the banks.

In sum, the borrowers have to exercise their choice after carefully weighing the pros and cons of the options in this rate flux  situation as the MCLR methodology is on a ‘test drive’ on the customers.

(The writer is a Bengaluru-based banker)