As per a common practice among all tribal communities of the state, angling is not permissible to those living outside the district as local people consider rivers as community assets.

Breaking away from the practice, the river rich in fish was formally thrown open to all anglers last November at a ceremony held at Subu village nestled beneath the picturesque Thrizino circle.

As a bonus, a weekly market on the banks of the river was also inaugurated at the village by the MLA of the Thrizino-Buragaon circle, Kumsi Sidisow. Anglers had for long wanted to catch the elusive Golden Masheer fish found only in the Bichom river - a trophy for the anglers.

Local people say the river has plenty of Golden Masheer which, they claim, is the toughest among fresh water sport fish. However, conservationists are sceptical about the opening up of the river as they fear it might encourage poaching of the fish.

The Wild Life Protection Society, based in West Kameng district, credited with the idea of opening the river for angling, said the spectacular fish species would only survive if angling holidays were set aside to make people understand the importance of conservation of the fish.

The Wildlife Society's president, Miali Sidisow, said it had prohibited all sorts of poaching in their community forests and rivers and even imposed stringent punishment and fine for disobeying the prohibitory order.

"There are different poaching techniques ranging from bombing, using electric current and use of bleaching powder. But we have prohibited it all," he said. Along with Golden Masheer, there are also other prized species available in the river like Schizothorax Richardsonii (common snow trout), Barilius Barna, Glyptothorax Horai, Gara Gotyla etc.
They can easily reach the spot as it is located on the Palizi–Thrizino road about 14 km from Thrizino and 5 km  away from Palizi.

Both the places have inspection bungalows to facilitate their stay and if they care for additional adventure, they can raise a tent near the banks of the river. There is also a bamboo-thatched house where anglers can take shelter at a nominal fee.

Sidisow said that beside local traders, businessmen from outside the state like Rangapara, Balipara and Tezpur in Assam’s Sonitpur district sold their goods in the weekly market. With the introduction of a weekly market and angling, the villagers will get to understand the importance of flora and fauna, he said.

For the convenience of the angler and prospective customer of the daily market, the Society is hammering hard to open a resort or an eco-camp near the angling spot. They are also planning to introduce river rafting in the near future.ADVERTISEMENT