The Ministry of Environment and Forests was spending nearly two-thirds of the funds allocated under Project Elephant, to compensate towards losses caused by elephants in human habitations, said Minister of State for Environment and Forests, Prakash Javadekar, here on Sunday.

The Centre has allocated Rs 200 crore for the Project between the years 2012 and 2017, where the focus will be on the development of elephant corridors and mitigating man-animal conflict in the country, he said. Javadekar, who chaired the Consultative Committee of Members of Parliament meeting, comprising 30 MPs from across the country, regarding the Elephant Corridor project in the country, held at Jungle Lodges and Resorts, Bandipur Tiger Reserve, sought the opinions of locals and officials with regard to the  problems faced by them, due to the conflict in the region.

He said that 88 regions have been identified as Elephant Corridors, out of which 21 were outside reserve forests declared by the Centre.

On an average, as many as 400 humans and 100 elephants die in the country on an annual basis due to the conflict between the two, while 0.8 - one million hectares of agricultural land and other properties were being damaged by elephants, he said.

Given the fact that more than 50 per cent of the elephant population has declined over the last 60 to 70 years due to man-animal conflict, destruction, shrinkage and degradation of habitats ‘Project Elephant’ was launched by the Centre to restore the elephant habitats, in 1991.

Financial assistance is being provided to 16 elephant States under this scheme, with a total plan outlay of Rs 200 crore (2012-17). As many as 28 elephant reserves, covering 61,830 sq km within eleven landscapes have been constituted so far.The Ministry is also providing financial aid for establishment of Elephant Rescue Centers in Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Haryana. 

Ananth Kumar Hegde, MP and member of the Committee, said that the Centre should initiate measures to avoid the death of elephants in train accidents, which are constantly being reported from States like Uttarkhand and Jharkand. He said that a action plan should be formulated regarding the amount sanctioned for elephant camps, expenses incurred and research activities taken up at such camps.

MP Kiranmoy Nanda spoke about the cases of poaching of elephants and sought necessary action to avoid repeat of such incidents in the country. Representatives present in the meeting, also questioned the credibility of reports about the increase in population density of elephants in the country.

While the meeting was earlier scheduled to be held on Monday, it was advanced to Sunday evening, owing to the engagements of the Environment Minister. ADVERTISEMENT
Forest department sources said that while such meetings are usually held in New Delhi, the recent meeting was convened at Bandipur for the members to “experience the ground realities”. However, field visits had to be cancelled due to the Minister’s tight schedule.

Sources added that issues regarding the acquisition of land for the project, conflict hotspots and measures taken to avoid conflicts in such regions were also discussed during the meeting.

Memorandum
Following the meeting, a memorandum was submitted by local farmers to Javadekar, demanding that 138 villages around Bandipur Tiger Reserve should not be as declared Eco-Sensitive Zones.

Farmers alleged that the government was acquiring the land of farmers, who were living in the fringes of these forests. Residents of such villages are victims of man-animal conflict and policies of governments, the memorandum read. They urged the Minister to take steps to reduce or prevent conflict in such villages. 

Noting that several illegal resorts had sprung up inside reserve forests, they requested the Mnister to issue orders to clear the illegal structures, and not to permit any such buildings inside the reserve.

They also requested to ease norms for the construction of roads for villages inside the forests, permission to grow agricultural and horticultural crops, permission to allow cattle to graze inside reserves, and to avoid sanctions for developing basic facilties in the said villages.