One of the popular Chinese restaurants in Delhi, The China Kitchen is soon going to complete 10 years. The award-winning restaurant at Hyatt Regency, Bhikaji Cama Place is celebrating the occasion by launching a revised food menu. The modifications are done by chef Jack Aw Yong, executive chef at Park Hyatt Beijing. 

ADVERTISEMENT“Sixty per cent of the menu has been changed, whereas the remaining 40 per cent, which includes some signature dishes, remains the same. We have tried to incorporate plenty of meat and veggies in the dishes,” says Yong. Even the colour and design of the menu has been changed from traditional red and black to pure white. Also, for the first time pictures of the dishes have been printed on the menu for a better understanding.

With over 60 varieties of dumplings, the menu offers an array of meat and poultry dishes such as ‘Braised Spicy Pork’, Twice Cooked Crispy Lamb Shank’, ‘Peking Duck’ and sea food like ‘Chilly Jumbo Crabs served freshly baked baguette’ and ‘Red Chilli, Coriander Shrimp Mousse, Ginger Soy’.

“Taking account of the competition in the industry, it is very important for us to keep ourself updated. We have to have something different and unique to offer to our patrons. Only then, we will be able to stand out. The menu, which was last changed in 2014, is an assortment of many exclusive and authentic Chinese dishes. 

Also, our core ingredients like chillies and sauces are imported from different parts of China,” says Yong, who has opened restaurants like Asia Made in China at Grand Hyatt, Beijing, Hubin 28 at Hyatt Regency Hangzhou and China House at Grand Hyatt, Mumbai.  

From the new menu, the chef chose dishes for Metrolife to give a glimpse into their new offerings. The special menu comprised appetisers like ‘Poached Chicken’, ‘Beijing Style Vegetable Dumpling’, ‘Crystal Vegetable Dumpling’, ‘Red Chilli, Coriander Shrimp Mousse, Ginger Soy’ and ‘Black Peppered Chicken, String Bean, Corn Puff’. What we liked the most were vegetable dumplings, shrimp mousse and the corn puff. Stuffed with adequate fresh pea, sweet corn, celery, wood ear fungi and seasonal veggies, the dumplings were steamed to perfection. The corn added a little crunch to the preparation. Whereas, the juicy shrimps placed inside a small red chilli piece came as a surprise. Served with ginger soy, the red chilly added a little spice to the dish. Each piece can be gobbled at a time, the way appetisers are liked. 

Coming to the main course, we were served with ‘Twice-Cooked Crispy Lamb Shank’, ‘Crispy Spicy Prawn’, ‘Traditional Mapo Tofu’, ‘Stir-fried Asparagus with Porcini Mushroom, Crispy Shallot’ and ‘Northern-style Fried Rice’, ‘Sichuan Fried Noodle’. No doubt, the lamb shanks were the highlight of the evening. The meat was juicy as it was cooked twice — boiled and later deep-fried. The crispy small lamb pieces cooked with garlic, cumin, coriander and chilli were a delight to our taste buds. 

However, not many may like the jumbo prawn that was served. Cooked in one piece with shells intact, it was difficult to eat it with a chopstick. And, when we dug inside it, the flesh lacked salt and other spices. 

However, those have a sweet tooth will be happy to try ‘Sweet Memories’, which is an assortment of their signature dishes like mango and coconut ice cream, mango mousse, fresh seasonal fruits, vanilla pudding and the chocolate cigar. But beware of the cigar which is served with neat whisky. With every bite of the chocolate stick, you are supposed to take a sip. Though it leaves your mouth with a pungent aftertaste, it is a must try. 
 
FAQs: 
n Address: Hyatt Regency, Bhikaji Cama Place
n Timing: 12 noon to 2.30 pm, 7 pm to 11.30 pm.
n Meal for two: Rs 5,500 (plus taxes).
n For reservation call: 
011 26791234.