Since the ancient times, the story of human-animal interaction has been anything but harmonious. From his initial awe and fear for them to employing cunning tactics to subdue them for his benefit, to snatching away their natural habitats in the name of development, man’s fascination with animals has mostly led to perilous consequences for the latter. ERC Davidar’s (1922-2010) Whispers from the Wild is an inspiring account of one man’s dedication and passion for restoring the dignity of the creatures of the wild.

ADVERTISEMENTA lawyer by profession, Davidar donned many hats with élan — a naturalist, an ardent conservationist, a wildlife photographer, a researcher and a writer among others. His work towards conserving the flora and fauna of the Nilgiri forests is a testimony to how one man’s clear vision and focused effort can accomplish what an entire system may sometimes fail to do. In Whispers from the Wild, which is a collection of some of his unpublished writings along with his famous work Cheetal Walk, Davidar takes the reader on an informative journey into the wild. 

Growing up in a family that kept a zoo comprising animals like leopard, sambar and wild boar, fascination for jungle and wildlife came naturally to Davidar. When his job as a legal professional took him to Ooty, he quickly bonded with the wilderness around him and became a ‘jungle lawyer’. A fun-filled trip down Davidar’s memory lane, the segment titled My Family and Other Animals talks about his childhood experiences with animals that his family kept as pets. Told from the perspective of an impressionable young boy beginning an enduring relationship with nature and animals, the stories here are heartwarming and funny. The section brims with anecdotes about his extended family and their fascination for animals.

For Davidar, a hunter-turned-saver of wildlife, inspired by conservationists like Richard Radcliffe and George Schaller, it was only natural to be living in the middle of the jungle that he so loved. Davidar’s family had bought a piece of land in the Sigur jungle at the foot of the Nilgiri mountains in the 1960s, on which they built a jungle home and named it ‘Cheetal Walk’. The home was so named as a tribute to the spotted deer called cheetal, which was the first animal to greet them on their arrival there. Titled Cheetal Walk, the second section of the book tracks Davidar’s transformation from a wildlife admirer into a die-hard conservationist.

Davidar pioneered many conservation measures as the president of the Nilgiri Wildlife Association. ‘Cheetal Walk’ was the first ever private elephant corridor in India. By throwing open the ‘Cheetal Walk’ for free movement of wild animals, the Davidar family formed lifelong connections with many jungle creatures. As a result, their conservation efforts became more of a personal commitment to the bond they shared with these animals, rather than a responsibility they needed to fulfill. 

While other wildlife scholars were busy with their ‘jeep researches’ in Indian jungles, Davidar spent days together keeping vigil at the holes and caves of wild animals to tell the world about their amazing lives. His articles on wildlife stirred the interest of wildlife enthusiasts all over the world. He was also instrumental in conducting the first co-ordinated census for South Indian elephants in 1979. Davidar family’s love for the elephants was duly reciprocated, as they bonded personally with many wild tuskers. An assortment of Davidar’s adventurous experiments and experiences in the land of the wild, Cheetal Walk is a captivating read.

Davidar was fascinated by tigers, which he believed represented “perfection in creation, the ultimate in evolution and poetry in motion”. When his attempt to communicate with tigers by imitating their voice was successful after years of trying, he was ecstatic. He built six machans to observe his jungle friends, which also gave him ample opportunity to connect with the rhythm and beauty of the wilderness in a deeper manner. His passion for wildlife photography won him many awards.

Whispers from the Wild also highlights the general indifference towards conservation and the loopholes in the way wildlife laws are implemented in our country. The book is an eye-opener with Davidar’s poignant observations on how things like indiscreet killing of wild animals by villagers in order to protect their livestock; taking up plantations that are unsuited for local ecology; failure to involve tribals in conservation activities; unnecessary intervention in wildlife population control; inability to check poaching and smuggling of forest resources, have all disrupted the delicate balance of nature and caused irreparable damage to the flora and fauna of our forests.

Davidar’s zealous devotion to the cause of conservation and his humour-laced, lively style of writing makes Whispers from the Wild both entertaining and educative. This book is a tribute to the unflinching spirit of a great lover of nature and is definitely a must read for everyone who is concerned about the fate of our jungles and wildlife.