Chief Minister Siddaramaiah has said that Prime Minister Narendra Modi should take the lead in resolving the water disputes involving Karnataka and other states.

Speaking to reporters here on Saturday, the chief minister said, “The state is reeling under drought. The state government has written to Prime Minister Narendra Modi several times, seeking his intervention in resolving the river water-sharing disputes between the riparian states. But the prime minister has not responded. 

The prime minister is the head of the government in a federal set-up and he should safeguard the interests of the states. Then prime minister Indira Gandhi had resolved many issues that had cropped up between the states. The BJP MPs should pressure the prime minister to intervene and resolve the disputes,” he said.

He slammed the Goa Water Resources Minister Dayanand Mandrekar for accusing the Karnataka government of playing dirty politics over the Mahadayi water dispute and said it’s the Goa government that is playing dirty politics.

On JD(S) state president 

H D Kumaraswamy’s proposed protest against the state government over the release of water from Krishnaraja Sagar to Tamil Nadu, Siddaramaiah said, Kumaraswamy was a chief minister and he should not do politics on such issues. “Even I am a farmer and I understand their problems,” the chief minister added.

“None of the four reservoirs in the Cauvery River basin has a storage of 50% due to below par monsoon. The KRS dam has only 7 to 8 tmcft of water. The water will be utilised for drinking, agriculture and filling up of lakes in that order. We have to release some volume of water to Tamil Nadu as per the tribunal’s order,” Siddaramaiah said.
‘NDRF norms unfair’

Siddaramaiah opposed the new National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF) norms. “Not even 20 taluks in the state will fit the new norms to be declared as drought-hit. As per the new norms, a taluk can be declared drought-hit, only if the crop loss is more than 50%. I have written to the PM, chief ministers of other states and also to Union ministers, demanding continuation of the old norms.”

When the reporters asked if Dakshina Kannada in-charge and Forest Minister Ramanath Rai would be the next Home Minister, the chief minister said, nothing has been decided yet. 

“Three ministerial berths, which are lying vacant in the state Cabinet, will be filled soon,” he said.

Siddaramaiah said, he is unaware of Gujarat Congress MLAs being shifted to Bengaluru to prevent them from quitting or poaching by BJP.
ADVERTISEMENT