There is a saying that goes — ‘the walls have ears’. The white-washed walls of Smoke House Deli are an example of this, with each wall telling a tale of old Bangalore. The Lavelle Road branch spins the story of the road and Michael F Lavelle, whom it’s named after.

Riyaaz Amlani, a restaurateur and the founder of Smoke House Deli, says, “Smoke House Deli on Lavelle Road is a tribute to the locality’s foremost resident: Michael F Lavelle, its namesake who was also the region’s first gold prospector.”   
 
The European and Mediterranean styled restaurant serves a mean helping of everything, starting from breakfast to dinner and drinks. “Our dishes are known to people and they can relate to them. Flavours take a very important role in the cooking. While presentation is considered important, the flavour is also paid attention to. We try to make something different all the time,” says Chef Saurabh Arora. 

The menu has special breakfast dishes like granolas, pancakes and skillet fried eggs, and a variety of sandwiches like ‘herbed balsamic smoked chicken sandwich’ and old school ham and cheese sandwich. They specialise in cottage cheese steak and ratatouille and desserts like hazelnut mousse flan, flourishes chocolate fudge and molten chocolate cake.

Chef Saurabh says his favourite dish is the peri peri rubbed smoked chicken served with potatoes. “Our burgers are well-known because we serve them with onion rings, homemade batter fry and cheese stuff. Sandwiches like chicken balsamic aren’t very common,” he adds. ADVERTISEMENT
Keeping up with their motto of experimentation, this Independence Day, they tried a new menu that started off with drinks like apple-soaked mojitos and Californian plum, star anise and apple juice and moved on to a high-street chicken and noodles soup and red wine poached pear salad with cumin dressing and walnuts. 

For main course, there was an option between three chilli cream penne, ratatouille and flavoured crusted Basa served on a bed of saffron and coconut flavoured rice. Call 25200898 for more details.