Day three of the sojourn of Gujarat Congress MLAs at a private resort near Bengaluru witnessed them sit through an orientation programme on current affairs in the country and also participate in a birthday bash thrown by Energy Minister D K Shivakumar.
AICC spokesperson Shakthisinh Gohil and party MLA from Gujarat left for New Delhi on Monday morning to brief the party high command on the mood of the legislators and related developments in Bengaluru. Gohil is likely to return to Bengaluru in a day or two with further instruction from the party high command, sources said.  
It is said a section of Congress legislators is not in favour of visiting temples and places of tourist interest as planned earlier. They are now thinking against going out of the resort as they feel that this would affect their image back home. A video showing how the Congress legislators are living in luxury being circulated on social media at a time when their constituencies in Gujarat are severely affected by floods had added to their apprehension. 

The legislators, for their part, claim that their families are working in the constituencies. They moved out from Gujarat due to fear of them being picked up by the BJP government in the state.
Unlike on Sunday, when the MLAs were paraded before the media, the legislators remained confined inside the resort through the day on Monday. The day began with some MLAs trooping into the yoga room at the resort for some simple exercises, a lecture on current political developments in the country also was organised.
Birthday party
 Later in the evening, a birthday party was organised by Shivakumar, who is looking after the MLAs, for the 12-year-old son of the lone woman legislator in the camp, Kaminiba Rathod. A 50-kg cake had been ordered from a bakery in Ramanagaram. There are reports that an orchestra followed by a cocktail dinner was organised for the legislators on Sunday evening. Only seven to eight legislators had drinks. Gujarat is a dry state
Speaking to reporters, Shivakumar reiterated that the Gujarat Pradesh Congress Committee will pick up the bill for the sojourn. He said the BJP and the JD(S) have no moral right to attack the Congress on ‘resort politics’. “Let the two parties introspect on what happened during political turmoil when they were in power,” Shivakumar said.   
Shivakumar said he wanted to take the guests on a tour of the Vidhana Soudha but the plan was dropped for the fear that the legislators will be hounded by the media the moment they step out of the resort.
RS polls
The Congress has kept its legislators at the resort for the last three days, fearing poaching by the BJP ahead of the Rajya Sabha polls scheduled on August 8. Of the 57 Congress MLAs in Gujarat, six have already resigned. The BJP in Gujarat, which can win two seats comfortably, has fielded a third candidate. Victory of the BJP’s third candidate is possible if the Congress legislators defect and vote in favour of the saffron party. The Congress candidate Ahmed Patel is the political secretary to AICC chief Sonia Gandhi. As many as 45 votes are required to win a seat.