Intelligence agencies of the US and that of some other developed countries have huge resources and worldwide network.

ADVERTISEMENTWikiLeaks has created nothing short of a tremor by publishing on its website around 25 lakh secret American diplomatic documents. It is an international online organisation which launched its website in 2006 in Iceland and uploads secret information, news leaks and classified media from anonymous sources. 

The website was launched by the organisation Sunshine Press and it claimed a database of more than 1.2 million documents within a year of its launch.

 Recently, it has again uploaded some diplomatic cables pertaining to India of the period between 1973 and 1976 when Henry Kissinger was the US secretary of state. It has some sensational disclosures but most of the disclosures are old which have been declassified earlier by the US national archives and records administration and are available even online also. 

It is also being said that WikiLeaks would not have come out with 40 years old information even though it might have been sensational at that particular time had it got some recent leaks.

It is Bradley Edward Manning, a United States Army soldier, who allegedly passed classified material to Julian Assange, an Australian internet activist, who is the founder and editor-in-chief of WikiLeaks.

 He was arrested in May 2010 in Iraq after Adrian lambo, a computer hacker, disclosed to the department of defence that Manning had confided during online chats that he had downloaded material from these databases and passed it to WikiLeaks. Manning charged with communicating national defence information to an unauthorised source and aiding the enemy which is a capital offence though prosecutors said that they would not seek the death penalty.

Daniel Ellsberg, a state department analyst who leaked the Pentagon Papers in 1971 containing a secret account of the Vietnam War and its pretexts to The New York Times, has called Manning a ‘hero’. First, he covertly tried to convince a few sympathetic senators to lay the Pentagon Papers on the Senate floor under privilege.

 Having failed in his efforts, he, with the help of Anthony Russo, leaked them to Neil Sheehan at The New York Times. He evaded arrest for long but then surrendered himself and was tried for theft, conspiracy and espionage but eventually all charges were dropped. It is to be seen whether Manning is convicted or acquitted like Ellsberg. The trial is likely to begin in June next.

The documents released have some sensational information but the question is how authentic it is. How far the cables of the US diplomats be trusted? Intelligence, by its very nature, is more speculative than factual. It is true that neither the US government nor anybody else has controverted the facts released. Still, it cannot be taken as the Gospel truth. However, it must make Indian intelligence agencies sit up and deliberate why the US intelligence is so effective.

Main suspects

Intelligence agencies of the US and that of some other developed countries have huge resources and worldwide network. The instruments and the gadgetry they have is unthinkable for India. When the Irish Revolutionary Army was very active in England in 1980s, the British intelligence was keeping surveillance on the main suspects so closely that their each and every movement was watched and it had the details of each visitor they had. 

They kept surveillance from a watch tower at a distance of around 1 km from the house of the main suspect through a very powerful telescope and had helicopters also at its disposal.

The operation of the US intelligence agencies in Yemen and Iraq proves how it uses its intelligence for strategic purposes. It has a huge data base. After the Homeland Security Act, there is nothing private in the US.

 It may not be an ideal or desirable situation but its database is of tremendous help which was used very recently to nab the accused of Boston terror attack. The intelligence in Russia is also quite developed. During 1950s and 60s, radio broadcasts of the USSR used some codes to send messages to undercover agents and sleepers. It spent enormous amount on it.

Indian intelligence agencies are overt, not covert. They have got some autonomy in the sense that their funds are not audited and they are not directly accountable to Parliament but still it leaves much to be desired. They should be accountable to Parliament but it should not compromise the very nature of its functioning.

When the Janata Party came into power dislodging the Indira Gandhi regime in March 1977, there was heated debate in Parliament on IB and RAW. It damaged the organisations to a considerable extent. Disgruntled elements in the two organisations wanted to take advantage of the situation. Transparency is always welcome but modalities have to be worked out how the secrecy is not leaked if not required in the public interest. 

Further, Indian intelligence agencies have become the fiefdoms of policemen who have tunnel vision. In the USA, the CIA is not a regular police force. It consists of lawyers, bankers and others and so, have inputs from different fields.

 Former president George W Bush Senior was the CIA chief before becoming vice-president and then president. Besides, personnel serving with intelligence should be trained such that they develop strong commitment to the nation. Many countries have successfully poached Indians serving in sensitive departments.

Anyway, WikiLeaks has posed certain questions before the traditional media with respect to information security. It shows the enormous power of social and digital media besides highlighting the role of whistleblowers. Julain Assange was also sought to be persecuted but he has not given in.