Guwahati: A month-old cub of Asiatic black bear was rescued after his mother was killed by suspected poachers in Arunachal Pradesh, where illegal trade of bear meat and body parts has posed a threat to the future of the 'vulnerable' wildlife species.ADVERTISEMENTThe male cub, which was rescued from the Sagalee region of Papumpare district by the forest department personnel recently, was shifted to the Centre for Bear Rehabilitation and Conservation (CBRC), located in the Pakke Tiger Reserve. The centre is run jointly by Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) and Arunachal Pradesh environment and forest department.Also Read:Leopard cub rescued near Turahalli reserve forest in KarnatakaAlso Read:Leopard cub rescued near Turahalli reserve forest in Karnataka"The cub, estimated to be a month old, is likely to have been separated from its mother, who is believed to have been the victim of poaching," WTI said on Thursday. This was the 85th bear cub received by the CBRC in Arunachal Pradesh since its inception in 2004.   The CBRC project is supported by the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW) and Kirloskar Ebara Pumps Limited. This is the only facility in India, for hand-raising and rehabilitation of orphaned bear cubs.  “Upon examination, we found the cub to be significantly dehydrated, weighing a mere 2.3 kg. Within the week following admission, it has gained some weight and is showing signs of improved health and activity," said Panjit Basumatary, Manager and Head, CBRC. The Asiatic black bear is categorised as 'vulnerable’ by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species and is protected under Schedule I of India’s Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. "However, it faces numerous challenges, including shrinking habitats due to logging, agriculture expansion, roadway networks, and dams. The primary threat has been poaching, particularly in Arunachal Pradesh. Bear meat, bile and claws hold a huge commercial value in the illegal wildlife trade market. Young cubs are often orphaned due to hunting or poaching of the mother and are either picked up to be sold or kept at home as pets," WTI said in a statement.Also Read:Conserving wildlife beyond bordersAlso Read:Conserving wildlife beyond bordersAsiatic black bear cubs spend between two and three years under the close supervision of their mothers to learn vital survival skills. At CBRC, these orphaned cubs undergo a similar rehabilitation process that includes hand-raising, acclimatisation and weaning, alongside regular walks in the forest with experienced animal keepers, to help them adapt to their surroundings. Eventually, the cub is released back into the wild, giving them a second chance in life in their natural habitat.