The silver-lining, however, is that the government is blowing it as a team -- loud and shrill.

Beginning this weekend, Chief Minister B S Yeddyurappa and his ministerial colleagues would launch a publicity blitz to showcase the government’s achievements. Of course, the acts of commission would be highlighted and the sins of omission cleverly glossed over.

The reason is not far to see: With the BBMP elections nearing, it would be but natural for the government to announce development programmes for the state capital. This assumes importance in the backdrop of the humiliating loss the BJP suffered at the national level in elections to the Lok Sabha. Transport Minister R Ashok said on Friday that the government would launch 10 new schemes on Sunday. These would be aimed at the weaker sections of society.

Weak opposition

Notwithstanding Ashok’s announcement of the largesse, the buzz in the State secretariat is that the government’s particular vision of deliverance is not without its flaws. Yeddyurappa was busy facing one election after another. 

There is no doubt that the BJP under Yeddyurappa’s leadership has emerged a topper — in the council elections, by-elections to the Legislative Assembly and the Lok Sabha polls. 

But a significant part for the government’s so-called success, or the lack of it, must go to a weak Opposition. The credit for the CM’s apparent success as an astute politician in the past one year goes to a feeble and/or non-existent Opposition. The BJP has succeeded in poaching legislators from the Congress and the Janata Dal (Secular).

But Yeddyurappa’s lack of administrative acumen came to the fore while handling the power crises and the economic slowdown. The BJP, which is often projected as an urban party, has not been able to live up to its image. 

Metro project

Let alone tier II and III cities, even Bangalore has not received due attention in terms of infrastructure development. The best example, of course, is the work on the Metro rail. The project is already a year behind schedule. Yeddyurappa spent much of his time in securing his party-government from the day he occupied the chair of state chief executive. Much against the wishes of Shimoga BJP leaders, he fielded his son for the constituency and ensured that Raghavendra won the seat. In a way, it was Yeddyurappa who pioneered encouraging dynasty politics in the BJP’s state unit.

Self-laudation is fine as long as it strikes a right balance between government and the party. He claims that all is well with his saffron flock, but is wary of admitting that there is simmering discontent among the rank-and-file. Some party leaders are not amused by the manner in which he runs the show; complaints have been lodged with the party high command which is dealing with its own internal and inherent contradictions.

ADVERTISEMENT