Recently, a suspected poacher from among a 12-member gang was shot dead by forest personnel on the fringes of a reserve forest in Kanakapura, Ramanagaram district. The incident took place when the poachers attacked members of the field staff who had come to investigate the flickering of flash lights in deep forest area. In retaliation to the killing of the poacher, villagers vandalised the property of the local forest office.

Incidents of people revolting against forest personnel who implement conservation rules are on the rise. Last year in Kerala, when the Gadgil and Kasturirangan reports on Western Ghats preservation were released, several vehicles and other assets of the forest department were destroyed by people who were instigated by religious leaders and estate owners. In the Kanakapura incident,  local politicians took side with villagers to blame the forest department personnel. 
The forest department is the custodian of public property for the welfare of the people. The field staff is the back bone of the success of any project of the forest department. They safeguard the forests rich in natural resources, both in the day and the night. The department is bestowed with the responsibility of detecting any illegal activity inside the forest on its own, investigate the case and also assist in prosecution. 
The frontline forest staff carry out many functions such as policing, afforestation work, protecting forests and its natural resources. But unfortunately, while discharging their duty — which is protection of national wealth — there is no immunity to the forest staff. Their job involves high risk, they are poorly paid, under-equipped, untrained and consequently demotivated. Their welfare is a prerequisite to secure our ecosystem, forests and wildlife. 
The working conditions of forest field staff are often miserable. They are deprived of basic facilities such as clean drinking water, toilets, electricity, communication systems and medical aid. They should be provided special incentives like special allowance and free ration for working in difficult and remote forest areas. They should get specialised training, incentives for working under tough conditions and career growth on par with other security forces such as the police. Such measures will be a huge boost for thousands of forest guards and rangers. 
Through my association with the field staff of the forest department during the period of wildlife research and surveys both in Karnataka and Kerala, I witnessed their dedication to protecting forests. They are always alert and ready to comb the forests at all hours of the day or night in spite of the shortfalls in the weaponry for self-defence.

Although latest surveys indicate that there has been a considerable increase in the overall vegetation cover of our country, the quality of natural forests continue to degrade. 
Increasing hostilities
The high rate of fragmentation pushes wild animals to human habitations for food and water. Forest fires are alarmingly on the rise during dry summer months. Moreover, the increase in wildlife tourism, cattle grazing and the spread of an invasive species (us) pose a great threat to wild animals.

To protect our remaining forests, a right understanding in the minds of the public about the nature of the job these field staff have to perform and what they have to deal with on a day to day basis is required. People should understand that all forest-related offences are cognisable offences, including the carnage on wildlife and encroachment of forest land. This will create more synchrony and harmony.
In the wake of increasing attacks on forest staff, the state governments should enact a legislation to empower them with authority to charge cases under Criminal Procedure Code against wildlife law violators and against those who attack forest staff. Threat by hooligans with the support of politicians looming large over the forest field staff is diminishing their morale.
Incidents of poaching for wild meat are on the rise in various forests. The culprits involved are often educated people from cities. 
In the Kanakpura case, it has been reported that the demand for meat of wild animals among tourists from cities who visit the resorts and dhabas of the areas often prompt locals to hunt animals in the forests for a quick gain. Thus, there is a need to monitor all such resorts and hotels near forests as well.ADVERTISEMENT