From the Great Barrier Reef in Australia to the Sundarbans in India and Bangladesh, the Unesco has designed nearly 200 spots across the globe as natural World Heritage Sites. Known for their iconic beauty, geology, ecology and biodiversity, these sites support large populations of rare plant and animal species. Many of these sites are also the last refuges of critically endangered species. They are home to almost a third of the world’s remaining 3,890 wild tigers and 40% of all African elephants. Their heritage status is supposed to ensure that they are better protected. Yet, a recent report by the World Wide Fund for nature shows that, despite their recognised value, nearly half of these sites have become regular hunting grounds for illegal poaching, logging and fishing. Conservationists fear that if the current levels of illegal harvesting continue in World Heritage Sites, many species could soon become extinct.

Rare plants and endangered animals are not the only ones affected by the degradation of World Heritage Sites. Local populations benefiting from an array of services — from clean water to tourism jobs — are also hit. Protecting these sites, therefore, is of vital importance — for wildlife and humans alike. The task is not easy. The sites attract traffickers because of their vulnerable flora and fauna and the profits from harvesting these endangered species are huge. The illegal wildlife market is worth $15 billion to $20 bn annually. The estimated value of the illegal timber trade every year is $30 bn to $100 bn. The WWF report is a sobering reminder of just how far this type of organised crime can reach. This is a global challenge that can only be tackled through collective, international action.

The fact that global wildlife populations declined by almost 60% on average between 1970 and 2012 shows that the current conservation activities are not enough. Enhanced protection and monitoring at the World Heritage Site level must be accompanied by greater action to curb demand for illegal wildlife and wildlife products through education, enforcement and prosecution. The governing bodies of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the World Heritage Convention must work in tandem to halt wildlife trafficking — from harvesting of species in source countries, transportation through processing destinations, to sales in consumer markets. The national governments must redouble their efforts. It is essential that CITES is fully implemented and that these irreplaceable sites are fully protected. In doing so, we will benefit our heritage and our wildlife, provide security to people and places, and support national economies and the rural communities that depend on these sites for their livelihoods.ADVERTISEMENT