Skills and talent development major NIIT on Friday announced the launch of StackRoute, an initiative to create the best programmers for the startup industry.

Speaking at the launch, NIIT Chief Executive Officer Rahul Patwardhan said, “There is an acute shortage of talent in the startup sector. IT services are not recruiting and there are so many engineers looking for a job, and these job-seekers are not suitable for startups. There is so much demand for people in the startup sector and poaching talent in IT service firms will not solve the problem.” 

According to a Manpower report, 58 per cent of Indian employers are finding it difficult to fill positions, and there is a significant talent shortage in the IT and accounting space. Also, close to 67 per cent Indian startups reported difficulty in filling job vacancies versus a global average of 34 per cent.

According to Patwardhan, StackRoute has been designed with the sole intent of teaching people to be top-class programmers. 

First batch from Oct 1 “We are starting the first batch from October 1, 2015, in Bengaluru. To begin with, we will train 72 people (12 teams with six people each). At the end of this three-month programme, they will produce real products, which are then released as open source contributions or as part of App stores,” he said.

“It’s a high-end and specialised programme offering, and the admission process includes a tough, real programming test, an in-depth aptitude test, and a formal interview,” said Satish Sukumar, principal consultant at StackRoute, adding that one should have basic programming ability in Java.

Patwardhan said that startups have shown a lot of interest in this programme. “We need people with an understanding of technology and our focus will be on producing high-quality technical software specialists,” he said.

The programme fee is Rs 2 lakh. Patwardhan said that scholarships would be provided to very talented candidates. 

“Going forward, we will launch this programme in cities like Pune and Delhi, where startups are booming,” he said. For more information, one can visit, www.stackroute.in.