Bankapur Peacock Sanctuary, situated within the ruins of Bankapur fort in Shiggaon taluk of Haveri district, is a perfect haven for India’s National bird. Karnataka Forest Department manages the sanctuary, popularly known as Navilu Vana, with the able 
support of the Department of Veterinary Sciences and the local people. 

A feast for the eyes

ADVERTISEMENTThe best thing about Bankapur is that no visitor can return home without seeing a flock of peacocks. The high mounds and deep trenches that mark the topography of this area seem to provide a perfect natural habitat for these lovely birds. The silence and stillness of this sanctuary is only broken by the raucous calls of the peacocks at regular intervals and flashes of glittering feathered wings taking short flights across the trenches, flying from branch to branch. 

Some walk about majestically through the bushes, their long, deep-blue necks and green tails swaying gracefully. Some perch themselves on the trees with their long graceful tails hanging, and some peck tidbits off the ground, in gay abandon. And when these birds open their tail feathers to dance, it is as if the heavens have arranged for a royal feast for the eyes. No wonder the peacock dance is intrinsically woven into India’s folk songs, music, literature, dance and art.

The Government of India declared Bankapur a peacock sanctuary in 2006. This sanctuary sprawls across 139 acres of land within the fort area. The gigantic moat of the old fort is about 36 km long, 10-15 metres wide and 7-8 metres deep. It is now fully covered with shrubs and trees. Majority of the trees are acacia, neem and ficus. Amidst this greenery, are small clearings where the Forest Department grows maize, jowar and horse gram for cattle feed, which is also partaken by the peafowls. 

According to the Forest Department officials, more than 1,000 peacocks and peahens are there in this sanctuary. The Forest Department helps create a congenial environment for peacock breeding. Minimal human intervention and disturbance have helped in the cause. 

A special bond

Nature enthusiasts reckon that in spite of a large presence of peacocks in this 
sanctuary, there aren’t many instances of poaching. The simple reason appears to be that the local people have developed a special bond with these birds and are 
very protective of them: Peacocks are considered farmers’ friends for they feed on insects that damage the crops.

The fort area also houses an ancient temple built by the Chalukyas known 
as Aravattu Kambada Gudi or Nagar-eshwara Temple. The shrine consists of 66 beautifully crafted pillars carved in stone and is built in a deep excavated plot below the ground level, presumably to conceal and protect it from invaders. The fort is of historical significance and is said to have been occupied by the Chalukyas, Vijayanagar rulers, Adil Shahi of Bijapur, Tipu Sultan and the British. Though the ornate shrine has deteriorated over time, it still retains its magnificence and beauty.