The Indian Coast Guard (ICG), popularly known as the 'Saviour of the sea' has completed 40 years of its existence. Various programmes have been organised to mark the occasion.ADVERTISEMENTIndian Coast Guard (ICG), the non-military maritime safety and security system, has lived upto its motto 'Vayam Rakshamaha' (in Sanskrit), meaning 'We protect'. The ICG has been the guardian angel of the maritime zone of the nation and has played a crucial role in not only rescuing fishermen in distress but also in offering assistance in maintenance of environmental discipline through prevention of smuggling and poaching. The intervention of ICG is also sought upon during times of maritime oil disasters towards rescue (M-SAR) operations. The role of ICG, Karnataka during the recent Ockhi cyclone, which had affected the Arabian sea, is worth a mention.The Indian Coast Guard (ICG), Panambur, Mangaluru, organised a programme 'Day at sea' for media persons in Mangaluru on Friday. The objective of the programme was to shed light on the activities of the Coast Guard and to make the visitors aware of the duties of ICG which comprises ensuring maritime safety and security of the nation.Journalists were on-board the Hovercraft Air Cushion Vehicle (ACV) H 198 to get familiar with the activities of the 75 Hovercraft Squadron, which is engaged in operational and administrative control of Coast Guard Karnataka.Addressing media persons, Coast Guard, Karnataka Commander S S Dasila said that various programmes such as blood donation camp, student visits to coast guard ship and Headquarters, Day at sea, troupes get together, cycle rally and coastal security week have been planned in order to mark the completion of 40 years of Coast Guard, Karnataka. The programme enables the Coast Guard to interact with people from various walks of life. At the same time, the visitors will get to know the activities of ICG. The 41st anniversary of ICG is scheduled to be held on February 1, the Commander said.Commandant Manish Kumar Dhaman said that since the time of its inception in 1978, Indian Coast Guard has grown from strength to strength. Initially, it had seven ships but now, the ICG is powered with 42 stations across the nation, with 130 ships and 62 air crafts. Indian Coast Guard is now the fourth largest coastal security in the world, after the US, Japan and Korea.Indian Coast Guard has been striving to maintain discipline by catching those indulging in smuggling of materials through sea and poaching of marine species. As many as 7,890 lives were saved during various sea-related disasters and 13,161 offenders were held for illegal activities at sea.75 Hovercraft Squadron Commander Gulwinder Singh said that ICG, Karnataka is the biggest operator of Hovercraft in India and is enabled with 75 Hovercraft Squadron, which is based in Mangaluru. Two medium scale Hovercrafts are deployed in the region towards rescue, search and anti-smuggling operations. Hovercraft Air Cushion Vehicle (ACV) H 198 is the faster Hovercraft vehicle with a top speed of 45 nautical miles per hour.Co-pilot Commandant J G Manish and Assistant Commandant Devayani were present.