That's all for today readers. Thank you for tuning in to our coverage of the Karnataka Cabinet expansion. For more latest news visit www.deccanherald.com. Finally, Karnataka CM B S Yediyurappa expands Cabinet, inducts 10 BJP MLAsChief Minister B S Yediyurappa inducted 10 BJP MLAs to his Cabinet here on Thursday. They are among the 17 Congress-JD(S) MLAs who defected last year.The much-delayed expansion came almost two-months after the MLAs won the bypolls held in December. During the period, the defectors camp exerted pressure on Yediyurappa to expand the Cabinet and include all the MLAs who contested the bypolls.Read the full report here. Profiles of new Cabinet ministersName: Ramesh Jarkiholi
Age: 59
Caste/Community: Valmiki (ST)
Education: Bachelor of Arts dropout
Constituency: Gokak
Political experience: Widely seen as the architect of the rebellion against the Congress-JD(S) coalition, this Belagavi strongman hails from the powerful Jarkiholi family that owns sugar factors among other businesses. He is a former minister and a 6-time MLA.Name: ST Somashekhar
Age: 62
Caste/Community: Vokkaliga
Education: Bachelor of Science
Constituency: Yeshwanthpur
Political experience: This 2-time MLA was seen as a loyalist to Congress’ Siddaramaiah, until he defected and joined the BJP. Before defection, he was appointed as chairperson of the Bangalore Development Authority. He was disqualified before he got re-elected.Name: BA Basavaraja (Byrathi)
Age: 55
Caste/Community: Kuruba (OBC)
Education: Bachelor of Arts dropout
Constituency: KR Puram
Political experience: The 2-time MLA was seen as a confidant of Congress’ Siddaramaiah. He was appointed as chairperson of the Karnataka Soaps and Detergents Ltd. Known for his wealth, Basavaraj along with his relative Byrathi Suresh, a Congress MLA, are realtors.Name: K Sudhakar
Age: 46
Caste/Community: Vokkaliga
Education: MBBS
Constituency: Chikballapur
Political experience: The 2-time MLA was the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board chairperson before he defected. His nonprofit works in the area of education.Name: Shivaram Hebbar
Age: 62
Caste/Community: Brahmin
Education: SSLC
Constituency: Yellapur
Political experience: This 2-time MLA is an agriculturalist who was earlier with the Congress. Hebbar was among the initial MLAs who were said to be in the BJP’s poach-list.Name: Shrimant Balasaheb Patil
Age: 64
Caste/Community: Maratha
Education: Bachelor of Science (Agriculture)
Constituency: Kagwad
Political experience: A native of Sangli in Maharashtra, the former Congressman is a sugar baron who owns several mills, including the Athani Sugars. Unlike other defectors, Patil had not resigned, but it was claimed that he had been “kidnapped” by the BJP. He later claimed that he was hospitalized and abstained from the trust vote that the Congress-JD(S) coalition lost.Name: BC Patil
Age: 64
Caste/Community: Lingayat
Education: Bachelor of Arts
Constituency: Hirekerur
Political experience: This cop-turned-actor-turned-politician was with the Congress and had made public a call recording to claim that he was being poached by the BJP. Patil sulked under the Congress-JD(S) coalition for not being made a minister.Name: Anand Singh
Age: 53
Caste/Community: Rajput
Education: Pre-University
Constituency: Vijayanagar
Political experience: A former associate of the Reddy brothers, the tainted mining barons, Singh was a minister under the first BJP government between 2008-13. He quit the BJP for the Congress in 2018 and got elected for the third time, before coming back to the saffron party.Name: K Gopalaiah
Age: 59
Caste/Community: Vokkaliga
Education: Bachelor of Science
Constituency: Mahalakshmi Layout
Political experience: Formerly with the JD(S), Gopalaiah began his career as a councillor representing the Vrushabhavathi ward. Gopalaiah is said to have been upset with the then CM HD Kumaraswamy for not standing by his brother, who was arrested in a murder case.Name: KC Narayana Gowda
Age: 56
Caste/Community: Vokkaliga
Education: Diploma in Hotel Management
Constituency: Krishnarajapet
Political experience: Formerly with the JD(S), Gowda is a 2-time MLA who has business interests in Mumbai. He was disgruntled alleging that his constituency had been neglected under the previous coalition regime. Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa and Governor Vajubhai Vala with the 10 newly-inducted Cabinet Ministers at Raj Bhawan in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/UpbIKdsGua— ANI (@ANI) February 6, 2020 Other notable absentees include Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Minister K S Eshwarappa and former minister Murugesh Nirani. Health Minister B Sriramulu and cabinet berth aspirant C P Yogeeshwar were absent from the event as well.