As a child he enjoyed eggs at home like anybody else but when it came to preparing the classic American breakfast dish Eggs Florentine, the Hollandaise sauce proved to be a tough challenge for Mayank Tiwari, executive chef at Mistral. 

So when it comes to naming any one dish with which he has good or bad memories, this one comes to mind immediately.

“It was post-monsoon, in the year 2001 and the hotel was full of guests,” recollects chef Mayank Tiwari from the days when he took up his first employment as a chef management trainee. Heading the breakfast shift with two other people, he got down to making Eggs Florentine just before the service started.

“It is a traditional, quintessential and simple breakfast dish that has three elements – English muffins, spinach and poached eggs,” explains chef Mayank while narrating the incident that redefined his equation with the eggs. “I prepared the Hollandaise sauce (an emulsion of egg yolk and liquid butter) and it split!”

There were four other dishes to be prepared for the meal and guests started pouring in after some time. “The sauce consumed our 20 minutes. I used up some copious amounts of eggs but failed in attempts to get the sauce right. 

As much as I despised the process, I used to love the flavour of this amazing sauce,” he says, narrating how the environment inside the kitchen got tense and all three chefs on the job kept whisking eggs until it turned out as perfect in the fourth time. “We had to do it manually and were quite exhausted by the end.”

As the chef waited in anticipation to see the response of the guests, it was surprising for him to see “Just one order for Eggs Florentine. There were orders for all other eggs but only one for this one,” he says with a sarcastic laugh. “It was quite a bummer!”After having faced the ordeal, the chef advice to all those who want to prepare this dish and Hollandaise sauce: “Keep calm and bake!”  
(As told to Henna Rakheja)ADVERTISEMENTRecipe Eggs Florentine  Method
For making the Hollandaise sauce: reduce the white wine with chopped shallots,peppercorns and thyme. 

Strain and cool when reduced to half. Blend this reduction with Dijon and one egg yolk, about a gram of salt over a double boiler and slowly pour in the clarified butter to form a nice emulsified sauce. Finish with a few drops of hot water.

Blanch the spinach in boiling water and shock in ice cold water. Strain and chop coarsely.
Place three eggs to poach in gently boiling water with some white wine vinegar and salt.
In a pan add some butter and brown garlic, toss in the spinach and thyme and season to taste.

Place this spinach on a toasted English muffin Top with the three poached eggs and Hollandaise. You could also cheat and add the ham of your choice or smoked salmon to this recipeServe hot with cracked peppercorns.
 Ingredients
 
Free Range organic Eggs - 4 
Spinach – 150gm
Thyme - 02 gm
Salt
Black pepper
White Wine – 15ml
White wine vinegar- 15ml
Clarified butter – 125 g
Dijon Mustard – 04 g 
White wine – 15ml
Shallots – 10 g 
English Muffin -01
Brown garlic – 02 g
Salted butter -05g