Cheetah, the world’s fastest animal, may not have many years left  to sprint in the open spaces of the earth. The world cheetah conservation fund has predicted that the last cheetah would disappear from the wilds by 2030.

 They had survived the rigour of the last ice age 10,000 years ago, when many species of animals disappeared, and had thrived in the world in the last many millennia. But they might find it difficult to cope with the changes that have taken place in their environment in the last few decades.

 There were about a lakh cheetahs in the world in the beginning of the 20th century. But there are only less than 10,000 of them left now and almost all of them are in Africa. There are a few in Iran.

What the cheetahs are facing is a Darwinian situation. Being the fleetest-footed animals, speeding  at  more than 120 km per hour, cheetahs need very large open but wild spaces to live in and hunt. The fragmentation and shrinkage of habitats have made it impossible for them to move freely across spaces.  Confined to a limited area they find it difficult to find enough prey. 

They also lose out in the competition with other animals like lions which are stronger. Poaching also takes a toll though this is not as much a threat as it once used to be. The small numbers have resulted in inbreeding for many generations and this has made them very vulnerable.ADVERTISEMENT Captive breeding has been experimented, especially because cheetahs are easily tamed and get close to human beings. But they are unable to survive when they are released in the wild.

There are not many options available for the cheetahs. Some ideas like creating long wild corridors for them are being pursued but experts are not very hopeful. 

Translocation to old habitats like India has been talked about but this may not be possible. The Supreme Court recently disallowed the proposal. 

The graceful beauties, quick and golden like lighting, may soon move into history. Some of them might continue to be bred in created conditions but that will mark only the token presence of the species on earth. However impossible the odds seem to be for their survival now, it is not yet time to accept  failure and imagine a world without them.