Congress vice president Rahul Gandhi is likely to visit the flood-affected regions of North Gujarat on Friday. The Congress vice president on his one-day visit is slated to visit Banaskantha and Patan districts, the worst affected regions in the recent floods in the state, which has been slated to be the worst in last 70 years. Over 270 persons are reported to have lost their lives, with 4.5 lakh persons directly affected by floods. Banaskantha saw deaths of 61 persons, while Patan recorded deaths of seven persons due to heavy rains and flood water due to rains in upstream Rajasthan.  

"Though the programme has not been finalised Rahulji is likely to visit on August 4," Bharatsinh Solanki, state Congress chief, told media persons on Wednesday. The Congress has been on the back foot with regards to its stance on work it needs to carry out in flood-affected North Gujarat region. Congress, that has over half-a-dozen legislators from the region have been receiving flak for its MLAs moving to a resort in Bengaluru at a time their constituents need them the most. The Congress has moved 44 of its legislators to Bengaluru to avoid any further poaching of its members, after six of its 57 legislators in Gujarat Assembly jumping ship, with three of them joining BJP. Of the remaining 51, seven are considered to be close to rebel senior leader Shankarsinh Vaghela. The Congress, that has fielded Ahmed Patel, the political secretary to party president Sonia Gandhi in the fray, does not appear to be in any mood to lose more legislators before crucial Rajya Sabha elections on August 8. Especially, when he is pitted against BJP president Amit Shah, Union minister Smriti Irani and Congress turncoat Balwantsinh Rajput.

Though Congress had set up a control room to coordinate relief work in the flood affected region and with Ahmed Patel, Bharatsinh Solanki and party in-charge for Gujarat Ashok Gehlot making a visit to North Gujarat recently, the visit by Rahul Gandhi is seen to be party’s one more move to help moderate the negative fallout of criticism against the party. When Rahul does visit the state, he is expected to be accompanied by Solanki and Gehlot.