But when two thieves forced their way in after midnight on July 28, they were seeking something else entirely. Never mind that their target, a large rhinoceros horn, was still attached to its owner, which had been standing blamelessly in the museum since 1907.

“They just snapped it off,” said Bryony Rudkin, the Ipswich Borough Council member in charge of culture. Grabbing a pair of additional horns from a shelf nearby, the thieves disappeared. Similar thefts, as many as 30 so far this year, have been reported in museums, galleries, antiques dealerships, auction houses and homes across Europe as criminals try to feed a growing market in the Far East, where powdered horn is revered for medicinal value.

“I was quite surprised, I must admit,” said Ian Lawson, a detective in the art and antiques unit at the Metropolitan Police Service in London, describing his first realisation that rhino-horn theft had become a serious law-enforcement issue. “It’s taken a bit of time for everyone to wake up to the fact that this is a cross-Europe offence, and that they will attack anywhere that has a rhino horn.”

Hostile reconnaissance

Lawson said that galleries and museums should be alert to what he called “hostile reconnaissance” by would-be thieves. They were also urged to keep images of their rhinos off their websites, to lock the horns away, or, as the Natural History Museum in London has done, to replace them with fake horns.

The spate of thefts has been spurred by a growing demand in China and other Asian countries, where medicine made from ground rhino horns is believed to act as an aphrodisiac and to cure cancer and other diseases. While horns have sold recently for upward of $200,000, the powder, Lawson said, is reported to fetch 60,000 pounds a kilo on the black market. Stricter laws governing the sale of used rhino horns, the kind found mounted on trophies or on rhinos that were long ago killed by big-game hunters and stuffed by taxidermists, have also played a part. This year Britain and other European countries tightened their regulations, making it virtually impossible to export most rhino horns from the EU legally, thus boosting the value of purloined ones.

That crackdown has inadvertently threatened the efforts of conservation groups to preserve wild rhinoceroses in Africa, as thieves – their supply curtailed – have turned to poachers who hack off horns from live animals, often leaving the rhinos to bleed to death, said Cathy Dean, director of Save the Rhino, an advocacy group in Britain. So far this year there have been 260 rhino deaths from poaching in South Africa alone, compared with a total last year of 333, she added. The problem was a major focus of the recent meeting in Geneva of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.

Rhino experts take great pains to rebut the claims that the horns have medicinal value. Dr Raj Amin, a researcher at the Zoological Society of London, said recently on an episode of ‘Nature’ on PBS that ingesting rhino horns would be about as healthful as “chewing your own nails.”

The law-enforcement organisation Europol says the thefts are believed to be the work of an organised gang of itinerant people known as Irish travelers who are also involved in drug smuggling, money laundering and the less flamboyant crime of distributing fake power tools. Since January the horn thieves have struck a Czech castle; natural history museums in Belgium, Germany, France and Italy; and other targets in Portugal and Sweden. 

Guy Schooling, Sworders’ managing director, said in an interview that the company thought it had averted trouble when, before an auction in February, it locked up its rhino-horn trophies and hired security guards to patrol the premises. But the thieves were too smart: They arrived after closing but before the guards, wrenching the only rhino artifact not locked up – a mounted head – free from a plaque that had been bolted to the wall.

“I would say, to anybody who’s got a rhino horn of any sort: ‘Do not have it on display. Put a dummy up and booby-trap it,”’ Schooling said.ADVERTISEMENT