After a BJP leader was seen in a sting footage trying to poach MLAs from the Aam Aadmi Party, Delhi BJP chief Satish Upadhyay said the party had not authorised any leader to talk to any legislator for supporting a BJP-led government in Delhi.

ADVERTISEMENTThe controversy erupted a day before the hearing of the Delhi Assembly’s dissolution in the Supreme Court.

“We have sought a clarification from the party leader purportedly speaking to some MLAs in the video,” Upadhyay said on Monday, in a clear indication of the party’s damage control strategy.

“The BJP does not believe in manipulation or dealings and does not approve such activities in any form,” he said.

Delhi BJP vice president Sher Singh Dagar, accused by the AAP of trying to poach its Sangam Vihar legislator Dinesh Mohaniya, claimed innocence and said he never offered money to any MLA.

“I made no offer. They came to my house with the offer to join our party. It was a trap to defame me and my party,” Dagar said.

He alleged distortions in the edited video released by the AAP and offered to quit politics if the charges against him were proven.

While AAP leader Arvind Kejriwal dared the BJP to face fresh elections, the saffron party said AAP was trying to remain in the limelight by making baseless allegations.

Former Delhi BJP president Vijender Gupta said, “They (AAP) earlier made allegations against Nitin Gadkari and now again they are attacking us. This is an attempt to defame the party."

Soon after the sting was made public, the Delhi BJP called a press conference to clarify its stand. The conference was to be addressed by Dagar and party spokesperson Sambit Patra at the Delhi party office.

But in an indication of panic in the party, the conference was rescheduled at Dagar’s home in south Delhi and Patra also pulled out of the briefing.

BJP national secretary R P Singh demanded that the sting tape be tested in a forensic lab and asked Dagar to resign from the party post till proven innocent.

The Congress also hit out at the BJP and the AAP, in a bid to set the stage for a high-voltage hearing on government formation in the Supreme Court on Tuesday.

Congress leader Ajay Maken demanded an early dissolution of the House. He also sought a probe to find out who was BJP leader Dagar taking instructions from for poaching the AAP MLAs.

“The BJP’s real face has been exposed,” he said.

The apex court on Tuesday will take up for hearing the AAP’s petition seeking dissolution of the hung Assembly. 

The BJP has support of 29 MLAs, AAP 27 legislators, Congress eight MLAs and there are three others. Three seats are vacant in the 70-member House.