The BJP Friday accused Bihar's ruling Janata Dal-United (JD-U) of trying to split it amid rising tensions between the two parties in the state.

ADVERTISEMENT"JD-U is trying to break the BJP in Bihar. This is objectionable and not good for democracy," state Bharatiya Janata Party president Mangal Pandey told the media.

Pandey made the allegation after a meeting of BJP workers and leaders including legislators and ministers.

Pandey said several JD-U leaders including ministers, legislators and MPs were in touch with BJP legislators in a bid to woo them into the JD-U.

"It is very objectionable that JD-U leaders have approached BJP legislators and persuaded them to join JD-U. They also assured them berths in the cabinet and other lucrative posts for their support," Pandey said.

The latest development has given a new twist to the tensions within the ruling coalition. 
Pandey said he had told BJP legislators and ministers to be present in Patna till June 17.
According to JD-U leaders, the party is in touch with over a dozen BJP legislators including ministers. 

The JD-U has 118 legislators, four short of majority in the house of 243 members.

Sensing that a split is almost certain now, the BJP state president also accused JD(U) of "poaching" on his MLAs to provide strength to the Nitish Kumar government in the Bihar Assembly.

"Many BJP MLAs have informed us of JD(U) leaders approaching them seeking their help for the Nitish Kumar government in future (after split with BJP)," Pandey claimed.
Independent MLA Dilip Verma has gone on record to highlight such "sinister" act of JD(U) to lure him with a ministerial berth for support to the government, he added.

Pandey said all BJP ministers have been directed to be in Patna by June 17. There are 11 BJP ministers in the Nitish Kumar Ministry including Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi, who also holds the important portfolio of Finance Minister.
Reports coming from JD(U) sources suggest that the decision about pullout from NDA would be announced either on June 15 or 16 after discussions with legislators, parliamentarians and other party leaders.

JD(U) president Sharad Yadav is coming here tomorrow for the discussion. Chief Minister Nitish Kumar has already returned to capital from Katihar leg of 'Sewa Yatra'.
The BJP core committee meeting which went for two-hours at Sushil Modi's official residence was attended by state NDA Convenor and minister Nand Kishore Yadav, other ministers and national Vice-President C P Thakur.

Seeking to put the blame on the alliance partner, the state BJP President said, "JD(U) leaders have created such a situation in which it is difficult to work together."
"Voters of Bihar had given mandate to NDA alliance. Hence such activities of JD(U) is against democratic tradition and coalition dharma. It is not good for healthy democratic tradition of the country," he said.