In its report on Foreign Educational Institution (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010, the parliamentary standing committee noted that acute shortage of qualified and experienced faculty in higher education institutions in the country is a cause of serious concern.

“No body would deny the fact that with the entry of foreign educational institutions in the country, the problem is bound to aggravate further. The committee, therefore, strongly, feels that as recommended by the CNR Rao Committee, government has to put in place adequate safeguards against poaching of Indian faculty by foreign educational institutions,” it recommended.

The committee in its report pulled up the government for not accepting various recommendations made by CNR Rao committee, noting that they were based on genuine concerns about the protection of our young students in every respect.

“The committee would like to emphasize that all these recommendations of the CNR Rao Committee need to be suitably reflected either in the Act or rules/regulations to be made there under,” it said.

The government did not accepted the CNR Rao committee recommendation regarding approvals to the foreign educational institutions. 

Approvals

The expert committee had suggested that approvals may be given in two parts; first for a limited initial period on a trial basis and second, for a longer term approval after review of performance of the institution in the initial short term.

“The committee noted that recommendations regarding initial approval that too for only those foreign education providers duly accredited in the home country followed by extension of approval after review of their performance needs to be looked into,” parliamentary panel recommended in its report.

Accreditations

The panel also pointed out that the proposed law does not make the accreditation status of foreign education provider mandatory.

The panel welcomed the proposed law noting that there was an urgent need for having a centralized policy and regulatory regime for foreign educational institutions operating in the country. However, it said that government should bring necessary modification in the proposed law to bring more clarity in it and.
ADVERTISEMENT