Seven “woodcutters” from this remote village who fell prey to the bullets of the Andhra Pradesh Police on April 7 were all reportedly “first-timers” looking to make a quick buck.

ADVERTISEMENTUnaware of the risks involved in their “new assignment”, the seven did not even tell their families where they were going and what they were going to do.  

Murugan (38), Moorthy (38), Mahendran (25), Palani (35), Munuswamy (34), Perumal (37) and Sashi Kumar (34), who died in the encounter, were making do with their earnings until recently, when they met the “agents” who lured them with a weekly pay of Rs 25,000. All seven—especially Murugan and Sashi Kumar—were planning to give surprise gifts to their families after their return, but were instead killed in a hail of bullets.

“Murugan was not a woodcutter; he is a painter. He went for a painting job. It is a clear case of false identity. He was victimised,” claimed Murugan's relatives and friends.
The families of the other victims echoed similar views, claiming they were not woodcutters.

However, some people in the village said though the victim's families claimed it was a fake encounter, it is still unclear how the deceased persons, from various professions, came together for a job, and that too in Andhra Pradesh.

“They were doing their respective jobs comfortably. I do not know how they decided to go there,” said Ravikumar, a resident of the village.

According to him, smugglers' agents, who ventured into this village for the first time, had lured the seven innocent people into the profession.

Of the seven victims, Murugan was a painter while Sashi Kumar did tailoring work. The rest were construction workers. A senior police official in the Tiruvanamalai district, on condition of anonymity, said: “Though we create awareness among the youths here to stay away from the illegal activity of cutting trees, especially in Andhra Pradesh, they still fall prey to agents, lured by the money.”

Manimaran, a social worker based in Tiruvanamalai, said woodcutters are the primary level in the poaching of red sanders. 

They are led by group agents, who are the second-layer and manage labourers. 
Transporters are the third layer, exporters are the fourth, and all the operations are coordinated by the fifth layer, with investment, protection and field operations to manage safe transport following negotiations with the men in uniform, said the activist.