JD(S) leader H D Kumaraswamy on Wednesday was taken to task over his non-performance, by a section of the party MLAs. The aggrieved MLAs had no hesitation to tell him on his face that he should decentralise power. However, the party legislators did not find an alternative to him to lead the party. Finally, they decided to strengthen the party under the guidance of former prime minister H D Deve Gowda and Kumaraswamy.
 
ADVERTISEMENTKumaraswamy, who is facing a rebellion in the party, had convened an ‘introspection’ meeting at a star hotel in the city. It was supposed to host 40 MLAs and 12 MLCs. 

But only 35 MLAs and 10 MLCs turned up at the meeting. Subsequent to the five-hour long meeting, Kumaraswamy, who had openly stated that he was ready to step down if any other leader was ready to take the responsibility, said that all MLAs and MLCs have arrived at a consensus on the future of JD(S). 

Kumaraswamy is now the party’s floor leader in the Legislative Assembly and the post of State party president is vacant. 

At the end of the day, the meeting decided to form a core committee to look into all aspects of the party. Its responsibilities include disbursal of tickets for future elections and charting out the roadmap for the party, Kumaraswamy told a press conference.

When questioned whether the Gowda family will stay away from the core committee, Kumaraswamy said: “To dispense the theory of being a family-run party, we are forming the core committee. We, however, will be part of the committee as ordinary members.” The committee will consist of MLAs, MLCs and senior party leaders, he added.
 
As announced on Tuesday, Zameer Ahmed Khan kept away from the meeting. Other MLAs who did not turn up are Mallikarjun Khuba, M T Krishnappa, Iqbal Ansari, H S Shivashankar and MLCs Basavaraj Horatti and Puttanna. Except Zameer, the rest had informed the party about their absence.
 
Sources privy to the meeting said that unilateral decisions taken while appointing T A Saravana, gold businessman, as MLC and businessman Kupendra Reddy as Rajya Sabha member, were not acceptable to some of the legislators. They demanded that Kumaraswamy explain the contribution of these two people to the party. They expressed resentment over conflicting opinions of his and Deve Gowda on key issues.
  
There was also a discussion over why importance was being attached to certain leaders who have been constantly threatening to leave the party. An MLA asked as to why Kumaraswamy was averse to him talking to Chief Minister Siddaramaiah even on administrative matters. If there is a bar on talking to the chief minister, the party should issue a circular, the MLA told the meeting.
 
Kumaraswamy told reporters that one mistake which was pointed out was that he was going ‘non-stop’ and not taking others into confidence.
 
“I have assured them that we will participate more actively in fulfilling our responsibilities as an Opposition party,” he said. He reiterated that none was quitting the party and there was no scope for ‘Operation Hasta’ to poach JD(S) MLAs.