The situation in Assam continued to worsen on Tuesday as flood waters inundated fresh areas, leaving 15.70 lakh people affected in the state. 

ADVERTISEMENTTwo people lost their lives on Tuesday in flood-related incidents in Assam, while situation remained grim in neighbouring Arunachal Pradesh with areas bordering China and Myanmar still cut off from the rest of the state.

Flood waters have marooned 80% of the 430 sq.km Kaziranga National Park (KNP). About 129 of the 178 anti-poaching camps in KNP have been inundated, increasing the risk of rhino poaching. Many animals, including elephants, hog deers and rhinos, were seen crossing the National Highway 37 and moving towards the Karbi Anglong hills for safe cover.

In Assam, 19 districts have been affected by flood waters as the Brahmaputra and seven of its tributaries are flowing above the danger level. Brahmaputra is in full spate in Dibrugarh, Tezpur, Jorhat, Goalpara and Guwahati.

Two people, one in Lakhimpur district and another in Mayong in Morigaon district, died after being washed away in flood waters, an official source told DH. At least 10 people have died in floods in Assam this year, the source added.

Meanwhile, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday called up Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal to review the flood situation in the state and assured all help.

Floods have ravaged Lakhimpur, Golaghat, Morigaon, Jorhat, Dhemaji, Sivsagar, Kokrajhar, Barpeta, Bongaigaon and Chirang districts. 

Army has been called in for rescue operation in parts of lower Assam on Tuesday.

According to the Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA) assessment report on Monday, 2,653 villages across Assam was affected by floods till Saturday evening and the floods have inundated nearly 1.40 lakh hectares of crop land across the affected districts
In total 15,70,571 people are affected by the recent wave of flood in Assam.

Apart from the Brahmaputra, Dhansiri, Jai Bharali, Puthimri, Beki Sankosh, Subansiri and Buri Dehing rivers are flowing above danger level.

The Majuli River Island is facing a massive flood threat as a key embankment breached on Tuesday, sources said.

On Monday, infrastructure damages have been reported from Kokrajhar, Morigaon, Nagaon, Bongaigaon, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Golaghat, Sivasagar, Barpeta, Goalpara, Dhubri and Sonitpur districts.

Meanwhile, in neighbouring Arunachal Pradesh, the flood situation showed little signs of improvement on Monday. While, the Meghalaya government has issued a flood alert for the low lying areas in the state.

Mumbai suburbs get rain
After a brief lull, rain lashed Mumbai's suburbs on Tuesday morning, however, there was no major impact on the suburban road and rail transport system, DHNS reports. Tuesday also marked the 11th anniversary of the 2005 deluge in Mumbai. 

The engine of Mumbai-bound Sinhgad Express had problems between Diva and Parsik. This resulted in minor delays on the Central Railway. Because of potholes and slush, traffic was slow on the Western Express Highway.