While the Delhi Assembly elections are still a few months away, politicians have already started changing their loyalties. Seven municipal councillors — including five independents and one each from JD-U and BSP — joined the Bharatiya Janata Party on Wednesday. 

ADVERTISEMENTState BJP President Vijay Goel, along with election co-incharge of Delhi BJP and member of Parliament Navjot Singh Sidhu, was present on the occasion to welcome the councillors into the party.

While the party leaders patted their backs for making seven councillors with ‘massive mass support’ join the party ahead of the assembly polls, four out of the seven councillors who joined the party are BJP rebels who contested as independents after they were denied ticket by the party. 

“Each of the councillors who joined the party on Wednesday have huge mass appeal in their area with loyal follwing of around 10,000 people in their area. It would strenghten the position of the party in the assembly seats they come from. More councillors would join the party as the assembly election would draw closer,” said Delhi BJP president Vijay Goel. 

The councillors who joined BJP on Wednesday include Suresh Garg (independent, Trinagar), Naresh Balyan (independent, Nawada), Pradeep Kumar (independent, Chhawla), Krishna Kumar Sehrawat (independent,  Mahipalpur), Pramod Tanwar (independent, Naraina), Rahul Pradbhudayal Sai (BSP, Sultanpur Mazra) and Chander Prakash (Janata Dal-United, Govindpuri).

The four councillors who have been BJP members in the past are Sehrawat, Tanwar, Chander Prakash and Garg. The councillors expressed their full faith in BJP and said that they have decided to join BJP as people have great expectations from BJP in Delhi as they are disillusioned with Sheila Dikshit government in Delhi and the UPA government. 

The only JD-U councillor in the city said that he decided to re-join his parent party as its is the only political front which can dislodge the Congress government in the city. 
“The general feedback which I have been geeting from people over the last one a half year is that they want to get rid of the Congress government. And as far as the political situation in the capital is concerned, the only other party which is in a poistion go form government in Delhi is BJP,” said Prakash. 

Party sources said efforts are being made to poach and bring in party-fold atleast eight more councillors, including independents and from other smaller parties before the assembly polls.