They were absorbed to fill vacancies in six new government medical colleges, which otherwise would have been denied certification by the Medical Council of India (MCI) for lack of adequate number of medical specialists.

The move by the Department of Medical Education (DME) has drawn objections not only by the Health Minister and his senior officers but also senior specialists already serving in teaching hospitals, who feel they were bypassed by the selective manner of the recruitment.   

Favourites chosen

“I have worked in the teaching hospital for more than 15 years under the Health department. Ideally, I should have been absorbed, but the Medical Education Department seems to have chosen their favourites, jeopardising the education of medical students in the process,” said a senior specialist from the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare (DHFD).

Applications of some senior specialists were reportedly not even considered for absorption although they had been serving in teaching hospitals in anaesthesia, orthopedics and surgery departments for more than 15 years. Instead, their juniors were given were selected.   

Then Health Secretary M Madan Gopal, in a note to Cabinet argued that departure of the doctors would affect the operations of the Department of Health, and demoralise senior specialists who were overlooked. 

“Both Health Minister Sriramulu and I were against it, but we were just bulldozed. There was some sort of a lobby,” Madan Gopal told 
Deccan Herald.

Objections overruled

Former Chief Secretary Sudhakar Rao also opposed the move, arguing that the huge difference in the pay scales of the two departments would lead to unfavourable effects. Even V Umesh, medical education secretary in a letter had stated that absorption must be based on the principal of 'seniority-cum-merit' or merit-cum-reservation'.  

Despite such objections, and being cautioned of avoidable litigation before the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal (KAT) and various courts, DME absorbed the specialists, resulting in two doctors filing cases against the selection procedure.

The Department of Health and Family Welfare is short of specialist doctors at district, taluk and community health centres (CHCs) and is barred by the Cadre and Recruitment (C&R) Rules from directly recruiting specialists. 

But the Department of Medical Education has the provision and flexibility to recruit specialists from the open market as most government medical colleges have become autonomous institutions.

Transfer not permitted

The Karnataka Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules 1977 do not permit transfer of employees from one department into another, nor into autonomous institutions. 
ADVERTISEMENT