BJP said Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's real face, that of someone without any principle and hungry for power, stands exposed today after an audio tape surfaced where he is purportedly heard talking about splitting the Congress to form the government in 2013.

ADVERTISEMENTBJP said Kejriwal tried to project himself as "different" whereas he was not, and proved to be like any other politician hungry for power. It said with this expose, the claims of senior AAP leader Yogendra Yadav that Kejriwal only wanted power have also been proved to be right.

"Kejriwal used to ask his people to do sting and record any wrong-doing. His own people have recorded and presented his own picture before the world. Kejriwal's real face today stands exposed before the world as one having no principle and who is only seeking to grab power," BJP national secretary Shrikant Sharma said.

This, the BJP leader said, also proves the allegations made against Kejriwal by senior AAP leader Yogendra Yadav that he had tried only to "grab" power.

"Where are his principles now. He said he was different. But it seems he is also hungry for power. Where is his internal Lokpal, which he talked about so much?" Sharma asked while seeking clarifications from the AAP leader.

Besieged by infighting, the AAP was today hit by twin blows with former party MLA from Rohini Rajesh Garg accusing Kejriwal of trying to poach six Congress MLAs to form government last year following which its prominent Mumbai face Anjali Damania quit the party.

Garg also alleged that Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia was in touch with the Congress MLAs to try to lure them to float another political party and extend support to AAP from outside as Kejriwal was not ready to face the polls.

"We are ready to form the government, but Congress is not ready to support us. Manish is in touch with the Congress. Do one thing, split the Congress and ask their six MLAs to float a new party and support us," Kejriwal was purportedly heard saying in a telephonic conversation with Garg.

"Congress won't support us. We have been trying for the last one and a half months. These six Congress MLAs would have supported BJP, but three of them are Muslims. They won't support the BJP. Those six MLAs should support us," Kejriwal was heard telling Garg in the clip.