Fears grow for Asia's endangered anteaters

ADVERTISEMENTTiger poaching gets the press but wildlife groups in Asia are increasingly fearful for the future of a smaller, scalier and "less sexy" creature: the pangolin.

So prized are the meat and supposed medicinal properties of this reclusive anteater that it is now thought to be the most heavily trafficked mammal in the region, rapidly being driven towards extinction.

"The volumes we are seeing in seizures are mind-boggling. No species can survive this level of extraction for long," said Kanitha Krishnasamy from the wildlife trade watchdog Traffic.

"Unfortunately, this scaly animal does not invoke as much attention from the public, and by extension from the authorities, as pangolins are considered to be less sexy than their larger mammalian counterparts," she added.

Tigers are also killed for their body parts, mostly for use in traditional Asian medicines, and major international campaigns have been launched to save them from extinction.
Trading in pangolins is banned under international law, yet Traffic's Asian surveys show they are frequently poached from the wild, mainly in Indonesia and Malaysia, exacerbating the threat from rapid deforestation.

They are transported through Southeast Asia, mostly ending up in China and Vietnam, where pangolin flesh is a delicacy and its scales — it is the only mammal known to have them — are ground into a powder for medicinal purposes.

Scientists identify ‘thinness’ genes

Scientists have discovered a genetic cause of extreme thinness that can lead to a syndrome in children called “failure to thrive,” according to a new study.

The research, published Thursday in Nature, shows that people with surplus copies of certain genes are much more likely to be very skinny.

In one in 2,000 people part of chromosome 16 is duplicated, making men 23 times and women five times more likely to be seriously underweight, they found.

Normally, an individual inherits a duplicate of every chromosome from each parent, giving us two of each gene.

But sometimes sections of a chromosome are copied or deleted, resulting in too many or too few segments of genetic coding.

“In many cases, duplications and deletions have no effect, but occasionally they can lead to disease,” said Philippe Froguel, a professor at the School of Public Health at Imperial College London.

In the study, Froguel and colleagues examined the DNA of over 95,000 people looking for patterns linked to extreme thinness.

They found that duplication of a part of chromosome number 16 containing more than two-dozen genes is strongly associated to being underweight, defined as a body-mass index (BMI) below 18.5.

The normal range is 18.5 to 25, with 25-to-30 corresponding to “overweight,” and above 30 to “obese.”

Half of all children in the study with this genetic glitch had been diagnosed with "failure to thrive," meaning that they did not gain weight at a normal rate as they grew older.

A quarter of the individuals with the extra genes had microcephaly, a condition in which the head and brain are abnormally small, and which is associated with neurological defects and shorter life expectancy.

DNA analysis instrument to monitor health of astronauts

Researchers from Louisiana Tech University are collaborating with NASA to conduct zero-gravity testing of an experimental DNA analysis instrument developed at Tech that could benefit future NASA astronauts.

Dr. Niel Crews, assistant professor of mechanical engineering, and Collin Tranter, a graduate student with the Institute for Micromanufacturing (IfM) say the instrument could be used to monitor the health of astronauts exposed to cosmic radiation beyond Earth’s protective atmosphere.

“Our goal is to understand how the system behaves under conditions similar to actual deployment in space missions,” said Crews.

The Louisiana Tech-developed devices are beneficial to NASA because they are small, consume less power and require little to no human operation.

The Louisiana Tech researchers will subject themselves to extreme conditions in order to conduct sensitive testing of the miniature device.  NASA has used these same flights to train their astronauts.

The instrument attracted the attention of NASA scientists for possible use on the International Space Station, during inter-planetary travel and even for unmanned missions to search for life within the Solar System.

“We hope that by working with NASA, one of our DNA analysis devices will be sent into orbit to study the effects of space environments on living things, first studying DNA then cells,” said Tranter. 

The tests will take place on a NASA airplane operating out of Ellington Field at Johnson Space Centre in Houston.