Poll code violations, including canvassing on the college campus, blemished the students’ union election in Delhi University.ADVERTISEMENT 

Polling on Friday at the Jawaharlal Nehru University stood out for conch-blowing by the right wing ABVP activists, amid aggressive slogan-shouting by Left student parties. 

At least 1.36 lakh students in DU and about 8,500 students in JNU – a large majority of them doing their post graduation – were eligible to vote for a new set of representatives. Despite constant reminders by student outfits through SMSes and social media, the voter turnout in DU colleges was just 43.43 per cent, a marginal increase from last year’s 43.25 per cent. 

In JNU, the turnout stood at 55 per cent, which is 1 per cent less than last year.   Campaigning officially ended on Thursday, but even on Friday pamphlets with names of candidates and ballot numbers were being distributed by volunteers within the Delhi University college premises.
At Hindu College, the student activists of ABVP and NSUI – two main student organisations in fray, besides the ultra-Left AISA – stood on both sides of the ramp leading to the main building to give a final reminder to voters about their party’s nominees and their ballot numbers. 

The canvassing for votes largely went unchecked due to lax security in college premises. “Till now none of our observers have reported such incidents. If we receive any complaint, the matter will be taken up the inquiry committee,” the DU chief election commissioner, D S Rawat, said. 

In a bid to poach voters on the day of voting, the student organisations also flashed placards and distributed pamphlets outside the Vishwavidyalaya Metro station. The heavy police presence outside the DU colleges, however, managed to ward off election time troubles. 

After a sluggish start, long queues were seen outside all the four polling booths in JNU. The BJP-backed ABVP, which is trying to make inroads into JNU politics, resorted to conch-blowing and chanting hymns to make the last minute appeal to voters. “JNU elections have been peaceful. In here, the battle is of ideologies,” Pallavi, a student of School of Languages, said.

The incumbent AISA, which had a clean sweep in JNU students’ union last year, is up against the CPM-affiliated SFI, a new alliance between two Left parties, and ABVP.

Polling in JNU was conducted between 9 am to 5:30 pm. And in DU, the students cast their votes between 8:30 am and 12:30 pm in the day colleges, and from 3 pm to 7 pm in the evening college. 

Election results for all the four posts in DU students’ union will be declared by Saturday noon, whereas in JNU, counting of votes will take place on Sunday.