Odisha's forest department has announced reward on information about conspiracy to hunt wild animals in the forests of Ganjam district.

ADVERTISEMENT"Since we have little chance of knowing plans of poachers, we have decided to reward informers suitably to prevent wildlife poaching," regional chief conservator of forests, Berhampur, J Kumar, said.

Poachers kill wild animals through electrocution by laying electric wires in the forest areas. In some places, farmers also lay electric wires to kill animals in order to save their crops, said divisional forest officer (DFO), Ghumusar(North), K C Mishra.

At least eight wild animals, including  five wild boars, a barking deer and a sambar were killed in various places under Ghumusara (North) division in the past year when they came in contact  with live electric wires in the jungle areas. Atleast two persons were arrested for allegedly poaching sambar at Gallery, the DFO said.

Besides, at least three elephants were killed by electrocution in the division recently, he said. According to unofficial sources, however, the number of wild animals, particularly the wild boare, barking deer, sambar and black bucks killed by poachers through electrocution for their meats is much more.

The meats of these animals are in high demand among people and hotels. "Not only wild animals, but in some places there are also instances of human beings being killed accidentally after getting entangled in live electric wires", the DFO said.

An awareness meet on prevention of wildlife poaching through electrocution was held at Bhanjanagar by the forest department  on Sunday. Senior forest officers in the district, other officials including Bhanjanagar sub collector and several people of over 100 villages located in the vicinity of the forests attended the meeting.

"Besides individual informers, we have also decided to provide reward to villages and Vana Surakhya Samitis (VSS) for successsful tip-off to prevent poaching", the DFO said.

"Wildlife poaching is generally high during harvest season. Therefore, we conduct  awareness meets just before the harvesting period", said DFO, Ghumusara  (South) R Ch Sethi.