The fever surrounding the quadrennial cricketing spectacle of the 2015 Cricket World Cup in Australia and New Zealand is underway already.

ADVERTISEMENT Direct To Home (DTH) companies do not want to be felt left out and doing their bit in order to cash in on the fever through innovative offers and attractive pricing.

For all customers buying Samsung Curve and UHD TV, Airtel Digital TV will offer HD DVR connection at the same cost as that of an HD connection. All customers will get discount coupons worth Rs 2,650. 

Customers can enjoy watching matches on an HD DVR by just paying Rs 2,350. This box has inbuilt hard disk of 500 GB and customers can enjoy record content up to 750 hours enabling them to record and watch the matches at any time conveniently. 

Additionally, customers will get free subscription for up to 12 months through a scratch card offer. On all other Samsung models, Airtel Digital TV will offer a discount coupon of Rs 660 on its HD+ variant. Customers will also get an 8 GB pendrive worth Rs 399 absolutely free enabling them to record and watch the world cup matches at a time convenient to them.

 Thay will also receive free subscription for up to 12 months through a scratch card offer. Activation charges on Samsung smart direct TVs will be waved off completely. Customers can also avail free subscriptions between 2 month-12 month depending on the scratch card. The offer is valid on purchase of the above Samsung variants between February 7-March 21, 2015.

“Around 2-3 months ago, we have tweaked our packaging and made it more sport-focussed and sport-friendly as a lot of people are shifting towards watching sports. We wanted to think about the long-term with a lot of sporting events coming and that is why we adopted this strategy,” Dish TV Chief Operating Officer Salil Kapoor told Deccan Herald.

The Cricket World Cup is one of the main events that people are looking forward to and we expect good additions in subscriber additions due to the event, Kapoor added. Dish TV had 3.78 lakh net subscribers as of September 30, 2014.

As far as Tata Sky is concerned, they have launched their 4k set top boxes for better quality pictures to cash in on the World Cup fever. The company received around 1,500 enquiries within one week of its launch and expects subscriber additions in this segment to be high.

Analysts believe that the World Cup is definitely an opportunity for DTH players to gain additional revenues and market share.

“The Cricket World Cup is the biggest sporting event in India. There is bound to be a great business opportunity around that. DTH operators have already begun pushing their products and marketing efforts to new levels. 

Most of them are likely to benefit from the additional revenue pie that comes with new connections and there will be some poaching of each others’ customers,” an analyst with a domestic brokerage firm said.

The ones with advanced technology, product innovation are likely to gain in the premium segment, the analyst added.