What do you do when you can’t decide between a nice salad or a satiating pasta? Let your hunger pangs decide for you, of course. 

This is a recommended approach at ‘Burp’ on New BEL Road. Pick up whatever you feel like eating that day and while you wait for your order, flip through the books placed there or listen to the radio.  

So why is the place named ‘Burp’? Harikrishna Mentha, managing director of the cafe-cum-restaurant, says, “Simple! When you have a full belly and feel happy, that is when you burp. It is associated with a fulfilling meal and that is exactly what we aim to serve.”

With the varied choices in starters like ‘Mexican cheese chilli toast’ and ‘Mexican potato cake’ and main course options like pastas, pizzas and sandwiches, the space aims to appease all taste buds. 

The breakfast menu, provided from 7 to 11 am, includes cut fruits, plain and flavoured curd and sandwiches in vegetarian and non-vegetarian options.

For the toast lovers, there is the ‘Baked beans toast’ and ‘Mushroom toast’.

The eggetarian can choose from the scrambled, boiled and poached eggs or even the omlettes. 

For those who love pizzas, there are several options in topping, classified as Topping 1 to 5, in the vegetarian and non-vegetarian category. While the simple yet satisfying 12-inch pizzas will impress one, the 20-inch ‘Spaya pizza giant’ is bound to stay in your memory.

“They are a hit among youngsters who like to party. These are smoked woodfire thin-crust pizzas with imported cheese and dough to maintain the authentic taste,” details Harikrishna.

If you want to go light on the stomach and grab a healthy bite, they have an impressive range of salads too. “We make it a point to use the best ingredients and olive oil in our salads to retain their true flavours. Our ‘Greek salad’, ‘Caesar salad’ and ‘Roasted Mexican chicken salad’ are the top choices for salad enthusiasts,” he says.

The place also has some interesting beverages. For the cold drink lovers, they have aerated drinks and ‘Fresh lime soda’ and for those who like it a tad different, there are mocktails like ‘Strawberry mojito’, ‘Virgin pina colada’, ‘Virgin blue lagoon’ and the 
‘Sherley temple’, all of which are popular drink choices.

For those who would like a sweet ending to a meal, indulgences like the ‘Oreo oreo’, ‘The gamer’, Brownie shakes’ and ‘Million dollar’ will make for a tempting dessert.

Located on the fourth and fifth floor of the building, the cafe can seat up to 100 people and has a open setting with a quirky touch. 

The cafe is located at No 110, beside BATA Showroom, above Purvika Mobile, New BEL Road. For details, call 8095917917. ‘Burp’ is open from 7 am to 12 am, seven days a week.ADVERTISEMENT