The term 'biological diversity' was coined by wildlife scientist–conservationist Raymond F Dasmann in 1968 and was later shortened to biodiversity by W G Rosen in 1985. In its broadest sense, biodiversity covers the entire lifescape of our planet, including microorganisms, and is believed to comprise nearly 5.6 million species of the total estimated number of one trillion species. According to the United Nations Environment Programme, biodiversity essentially deals with variation at the genetic, species and ecosystem level. Terrestrial biodiversity is rich in the tropics because of warm climate and high primary productivity near the equator.ADVERTISEMENTThe importance of biodiversity as our life-supporting system is rather well-understood. We know that life begets life only if the ambient conditions are favourable for propagation. Causes and effects of biodiversity destruction, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, storms, hurricanes, cyclones, floods and drought are better highlighted than the ways and means of protecting it against rising global population and the concomitant array of civilisational needs (for housing, industry, transport, energy, commerce, agriculture, communication, etc).It has been a great challenge to safeguard the biodiversity in its totality. Severe climatic changes affect both the biological and physical worlds. For instance, recent events such as hurricanes in the US and the Caribbean, monsoon deficiency in India, heat wave in Europe, drought in Australia, flooding in South Asia, melting of Arctic and Antarctic ice, rising sea levels, increasing global temperature (compared to pre-industrial era) and associated phenomena have significantly threatened biodiversity.The concept of conservation should be a way of life as has been practiced in India by the Adivasis - tribals who live on the periphery of forests. We have to bear in mind that our forefathers had left this planet in a 'livable' state and hence we have the bounden obligation to leave it behind in a comparable (if not similar) condition. We certainly need to come out of the mindset that all natural resources and treasures belong only to the present and nothing need be conserved for future generations. This is a highly short-sighted, ill-conceived and self-centric attitude. Our basic need is justifiable, but not unbridled greed. Ever-increasing consumerism and the desire to raise the standard of living have led to overexploitation of our natural wealth.Minimising the degradation of natural habitats/ecosystems is one of the best ways of protecting biodiversity. But, this is easier said than done. Conservation entails considerable planning of our development schemes with a set of well-defined, integrated and sustainable concepts. Environmental issues warrant multi-pronged action through multi-agencies. Many developing countries including India have not been able to maintain a harmonious synergy between civilisational requirements and environmental issues. This mismatch has often threatened our invaluable biodiversity, be it in the Himalayan and Nilgiri biospheres or the Western Ghats - declared by UNESCO as 'world heritage site' and considered 'hyper hot' for conservation.It must be emphasised that the West has totally failed to appreciate the fact that there is also an ethical approach to conservation. For instance, simple and balanced lifestyles, devoid of high consumerism and less demand on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas, will certainly lead to decreased energy consumption. The HDI (human development index) of the United Nations does not account for noble values and philosophy of austerity in life and living. It was reported that some of the virgin stretches of forests in the sub-continent remained so because of religious taboos against tree-felling (the so-called religious basis of conservation). In Karnataka, such sites are called 'Devarakadus' and 'Nagarabanas'.We need to explore newer strategies of conservation and adopt new norms (dos and don'ts), say, of slowing down the pace of industrialisation, checking population growth and increased switchover to solar-wind-hydro-bio-sources of clean energy. Decreased global population, if realised, naturally will reduce energy consumption. It is well known that one of the greatest threats to biodiversity is human interference on an unprecedented scale.Apart from effective educational programmes through schools, print and electronic media, the laws on hunting, poaching, pollution, illegal logging and felling of trees, trade in plants and animal products, mining, etc., must be vigorously enforced. The tendency to resort to megaprojects should be curtailed.There could be smaller units of irrigation and power generation. The routes of new highways and railway lines must be thoughtfully chosen. Eco-auditing of large development plans such as dams must be done on reliable data. The dictum should be "development yes, but environmental safeguards first". Wherever tampering is inevitable, conscientious efforts must be made to restore and rejuvenate the ecosystems. This was done successfully in many other countries, especially after large-scale mining operations.New technologiesScience gives rise to technologies. Application of technologies could be destructive as well as productive. In terms of conservation of biodiversity (say, of rare endemic and endangered species of plants and animals), we have new techniques of tissue culture - micro-propogation, cryo-preservation of semen, eggs and embryos, and their long-distance transportation by air, cloning, translocation, captive breeding, super-ovulation, in-vitro fertilisation (IVF), embryo transfer, surrogacy and production of transgenic plants and animals. Well-protected national parks, wildlife reserves, sanctuaries, safaris, zoological and botanical parks, massive afforestation, rejuvenation of rivers, lakes and wetlands, all will enhance biodiversity conservation.Apart from government schemes, it must be reiterated that people's involvement at the grassroots level, as partners in conservation of biodiversity, is of paramount importance. Without citizens' participation and cooperation, we cannot safeguard our landscape or lifescape. Finally, our teaching institutions at primary, secondary and tertiary levels should expose students to the marvels of biodiversity to ensure human welfare through proper climate, health and food security. The future of mankind is inextricably linked with the abundance of biodiversity.(The writer is former Vice Chancellor, University of Mysore)