New Delhi: Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Saturday claimed that the BJP has offered Rs 25 crore each to seven of its MLAs in Delhi to quit the party and warned them that he will be arrested, an allegation the BJP denied.ADVERTISEMENT Kejriwal made the allegation in a post on 'X' claiming that seven MLAs were approached with a message that the BJP will break the AAP MLAs after Kejriwal is arrested. He also claimed that the MLAs were told that they had held talks with a total of 21 lawmakers.  However, Delhi BJP president Virendra Sachdeva challenged AAP to name the MLAs and the people who allegedly contacted them with the offer. "This shows how politically desperate Kejriwal has become. This unfounded allegation by him is an attempt to keep himself politically alive. The allegation that the BJP wants to break away MLAs of the ruling AAP, having 62 out of 70 MLAs in Delhi, shows his mental bankruptcy," he said.Also Read:Vow to protect Constitution, strengthen democracy: Arvind Kejriwal to people on Republic DayAlso Read:Vow to protect Constitution, strengthen democracy: Arvind Kejriwal to people on Republic Dayपिछले दिनों इन्होंने हमारे दिल्ली के 7 MLAs को संपर्क कर कहा है - “कुछ दिन बाद केजरीवाल को गिरफ़्तार कर लेंगे। उसके बाद MLAs को तोड़ेंगे। 21 MLAs से बात हो गयी है। औरों से भी बात कर रहे हैं। उसके बाद दिल्ली में आम आदमी पार्टी की सरकार गिरा देंगे। आप भी आ जाओ। 25 करोड़ रुपये देंगे…— Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) January 27, 2024


Kejriwal said all the seven AAP MLAs refused to quit the party. "God and the people always supported us. This time also these people will fail in their nefarious intentions," he said."These people know our government has done so much work for the people of Delhi. Despite all the obstacles created by them, we have accomplished so much. The people of Delhi love AAP hugely. It is not in their power to defeat AAP in the elections. So they want to topple the government through the arrest on the pretext of a fake liquor scam," he added.Delhi Minister Atishi alleged that the BJP has launched "Operation Lotus 2.0" in Delhi and that it had made a similar attempt to poach AAP MLAs last year also.