With the threat of Operation Lotus (poaching of dissident MLAs by BJP) looming large, Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy will in all likelihood either expand his Cabinet or reshuffle it soon as a measure to quell disgruntlement, especially in the Congress.ADVERTISEMENTCongress Legislature Party (CLP) leader Siddaramaiah told reporters in Mysuru that three vacant Cabinet berths will be filled soon. Of the three ministerial berths, one belongs to the Congress and two to the JD(S), he said, adding that there was no plan to reshuffle the Cabinet at this juncture.Sources in the Congress said the coalition partners are considering re-inducting Ranebennur MLA R Shankar of Karnataka Pragyavantara Janata Paksha. Shankar was dropped from the Cabinet last year. Names of Independent MLA from Mulbagal H Nagesh and Congress legislators B Nagendra (Bellary) and B C Patil (Hirekerur) are making the rounds as probable candidates to be made ministers. Sources in the JD(S) said Kumaraswamy is in favour of a minor reshuffle of the Cabinet to counter the BJP, which has been trying to woo rival party legislators after sweeping the recently held Lok Sabha elections. But Siddaramaiah has advised the Chief Minister only to fill up the three existing vacancies now. Other dissident MLAs will be accommodated in various boards and corporations.Kumaraswamy’s plan is to drop six ministers — three each from the Congress and the JD(S) — and accommodate aggrieved MLAs who are said to be on the BJP’s radar.The saffron party is said to be in touch with close to a dozen Congress and JD(S) MLAs. Many of these MLAs are upset with their parties on being denied ministerial berths.The sources said Kumaraswamy has prepared a list of his party ministers to be dropped. Ministers S R Mahesh and C S Puttaraju are likely to be shown the door. It is speculated in the Congress circles that ministers loyal to the party like Krishna Byre Gowda and U T Khader have expressed their willingness to step down and pave way for a reshuffle in the interest of the coalition government.KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao said the decision on whether to only expand the Cabinet or go in for a reshuffle will be taken after the CLP meeting. “No decision has been taken yet. We will do all that is necessary to safeguard the coalition government. We are not scared of BJP’s efforts to lure our MLAs,” he added.Meanwhile, Gundu Rao met JD(S) chief H D Deve Gowda at his residence and discussed the political situation in the state. He, however, refused to divulge details of the meeting.