Two glasses of wine will bring down cholesterol levels and help you stay away from hard liquor, advises international winemaker Jean-Manuel Jacquinot.

ADVERTISEMENT“Two glasses (20 cl) of wine a day will considerably bring down cholesterol levels. Wine will enable you safely eat red meat and keep you away from hard liquor, which is bad for the system,” Jacquinot told agencies on the sidelines of a “Meet the Masters” wine pairing event here on Saturday night. Jacquinot and viticulturist Phillip Deverell are touring the country for presenting lunches and dinners paired with Nine Hills, a bouquet of exotic wines from Pernod Ricard India (formerly Seagram India) to introduce Indian consumers to a taste that is fresh, yet mature.

Thus, on offer Saturday night were five varieties: Shiraz Rose 2010, Sauvignon Blanc 2010, Chenin Blanc 2010, Shiraz 2010 and Cabarnet Sauvignon 2009.

The first was paired with gruyere, spinach and sundried tomato equiche/mushroom vol-au-vent/chicken shish kababs starters and the second with a starter of home grown sprouts salad with summer fruits/poached chicken. The Chenin Blanc 2010 was paired with goat cheese, spinach and pine nutravioli with pesto sauce. The piece de resistance, of course, was the main meal with a choice of Moroccan-styled braised lamb shoulder, Cajun spiced grilled sole, ratatouille cottage steak with mustered cream and baked aubergine, tomato and mozzarella stacks. This came with not one, but two wines: Shiraz 2010 and Cabarnet Sauvignon 2009.

Jacquinot, better known as JMJ, is a member of the French Oenologist Association and was elected to the board of the Champagne Oenologist Association. 

A qualified taster at the Comite Interprofessional des Vinesde Champagne, he also sought to dispel the notion that wine couldn’t be paired with Indian food as it was too spicy.

“On the contrary, red wine pairs ideally with spicy Indian food,” adding that oily food was a strict no, no.

“Oily food and wine just don’t go together. In any case, oily food is best avoided as it is bad for the system,” he pointed out.