The Delhi BJP and the AAP continued to exchange barbs over issues related to alleged poaching of MLAs, government formation through unethical means and Arvind Kejriwal’s ambition.

ADVERTISEMENTThe BJP claimed Kejriwal was showing signs of political frustration and repenting his decision to quit as chief minister and the AAP leaders hit back by alleging that the saffron party might again try to form a government in the city on September 25 through illegal means.

The two parties crossed swords a day after rumours that three AAP MLAs visited Goa for an alleged meeting with BJP leaders and striking a deal for helping BJP form a government in Delhi.

Aam Aadmi Party leader Manish Sisodia denied any move by its three MLAs – Ashok Kumar Chauhan, Dharmender Singh Koli and Prakash Jarwal – to jump ship. And in an attempt to quell rumours, Sisodia said all of them were asked to return from Goa within hours of landing there. 

“Our MLAs are not up for sale...even if there are buyers based in Goa,” he said.
“It will be good if the BJP puts its house in order before questioning our MLAs’ loyalty,” he said, slamming the Bharatiya Janata Party of spreading rumours about differences in the new party.

Delhi BJP chief Satish Upadhyay denied any manipulations by his party to form the city government, but questioned why AAP MLAs figured in any rumour related to possible government formation in the city.
“It seems there are cracks within the AAP,” he said.

“Earlier, Kejriwal had apprehensions about defection in his party and now his frustration has been reported in some newspapers as he put pressure on his three MLAs to come back from Goa airport to Delhi who had gone there as tourists,” he said.  

“Kejriwal is so worried about government formation in Delhi that he issues statements about the steps BJP will take in future,” he said.

“In place of doubting his MLAs and the opponents, he should admit that the people of Delhi want development and a strong government. They do not want Kejriwal’s apology for resigning from the government,” he said.

Kejriwal trained his guns on the BJP at a public meeting on Sunday and said, “The auspicious days of Navratras are beginning on September 25 and I am told the BJP is again going to try and form the government from that day.”

“They want to do it one day before Prime Minister Narendra Modi is scheduled to leave for the US,” he said.

He said if people of Delhi give him another chance to become the chief minister, he will not resign in haste like the previous occasion.