At a time when connoisseurs and patrons of cinema complain that theatres are being demolished to make way for commercial complexes as television and other new media are poaching cine-goers, the screens exhibiting cinema in the city are actually on the rise.ADVERTISEMENTAfter crossing a lot of hurdles, last week PVR Cinemas finally opened four screens, all Prime, with a total capacity to seat 911 audience at Garuda Mall opposite the City Bus Stand on Albert Victor Road, without much fanfare.G Raghunath, cinema manager of PVR said that the response on the opening day was good despite little publicity, and it improved by 25% on the second day. “The pricing of the tickets is from Rs 100 to Rs 150. It is Rs 50 more on weekends. For 3D movies, it will be a little more,” he said.“Compared to other cities such as Bengaluru, not many theatres have been pulled down in the recent past in Mysuru. The loss in single-screen theatres has become a gain via multiplexes. As far as I can recall, Opera, Ranjith, Vidyaranya, Gokula and Ganesha have been pulled down. However, more screens have come up in the form of multiplexes. Both DRC Cinemas in Habitat Mall and Inox in Mall of Mysore have four screens each. Now, PVR has added four more screens,” said R Raju, Assistant Director for Information and Public Relations.Besides, three more multiplexes are coming up in the city — at Bannimantap ‘A’ Layout, a project of Belur Enterprises and Rockline Cinemas; PVR Cinemas at Forum Centre City Mall; and a project by women entrepreneurs in Metagalli.“All aspects of life are changing. Cinemas are no exception. Watching of cinema has evolved with technology. Cinema that gives a fulfilling experience is the order of the day. People cherish not just the movie but the experience of watching it. Even old movies like ‘Nagarahavu’, with an enhancement with the help of technology, are being received well in the new generation theatres or multiplexes,” points out D C Nagaraj, an avid film-goer.“PVR Cinemas currently operate 634 screens at 136 properties in 53 cities across India — 19 states and Union Territories — serving 7.6 crore patrons annually. PVR has a total count of 89 screens across 12 properties in Karnataka and 164 screens at 25 properties in South India. PVR in Garuda Mall is spread across 29,500 sq ft. It features 4K projection system, along with Dolby 7.1 surround sound and next-generation 3-D,” said Raghunath.