People in showbiz are generous with expletives, and even forget their admirers are watchingADVERTISEMENTKapil Sharma, anchor of hugely successful TV comedy shows, has a less pleasant face. He once got into a scuffle mid-air with fellow actor Sunil Grover. Last week, he went after a journalist, using filthy language against him.

Metrolife brings you some candid moments with the celebrities.Twitter rantKapil Sharma targeted a journalist on Twitter, saying he "only spread(s) negativity about me for very little money". Soon, he disowned the tweet, saying his account had been hacked. But he went on to abuse journalist Vickey Lalwani, who edits website Spotboye, over the phone. Kapil Sharma stooped so low as to bring in Lalwani's daughter into the conversation. An outraged Lalwani shared the recording
on social media. Kapil Sharma lodged a complaint. The battle is raging, but someone needs to head back to school to learn how to talk.No comment, pleaseWith the media reporting the 1998 blackbuck poaching case, Saif Ali Khan was bombarded with questions he was trying his best to avoid. He got so annoyed he snapped at his driver, "Put the window up and reverse the car or you will get slapped." The remark went viral on social media.Oh snap!Sanjay Dutt is known to have thrown many vile words at the paparazzi. On one occasion, he politely asked a reporter to remain calm while taking a picture. He then got furious and used foul language to convey the same message. People say he talks that way when he is drunk. Well, someone should tell him not to talk after drinking.For a noble causeJackie Shroff was shooting for a pulse polio advertisement in the late '90s. The unedited footage became public years later. It showed the actor struggling with his Marathi script. He used expletives again and again. He brushed off the outrage: "You don't have to take it all so seriously. What's wrong if I was in one of those 'bindaas' moods?'Doting father During IPL 2012, Shah Rukh Khan and his children entered a stadium after the match to celebrate his team's victory. Shah Rukh said a security guard had roughed up his children. The ground staff and officials said the actor had tried to assault the security guard for stopping him for a security check. An FIR was filed against the star. Maharashtra Cricket Association banned him from entering Wankhede Stadium for five years. The ban was to last till 2017 but was lifted in 2015. In 2016, Shah Rukh got a clean chit in the case.Casteist slur Talking about his dancing in the film 'Tiger Zinda Hai', Salman Khan used the word 'bhangi'. Shilpa Shetty also used the word to describe how she looks at home. The National Commission of Scheduled Castes took objection to the actors using the word in a derogatory sense.