In order to ease over-crowding on two of the busiest coridors – Noida City Centre-Dwarka and Jahangir Puri-HUDA City Centre – all the trains running on these two lines would have eight-coached by the end of 2013. While over 20 lakh commuters in Delhi use Metro every day, over 13 lakh passengers travel on these two lines itself. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn his first interaction with the media after taking over as the Metro chief, Mangu Singh said, “By the end of 2013, more than half the trains on line 2 (Jahangir Puri-HUDA City Centre) will be eight coached. Similarly, half the trains on line 3 (Noida City Centre-Dwarka) will also have eight coaches. By June, 2015, all trains on these two corridors would be converted to eight coaches.”

Coming soon

The DMRC chief said the organisation has placed orders for procurement of coaches, which would be added to the existing trains. 

While 60 trains currently run on line 2, line 3 has 71 trains. Meanwhile, Singh said set aside any proposal for a fare hike.

‘Take attrition positively’

Replying to a question about the resignation of Kumar Keshav, director (projects and planning), Singh asserted that and it would not affect the functioning and his replacement would be made by mid-June.

“A new director would be appointed by June 15. Metro is a unique organisation. Work is not affected due to an individual’s exit as the system has been designed in such a way,” Mangu Singh said. 

Attrition rate

Commenting on the high attrition rate in DMRC, the Metro chief said he takes the attrition rate in a positive way. 

“The demand for Delhi Metro people is so high which is why they are being poached with incentives. Through this way we can attract more and more people. We can attract much better people,” he said.

Platform screen doors

Aimed at taking care of the safety concerns at stations, the DMRC has decided to put half-screen doors at all stations from Central Secretariat to Kashmere Gate except Patel Chowk. 

However, Singh said, the work would take two years to complete as it will be very difficult to carry out construction work in operational stations.  

The stations where screen doors would be installed include Central Secretariat, Rajiv Chowk, New Delhi, Chawri Bazar, Chandni Chowk and Kashmere Gate.