The snares, made of telephone wires, steel cables and even natural tree fibres were set to catch animals like chital, sambar, wild pig, barking deer, mouse deer and other animals for meat.

The exclusive combing operation, which led to the detection of snares has proved that every sanctuary is vulnerable to poaching and also that a vigil watch can protect rare endangered wildlife. 

“We began snare combing operation after the April 2010 incident at Gopalaswamy Betta, wherein a tiger was killed. It is a regular exercise now. In a short duration, we have been able to detect the snares,” said K T Hanumanthappa, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Bandipur. 

Tiger found dead

In April this year, a tiger was found dead after it was caught in a snare in Gopalaswamy 
Betta. It was suspected to be handiwork of notorious poacher Paapa and his associates Nagarajaswamy, Govinda, Shivaraju and Kumaraswamy.  

The same gang struck again  in  February this year by poaching another tiger in Bandipur in a similar manner.  Five leopards have been killed after being caught in snares in Chikmagalur, Shirva, Mangalore and Virajpet within the last 18 months.

The intense combing operation led by B J Hosmat, Field Director, Project Tiger and Deputy Conservator of Forests K T Hanumanthappa the departmental staff removed the snares which were laid on regular trials where wildlife are known to frequent. 

Most of these snares have been found in these two ranges which borders Kerala and also several villages. Snares have become a serious problem in the forests. According to Forest officials, these silent killers are very difficult to detect, unlike incidents where poachers use firearms.

Unnatural loss

Explaining about the loss of endangered animals, Sanjay Gubbi, wildlife expert said, “These kinds of unnatural losses of adult large cats will have a serious impact on the carnivore community in the area. If a dominant male tiger is killed, other males which like to take over the territory held by the killed tiger, will eliminate the cubs and young male tigers in its territory.”
 ADVERTISEMENT