He’s a master craftsman and why not? After all his last name has ‘craft’ in it! Matthew Hopcraft has captured the hearts of foodies with his cooking prowess on the latest season of ‘Masterchef Australia’ which airs on Star World every weeknight at 9 pm. For the dentist and a father of two, the show was a dream come true and life has definitely taken a huge turn post it. 
ADVERTISEMENTIf not a chef or dentist... I have always loved the idea of being an architect.
What are your favourite ingredients to work with? I like seafood as I love eating it. So fish, scallops and any fresh sea produce with fresh ingredients. 
It’s your last day on the planet. What would you like to eat and where? I really love salmon, so a nice salmon dish. And I’d like to eat it at home in Melbourne. We think it’s the best city in the world! 
What did you have for dinner last night? (Laughs) Spaghetti bolognese.
A celebrity you would love to cook for... The Australian Prime Minister as I’d enjoy talking to him on politics. Like every other chef, I always dreamt of cooking for Heston Blumenthal too and this dream came true thanks to the show. It was the most amazing experience. He thinks very differently and as a scientist myself, I love his approach. 
What do you like cooking for your kids? My son isn’t all that adventurous so it’s always pasta for him. My daughter is more experimental and likes Thai and Japanese food. 
Your tryst with Indian food... My family and I enjoy eating at the different Indian restaurants here. But Australian-Indian food is different from actual Indian food. Nothing is too hot (laughs). I tried cooking butter chicken once as my kids really like it. I also tried to make ‘naan’ but without a proper ‘tandoor’, it doesn’t come out as well. ‘Samosa’ is another favourite of mine.  Did you know the series was this popular in India?Till I took part in it, I had no idea it was this big around the world. After being on the show, I have got a lot of Indian followers on Facebook and Twitter. 
How did you feel when you first saw the three judges? I was very excited. I had so much of hope and being selected was an amazing feeling. Matt (Preston) is a really funny guy. He and I get along really well. Gary’s (Mehigan) cooking is similar to mine while George’s (Calombaris) style is very different. They are all fantastic mentors. 
What was your most memorable moment on the show? As someone who spent nine years in the army as a dental officer, the army challenge was a wonderful experience. 
An embarrassing moment? When I tried to poach an egg and the yolk broke. And this was during an immunity challenge!
Favourite fellow contestants...Reynold as he thinks very creatively. Billie is also a strong cook and nothing seems to worry her. 

(As told to Deepa Natarajan Lobo)