Hotels and restaurants across the City are gearing up for Easter Sunday with mouthwatering dishes and desserts. What’s more, there’s is an array of Easter eggs, cupcakes and hot cross buns to choose from.    

ADVERTISEMENTITC Gardenia’s The Cubbon Pavilion and Lotus Pavilion is offering ‘Easter’ Brunch on Sunday featuring all-time favourites alongside a selection of world cuisine. From the ‘Cold Buffet’, one can treat themselves with ‘Oysters and Chardonnay Poached Prawns’. Indulge in ‘Salt-crusted Bekti’, ‘Stuffed leg of lamb infused with Merlot’, ‘Pork Belly Roulade’ and many more. The ‘Grills Counter’ will offer one a variety of gastronomical delights like ‘Chicken Cafreal’ and ‘Fish Rechadeau’. From the dessert counter, one can enjoy the ‘Easter Semolina Tart’, ‘Easter Bunny cupcakes’, ‘Marzipan-filled Eggs’ and entremet specials like ‘Apricot and Pistachio Praline Perfection’, ‘Sour Cherry’ and ‘Citrus Chocolate’. 

The Taj West End is ringing in the Easter cheer with a brunch spread at MYNT. Sip on ‘Moët & Chandon’ and soak in the festive ambience. Enjoy the range of exotic dishes drawn from Western, Mediterranean and Indian cuisines, complete with holiday specials like roast turkey, pork legs, grills, an exotic selection of cold cuts and cheeses. Catch all the action at the live stations, where the chefs display their culinary skills and offer a spread of grilled vegetables and meat. All this topped off by a holiday-inspired dessert buffet. 

Vivanta by Taj - MG Road is celebrating Easter at Cafe Mozaic with a ‘Grand Easter Brunch’ featuring festive goodies, a build-your-own-omelette station, a kid’s buffet, unlimited beverages and sparkling wines on the house and a live performance. ‘Sugar and Spice’, the patisserie will have Easter eggs, chocolate bunnies, cross buns, marzipan sweets, butter cookies and choco cakes. These are available till March 28.

 The Gateway Hotel’s ‘Karavalli’ will have an ‘Easter Special Balele Oota Lunch’. Choose from the vegetarian delicacies of ‘Vazhapoo Cutlet’, ‘Ulli Theeyal’, ‘Pachakkari Stew’, ‘Vellayappam’ and Ada Pradhaman. 

The special lunch for non-vegetarians will include ‘Feast on Tharavu Roast’, ‘Meen Moilee’, ‘Kozhi Mappas’, ‘Erachi Varattiyathu’, and Easter Eggs among many more. The all-day long Deli is laden with Easter goodies to munch on at the ‘Alfresco’ or gift to your loved ones.  Choose from platters full of Easter eggs, hot cross buns, ‘Bunny Choux’ pastries, Italian Easter breads, sticky cinnamon rolls, and Easter bunny cookies.

 These are available till March 30.‘24/7’ at The Lalit Ashok will have a special blend of food, wine and music. Specially crafted by chef Abhishek Kumar, the elaborate menu includes ‘Oyster Bar’, ‘Brunch Favourites’, Easter Eggs Counter’, pastries, unlimited sparkling wine along with live cooking stations. The brunch is on from 12.30 pm to 3.30 pm. 

The Easter Sunday brunch at Bayleaf, Koramangala, will have  a ‘Lavish Spread Buffet’ from 12 noon to 4 pm.