A blackboard concept for a contemporary Parsi restaurant might sound a bit surprising, but ‘Red Fork — A Daddy’s Deli Idea’ sure knows how to turn that notion around and give their guests a warm welcome as well as lip-smacking food. It evolved from a tiny, four-table eatery in Richmond Town 15 years ago, serving authentic Parsi cuisine under the name of ‘Daddy’s Deli’, to what it is today. Chef Xerxes and team have come up with innovative presentations of the authentic Parsi favourites while retaining the original flavours. 

ADVERTISEMENTTheir menu boasts of a great spectrum of delicacies that anyone can walk in anytime of the day and enjoy. They have a half-day breakfast policy till 3 pm, whereas the regular menu starts from 12 pm. 

The menu ranges from healthy breakfasts to burgers, salads, shared plates, hearty eats and sweet treats. They also make all their products in-house including breads, sauces, dips, ice creams and desserts.    

While the tag of ‘contemporary’ may intimidate a few with the idea of fancy utensils, they put a smile on everyone’s face with homely cutlery and elegant presentations. The innovative menu consists of must-not-miss dishes like the perfectly balanced ‘Grilled asparagus and zucchini salad’, the soothing ‘Breakfast bruschetta’, ‘Pork vindaloo sliders’, which is a burst of flavours in your mouth, the smooth and creamy ‘Egg noodles in a lemon grass soup’, the fresh from the oven ‘Frangipani tart with red wine poached fig and ice cream’, and the devilishly good ‘Caramelised apple cheesecake with spiced creme anglaise and toffee sauce’; each one better than the other. Their highlight also includes the minty fresh iced tea that’s perfect to wash your meal down with. 

With lively interiors that resonate freshness, ‘Red Fork’ easily draws a person in to enjoy a great meal. They assure that once you’ve sampled the fare there, you will be tempted to return over and over again. 

The restaurant is located at 594, 12th Main, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar. For details, call 30752480.