It’s all about money, honey!
ADVERTISEMENTThey say you are what you eat. But do we know what we are eating? Take honey. Little do we know how the business of honey has changed. Some decades ago, leading scientific institutions in India sold the idea of introducing the European bee (Apis mellifera) into the country. This prolific honey producer bee took over the business, virtually replacing the humble but more adapted Indian bees (Apis cerana and Apis dorsata) from our food.

At the same time, the business of honey moved away from small producers, collecting honey from the wild and cultivating it in natural conditions. It became a highly organised business. Thus we lost the biodiversity of the bee.

Business is now about commerce, not food. But nature has its way of getting back at us. The European bee is showing signs of overuse across the world. In the US and Europe there is worrying news about honeybee colony collapses—bees are disappearing from colonies. This is in turn is hitting crop production as bees play a critical role in pollinating food crops across the US. The trade in pollinator bees involves carting bee colonies across the county, where crops need their service. But now there is evidence that such overwork, combined with the use of nasty new pesticides, new diseases and immune-suppressed bees, is destroying bees.

In India, things are no different. The dependence on an introduced species and emphasis on overproduction means the overworked bees are susceptible to diseases. The creatures are immune-suppressed and not adapted to local conditions. So, the answer is to feed bees antibiotics mixed liberally in sugar syrup.

When the Pollution Monitoring Laboratory of the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) checked honey, it found cocktail of antibiotics—mostly banned and prohibited in food. Any doctor will tell you these antibiotics in food are bad. It is also because of this that food regulators say there should be no—or minimum and controlled— antibiotics in our food. The health-conscious companies, in this case from Australia and Switzerland, do not check antibiotics in products they export to our world. It is about double-standards and it stinks. The same government which makes strict orders for the export of honey has nothing for the domestic market. 

Sunita Narain

Deer in Sunderbans as tiger prey 
The conservation broth has got eager hands to stir it. Some throw in extra spices which sometimes spoils the broth. For instance, the forest department’s prescription to tackle the dearth of prey base for tigers in the Sunderbans: release deer in the mangroves. The deer, in question, are not native to the Sunderbans nor accustomed to its saline conditions. On January 13 this year, 65 deer were released in the Sunderbans and in August another 25. The last tiger census pegged the figures for the Sunderbans at an arguable 274. An adult tiger eats about 50 deer in a year. Two hundred and seventy four tigers would require more than 13,000 deer a year. This means a tourist on a three-day visit to the Sunderbans can see a good number of deer. Poaching, changes in the Sundarbans landscape and increasing salinity could be affecting tiger behaviour. Many tiger experts suggest the animal is moving northward. Does this indicate the Sunderbans’ ecosystem is becoming unsuitable for deer? The Deer Centre at Dobanki is supposed to acclimatise deer brought in from outside the mangrove ecosystem before their introduction into the forest. 

Tiasa Adhya