In a fresh sign that the BJP is trying to lure dissident MLAs, Congress MLA from Chikkaballapur Dr K Sudhakar and rebel MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi met senior BJP leader S M Krishna and R Ashoka on Sunday.ADVERTISEMENTThe development comes amid speculation that disgruntled Congress-JD(S) MLAs would be shifting to a resort to thwart possible poaching by the BJP. Though some of the dissident Congress MLAs denied the news of being lodged in any resort, it is reliably learnt that close aides of Jarkiholi have booked rooms at a resort in Goa. Mahesh Kamtahalli and Bheema Naik, Congress MLAs close to Ramesh, however, clarified that they were not in any resort.BJP wooing MLAsThe saffron party seems to have intensified efforts to woo disgruntled MLAs, and Sunday’s meeting between Sudhakar and Ramesh and BJP leaders is seen as an indication of that. This also proves that rebel legislator Ramesh, who had openly declared that he would quit the Congress soon, has been trying to muster support of the dissidents.Sudhakar is a close follower of Krishna, so much so that he has no qualms in calling the veteran leader his “political mentor” though the latter is now in the BJP.Speaking to reporters, Ramesh admitted that he was not alone. “I have a team (of MLAs). But I will not reveal anything at this juncture...I met Krishna to enquire about his health,” he added.Asked when he will quit the Congress, he said: “I cannot say anything now. “Do you guys (media persons) reveal anything before conducting sting operation? In the same way I cannot reveal anything now. I will let you know when I am resigning,” he retorted.Ashoka dismissed the meeting as coincidence and claimed that politics was not discussed. Earlier in the day, State BJP president B S Yeddyurappa met Krishna and discussed political situation in the state.Sumalatha open to supporting NDASumalatha Ambareesh, who won the Mandya parliamentary seat, on Sunday said that she was open to extend issue-based support to Narendra Modi-lead NDA government at the Centre.Speaking to reporters after meeting BJP leader S M Krishna and State BJP president B S Yeddyurappa, she said the decision on whether she would join the BJP would be taken by consulting people of Mandya. "I would like to clarify that there is no provision for an independent candidate to join a party. The only option is to extend external support to the government," she said.