‘Hey Ram’ to ‘Jai Shri Ram’

Despite odds, including flood threat and impending CBI cases, the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) chief Lalu Prasad put up a massive show of strength at the ‘Desh Bachao, BJP Bhagao’ rally in Patna on Sunday. While 17 anti-BJP political parties attended the rally at the historic Gandhi Maidan, heavyweight Opposition leaders like Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi, Mayawati and Sitaram Yechury were conspicuous by their absence. The rally also saw most speakers slamming Nitish Kumar for disrespecting the mandate of the 2015 Assembly poll. 

Lalu’s son and former deputy CM Tejashwi Yadav launched a scathing attack on Nitish. “Nitish Kumar is such an opportunistic leader that in April, he was with those who said: ‘Hey Ram’. By July, he was with those who chant ‘Jai Shri Ram’,” said Tejashwi. He was referring to how the JD (U) strongman had participated in the Champaran Satyagrah Centenary celebrations, but had changed colours in July and joined hands with the BJP.
Abhay Kumar, Patna

Escort service

The presence of a young lady inside the private helicopter that took Dera Sacha Sauda chief and rape convict Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh from Panchkula to Rohtak jail has raised eyebrows. No convict is allowed any personal escort after the judge pronounces him guilty of an offence. But authorities are on the backfoot for allowing the lady to travel with the DSS chief. 
The lady, who is said to be the namesake daughter of Ram Rahim, has also acted with him in movies. She was present inside the courtroom when the CBI court pronoun­ced the verdict. This was with prior permission of the court when she sought to be present on the ground that the Dera chief was unwell and that she was his attendant. There was, however, no permission for her to board the helicopter after his conviction.
Gautam Dheer, Chandigarh

Rane-nitiADVERTISEMENTEveryone is keeping their fingers crossed in the power corridors of Maharashtra. The reason: will or not Shiv Sainik-turned-Congressman Narayan Rane join the BJP? Ahead of the Cabinet reshuffle and the expansion to be undertaken by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, there are signs that Rane is likely to switch sides. That has worried every party in the political spectrum.

A section of BJP men are already worried by the Konkan strongman’s dominance. So, too, the Shiv Sena, because once Rane joins the BJP, he may stonewall the attack that the party will face from its alliance partner. The Congress is bothered that it could lose its position as the Leader of Opposition in the Assembly. The NCP is concerned that Rane would start poaching its members. One thing is certain: a lot of churning will happen if Rane moves to the BJP. 
Mrityunjay Bose, Mumbai

Curious move

Unlike his younger colleagues, Home Minister Rajnath Singh is not known to comment on Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s speeches. But 36 hours after Modi addressed the nation from the Red Fort on August 15, Singh released a four-page article titled “decoding the PM’s speech.” He began with a preface that “as a colleague, I feel the need to appreciate certain remarkable and distinct patterns emerging from his address, which reflect in his entire concept of governance almost like mantras.”

In fact, this is the first time that Singh has responded to Modi’s speech in the form of an article, making many BJP leaders wonder why this occasion was so special. Was it because of Modi’s call to shun “bullets and abuses” to resolve the crisis in Jammu and Kashmir? Or due to an impending reshuffle of the Union Council of Ministers? 
Shekhar Iyer, New Delhi

Quiz for votes

Arch rivals, the BJP and the Congress, have turned to social media quizzes to reach out to their supporters. While the BJP has sought to keep its followers engaged through a Twitter quiz #KnowyourGovt that highlights government initiatives, the Congress has countered this with its own version focusing on the renaming of UPA schemes by the Modi government.

PM Narendra Modi has been known to keep his supporters engaged through occasional quizzes on his NaMo App. Having realised the engaging nature of such Q&A format, the Congress, too, runs a quiz, called #KnowyourLegacy, quite regularly now. It seeks to highlight the contribution of freedom fighters and the work of successive Congress governments.
Sagar Kulkarni, New Delhi