A leopard which fell into a well, made its way to forest after attempts to capture it, went futile.

ADVERTISEMENTThe leopard, which was after a hen, eventually fell into a 20 feet deep open, dry well in Valakadame Padaccharu in Koila village on Wednesday morning. The well is situated in a land belonging to Kamala from the same village.
 
The big cat struggled its way out for about two hours. While, more than 30 forest department staff tried to capture the leopard, he managed to escape into woods. 
The leopard is said to have come from the government forest in Shanthigodu. He came to poach a hen belonging to Kamala, and chasing the hen, he eventually fell into the well.
 
The incident came into light when the local people heard the hen screaming and dogs barking. They immediately informed the forest department staff, who arrived at the spot, planning an action. They temporary barricaded the well and provoked the leopard to rise above, after splashing water on him.

The forest department staff also placed a trap by placing cage and net outside the well so that they could arrest the leopard when he jumps out of the well.

But, though the leopard came out, he did not fall into the trap and ran away to the forest, to the dismay of people and officials gathered at the spot. 

More than 30 forest department staff including Puttur Assistant Conservator of Forests Harish, Zonal Conservator of Forests Shridhar, Panja Zonal Conservator of Forests Pravin, Uppinangadi Zonal Conservator of Forests Harsha and  others took part in the operation. Kadapa police staff Monappa and Pampapathi tightened the security in the area.

Public disappointed

More than hundred people who were witnessing the operation, were disappointed when the leopard escaped from the trap. Some people picked up an argument with forest department officials and blamed them for not being able to catch the leopard. They claimed negligence of officials for the futile attempt. The villagers warned that the officials will be held responsible if the escaped leopard reenters the village and bothers the people again.