When giants of Europe meet in the Champions League quarterfinals, concentration becomes a crucial factor. The skills, the heart and soul, and the tactical preparation are all to be expected. But lose concentration, and you lose control.

ADVERTISEMENT“If you leave a player like Lionel Messi for just two seconds, he damages you,” David Beckham said after the 2-2 draw at the Parc des Princes between Paris Saint-Germain and Barcelona on Tuesday.

Two seconds proved to be an overstatement. Blink, and you missed Messi’s ability to find space and score for Barca. Look away – as the referee and two assistants apparently did – and you failed to spot Zlatan Ibrahimovic lurking offside when he poached an equaliser for Paris.

Fine margins, punishing consequences. The game remained on a knife edge up to the final kick, when Blaise Matuidi, the Parisians’ extraordinary, indefatigable midfield warrior, scored in the fourth minute of time added on for stoppages and injuries.

“We played with our heart and showed courage,” Matuidi said. “We proved that PSG. has a soul and a real team. People will be able to count on us in the Champions League for the next few years.”

Matuidi, alas, will not be on the field at the Camp Nou for the return leg in Catalonia. When the aging, surely almost finished, Beckham is included, then Matuidi does the running for two men. Coach Carlo Ancelotti gambles on Beckham’s ability to hit a pass or to strike a free kick, supported in midfield by the extreme running power Matuidi supplies. Alas for Paris, Matuidi is suspended from the return match after receiving another yellow card for excessive force.

His athleticism and his competitive spirit will be sorely missed. But Barcelona has wounds of its own, not the least a strained hamstring for Messi and a damaged knee ligament for defender Javier Mascherano.

Those were the physical stresses that greeted Barca’s coach, Tito Vilanova, in his first game back after spending months undergoing treatment in New York for cancer of the salivary gland.

A cold, gray, bleak night for him in Paris. And an equally chilly one in Bavaria, where Bayern Munich on Tuesday took a decisive 2-0 first-leg lead over Juventus.

Once again, concentration was a factor. Juventus is built on defensive solidarity, and it had not conceded a goal in 490 minutes before Tuesday. That was undone in the first minute – within 25 seconds of the start – when David Alaba fired in a long, low, deflected shot that caught Gigi Buffon, an outstanding keeper, by surprise. By the time that Thomas Muller scored Bayern’s second goal just over an hour later, German power had overrun Italian pragmatism. The crux of the game was Munich’s ability to prevent Andrea Pirlo from orchestrating the play, as he invariably does for Juventus and as he did when Italy eliminated Germany from the Euro 2012 tournament in Poland.

A majestic playmaker, Pirlo admitted that he could not find his rhythm in the Allianz Arena. But the Germans remain wary of him. Bastian Schweinsteiger, Bayern’s driving force, said after the first leg: “My gut tells me that we needed another goal. It wasn’t easy, and it won’t be easy in Turin where the key for us will be to score an away goal.”

PSG might need two or more goals to do something that no team has done in six years – win a knockout game against Barca at the Camp Nou.

Yet Barcelona is not quite at the peak of its powers. It dominated possession, as always, against Paris. Xavi Hernandez, nursing a tight hamstring of his own, still caressed the ball around as few men can.

Dani Alves motored up and down the right flank, now a defender, now a galvanic attacker, throughout the 90 minutes. And it was Alves who spun a magical pass off the outside of his right foot for Messi to score.

Two opponents stood on either side of Messi, but they may as well not have been there. One instant the ball is taken on his chest, the next it is dispatched with the left foot beyond the onrushing, but beaten, goalie Salvatore Sirigu.

Two seconds, did Beckham say? Try two blips – Messi sees the move in his mind before others sense the chance.

Even so, PSG showed that there is more than money behind its emergence as a European team to be taken seriously. Matuidi never gives up, Thiago Silva marshals the defense with a quality that must make Brazilians proud, and Lucas Moura, another Brazilian, runs and creates at lightning speed down the right wing.

The quality is there. It is being knitted together by Ancelotti’s wily coaching and his ability to persuade the apparently languid Ibrahimovic to be more of a team leader in attack than anyone at Barcelona thought him to be.In his year at Barca, he looked a brooding misfit – a player figuratively and physically apart from the diminutive sorcerers Messi, Xavi, and Andres Iniesta.

But in Paris, guided and goaded once again by Ancelotti, who coached him in Italy, Ibrahimovic fits the bill. On Tuesday, he might have had a hat trick. Though he stumbled over missed chances, he eventually scored after Silva’s header came back off a post. Two elements of that goal are questionable. First, that Ibrahimovic was so obviously offside, and, second, that he was there at all. He was supposedly banned for two matches after a reckless foul in the previous round, but the ban was then halved.

If the original punishment was just, why would a UEFA appeals panel overturn it?