FISH CUTLETS
(Poached fish and mashed potatoes, mildly spiced with ginger and pepper, crumb-fried)

Ingredients: Around 500 gm of fish (seer); 500 gm of mashed potatoes; 250 gm of onions (chopped); 1 tsp grated ginger; salt and pepper for seasoning; juice of a lime; 2 eggs for dipping the cutlets; a cup of bread crumbs; oil for cooking the cutlet mixture and for frying.

Method: Poach the fish and flake it lightly. Heat 2 tbsps of oil in a pan and fry onion and ginger till onion is translucent. Add the flaked fish and mashed potatoes. Season with salt and pepper. Add lime juice. Shape this mixture into small lemons, dip these in egg first and coat them well with bread crumbs. Deep fry these cutlets and drain on kitchen paper. Serve hot with a chutney of your choice.

 
DEVILLED PRAWNS 
(Prawns tossed in a piquant sauce)

Ingredients: 500 gm of medium prawns (peeled and deveined with tails on); 500 gm of onion (cut into large chunks); 500 gm of large green chillies (salan ka mirch cut into large pieces)

For the sauce: 2 tbsps of tomato ketchup; 1 tbsp of soy sauce; 1 tbsp of Worcestershire sauce, oil, salt and pepper for seasoning.

Method: Heat the oil in a pan and add the prawns. Sauté them on high heat, and then add onions followed by the chillies. While they are still crisp, add sauces, adjust seasoning and serve.

Note: You can substitute the prawns with boneless chicken cubes to make devilled chicken.

ANNASI CURRY
(Pineapple curry laced with cinnamon and fennel)

Ingredients: One pineapple (skinned and cut into large cubes); 1 onion (sliced); 1 tsp of chilli powder; 1 tsp of ground mustard; a pinch of turmeric; a 2-inch piece of pandan leaf; a sprig of curry leaves; a stick of cinnamon; 1-inch piece of lemongrass (bruised); a cup of coconut milk; 1 tsp of roasted fennel or saunf powder; salt to taste and 1 tbsp of oil.

Method: Mix the chilli powder, ground mustard, turmeric, pandan leaf, curry leaf, lemongrass and cinnamon in the coconut milk and set it aside. Heat the oil in a pan and fry the sliced onion. Add the pineapple cubes and sauté them for a minute before adding the coconut milk. Season with salt. Let the pineapple cook in the coconut milk mixture till it thickens. Add the roasted saunf powder and remove from the heat. Serve hot with a side of steamed rice.

(Recipes by Priya Bala and chef Sanjay Rawat, Bengaluru Marriott Whitefield)

 ADVERTISEMENT