Failure may jag the learning curve but that has never deterred Irish cricketer Eoin Morgan, captain of England’s shorter versions of cricket (ODIs and T20) and player of the Sunrisers Hyderabad this season of the IPL, from chasing his dreams with the willow.

ADVERTISEMENT Eoin grew up only wanting to be a cricketer and nothing else. And he did accomplish his dream through sheer hard work and passion for the game. The recent defeat against the West Indies in the T20 World Cup has not dampened the young man’s spirits. Back in India for the IPL series, Eoin shares with Nina C George his experience in the country and its people.

How are you finding the IPL sojourn?

This is my 7th season in the IPL and it seems to get better with every year. Somehow, cricket during the IPL seems to revolve around India and its culture which is what makes this format special. The IPL embodies Indian culture. I am enjoying every moment of it.

Do you get some time to go sightseeing in the cities where you play?

One gets very little time between matches to travel and explore as much as one would like to. But I did manage to grab some time to visit Agra and see the Taj Mahal. The place is very important both in terms of its historical value and beauty.

Do you spend a lot of time with Indian cricketers? 

The IPL brings together cricketers from across the world. I think this is the only time when we get to spend some time with everybody, including our Indian counterparts. There’s a lot of exchange of cultural knowledge.

What do you do when you are not playing cricket?

I play golf. I never get tired of it.  

Do you cook?

Oh! I am terrible at cooking.

What are your experiments with food in India like?

India has developed in terms of serving cuisines from across the world. The choices are varied and the food is great. There are no great experiments because I am not fussy about food, I eat everything. 

Are you particular about what you eat otherwise?

I try and eat a healthy and balanced diet as much as possible. For breakfast, I have poached egg, lunch is usually ‘pasta’ and my evening meal would comprise anything from chicken to steak.

Do you go shopping when travelling for the IPL?

I am not much of a shopaholic. I’ve strolled around some of the open markets in Delhi just for the experience but I don’t shop much. I just buy whatever I need.

Do you travel other than for cricket?

Well, for the last couple of years, travelling has revolved around cricket but I hope to get my backpack ready and travel out soon. Maybe, I will come back to India and explore the place at leisure.

Your thoughts on Bengaluru…

Bengaluru has one of the best golf courses. The people here are extremely engaging. You can feel that they are passionate about whatever they are doing. It’s a vibrant city.