With a number of special delights to choose from, ‘Grubpot’ in Kalyan Nagar is a favourite of many Bengalureans.

ADVERTISEMENT   The eatery offers Indo-fusion items like Indo-Conti bites, Oriental and more. One will be surprised by the number of options available at this humble eatery which can only seat limited people at present. Started by seven founders — Chenthil A, Sumanth Reddy, Shreyashi Ganguly, Pooja Chabria, Jayanth Nath, Manish Jumani and Maqsood — the eatery has everything from starters to elaborate combos to suit one’s needs.

Chenthil, the co-founder, says that the burgers, wraps and sandwiches are the highlights here. “From the ‘Grilled jerk lamb burger’ to the ‘Teriyaki chicken and grilled pineapple burger’, there is a blend of different tastes available. An Indo-Oriental mix can be seen in burgers like the ‘Schezwan chicken burger’ and a‘desi’ touch in the ‘Grilled desi chicken burger’,” he details. 

Hodogs in classic chicken frankfurter poached or grilled, ‘Chicago style hotdog’ and ‘Bulldog hot dogs’ are other quick bites one can indulge in here. Sandwiches in a variety of breads like focaccia or plain panini bread, with options for the vegetarian and the non-vegetarian are also a part of the menu.

     “From ‘Cottage cheese sandwich’ to ‘Chicken steak sandwich’, there’s plenty to choose for lunch or for an evening snack,” informs Chenthil. 

For a more wholesome bite, one can also indulge in the mouth-watering wraps like the ‘Peri peri paneer wrap’, ‘Cajun chicken wrap’, ‘Falafel wrap’ and ‘Pesto chicken wrap’. “We also make sure that different sauces are available for the customer to add accordingly,” he says. 

For a light eater or someone who wants to just have a quick healthy bite, there are some interesting salads like ‘Watermelon and tomato chaat salad’, ‘Caesar salad veg’, ‘Dio of yellow salad’ and ‘Crunchy munchy salad’. 

For those who want a proper meal, there is combo options of ‘Kadai paneer and jeer pulao’, ‘Moroccan veg skewers  with Spanish rice’, ‘Ghee rice with veg kholapuri’ and  ‘Stuffed chicken with saffron rice’. 

To close one’s meal on a sweet note, there are desserts like ‘Tiramisu’, ‘Walnut brownie’, ‘New York cheesecake’ and ‘Chocolate truffle cake’. The eatery has a regular inflow of young professionals and customers who are open to experimenting.

Chenthil adds, “Our USP is that we customise according to the person’s needs. We let people add any ingredient, according to one’s taste preference.” 

The eatery is located at 523, 4th cross, 2nd Block, Kalyan Nagar. It is open from 
12 pm to 11 pm (Monday to Sunday).