What are the implications of Navjot Singh Sidhu’s imminent exit from the BJP as Punjab faces Assembly elections in a few months’ time? As of now, uncertainty prevails about his next step as both the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and the Congress are reportedly wooing him.

ADVERTISEMENTIt is, however, clear that unlike former Akali Dal leader Manpreet Badal (now in the Congress), who had formed a separate party and managed to get 5% of votes in the 2012 Assembly elections causing the defeat of a hopeful Congress, Sidhu is not going to form a new party. 

This leaves him with only two choices, either to join the AAP or the Congress, the first one being the distinct possibility going by the AAP leadership tweets and statements and also the ongoing media buzz. In any case, an ambitious Sidhu cannot replace Captain Amrinder Singh as the face of the ongoing Congress campaign.

It may turn out to be a shot in the arm for the AAP if Sidhu, an educated Jat Sikh from electorally important Malwa region and a two-term Lok Sabha member from Amritsar constituency in Majha region, joins the party. The AAP is bereft of a credible Sikh state level leader and is still hoping to bank on Kejriwal popularity in a state level election, which may be dicey. 

For the last 50 years, it has been the Sikh leadership, especially from the landholding, numerically significant Jat Sikh community, that has held the re-ins of power in the state irresp-ective of whether the Congress or the Akali Dal (in alliance with Bharatiya Jana Sangh/Janata Party/BJP) being in power.

Given the importance of the state leadership factor especially in a local election, the AAP does not have a single leader who can negate the leadership advantage of the Akali Dal and the Congress, led by Chief Minister Prakash Singh Badal and Amrinder, respectively. The two leaders irrespective of their parties, continue to enjoy state-wide support base, cutting across the communities and electoral regions.

Moreover, in a state where there have been wide-ranging charges of corruption, drug/ liquor trafficking, mafia running and criminality against the politicians of different allegiance, Sidhu has always enjoyed a clean image in his more than two decades old high profile cricketing/professional and public life. 

A border state with militaristic tradition, necessitated by facing the constant attack across the border, furthered by both Sikh Khalsa tradition and the colonial regime, the rural electorates are likely to be impressed by a strong/rebellious, even if somewhat erratic/verbose character like Sidhu, to take on formidable Badals and kin ruling the state for a decade now.

Decline of BSP

The AAP, with its background of a crusader against corruption and the candidates to be given tickets coming from the professional/ apolitical/ middle class background is hopeful of receiving the urban vote, especially of the youth. It also is looking to take advantage of the decline of the BSP to get the support of 31.9% of the Dalit population in the state as is evident by Kejriwal’s frequent visit to Doaba region with significant Dalit vote.

The challenge for the party is to get the Sikh landed-peasantry votes, especially in the Majha region, which have traditionally gone to Akali Dal, still considered a panthic party despite its avowal of standing for Punjab, Punjabi and Punjabiat. 

It is this powerful, numerically strong segment of the electorates, who continue to influence in many ways the vote of the landless farming labour and tenants in the villages of Punjab, and whose rural ‘notables’ have been the foot soldiers/’vote contractors’ for both the Akali Dal and the Congress.

This is one reason why both Badal and Amrinder have been going all out to woo this influential segment. As the events in the last one year like the farmers’ suicides in the cotton belt, incidents of disrespect shown to the Sikh revered book, atrocities by the police besides the spreading drug menace in rural Punjab for whom the Akalis are being mainly blamed, have alienated the traditional Akali supporter Sikhs. 

With the help of Sidhu, the AAP can think of connecting with them in an effective way. As of now, the party has Bhagwant Mann, Lok Sabha MP but Mann, a comedian by profession until recently, is not in the same league as Sidhu in terms of stature or state-wide popularity/acceptability. 

To what extent, the Sidhu exit would affect the chances of the BJP or the Akali Dal? Arguably, the Akali leadership, facing until now the constant barb of Sidhu couple without being able to respond adequately due to coalition dharma, would be somewhat relieved now. 

In fact, as the things stand now, it is the BJP which, without any credible Sikh leader from the state now besides sharing a frosty relation with its long-term ally Akali Dal, seems to be in trouble. To compound BJP’s problems, the Akali Dal has been gradually poaching on the party’s urban support base.

(The writer is Professor, Department of Political Science, Panjab University, Chandigarh)