The BJP is working out a strategy to ensure cross voting from the Opposition party members in favour of the NDA nominee in case there is no consensus evolved on the Presidential candidate.

After the Union Cabinet meeting on Wednesday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led core committee discussed the Presidential election. BJP sources said it emerged during the deliberations among the top brass that members of some of the seventeen parties that are perceived to be with the Opposition camp will vote for the NDA candidate. 

According to party sources, the BJP has got assurance from both the factions of the AIADMK — one led by O Panneerselvam and the other by Edappadi K Palanaswami — that they will side with the NDA.

A minister from Uttar Pradesh hinted that the BJP was also in touch with the disgruntled leaders in Samajwadi Party to try and get them to vote for the NDA candidate.

The move to poach members from the other side of the political spectrum comes at a time when a sub-committee of the Opposition parties — Congress, RJD, NCP, JDU, CPM, BSP, SP, TMC and DMK — deliberated on the Presidential election on Wednesday afternoon.

The announcement of the NDA candidate before Modi leaves for the United States on June 25 was also discussed, said party sources. The core committee meeting was attended by senior ministers Rajnath Singh, Sushma Swaraj and Venkaiah Naidu. Arun Jaitley was not present during the interaction since he is out of country on an official visit.  

The BJP’s three-member panel, comprising Rajnath Singh, Arun Jaitley and M Venkaiah Naidu, has already begun the process of consultations with its allies and non-NDA parties. Naidu reached out to BSP leader S C Mishra and NCP leader Praful Patel to seek their views on the Presidential candidate. They told Naidu that their parties will take a stand on the issue only after the umbrella Opposition camp firms up its decision, said sources.

The ruling party panel is also slated to meet Congress president Sonia Gandhi and CPM leader Sitaram Yechury on Friday. ADVERTISEMENT