Chelsea’s sacking record is embarrassing: LMA

Chelsea's hire them and fire them habit has become an embarrassment to the Premier League, England's League Managers' Association (LMA) said on Monday in the wake of Andre Villas-Boas's sacking after only 40 games in charge. 

The club's Russian billionaire owner Roman Abramovich has gone through seven managers since buying the club in 2003, a revolving door policy that has cost around 100 million pounds in compensation, salaries and pay-offs. 

The situation led one of those seven, Brazilian World Cup-winning coach Luiz Felipe Scolari, to describe the job as ‘hell’ for the next incumbent of the hot seat.

“Looking for what is an eighth manager in nine years is a serious embarrassment to the owner, the club, the fans and the league,” LMA chief executive Richard Bevan said in a BBC Radio interview on Monday. 

He said Abramovich's notorious lack of patience had undermined Villas-Boas and could be a problem for whoever is hired to replace the Portuguese. 
“Players need to know that the manager’s strategy and his job is not in question, there’s a clear remit,” Bevan said. 

Korean ‘Frogs Friends’ seek help from Park 

A South Korean environmental group is appealing to Manchester United midfielder Park Ji-sung, who said he used to drink juice made from boiled frogs to build his physique, to help it protect the amphibians from a surge in consumption. 

Lobby group ‘Frogs Friends’ said consumption of frog juice had surged since Park's 2006 autobiography in which he said he had drunk it as a tonic, and said they would lobby the international and Premier League star to join their campaign.
 
“I do not know if it is just coincidence but after it was revealed... that Park eats frogs as a means to boost his strength, the number of cases of illegal poaching of frogs and toads residing in mountains has increased,” campaign organiser Park Wan-hee was quoted as saying by Yonhap News Agency on Monday. 

Sound system causes havoc for athletes 

A baffling sound system attached to the starter's gun left sprinters and hurdlers bewildered, angry and even eliminated at the world indoor championships on Friday. 
“It was pretty nerve racking,” said British sprinter Dwain Chambers. “You could hardly hear anything from the speaker, which made it very difficult.” 

Among the casualties were Jamaican 60 metres contender Lerone Clarke and American Kristi Castlin, the year's fastest women's 60 metres hurdler. 

“Nobody can hear it,” an upset Clarke said after a slow reaction time as he waited for the sound from the starting gun left him a non-qualifying 34th in the 60 metres. 
Other athletes, including Australian world athlete of the year Sally Pearson, said they often heard a ‘double sound’ from the starter's gun, prompting uncertainty on how to react. 

"It sounds like there are two guns going off all the time," Pearson said. "I am just glad I reacted to the first sound I heard." 

Melbourne player charged over attack 

Australian Rules player Liam Jurrah, the first from the remote centre of the country to play in the AFL, has been arrested and charged in relation to a machete attack, his club Melbourne said on Friday. 

Jurrah was one of two 23-year-olds charged with intending serious harm, causing serious harm and being armed with an offensive weapon after a man suffered head injuries at the Little Sisters Town Camp some 300km from Alice Springs.
 
Jurrah, a member of the Warlpiri people, was Melbourne's leading goalkicker last season in the AFL, the most popular professional league in the states of Victoria and South Australia. 

Williams perform better off F1 track than on it 

Williams performed better off track than on it last year with annual results showing a strong increase in turnover and net profit despite the team's worst season in Formula One. 

Chairman Adam Parr said in an interview from Australia, where the season starts next week, that the former champions were in good shape financially and could hope for a big step forward in races as well. 

They still have no title sponsor after the departure of American telecommunications giant AT&T at the end of last year but Parr said there was no rush to find a replacement. 

Williams Grand Prix Holdings, which includes the Formula One team, reported earlier a 14.8 percent increase in turnover to 104.5 million pounds ($165.28 million). In the core business, turnover increased by 12.7 percent to 102.3 million. 

Overall group net profit was up 30 percent to 7.8 million. ADVERTISEMENT