Defending champions Salgaocar SC had to sweat it out to register a solitary goal win against Prayag United, Kolkata while Pune FC defeated United Sikkim by an identical margin in the Group ‘D’ league encounters of the 34th Federation Cup football tournament here on Thursday.

In an evenly contested match played at JRD Tata Sports Complex, Salgaocar were under pressure for major part of the goal-less first half but got their act together after the interval.

Forward Milagres Gonsalves sent an accurate pass to midfielder Anthony D’Souza, who dribbled past two defenders of Prayag United before he dodged past goalkeeper Subrata Paul to score a goal in the 64th minute. At the Keenan stadium, United Sikkim dominated the proceedings initially but Pune FC bounced back into the match to score the winner off forward Jeje Lalpekhlua in the 51st minute.

Sporting win

Meanwhile, in Siliguri, Mohammedan Sporting continued from where it had left in the qualifiers to down Durand Cup champions Air India by a lone goal in a Group B match at the Kanchanjungha Stadium. Midfielder Mohammad Mukhtar brought his goal-poaching skills to a good effect to produce the only goal for Mohammedan Sporting after the break in the 54th minute.
 
Air India tried to regroup late and opened the Sporting defence twice but failed to find the equaliser. Nigerian striker Henry Ezeh came at the end of both the chances for Air India, in the 86th and 93rd minutes, but could not produce the required finish.
On Wednesday, I-league champions Dempo SC held 1-1 by AIFF’s development side Pailan Arrows in the opening match of the tournament. ADVERTISEMENT
After a barren first half, Pailan Arrows’ forward Holicharan Narzary put his team into the lead in the 52nd minute after dribbling past two defenders of the rival team.
Dempo, however, equalised eight minutes later as midfielder Clifford Miranda headed home. 

In the other Group A match of the day, Shillong Lajong defeated Mumbai FC 2-1. John D Menyongar put Lajong ahead but Ndobuisi Opara equalised.
Lajong’s Nigerian striker Friday Gbeneme scored the winner