There are many ways to approach a pescatarian dinner. The next time you buy a piece of fish for dinner, instead of pan-frying, poaching or broiling, why not consider steaming? It's fast, easy and makes a remarkably satisfying light meal.ADVERTISEMENTChinese cooks have long been experts at steaming fish - especially whole fish, which may seem daunting. But boneless fillets are also excellent when prepared in the same way. The technique is not at all difficult to master, and the aromatics - like ginger, scallion and sesame oil - are readily available.* Most vegetables, whether small potatoes or carrots or asparagus, benefit from steaming, which accentuates their innate sweetness. The same holds true for fish.* Of course, spanking fresh fish is required. Look for white-fleshed fish such as halibut, sea bass or cod, preferably about 2 inches thick. In a pinch, you could use salmon, but avoid stronger-tasting fish (like mackerel) for this method.* It's worth investing in a good steamer with a sizable diameter. One made of stainless steel, though expensive, will last a lifetime. The inexpensive bamboo steamers available in Asian markets are quite sturdy and come in every size. A large wok with a lid works, too. It just needs a rack of some sort to hold what's being steamed well above the boiling water below. Chopsticks can do the job, or a cake rack propped up securely. Don't have a wok, a wide deep skillet with a domed lid will suffice, or some pasta pots have a steamer basket included.* The preparation for  a steamed fish dish takes longer than it does to cook, but not by much: The cooking itself takes only 10 minutes or so.* First, you cut scallions and ginger into fine julienne, then stir up a little mixture of soy sauce and sesame oil, spiked with Shaoxing wine and a pinch of sugar. This makes a savoury steam bath for the fish.* Then, you put your fine fish fillet directly on the plate from which it will be served. It goes into the steamer for a brief spell and emerges succulent and fragrant.* With its topping of sizzled ginger, chopped pistachios and fluffy cilantro, the fish is both festive and fragrant.DAVID TANISNYT