Salman Khan undoubtedly is the poster boy of the Hindi film industry. But he could not always delink his personality from his bad boy image because of the many controversies he has courted over the last three decades. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe action hero has starred in 140 movies. He played the lead role in around 130 of them.
A ladies’ man, Salman Khan often hit the headlines for his reported dalliances and break-ups with leading actors like Somy Ali, Sangeeta Bijlani, Aishwarya Rai and Katrina Kaif. While Somi Ali is settled in the United States, Sangeeta Bijlani married former Indian skipper Mohammed Azharuddin, Aishwarya Rai married Abhishek Bachchan and Katrina Kaif is in a relationship with Ranbir Kapoor.

Khan manhandled mediapersons three or four times; he always had a love-hate kind of relationship with the fourth estate. Because of the controversies he stirred up and his generic bad-boy image – earned particularly after his break-up with Aishwarya Rai – he has often been the whipping boy of the fourth estate. 

Khan courted a big controversy when he was arrested in a blackbuck poaching case in Rajasthan.

Born on December 27, 1965, in Indore to scriptwriter Salim Khan and Salma Khan, he studied in the Scindia School at Gwalior and St Stanislaus High School, Bandra. He launched his career with ‘Bibi Ho Toh Aisi’ and shot into fame with ‘Maine Pyaar Kiya’.
Among his hit films are ‘Maine Pyar Kiya’ (1989), ‘Hum Aapke Hai Kaun’ (1994), ‘Saajan’ (1991), ‘Sanam Bewafa’ (1991), ‘Karan Arjun’ (1995), ‘Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam’ (1999), ‘Hum Saath Saath Hai’ (1999), ‘Hello Brother’ (1999), ‘Chori Chori Chupke Chupke’ (2001), ‘Ek Tha Tiger’ (2012), ‘Dabangg’ (2010), ‘Dabangg 2’ (2012).

Khans stays at the Galaxy Apartments in Bandra. He is considered the binding force of the family. He is close to his father’s second wife, Helen. His family includes his two brothers, Arbaaz Khan and Sohail Khan, and two sisters, Alvira and Arpita, and their families. His father Salim Khan was one of Bollywood’s most successful scriptwriters and formed the famed pair of Salim-Javed, who penned Sholay, among others famed scripts. 

Two seasons of his television  show ‘Dus Ka Dum’, the reality show ‘Bigg Boss’ and his NGO ‘Being Human’ brought about positive changes to his personal image and professional career and made him very popular.

Right now, Bollywood has a stake of Rs 200 crore in him. He has two films under production – Kabir Khan’s ‘Bajrangi Bhaijaan’ and Sooraj Barjatya’s ‘Prem Ratan Dhan Payo’ – these are nearly complete. 

Another of his planned projects is a remake of the 1983 blockbuster, the Jackie Shroff-starrer ‘Hero’, which is likely to be produced by Khan’s production company. 

The film would have Sooraj Pancholi, the son of Bollywood couple Aditya Pancholi and Zarina Wahab, and Athiya Shetty, the daughter of Suneil Shetty.  And then there is another family production — ‘Dabangg 3’ — in the pipeline as part of the ‘Dabangg’ series.