It's a whole new concept of providing world cuisine at your doorstep. Party Chef Menu brings you a specialised menu, from Indian dishes to world delicacies, along with  master chef who personally visits your place to get all the kitchen work done for your event.

ADVERTISEMENTRecently, the Future Group's Foodhall outlet at Select City Walk mall was host to a celebrity culinary show to launch the initiative of young entrepreneur Avni Biyani.

The event saw popular TV kitchen kings and queens like Aditya Bal, Vicky Ratnani and Pooja Dhingra displaying their culinary skills and making some delectable dishes. The chefs lent expert hands to prepare some scrumptious delicacies, adding their magic touch to the recipes.
“Many people miss out the fun while organising a party at home as most time is spent in kitchen. The idea behind the creation of Party Chef Menu was to free our consumers from the kitchen chores and enjoy the company of their guests wholeheartedly,” said Biyani.
The initiative not just provides readymade dishes but also cooking ingredients and master chefs who will personally cook at your place for any event, reports IANS.

“People are spending more money on food now-a-days. They are willing to try international flavours. It is quite a bold step taken by Party Chef Menu,” said Ratnani, who cooked scrumptious dishes like quinoa lentil chaat and coconut water poached jumbo.
Pooja Dhingra, a young chef who is known for bringing Macarons to India, delighted the audience with Nutella Squares.“We have so many functions at home. Everybody wants to organise something different. This type of concept makes our work easy as well as we get good food to taste. And all that guests want is good food,” added Dhingra, who runs her own bakery shop in Mumbai.

Aditya Bal feels concepts like Party Chef Menu are going to work well in India.“With the availability of ingredients and exposure to television and internet, people are now getting accustomed to world cuisines. They are increasingly visiting multi-cuisine restaurants," he noted.
“Indian kitchens are now welcoming global dishes and Party Chef Menu indeed provides one of finest world cuisines,” said Bal, who is planning to launch his own kitchen in Delhi.
So, the next time you think of surprising your guests with the finest delicacies from across the world or get an expert hand in your kitchen to prepare your menu, make a call to Party Chef Menu.