IN a major relief to Salman Khan, the Jodhpur bench of Rajasthan High Court accepted the actor’s criminal miscellaneous petition to re-examine all five witnesses in the 16-year-old arms act case. 

It is all but certain that the final judgement in the case would be delayed as the lower court begins re-examining the witnesses. 

The criminal miscellaneous petition was filed since both the lower and session courts rejected Salman’s revision petitions. 

“Justice Nirmal Jeet Kaur allowed the petition and directed the lower court to summon five prosecution witnesses for re-examination which includes former Jodhpur collector Rajat Mishra,” Salman’s lawyer H M Saraswat said. 

Final judgement in the case, which should have been pronounced in February, was delayed as the court was made aware that several petitions have been kept pending since 2006 that need to be heard. 

In the process of the hearing those petitions, Salman asked the court to re-examine the witnesses which the two courts rejected, prompting the actor to approach the High Court. 

A month ago, Justice Vijay Vishnoi of Rajasthan High Court refused to hear the case since he belongs to the Vishnoi community, one of the parties to the case, prompting its shift to the bench of Justice Nirmal Jeet Kaur.

The Public Prosecutor described Salman’s revision and criminal miscellaneous petitions as a ploy to delay the judgement, noting that there has not been a need to re-examine the five witnesses as they were already examined. 

Salman has been accused in the arms case of using unlicensed weapons to poach black bucks in Kankani village of Jodhpur in 1998 while shooting for the movie Hum Saath Saath Hai. Section 3/25 and 27 of Arms Act were invoked since the actor used unlicensed revolver (S&W 32 bore) and a rife (22 bore) during hunting. 

After the poaching incident, forest officials had lodged three separate criminal cases against Salman and his co-stars.  The Arms Act case had to be filed as a separate case, as the court refused to add it as part of the three cases filed against the actor for poaching.