Hospet/Bengaluru: Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah on Thursday said he would continue in the top post for a full five-year term, trashing talks of a change in leadership that has shrouded the Congress ever since the party stormed to power five months ago. ADVERTISEMENT"For five years, it'll be our (Congress) government. I'm the chief minister now, and I'll continue," Siddaramaiah told reporters in Hospet when asked to clarify if he would be the CM for a full term amid buzz in the Congress over a midterm change in leadership.A statement from the chief minister's office quoted Siddaramaiah more explicitly: "I am going to continue as chief minister for five years."Siddaramaiah's assertion came a day after AICC general secretary Randeep Singh Surjewala warned Congress ministers, leaders and lawmakers from making public statements on matters such as the chief minister's tenure. Siddaramaiah's statement sought to end speculation over his tenure amid buzz in the party that he will make way for his deputy DK Shivakumar, whose loyalists have been pushing his case to become the next CM.Shivakumar, however, chose not to react. "I won't say anything. All I know is to follow the party's instructions," he said.  But in a clear sign that the Shivakumar camp is in no mood to concede, Ramanagara MLA Iqbal Hussain maintained that a change in leadership will happen. "Shivakumar will definitely become the CM after one or one-and-a-half years," he said. "Siddaramaiah is also our leader. As CM the last time, he gave good programmes. This time, too, he's doing good. But many people want Shivakumar to be the CM. He must. It's our dream. People in all 224 constituencies desire to see Shivakumar becoming the CM this time," he said. At Hospet, Siddaramaiah brushed aside statements made by a few Congress MLAs that Shivakumar will become the CM after 30 months. "When some useless people speak, why do you give it so much importance?" he said. Siddaramaiah also rubbished BJP leader Ramesh Jarkiholi's claim that the Congress government would fall. "He has no other work. The (BJP) has lost, so they're saying whatever they want," he said. "People of the state have given (Congress) 136 seats. We'll provide a stable government for five years." The CM accused the BJP of being "disillusioned" after losing the Assembly polls. "They tasted success once with Operation Lotus (poaching MLAs). They'll trying doing it again, but won't succeed," he said. Asked about calls for three more deputy chief ministers, Siddaramaiah said it was for the Congress high command to decide. "Unlike a regional party, ours is a national party where no decision is made without consulting the high command," he said.