Having an ‘egg-celent’ day so far? It’s probably because it’s World Egg Day! Starting a day with eggs has become a common phenomenon now. It’s healthy, delicious and has all the nutrition that one needs to make it through the rest of the day. 

ADVERTISEMENTHowever, it’s not just chicken eggs that one prefers these days. With imported eggs like those of ostrich and emu available, many Bengalureans are stocking up their fridges with these. But the most bought ones are duck and quail eggs. 

Jyoti Varne, a professional, has been making trips to Russell Market ever since she was a young girl. She says, “There’s a vendor who supplies quail and duck eggs from the farm. I’ve been going to him ever since I can remember. Quail eggs are one of my favourites. The yolk is much better than that of chicken eggs, easy to cook and has a lot of health benefits. And the best part? Unlike other eggs, you can simple hard boil these and have it with a bit of salt.”

She also uses farm chicken eggs at home. She enjoys making ‘egg curry’ and also uses  these for baking. “Farm eggs are better than the regular ones because I know the vendor who supplies it. When cooked, it’s much healthier and delicious than the usual ones.”

Sai Priya, a food blogger, also enjoys her quail eggs. She says, “It’s widely used in 
Chinese and Japanese cuisine. I’ve heard that it helps in beating asthma, fever and 
diabetes. I prefer having them over chicken eggs because of the health benefits. Most of all, they are great to decorate a dish with.” 

She prefers to have  boiled, poached or deviled eggs. 

With the culinary world opening up to experiments, egg is becoming one of the widely used ingredients. 

Executive chef of Nimisserie, Nimish Bhatia, recently created ‘Egg Dokhla’ as part of the brunch menu at the restaurant. He says, “It’s easy to work with eggs and people love their ‘dokhla’. I decided to amalgamate the two together and create a dish that can be enjoyed in a different form. There’s also another all-egg dish which has ‘egg dhokla’ and deviled eggs topped with flying fish eggs. It’s simple, sophisticated and absolutely delicious.”

Nazaneen Jalaludheen, the curator of ‘Mappila Kitchen Treasures — A Culinary Journey’, which is a compilation of her grandmother’s recipes, says, “The dish 
‘Mutta Mala’ is made with just two ingredients — eggs and sugar. It’s a dessert made with just egg yolks that are sieved through coconut shells into hot sugar syrup. It eventually becomes like a long noodle that one can enjoy.”

She explains that it takes a long time to make and it’s a classic dish in the Mappila 
cuisine. 

“It’s usually served on  special occasions and for close family and friends. It takes a very long time to make. The leftover egg whites are made into a ‘halwa’ format that is served along with the 
‘Mutta Mala’,” she adds.

Whether it is an age-old recipe or a simple scrambled egg, the white and yellow 
ingredient is here to stay and make your meal an ‘egg-citing’ one.