The State Wildlife Board on Wednesday gave its approval for declaring Ankasamudra Lake in Hagaribommanahalli taluk, Ballari district, a bird conservation reserve. This will be the third bird sanctuary in the state after Puttenahalli and Ranganathittu.

ADVERTISEMENTT M Vijay Bhaskar, additional chief secretary, Forests, Environment and Ecology, told DH that the 244-acre lake was frequented by 136 bird species, including many migratory species. This will be the first bird reserve in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region.

The Board also gave its clearance to declare Ummathur and Balgi villages in Chamarajanagar district as Ummathur Black Buck conservation reserve, spread across 1,500 acres. This will help in conservation of the species, on the lines of Jayamangala Black Buck reserve in Tumakuru district.

State butterfly

Bhaskar said that the Board had agreed to declare the Southern Bird Wing as the state butterfly. The butterfly was chosen because of its colour - red and yellow, same as the state flag. It is also easy to sight and found in abundance in Karnataka. It is also the largest butterfly.

The Board has approved the long-pending proposal of the Railways for doubling the track on the Hosapete-Ballari-Goa stretch via Castle Rock, passing through the Western Ghats.

Principal Chief Conservator of Forests B J Hosmath said that the Board cleared the proposal of track-doubling between Thinaighat and Castle Rock. Clearance has been given on the condition that the train speed limit is not over 30 kmph.

A detailed study will be undertaken, after which more precautionary measures will be listed. The Board also decided to send a proposal to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, seeking time extension for considering issues regarding possession certificates for wildlife trophies.

Bhaskar pointed out that since April 2003, no fresh permission was granted and there were over 500 applications pending for clearance. If they are not declared as per the Wildlife Act, they are considered as poached items. The Board withdrew its previous decision declaring Kappathagudda in Gadag district as a conservation reserve as due procedures were not followed.