Play Cricket to get land in BangaloreADVERTISEMENTI refer to the report “A long wait ahead for Arkavathy allottees” (DH, April 6).According to our Chief Minister if one wants to get a site instantaneously in Bangalore one has to only score runs in cricket tournaments and not in other games! Otherwise wait for long years to get a site in Bangalore or make many attempts to be eligible. Also the BDA regulations about being a resident of Karnataka or not owning property elsewhere can be ignored. You may even look forward to a special layout carved out for yourself where the roads, parks and civic amenities will be named after well known cricketers.
 
 H N Ramakrishna,Bangalore Vandalism in the name of the blessedThis refers to 'Sai Baba Critical, but improving' (DH, April 6). It is good news, but people should learn to accept the reality. There is already "tension at Puttaparthi and some vehicles were attacked". Anyone born in this world, even if he is an 'Avatar', should die one day.
 
 Instead of thanking God for the long and useful life of Sai Baba, if people resort to violence and vandalism, all in the name of love and devotion to the God-man, it shows their immaturity. The wise and the educated among his devotees should appeal to the masses to be calm hoping for the best and preparing for the worst. Anyway, people should be happy and peaceful because if he is not going to be with them, he would be with God showering more blessings on every one.
 Alice K Jose,Bangalore Hazare deserves supportReferring to “Hazare fasts against graft” (DH, April 6). Social activist Anna Hazare deserves solid support from every section of society in his crusade against all-pervasive corruption. The support should pour in from every nook and corner of the nation so that the giant tree of corruption can be at least shaken if not uprooted at once! The Jan Lokpal Bill should not be just another piece of legislation. If the intellectual’s view that the Lokpal Bill (Ombudsman Bill) 2010, currently before a select committee, is not acceptable in the present form, it must be replaced by the Jan Lokpal Bill (Public Ombudsman Bill) as prepared by Karnataka Lokayukta Santosh Hegde, senior Supreme Court advocate Prashant Bhushan and others as suggested by Hazare. People like Hegde and Bhushan are known for their impeccable character in their public life. The views and suggestions can be invited from civil society and common man, as suggested by Hazare. 
 
 The Bill should be an effective instrument in tackling the corruption at high levels. The PMO’s belief that “give and take” is in the best democratic tradition is ridiculous. The problem is mainly in “give and take” (of bribe) only. The unwritten policy of “give and take” of bribe must be shown the door. The authorities concerned should wake up to the call before the people take the law into hands and before the situation goes out of control in the war against corruption.K.V. SeetharamaiahHassan. A lot of hype has been created around the Indian team's ICC World Cup victory. This "World" comprises of only 14 countries, of which four countries, viz. Holland, Kenya, Canada and Ireland were in the event apparently only to provide opportunities to the other teams to improve their run rates. Hence, for all practical purposes, the Cricket "World" comprises of only 10 countries. In these circumstances, one cannot understand the hype about the World Cup win. Add to this the bonanza to the players. State Governments are vying with each other to reward them. I think we, as a nation are pampering the cricketers.
 
 While our cricketers do merit appreciation and praise, let us reserve the cash and gifts to the members of an Indian sports team that wins a global competition (Olympics?) involving at least a reasonable number of countries.
 
 A.K Melkote
Bangalore 
 No takers for the Have-Not’s
 
 On Monday, Deccan Herald published two contrasting news items. One was offer of free sites to cricketers and the other displacement of Iruligas from Savanadurga forest by our forest department officials.
 
No doubt the cricketers have done a wonderful thing and have brought fame to India. However, when these players are wallowing in riches our CM's offer is not going to change their lives. Whereas the lives of homeless Iruligas of Savandurga can be changed even if a small hut is provided to each of them.
 
Will the CMs of all states stop pampering the have’s and look towards the have- not’s.Ramachandran P V
BangaloreVisas to PakistanisThe government ought to be very cautious before granting visas to Pakistanis. The liberalisation of the visa process should be taken up only after Pakistan dismantles all the terror camps in India and ensure that there is no terror threat.
Pakistan should realise by now that it is in its own interest to have a friendly relationship with India.Hansraj Bhat
Mumbai

Land gift
 
This has reference to the announcement made by our Chief Minister to gift 50’X80’ sites to all players of Team India, who brought pride to the nation, by winning the World Cup.
 
 Being a great fan is no excuse for donating public land to anybody. Public money should not be used for such gifts especially when all the players have been given one crore rupees by the BCCI and derive benefit from highly lucrative endorsement deals along with other perks.
 
 He should bear in mind that he is just a representative and custodian of the common man. He is accountable for his acts.
 
 DR Prakash
 BangaloreThis refers to ‘Small leap in the wild for big cats’ (DH, March 29). The tiger census conducted recently suggests an increase in the number of tiger population from 1,411 in 2006 to 1,706 in 2011. Agreeably, the tiger count is not foolproof. Exclusion of Sunder bans delta in the 2006 census had failed to project the true and correct figure of tiger count that year itself.    So, the projected increase of 295 tigers in the five-year period does not present the accurate figures. The only consolation is that the tiger population has not dwindled by any standard. Deforestation of more and more areas, followed by poaching and killing of the big cat has been contributing for the retarded growth of tiger population.The threat of extinction of tigers in the years to come cannot be ruled out if proper measures are not taken to protect them.K V Seetharamaiah
Hassan
BJP should act
 
 I fail to understand why the BJP refuses to heed the representations of the leaders from the state against chief minister B S Yeddyurappa. It’s an open secret that corruption is deep rooted in the political administration of this country. But that does not justify the actions of Yeddyurappa. It is high time the party high command takes serious note of the situation in Karnataka and sets things right.

S N Iyer
 Bangalore

It is now 'official' that in India bigamy is permitted to be committed by highly placed individuals. Perhaps our most vocal and knowledgeable Union Minister for Law, Veerappa Moily could clarify as to who could get married several times and still continue to live a normal life without being arrested. Some of the MPs, governors and chief ministers are all known to have more than one wife. However, if a carpenter, mason or a lowly placed individual marries twice, the law catches up with him and he is arrested for ‘bigamy’!!!

The headline which says M Karunanidhi has declared the assets of both his wives make a shameful reading. Veerappa Moily could do well if bigamy is abolished and everyone is let free to marry any number of times, rather than making a mockery of Law .Or do we have to be convinced that only governors, chief ministers etc. are allowed to marry twice? Is bigamy a political perk?

M.V.Nahusharaj 
Bangalore 


The tatkal farce  There is no dearth for man power or resources in this country. Then why can’t railways run more trains with comfortable sitting accommodation like aircraft and buses at frequent intervals for travel up to 8 hrs journey so that majority of the passengers get a seat on purchasing tickets at the current booking counters itself instead of advance reservation and tatkal farce etc. It would definitely boost the revenue manifold. One can understand the need to reserve sleeping accommodation for long distance travels exceeding 12 hrs of journey a week before since short distance passengers are provided with a seat in sitting trains and as such will not cause hindrance to long distance passengers. Railways could consider the proposal in the interest of masses.

Sivakumar
Bangalore 


BBMP move shocks residents

This refers to ‘Tagore Circle underpass in limbo’ (DH, March 24) wherein H Ravindra, Chairman of standing committee -Works BBMP assured that the above project will be completed by June 2011. He stated that BBMP will acquire minimum of 3 metres land from the establishments to provide foot path and service road. This announcement has shocked the residents of the locality. As citizens, we wish to know (a) why this was not intimated to residents before the commencement of the project (b) was this plan submitted to JNNURM as part of feasibility report c) was this informed to the High Court when arguments were heard on a PIL 

N Mukund
Bangalore 


Indian Left has lost direction

This refers to edit CPM's gaffe( DH, March 23). A veteran journalist had once termed Karat &Co as the 'Old Boys of the JNU' in the CPI-M. These armchair theorists have managed to undo what had taken decades under comrades like Basu ,Surjit and others to build. Given to quirks of ideology, their rigid stands on capitalistic solutions to growth, allowed a stasis to creep into development. Unlike Communist China, where the Party embraced development selectively into its ideology, the Indian Left alas, persisted with its dichotomy. 

As a result development played second fiddle to the mythical superiority of Red ideology/ hierarchy. Karat and his politburo handled it all badly, to the extent appearing to go against their own elected CMs in WB and Kerala. V.S.Achuthanandan represents the Gandhian content of communism,which is anathema to these younger practitioners. The belated ticket to VS exposes their green fingers in mature political management.

R.Narayanan,
Ghaziabad. 

Nine lives of Yeddyurappa

Cats are known to have nine lives. But it seems Yeddyurappa has outlived a cat. The BJP top brass has believed him for the umpteenth time. He proclaims that the media is lying about him. Either he has failed to satisfy the media in the same manner as he has satisfied M/s Gadkari and party or he considers the voters and general public as fools.

Bonsai Srinivas

Libya bombing: A dangerous precedent

This refers to Gaddafi’s command centre flattened (DH, March 22).
The UN nod to no fly zone over Libya, has been overstretched by the coalition forces, resulting in a carte blanche license to bomb and attack strategic installations in Libya, headed by the United States, though the country prefers to be in the background. The attitude of the US as the universal policeman would prove costly to the country, as it would result in ruling junta’s support to Jihadi groups, which are the avowed enemies of the US.

It is not entirely hypothetical to believe that a similar yardstick could be applied by the US, on the J&K of India, in justifying the state to be a disputed territory of India, and in resorting to unilateral action on its part to liberate, and hand it over to the Kashmiri secessionist elements operating in the valley.


K.V. Raghuram
Wayanad,Kerala.

Ordinary lives under threat

This refers to the editorial ‘Quagmire ahead’ (DH, March 21). The situation in the Arab world where the western forces and religious forces are fighting for supremacy is really serious. As always, common people would suffer the most.

Oil, which has been the reason for the prosperity of the region, is now becoming the real reason — directly or indirectly — for all the conflicts and might become a curse in future.
The people of the region are unable to choose between the anti-US religious groups and the US-led Nato or the so called neo-imperialistic countries.In pro-US countries, the anti-US religious groups like Taliban, al-Qaeda and Iran would support the uprising. But, in anti-US countries like Libya, interference by the US and its allies cannot be ruled out.
Both, imperialism and fundamentalism, are common evils for common citizens. As the people of the region are being sandwiched between the two, they may be compelled to choose a lesser evil.

Ramakanth Udupa K
Bangalore

Corruption in air

This refers to ‘10,000 pilots to come under DGCA scanner’ (DH, March 22). For ordinary citizens, with daily doses of scams and frauds around, leading a normal life has always been a herculean task. Now, with fake pilots, it’s no longer safe, even in air.

S Narendra
Bangalore

Alarming situation

This refers to '550 girls go missing in a year in Mysore district’(DH, March 22)) The report does not indicate how many girls have been traced.The statement of chairperson of the State Women's Commission about conducting moral education classes implies that in many cases it may have been the case of elopement. If detailed statistics about the missing girls in various categories are presented it would have help to appreciate the problem better so that NGOs too can play a role.

H.R.Bapu Satyanarayana
Saraswathipuram,Mysore