In less than 24 hours after resigning as the Bihar chief minister and dumping the JD(U)-RJD-Congress ‘Grand Alliance’ claiming high moral ground of zero-tolerance to corruption, Nitish Kumar has returned. This time, heading a coalition with the BJP-led National Democratic alliance he had berated since Narendra Modi was declared BJP’s prime ministerial candidate in 2013. He has also managed to sail through Friday’s trust vote with 131 of the 243 legislators voting for him after opposition’s demand for secret voting was rejected. Though he has crossed the first hurdle, murmurs of dissent have already started surfacing within his party following his political somersault. Since the BJP-JD(U) coalition enjoys a thin majority in the state assembly, his challenge now is to hold his flock together. Out of the 71 JD(U) MLAs in the present assembly, 18 are Muslims and Yadavs.

Though Nitish Kumar has managed to remain chief minister, it is with diminished strength, stature and credibility. Having burned his boats with the anti-BJP forces, his bargaining capacity in the NDA has been considerably reduced. It would be the BJP that empowers itself in a partnership with a politically weakened JD(U). Forming a government with BJP support at a time when the latter is relentlessly poaching on the political constituencies of its allies across the country, is probably Nitish’s most risky gamble of his political career. The BJP is the undisputed gainer in the current twist and turn in Bihar politics, which will have far reaching implications not just for the state but for national politics at large. The credibility that Nitish had enjoyed has come under cloud as he has shifted his stance frequently and changed alliance partners irrespective of ideology. The whole Bihar drama also appeared a well-planned strategy chalked out by the JD(U) and the BJP culminating in Nitish returning to power in an unseemly hurry. Should not he have sought dissolution of the assembly and faced elections while joining hands with the BJP?

What is happening in Bihar has raised questions of political propriety, not only among the politicians but also the constitutional functionaries, such as the speakers and the governors. The Patna High Court has already admitted a petition challenging the governor’s role. This is the third time the BJP has followed the examples of Goa and Manipur where it was not elected to rule by the electorate but grabbed power through manipulation. The Bihar imbroglio is inarguably a setback to the prospect of a viable united front against the BJP ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. If Rahul Gandhi’s claim of prior knowledge of the conspiracy is true, it only shows that the Congress leadership in incapable of arresting its own down the hill slide and managing contradictions within non–BJP parties.
ADVERTISEMENT