A feeling of contentment washes over you as you enter ‘Forage’. Brightly coloured statement furniture and cosy corners catch your eye even before you step into the main dining area. 

Glass ceilings, brick walls and a lot of green all around you set the mood for a pleasant evening; the bar of expectations was already raised and the food served matched it perfectly.

Forage aims to bring the trend of clean eating cuisine to Bengaluru. Started by Chef Himanshu Dimri, who co-created the popular design and food space Grasshopper, along with his partners Rajnish Kapoor and Mayura Kutappa, this restaurant brings the Best of California style cuisine to your plate.

This new philosophy of eating ensures that you can indulge with no regrets. The menu is not very extensive but the options available are equally delicious and suitably exotic. For starters, try the ‘Simply fantastic tomatoes’. The heirloom tomato salad with sea salt, olive oil and oregano will melt the hardest of non-vegetarian hearts and leave them longing for more. 

Other options include ‘Quinoa salad’, ‘Zucchini pappardelle’, ‘Vegetable terrine’ and more. The fresh produce and a unique mix of flavours will tantalise your taste buds in a creative way.

 For non-vegetarians, there is ‘Mackerel’, ‘Petite lamb chops’, ‘Wonderballs’ and so on. The delicious aromatic offerings are light on the stomach and leave ample space for the main course.

The wholesome lunch and dinner options include ‘Smoked aubergine’, ‘Beatroot pasta’, ‘Steamed root vegetables’, ‘Soupy lamb’, ‘Pan poached sea bass’ etc. The ‘Steamed root vegetables’ pack a nutritional punch in the most appealing of ways with beets, turnips and carrots tossed in an onion mustard sauce and served on black forest rice. The ‘Smoked aubergine’ is a medley of flavours in which chargilled aubergine is served on brown rice and is topped with peppers in tomato. 

‘Soupy lamb’ includes cubed lamb, spinach and kodo millets in an aromatic broth while ‘Sausage casserole’ is brown rice, carrots and beans with country peppered pork flavoured with crushed fennel. The numerous delectable choices are quite filling and the appetising taste masks the fact that these dishes are made in the healthiest way possible and are ideal combinations of complex carbohydrates and proteins.

 Chicken lovers will be a little bit surprised and dismayed to learn that chicken is not an option here, in any way whatsoever. The owners feel that chicken is a thoroughly unhealthy option and believe that their other dishes more than make up for its absence. 

Make sure to leave some space for the amazing selection of desserts, which are made with pure cacao, unprocessed cane sugar and really dark chocolate. From the ‘Cashew and date creme brûlée’ to the basil and lime, coconut milk ‘Panna cotta’ served with a drizzle of honey, it is the perfect way to indulge with no regrets. A spoonful of the ‘Just chocolate mousse’ leaves you smacking your lips and wondering how it could be made with no added sugar. 

At the end of the meal, one has to agree that ‘Forage’ did achieve what it wanted — serve a filling, flavourful meal that does not leave the customer feeling bloated or lethargic. Whether you’re trying to eat clean, stick to a diet, or just feel great so you have more energy to go about your day, the place has got you covered. 

Forage is located at No 318, 6th Main, HAL 2nd Stage. For details, call 48525250.