As superstar Salman Khan was today granted bail by a district and sessions court in Jodhpur in the 1998 blackbuck poaching case in which he has been sentenced to five years in jail, his friends and well-wishers from film industry expressed their happiness over the decision.ADVERTISEMENTDistrict and Sessions Judge Ravindra Kumar Joshi allowed Salman's plea for bail and suspension of the sentence so that he can file an appeal against his conviction and sentencing.Director of Salman's upcoming film "Race 3" Remo D'Souza told PTI, "I am happy that he has got bail. After working with him so closely I have become a huge fan of him not only as an actor but also as a human being. Almost 90 percent of the shoot for 'Race 3' is over and the remaining portions will mostly be shot in India."The 52-year-old actor, who had spent two nights in the Jodhpur Central Jail after his sentencing on Thursday, was granted bail on a bond of Rs 50,000 and two sureties of like amount, Defence counsel Mahesh Bora said, adding he is likely to be released this evening once the papers are ready and sent to jail authorities.Producer of "Race 3" Ramesh Taurani said he is "happy" that the actor has come out of jail."For us Salman coming of this was more important. Our prayers have been answered. The shooting of 'Race 3' is almost over, a romantic song is left, which will feature Salman and Jacqueline."Director Anees Bazmee, who has worked with Salman on "No Entry", hopes the "Sultan" star will soon be out of this case."I am very very happy. He is a family, a very dear friend so I wanted me to be free at the earliest from all this. At the same time, we have to follow the law of the land. We are hopeful the higher court will look at things properly and he will be out of this soon," he said.The actor's "Prem Ratan Dhan Payo" co-star Neil Nitin Mukesh took to Twitter to express his happiness over the decision."?And he finally gets Bail. Salman Khan more strength to you bhai. Believe in the power of justice and the God above," he tweeted."The force and the force field #surakshakavach #humreallysaathsaathhai #gotyourback," Sonakshi Sinha posted on Instagram.Salman's "Dabangg" co-actor Sonu Sood tweeted, "A Good deed is the best Prayer. Welcome brother Salman Khan ."Singer Adnan Sami, who composed the music of Salman's "Lucky: No Time for Love" said, "So happy for the bail of my dear brother Salman Khan. Relieved. Come home. JAI HO!"Singer Mika Singh tweeted, "I'm so happy that my brother Salman Khan finally bail! Today I will dedicate 2 songs to my big brother in @IPL".