A fiery vindaloo (a tongue-blistering curry) or a good rogan josh can take Adam Richman to culinary heaven. Add a portion of saag aloo and crisp pakoras with a dash of piquant mango pickle to the meal, and it could well qualify as paradise on a plate for him.

But these days the celebrated American actor and TV personality is excited to host his show called Food Fighters on TLC. In this TV cookery series, Richman will recognise the unsung heroes of the kitchen, as amateur cooks test their skills competing against professional chefs.

Can an amateur take on a professional chef and hope to win a cooking competition? Yes, says Richman. “I think that most people in the world are amateur cooks and a show like this reflects the brilliance that lies in each of us. Trained chefs receive respect and celebration, but home cooks can certainly defeat some of the greatest culinary minds of our time.”

Ruling blueprint

The contest works on the premise that every amateur cook has one ‘signature dish’, or a ‘secret family recipe’ that always gains favour with friends and family, and this will be their secret weapon in their fight against trained chefs. The professional chefs will have to cook the amateurs’ specialty dishes better than them. And the dishes are judged by a panel of blindfolded judges. Once they win a round against the professionals, the home cooks have to work towards bigger challenges and greater cash prizes.

“People from every walk of life, every race, every gender, every background come here to compete,” Richman says. “They bring five of their best recipes and go head-to-head with five of the best chefs. And with each chef they defeat, they aim for a higher cash prize in the next round.  A wounded veteran and a grandfather to the mother of a special-needs child are a couple of contestants. The show is incredibly heart-warming, and there’s something beautiful about watching them get recognition and the life-changing money they deserve.”

After he earned a master’s degree from the Yale School of Drama, Richman’s acting career took off. He had cameos in Law & Order: Trial by Jury and Joan of Arcadia. He was seen on national television commercials — he was part of a food challenge called Man v Food, and the shows The Traveler’s Guide to Life and Fandemonium. 

Richman is a self-educated food expert, trained sushi chef and an author, whose second book will be released shortly. Over the years, he has kept a travel journal that includes every restaurant he has visited. As to how he entered the field of food and television, he says, “I have always had a little bit of an entertainer in me. Food has been my passion, and the nice thing about food shows on television is that they allow me to blend both my passions.”

The ever-increasing food TV shows is a good trend, says Richman. “It has to do with education. I think you end up having a much more educated eater. For some people, a French fine dining chef would seem boring, but someone explaining  them how it is done can be exciting. Each show speaks to one type of person or the other, whether it is about pizza or ice cream. So, there is something for everybody,” he says.

Counting calories

As a foodie who is conscious about health, Richman is a firm believer in ‘portion control’. “Truthfully, weighing and measuring the food you eat is crucial because its composition and calories will dictate the weight you gain. I know there are superfoods, but I try to prepare healthy stuff. For example, if I choose salmon, I go for the Wild Alaskan sockeye salmon. If my choice is olive oil, I opt the extra virgin olive oil, and I make sure they are measured. You can have your cake and eat it too. There are plenty of low-fat alternatives. You could substitute yogurt for sour cream for a delicious flavour or texture,  but with only a third of the calories involved.” 

His advice for those who love cooking and those taking on a culinary career is ‘less is more’. He explains, “Like, stirring your food less is sometimes better. Adding less spice is better. If you’re trying to sear a piece of fish or a piece of lamb, you don’t have to mess with it often. You don’t have to add layers and layers of flavour. Sometimes, the natural flavours of the dish will make it perfect.”

According to Richman, once a chef has learnt the basics of cooking techniques like sautéing, poaching and roasting, he/she should concentrate on having fun. “People get nervous about doing something right or getting the approval of ‘serious’ food people. But the bottom line is you know what you like. And if what you’re doing is true to yourself, and if you’re creating out of a place of love and genuine interest, whatever you cook or bake will be great.” Food Fighters airs every Thursday at 9 pm, on TLC.