After yet another Rhino was killed in Assam’s Kaziranga National Park, Assam Forest Minister Pramila Rani Brahma on Monday expressed her sorrow for not being able to save the rhinos.

ADVERTISEMENTThe second rhino was killed, taking the toll to two Rhinos in ten days, in spite of a major crackdown against rhino-poachers and the suspension of the park director. 
 “People of Assam have voted us to power with high hopes. Stopping of rhino killing is top in the agenda of BJP government and we had promised that we would be able to do that. But the killing of the second rhino has hurt me a lot. I am feeling very bad and I apologise to the people of Assam for this loss.” Brahma told reporters on Monday.

2 killed in a month 
Within a month of the BJP government in office, two full grown rhinos were killed at Kaziranga National Park. The first rhino was killed on June 7, when Forest Minister Pramila Rani Brahma was on a three-day visit to the park to take stock of the situation.

The minister also stated that rhino poaching rackets are very smart and they use modern arms and technologies to kill the one-horned pride of Assam. Pramila Rani Brahma also said, “Unless a proper system is in place, curbing of rhino poaching is difficult. I have been talking to Home Department, chief secretary and local officials to form an efficient system. I need cooperation and I need time too. I have been to nearby villages too seeking help from the villagers.”

Pramila Rani Brahma has revealed that poachers enter Kaziranga National Park from the upper part of the River Brahmaputra by crossing it by boat. “I have not been able to go to the upper part of the river yet. The poachers enter from that part through river ways. These areas are not well protected. I have sought details from forest officials posted in those areas. We must change the system”, the minister further said.

Meanwhile, former Assam chief minister, Tarun Gogoi said, “In the 100 day’s action plan, nothing is being stated about what steps government will initiate for detection and deportation of foreigners. The plan has not stated as to by when the ongoing National Register of Citizens (NRC) will be updated.”