The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) came out with a 41-minute sting video on Monday claiming that a senior leader of the Delhi BJP unit tried to poach their party legislator. 

ADVERTISEMENTAAP legislator from Sangam Vihar, Dinesh Mohaniya, was offered Rs 4 crore and other perks by Delhi BJP’s vice-president Sher Singh Dagar, if he backed their effort to form a government in the capital, the clip purportedly shows.

AAP chief Arvind Kejriwal said the “dirty tactics” of the BJP trapped in the sting footage will be presented before the Supreme Court on Tuesday. The court will be hearing the AAP’s petition on early dissolution of the Assembly. 

Claiming that four other  MLAs are ready to resign, the BJP leader can be heard in the clip trying to convince Mohaniya to resign from the Assembly. The sting suggested that the resignations of the AAP legislators were being “organised” by the BJP to reduce the current strength of the 67-member Delhi Assembly, giving the saffron party a clear majority to form a government. 

The BJP has the support of 29 MLAs, the AAP has 27 legislators, the Congress has eight MLAs and there are three others. Three seats are vacant in the House.

Dagar, who is in the eye of the storm, denied the charges. “I made no offer. They came to my house with the offer to join our party... it was a trap to defame me and my party,” he said.

But, Delhi BJP chief Satish Upadhyay said the party had not authorised any leader to talk to any AAP legislator for supporting a BJP-led state government in future.

“Dagar is seen assuring Mohaniya that if he resigns as AAP MLA, the BJP will not only make him its candidate in the by-election, but will also bear his entire election expenditure,” the AAP said, adding that the party legislator was asked to abstain in case of a trust vote. 

The sting also shows the BJP leader purportedly claiming that he made similar offers to other AAP legislators.  The AAP said that Dagar’s close aide Raghuvir Dahiya had approached the Sangam Vihar MLA and offered him Rs 4 crore to resign from the Assembly. Referring to the conversation in the sting, Kejriwal alleged that several teams of BJP were busy horse trading after the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh proposed BJP leader Jagdish Mukhi for the chief minister’s post.

 He claimed that the AAP would come up with more evidence to prove horse trading. “If the BJP expels Dagar, will they also expel all those who appear in future stings?” Kejriwal said on Twitter, taking a dig at the BJP.

Meanwhile, the Delhi BJP chief said he has sought a clarification from Dagar. 

After the AAP went public with the sting, the Delhi Congress president Arvinder Singh Lovely said the BJP was on a buying spree of MLAs, and the AAP leaders were either on “sale” or were playing politics to help BJP form a government.