The Congress high command, which is struggling to finalise the candidates for 47 constituencies in the second list, is likely to delay announcement of the list due to differences among leaders over prospective contestants.

ADVERTISEMENTDespite party national president Sonia Gandhi chairing a meeting on Friday, it failed to arrive at any consensus on selecting the party candidates for a dozen constituencies, including those in Bangalore, Bellary and Davangere.

At a meeting held at 10, Janpath, the leaders discussed each constituency threadbare. While discussing the complaints about corruption in the distribution of tickets, Sonia reportedly sought a feedback from the leaders about the list already announced by the party, sources told Deccan Herald.

Both Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee chairman G Parameshwara and Congress Legislative Party leader Siddaramaiah reportedly refuted the charges and said the party high command was free to make any modification in the list already announced. They also asked the party to probe into allegations of corruption.

Of the total 177 candidates, the party has so far issued ‘B’ forms to only 50 per cent of them. If required, ‘B’ forms for the remaining segments will be withheld, the State leaders reportedly said.

When the leaders failed to arrive at a consensus, Sonia reportedly asked the members of the screening committee to hold further discussions and come back with feedback, before finalising the list for some of the constituencies, including Bellary City (general), Davangere South and North, C V Raman Nagar, Jayanagar, Bangalore South, K R Puram and Hebbal. Film actor-turned-politician Ambareesh, who sought the ticket from Mandya instead of Srirangapatna, was also discussed in the meeting, but no decision was taken.

Apprehending that disgruntled ticket seekers may jump into the fray as rebels or may be poached by the rival parties, the party is mulling over announcing the candidate list for the remaining 47 constituencies at the last moment, sources said. As rival parties, including JD(S) and BJP, are yet to announce candidates for some of the constituencies, the Congress too wants to wait and watch, sources said.