Cricketer Rohit Sharma recently forayed into the superhero arena with digital comic series Hyper Tygers — a superhero cricket team that plays futuristic ‘Hyper Cricket’, a form of cricket that brings together  aspects of present-day cricket and futuristic technology, to save the environment. In an email interaction withMetrolife, the Mumbai Indians captain tells Shweta Sharma about the series, the role comics play in creating awareness, and his favourite superheroes.

Excerpts:
How did your association with Hyper Tygers happen?
When I was approached to be a part of this project by ISM Komix, Graphic India and Cornerstone Sports, I was more than happy to agree as I feel there is an urgent need to raise awareness about the state of our planet, and highlight the damage being caused by deforestation, pollution and global warming. A comic or animation series is the perfect medium to reach out to young people and get them to start thinking along the lines of conservation. My hope is that once the message is planted in young minds it will grow, and tomorrow the youth of today can be great drivers of change.

What about the project interested you?
Hyper Tygers as a digital comic book and an animated series is uniquely positioned as they reach out to an audience of all age groups and the massive world of cricket fans. If we can embed the idea of being champions for the environment in everybody’s minds then we can hope to make the world a better place for everyone.
Superheroes give hope to people. With the right message, which I believe Hyper Tygers inherently has, we can reach out to a huge number of young individuals to help us achieve social change and develop a more caring mind set. This comic is timely and relevant. I wanted to help spread this message and the comic series has a fun connect with cricket, so it was something I could not refuse.

What is the idea behind the collaboration?
The idea is to raise awareness about the harm that pollution, deforestation and poaching of animals, is causing. The comic series aims to help people make a connect between preservation of our flora and fauna and our quality of life. Hyper Cricket is the medium via which this battle is played out in the series. I get to share this important message in a  fun way, with all my fans.

What is Hyper Tygers all about? How do they attempt to save the environment?
It is set in futuristic India (year 2077) where technology is super advanced. They play Hyper Cricket, a form of cricket which has taken aspects of cricket as played today and married it with futuristic technology.The series charts the meteoric rise of a small Indian rural community and their cricket team, including their mysterious hero the Green Tyger who has super powers. By showing a world in which cricket idols are making a difference, we hope to create tremendous impact with the comic and show that everyone can make a difference.

What role do comics play in creating awareness?
With the rise in popularity of comics and comic book movies, I see a large number of people taking to the medium. The success of comic book stories in movies has shown us the power this medium has with a mainstream audience. They see their favourite superheroes on-screen and want to emulate them. It is similar with cricket fans as many fans see their heroes and want to be more like them. I think comics 
are a fun way to engage readers and embed the idea of being environmentally conscientious.


Your say on the comic series that clubs technology and cricket?
It is an amazing concept that uses the power of social media to deliver impactful messaging. Today, almost everyone has a smart hand held device or access to the internet thus helping the message of Hyper Tygers to spread far and wide. I hope it will make a difference and that some of our readers will go on to become powerful 
eco warriors.

Are you a comic book fan? Which is your favourite series?
Yes, indeed! I am a 90s child and grew up watching Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles cartoons and reading comics like Batman and Spider-Man to name a few. I love comics and animation!

The Hyper Tygers e-books will be available on DailyHunt and a new chapter will be 
released every week.
ADVERTISEMENT