It is migration time for the winged beauties from across the globe, which come in search of conducive water bodies for breeding. Thousands of bar-headed geese, winter guests of the State every year, have been landing in the taluk for the past one month.

ADVERTISEMENTBut bird lovers have raised concerns over the safety of the birds, which have become targets of poachers. They have demanded that the Forest department take the initiative to save the rare birds, which travel thousands of kilometres for breeding and also to create awareness among locals on the importance of these birds.

As the district recorded poor rainfall for the past three years, lakes and ponds had gone dry. 
But due to sufficient rains this year, all the water sources have filled, attracting birds, particularly bar-headed geese that are found in large numbers in Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Tibet, Russia and other countries.

The birds can be spotted in the water bodies at Hondarabalu, Nagavalli, Nalluru, Honganuru and Hirikere. They are slightly bigger than ducks and are grey coloured. Their head is white with two black stripes. Their body structure facilitates longer flights.

According to experts, a majority of bar-headed geese migrate to India from Mongolia, travelling a distance of 5,500 km. The migration begins in August and September, the birds cross the Himalayan mountains and enter the country by November and December.

The water bodies in Mongolia freeze by December. So, the birds which breed during summer leave the country for India during winter. They stay here till March and return, experts say.

The geese have the capacity to fly at a height of 18,000 to 26,000 feet and are not affected by lack of oxygen at high altitudes. Collar identification gadgets have been fixed to a few birds and the path of the birds have been confirmed. However, no such gadgets were found on the birds spotted in the district.

But the birds at Nallur and Nagavalli lakes are being poached. They are shy and fly away as soon as they see humans. Those involved in illegal extraction of sand have been driving away these birds and are also hindering them in finding their prey.