With the spring closing in, the weather was mildly warm as we drove eastward from Guwahati, the capital of Assam. The destination was Kaziranga, 200 km away. The long plain road forked through the vast fields of tea on either side, and frequently a tiny village would zoom past us. After a pleasant drive of five hours, we landed at Kohora, the headquarters of Kaziranga National Park. It is also here that the tourist complex is based.

ADVERTISEMENTThe lunch was only a quick bite as embarking on the afternoon safari seemed more exciting. The central range of the park in close proximity was where we began our journey into the jungle. With hardly any time to find a guide, we had to make do with our driver, Pawan, who turned out to be well-informed and experienced. Following the trail of jeeps, we saw the forests becoming thicker. It was the commoner species like the sambar deer that were sighted first. The barking deer, a smaller antelope, also abounds in the forest, as could be discerned from its frequent sighting. But a rare sight was in store. 
Further on the game road across the vast grasslands were an elephant and a rhinoceros. Both being herbivores, Pawan said they posed no danger to each other as long as they maintained a decent distance.

Along the forest stream the tall elephant grass grew so profusely that the lone tusker was dwarfed. While he quenched his thirst taking large swigs through his trunk, the cameras clicked away intermittently. We were lucky enough to see a lesser adjutant stork and a black-necked stork before we left the forest.
Range safari

The following morning began with an elephant ride into the jungles of the Western range. Kaziranga is spread over an area of 430 sq km with a landscape of variety. There are dense jungles of tall trees, patches of elephant grass, meadows, marshlands, water bodies and rivers that make them suitable for a variety of species of prey as well as predators.

The forests of Kaziranga that spread over Golaghat and Nagaon districts of Assam were declared as reserve forests in 1905. This was a hunting ground in the colonial era. Banning hunting and opening the forests for visitors were the significant steps taken to elevate Kaziranga to the category of wildlife sanctuary in 1950, and a national park in 1974.

The diversity of the fauna and flora apart, it being home to a large population of the Indian one-horned rhinoceros was what made UNESCO confer the status of a World Heritage Centre on Kaziranga.
The park is divided into ranges, and visitors can choose the range depending on its uniqueness. The Western range is known for elephant rides, and one can expect to get closer to animals. After formalities, we mounted the elephant. We had the feeling of moving through a canopy as she strolled the forest.

One-horned giant

A pair of female barasinghas, so called because of the 12 tined antlers of the males, looked on in awe. This is also an endangered species, the guide said, having become extinct in the neighbouring countries. We were within the touching distance of a lone rhinoceros that was munching the short grass in a field. Unlike its African cousin, the two-horned denizen, the Indian rhino has a lone horn. Unfortunately, the notion that its horn has aphrodisiacal property had subjected the animal to large-scale poaching. But protective measures have been initiated.

The Eastern range, touted as a birders’ paradise, was chosen for the afternoon. Tokib, the driver, and Kangchen, the guide, made for an experienced team, and if not for their alertness, we would have missed many sightings. A collared dove was seen amidst stalks and branches of a tree. A pair of blue jays were spotted flittering around. Many eagles, fishing owls and pelicans were also glanced at.

Many migratory birds flock here because of the breeding season. A gaggle of bar-headed geese, said to have flown over the Himalayas, were pecking in the grassy marsh, while numerous species of wetland birds like the northern shovellers, mallards and pintails were drifting far away on water. 

We were pleasantly surprised by the sight of a few wild water buffaloes, which are among the largest denizens in Kaziranga. Though similar to the gaur (Indian Bison), the huge span of their strong horns was a sight to behold. Our safari ended after spotting a few Indian tent terrapins, the smaller turtles basking on half-submerged tree trunks. 

Back at the tourist complex, we had a feel of the local culture. At Rang Sandhya, a cultural programme, we were treated to a few dance performances by the tribal people. Jhumur, practised by tea estate workers, and Bihu, the Assamese folk dance, made for a colourful way to conclude our visit to Kaziranga.

Getting there

By air: Jorhat (100 km) & Guwahati (215 km) are the airports from where a taxi can be hired to reach Kaziranga.

By rail: Guwahati is a major junction connected to other cities.
By road: At Guwahati, one can take a taxi or an AC bus for a five-hour drive to reach Kohora, the tourist complex.

Accommodation

Numerous resorts besides tourism corporation’s lodges are available. Accommodation has to be booked first. Safari/elephant ride can be arranged after reaching.
Best time to visitBetween November and April. 
For more information, 
visit: kaziranga.assam.gov.in or www.kaziranga.co.in