Javier Hernandez poached a second-half winner as Manchester United beat arch-rivals Liverpool 1-0 to move into the English League Cup fourth round on Wednesday, subduing Luis Suarez on his return from a 10-match ban. 

ADVERTISEMENTMexican Hernandez lost his marker and steered home a Wayne Rooney corner a minute into the second half and United held on despite being outplayed for large periods by a Liverpool side welcoming back Uruguayan Suarez for the first time since April. 

It was a welcome fillip for United manager David Moyes, who had been desperate to avoid a second defeat to a major rival in quick succession after Sunday’s 4-1 Premier League loss to Manchester City. 

Arsenal set up a fourth-round clash against Chelsea, coming through a penalty shootout against West Bromwich Albion after the match had finished 1-1 after extra time.  An inexperienced Arsenal side had trailed 3-1 in the shootout but won 4-3 with Nacho Monreal netting the decisive spot-kick. There was gloom for holders Swansea City who suffered a shock 3-1 defeat by second tier Birmingham City and Papiss Cisse scored his first goal since April as Newcastle United beat Leeds United 2-0. 

Premier League Stoke City also booked a spot in the next round, winning 2-0 at third tier Tranmere Rovers. 

Suarez, who missed the end of last season and the start of this one for biting Chelsea’s Branislav Ivanovic, had dominated the headlines in the run-up having caused controversy in previous games against United. 

The script was written for him to make a decisive impact, but he was upstaged by Hernandez who showcased his finely-tuned eye for a goal with a typically clever finish. 
He left his marker Jose Enrique flat-footed in the box and found a metre of space to sidefoot home. 

“The movement is great for the goal, that’s what Chicharito is all about. He finds space so well,” Moyes told Sky Sports.  The goal was largely against the run of play as Liverpool dominated possession, but their neat and tidy approach play frequently lacked any end product.