As India completes 68 magnificent years of freedom, restaurants in the city bring to its guests a special menu to spice up the most important of day on the Indian calendar. ​So, this I-Day enjoy a lavish brunch and dinner in the true spirit of the moment with your family and friends. 

ADVERTISEMENTCelebrate the freedom of flavours with a lavish buffet at Fio Cookhouse, Epicuria, Nehru Place. The special buffet on Friday has a mouthwatering selection of soups, salads and pastas along with a delightful main-course option and absolutely sinful desserts. Treat your senses to delicacies like Poached Prawns, Oven Roasted Chicken with Orange Oliev Thyme Jus, Spinach Mushroom and Butter Beans Roesti, Chicken e Khas, Aubergine Beans and Corn Parmigiano. 

Check out the lavish brunch at Lesiure Inn, West Gurgaon. Indulge in a wide selection of salads, soups, main course dishes and dessert. The restaurant is offering  Idlis, appropriately hued in the colours of the Tricolour with tangy chutney, Kesariya Bhaji with Poori, Kasoori Handi, Murg Biryani and Tiranga Barfi, all accompanied with some refreshing mocktails.

Like every year, Hangout at Select Citywalk has also devised something special for everyone to enjoy a perfect weekend bonanza. Hangout has an exciting menu offering tricoloured sandwiches, pizzas and other yummy dishes. For children, there are some interesting activities also which includes key chain/bracelet making, flag making, nail art and painting competition. The Ancient Barbeque (TAB) in Noida too has a special menu on the occasion of Independence Day. In vegetarian fare they have dishes like Banarsi Tiranga Paneer Tikka, Rajasthani Shangri ki Shammi, Kotayam Vegetable Fry, etc. And in non-vegetarian cuisine they are offering Kolhapuri Tiranga Murg Tikka, Konkani Jhinga Fry, Jalandhari Seekh Kebab and Punjabi Tangri. These starters are followed by lip-smacking main courses like Jaisalmeri Paneer, Bhojpuri Aloo, Kerala Ardul Curry, Lucknowi Biryani, Goan Vindaloo Mutton, Patiala Shahi Murg, Bangla Macher Jhol, etc. To complete the dining experience they have delectable desserts like, Tiranga Barfi, Tri Colour Cream Cake and Nation Pudding.

Reflecting India’s rich cultural history, the 24x7 Plaza Premium Lounge at Terminal 3, Indira Gandhi International Airport is offerimg a lavish buffet prepared around the concept of freedom. Travelers will have the choice to try out authentic Indian dishes such as Mulligatawny Soup, Murgh Hashan, Kashmiri Pulao, Hyderabadi Dum Biryani, Kesari phirnee, Gulab Jamun, Chaat Salad, Jalebi etc. For the patriots, the lounge also gives a visual treat by presenting an array of tri-coloured fusion offerings such as Tiranga Paneer Tikka, Makai Tiranga Kebab, Azadi Rabri, Tri Colour Mousse, Tri Colour Pasta, to name a few.

For a change enjoy food from pre-Independence era at Pind Balluchi. The menu is enriched with classic dishes of the 1940s like Paneer Amritsari, Murg Tandoori, Rahra Meat, Pindi Chhole, Gosht Biryani, Aloo Pyaz Parantha and many more. Round off the sumptuous meal with generous helpings of thandi Kheer and end the day on a truly sweet note.