Following the public outcry near MM Hills in Chamarajangar district over the death of 40-year old poacher A Palani last week, forest and police officers of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu will meet within 10 days to solve issues related to poaching in the border areas, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) Vinay Luthra has said. 

ADVERTISEMENTSpeaking on the sidelines of the 60th Wildlife Week Valedictory Function, 2014, organised by the Karnataka Forest Department on Thursday, Luthra  said, “It has been confirmed that Palani was a poacher and hence was shot dead.

 The operation was carried out with the help of police from both the states. While Tamil Nadu officials are helping us, there are some elements who are instigating the local people. Hence, to ensure that the situation does not escalate, the Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) has been deployed and special drives are being conducted. The meeting will ensure better co-ordination in border areas.” 

The Wildlife Week celebrations, that began on October 2 with a nature conservation walk from Cubbon Park to Lalbagh here, concluded on Thursday. During this period, seminars, photography, essay writing, drawing and painting competitions, among others, were held. A book entitled, ‘Born in Bandipur’, was also released.

 Besides, a letter of Income Tax exemption for nature conservation under Section 80G of the Income Tax Act, 1961, was handed over to the director of Dandeli-Anshi Tiger Reserve, Srinivasulu. Twenty-one school and college students who had taken part in drawing and essay competitions were awarded with certificates and cash prizes. 

Minister for Forest, Environment and Ecology, B Ramanath Rai, said the fact that more girls had won the prizes showed they had more understanding and concern about wildlife and environment. According to him, Karnataka has more tiger and elephant population than others states, but more needs to be done to conserve wildlife. A meeting in this regard will be held soon, he added. 

Additional Chief Secretary, Forest, Environment and Ecology, M Madan Gopal, said that mere laws and rules on conservation would not help. More practical and social solutions are needed as conflicts are inevitable, he added.