On the face of it, the first ever census of leopards in India brings good tidings. It indicates that in terms of numbers, at least, leopards are not doing too badly in the country, especially when compared with tigers and lions. 

The leopard census was conducted last year and puts the total number of leopards in the country in the range of 12-14,000. It indicates that leopards far outnumber tigers and lions in the country. ADVERTISEMENTHowever, wildlife experts are skeptical over the count and are cautioning against popping the champagne corks. For one, while the number of leopards may 
be larger than that of tigers and lions, it is unclear whether leopard numbers are growing or declining. 

This, after all, was the first leopard census. We do not have an idea of how many leopards existed in the past to compare numbers over time to figure out the magnitude of the threat faced by the spotted cat.

Besides, wildlife experts have questioned the method adopted by the leopard census, the restricted area in which they were counted, etc. The leopard census 
was carried out alongside the tiger census and was thus restricted to tiger habitats in 13 states.

 Besides, the leopard numbers that eme-rged were not the culmination of an actual headcount but like the tiger census, the outcome of much extrapolation. 

Apparently, the 12-14,000 figure was arrived at through extrapolation of the 7,910 leopards guess estimated in and around tiger habitats, which itself was an extrapolation of some 1,647 leopards that were actually photographed by camera traps set up to count tigers. 

The leopard census, say experts, is riddled with several of the problems afflicting the tiger census.

While the leopard numbers may not be accurate, dismissing its findings isn’t helpful. A process to count leopards has been put in place and it needs to be improved. 

This is a start and it gives us some idea of leopard numbers, their density and distribution. India has focused on conservation of tigers and lions. And while their smaller numbers merit the greater attention they receive, the leopard too is in danger. Like his striped cousin, the tiger, the leopard is widely poached for its bones and body parts. 

Indeed, leopard parts are a popular substitute for tiger parts in traditional Chinese medicine. Hence their numbers could decline too in the coming years. 

India needs to act to prevent their poaching. Having a more accurate idea of their numbers is a necessary first step to put in place a robust conservation strategy.