If you are a lover of seafood, then this winter, crispy and juicy prawns are awaiting you at the Prawn Fest at Royal China restaurant, Nehru Place. Fresh prawns imported from China have been prepared in at least 30 ways to tantalise your tastebuds.

 These include Chinese Szechuan style, as dimsum filling, Indian curry style, Australian barbecue style, batter fried, cocktail style and more. Come and get ready to munch on exotic delicacies. 

Prawns have been had by humans since time immemorial. Deposits that prawn shells and bones have been found in sites of early civilizations. In the 7th century, prawns and other seafood composed majority of the Chinese diet, and does today. In 1280, Marco Polo commented on the abundance of seafood, including prawns, in Chinese marketplaces. 

The first harvesting of shrimps was done in the 17th century by Louisiana bayou residents. Even today, the US harvests over 650 million pounds a year, more than any other country. This is still not enough to meet the demand for this nutritious, sweet and juicy seafood variety.

Ram Krishna Katoch, manager at Royal China, informs Metrolife, “In India, people are relatively unaware as we do not have a tradition in prawn preparations. In Delhi, more so, people do not get to enjoy fresh prawns as we do not have a sea nearby. Therefore we decided to give a flavour of this tasty seafood species to Delhiites. It goes without saying that winter is the best time to do so.”

The chef Eric Phiam Khoo, adds, “Many people do not know that prawns are a great source of calcium, iodine, proteins and healthy cholesterol. They help improve the circulation system. Besides, they can be had in any which way – fried, steamed, poached, baked, sautéed or grilled with or without the shell.”   

“At the fest here this season, we have Flaming prawns in superior sauce – sautéed with soya sauce, chilli, spring onions and garlic; Grilled king prawns in garlic & butter sauce (in shell), Sauteed prawn in chilli and black bean sauce, Sauteed prawn with red chilli ‘Szechuan Style,’ Kung Pao prawn in spicy sauce and Prawns in XO sauce to name of few.”ADVERTISEMENT“Besides, there is the Batter fried prawns in sweet and sour sauce served with pineapple and bell peppers, Prawn and tofu wrapped in dumpling sheet steamed to melt in the mouth and much more. Have them as appetizers, chowders (stew), main course or even salads. There are all equally tasty.”