The tiger conservation programme of Bhadra National Park has got a shot in the arm with the Central g overnment giving its nod for a Rs 9-crore action plan to take the project forward. 

ADVERTISEMENTTiger Project Director and Conservator of Forests P B Karunakar told Deccan Herald, “While the fund is awaited, it has been planned to strengthen anti-poaching camps, modernise facilities for effective watch and ward, adopt fire prevention methods, among others, under the action plan submitted to the Centre.” The Centre provides most of the funds for conservation of tigers in the country, following the recommendation of National Tiger Conservation Authority. Last year, Bhadra project was sanctioned Rs 5 crore. The grant was spent on daily wages of forest watchers, maintenance and setting up of three new anti-poaching camps, drives to prevent forest fires and improvement of animal habitats.

The park spread across 500 sq km, has an estimated 30 tigers. Taking this into cognisance, 36 anti-poaching camps were set up in the first phase and three more camps were added last year, taking the total to 39 camps, the officer said.

Each camp comprises a team of four forest watchers and two permanent guards, equipped with arms, GPS device, smartphone and walkie-talkies. They are entrusted with the task of round the clock vigil. Six such camps are set up near Bhadra backwaters to keep a vigil against timber smuggling and poachers sneaking into the forest using coracles. The officer said, in general, anti-poaching camps have proven helpful in mitigating poaching and theft of rich forest resources.

To monitor the activities of anti-poaching camp personnel, a dedicated system called ‘monitory system for tiger intensive poaching and ecological systems (Mstrips) has been in place since 2012. With this Bhadra has the credit of becoming one among seven national parks in the country to be equipped with such a system. The activities are monitored from a dedicated control room.

The successful rehabilitation of tribals living in the villages inside the forest is another reason that has come in handy in protecting the big cats. As many as 736 families had been identified during 2001-02, with 436 among them being rehabilitated under the tiger project. It is also considered one of the successful rehabilitation programmes in the country. The officer said, unlike local poachers, professionals from  north India camp on the fringes of the forest for months, biding their time to strike. Rapid response unit has been formed to swing into action, especially during tiger and leopard sightings in villages outside the forest.

Barring the death of a tiger in territorial fight, there are no reports of tiger deaths due to natural or unnatural reasons till date. Wild gaurs were on the verge of extinction 20 years ago, but now, their numbers are on the rise.