Brightly lit, rustic in its appeal and spacious - these are the words that define ‘Plated’, a bistro located on 80 ft Road, New BEL Road.ADVERTISEMENTIt was the idea to start a place which will be popular among people not just for its food but also as a place dedicated to music and art, Balaji Hariharan, chef and the owner of the bistro came up with the concept of ‘Plated’. For starters, all you pet parents, it is a happy place for all your furry kids. Yes! It is pet-friendly. So now, you can have your meal without worrying about your pets. The first thing that you will notice is the artistically done up walls-- wall paintings and sponge-painted walls cover most part.  Make yourself comfortable and brace yourself up for a lavish spread that is going to pour in. Ask for a ‘Dark Chocolate and Hazelnut Shake’ to start your meal. The in-house made dark chocolate ice-cream and the ‘gianduja’ milkshake is mildly sweet and thick - just perfect for those who don’t have a sweet tooth. You can also try the ‘Walnut, Blueberry, Banana and Caramel Shake’, which is prepared using the in-house vanilla ice cream with toasted walnuts, caramelised bananas, and blueberries. Ask for a plate of bruschetta. The pesto garlic bread with cream cheese, bocconcini and hydroponic cherry tomato topping is the best way to start your meal. It’s crunchy and not messy at all. You can also try their mushroom and cheese variant. The ‘Grilled BBQ Chicken Wings’ slow cooked and grilled with their in-house BBQ sauce is something that will leave you asking for more. The perfectly cooked, soft meat is a treat to your taste buds. The main course generally takes about 20 to 30 minutes to come to your table, so it is recommended that you order it along with your starters. If you are a mustard fan, ask for a bowl of ‘Jhaal Muri Tandoori Prawn’. The tandoori style prawns with smoked virgin mustard oil flavoured puffed rice’ is something to try. The unusual twist of puffed rice instead of white rice is for the main course is the quirkiest main course you will ever come across.   The ‘Dak Bungalow’ chicken is another dish you must try. Inspired by an Anglo-India Roast Chicken from Eastern India is served with mustard spiced potato mash, gravy and buttered pao’. The chicken is soft and well cooked and the taste of the potato brings in a sense of nostalgia. ‘Paneer Makhani Lasagne’, a chef’s recommendation, that will never go wrong. Layered with cottage cheese, ‘jeera aloo’ and ‘gatte ki subzi’ lasagne sheet, and baked with butter gravy is also a fast moving item. All their dishes come in generous quantity so be careful if you want to try the other dishes on their menu.End your meal with ‘Flambeed Rum Banana and Grilled Banana Ice cream’. The lavastone grilled banana ice-cream with caramelised bananas, flambeed with rum and served with toffee sauce is sure to suit every palate. The best part of this bistro is all their cutleries are wooden and the owner makes a conscious effort to reduce the use of plastic. For the convenience of their customers, the total time to serve a dish and how the food is prepared is already mentioned on the menu.Overall rating: 4.5/5
Ambience: 3.5/5
Food: 4/5
Service: 4/5
‘Plated’ is located at 70, 80 Feet Road, RMV 2nd stage, New BEL Road. For details, call 9513803926.Must Haves
Olive Oil & Butter Poached Norwegian Salmon on Wasabi and Shrimp Mash, Wakame and Green Peppercorn Jus
Grilled Chicken Breast stuffed with Green Amaranth and Shiitake Mushrooms, on Creamy Potato Mash, Sauteed Vegetables, Mushroom Veloute Sauce
Slow Roasted Pork Spare Ribs
Cheesecake
Creme Brulee