A man-made grassland, the first of its kind in the country, has been  developed in Nainital district to accommodate the growing population of  tigers and elephants in the western forest circle of Kumaon.

Spread over 60 hectares, the grassland, in the Dolly range of Terai East forest division, developed over the last two years, boasts of 39 local varieties of grass, Conservator of Forest (Western Circle) Parag Madhukar Dhakate told PTI.

Started on an experimental basis to accommodate the growing population of tigers and elephants, the project is already on its way to achieving its objective with camera traps recording movement of a big cat family in the grassland area.

Enthused by its success another man-made grassland is being developed over an area of 38 hectares in the same range.

"Camera trap footage confirms that a full grown tiger, a tigress and their two cubs are inhabiting the grassland. It is an indication that the experiment has been successful. The animals are adapting to the surroundings created for them and have accepted it as their habitat," Dhakate said.

Noting that demonstrating indicators show an increase in population of both tigers and elephants in the western circle over the last few years, he said habitat expansion through judicious use of the forest wasteland to accommodate those animals was the need of the hour.

"These grasslands are a step in that direction," Dhakate, who holds a PHD degree in genetics and wildlife management, said.

Dhakate attributes the rise in the number of the big cat and pachyderms in the circle to the presence of Sashastra Seema Bal in the area bordering Nepal which has reduced incidents of poaching and man-animal conflict substantially.

He said more money is being spent by the government over conservation efforts in the state through the Gaula corpus fund which hes led to rise in population of tigers and elephants.

As per 2016 tiger census, the number of big cats in the western circle, which consists of five forest divisions, was 119, whereas the number of elephants in the circle as per the census carried out in 2015 stood at 197.

As per demonstrating indicators it was a substantial increase in their population, Dhakate said.

"This means it is time we build more such habitats for them inside the forests where they feel at home and move securely and freely," Dhakate said.ADVERTISEMENT