On the last day of filing nominations, confusion reigned supreme in the JD(S) camp, with candidates and aspirants in over 10 constituencies unsure of their candidature.ADVERTISEMENTThis is thanks to the party leadership, which created confusion by issuing ‘B’ forms and ‘C’ forms to contenders even until the 11th hour.Though it had announced the candidature of MLA Pilla Munishamappa from Devanahalli, it decided to field Nisarga Narayanaswamy from the segment in the last minute. In K R Pet, the party gave jitters to MLA Narayana Gowda by considering advocate B L Devaraj. It had even given the ‘B’ form to Devaraj. It however changed its mind on Tuesday, by finally fielding Gowda from there. In Shidlaghatta too the party reconsidered its decision to field MLA Rajanna, resulting in dramatic turn of events in the constituency. The party issued the ‘B’ form to B N Ravi Kumar, which led to Rajanna seeking the BJP ticket. The JD(S) finally decided to field Rajanna.In Hangal, the party, which could have poached Congress leader Manohar Tahsildar, failed to do so, as he had a change of heart in the last minute. The JD(S) had given the ‘B’ form to Bommanahalli Babu to contest from Hangal, but later issued ‘C’ form to Tahsildar, when he showed interest in joining the party. Babu is now the candidate from Hangal.In Bilagi, the JD(S) made way for BJP leader S K Bellubbi in the last minute, forcing party’s candidate Sangappa Tandagal out of the race.In Jayanagar, it had announced the ticket to Tanveer Ahmed, but it ended up giving the ‘B’ form to Kalegowda.In Bommanahalli, the party had announced N Somashekar as the candidate. Later, names of a seer and a film producer started doing the rounds. But it gave the ‘B’ form to T R Prasad, but did a flip-flop and decided to field former cricketer Dodda Ganesh. But as Ganesh was late in filing his papers, Prasad stands as the party’s candidate.In Varuna, the party, which had announced Abhishek’s name, had however decided to change the candidate to help the BJP’s probable candidate B Y Vijayendra. But when BJP failed to field Vijayendra, the party considered fielding Chamundeshwari MLA G T Deve Gowda’s son Harish Gowda. In the last minute, the party decided to field Abhishek again.