The Congress which is slowly gaining numbers in the Legislative Council is planning to unseat the Council chairman D H Shankaramurthy with the support of JD(S). The chairman’s post has been held by the BJP for over six years now.

ADVERTISEMENTIt is learnt that the Congress has reached out to the JD(S) seeking its support to unseat Shankaramurthy, who is a BJP MLC. The Congress is learnt to have extended an olive branch to the JD(S) by offering to make its member the chairman. Senior JD(S) MLC Basavaraj Horatti who has entered the House for the seventh time, has emerged as the frontrunner for the post. The Congress is said to have agreed to settle for the deputy chairman post.

The BJP has managed to continue its member as the chairman with the support of JD(S). In exchange, JD(S) member Marithibbe Gowda has been elected deputy chairman. But after the recent elections to the Council, the Congress’ numbers have risen in the 75-member House. However it is short of two members to gain a majority in the Upper House. The party currently has 30 MLCs. While the government is in the process of nominating three more members, it also enjoys the support of two or three Independent MLCs. This brings Congress’ numbers to 36, while it needs 38 votes to move a no-confidence motion against Shankaramurthy.

The BJP-JD(S) combine, along with the support of two Independents, has 38 members. The Congress can’t poach MLCs from the opposition JD(S) as it would lead to disqualification of the members. Hence, it has decided to seek the support of the JD(S) as a whole, sources said. 

When contacted, Horatti said that he is not aware of the development and he was not vying for the chairman’s post. However, it is reliably learnt that he will be meeting his party supremo H D Deve Gowda on Friday. 

Speaking to reporters here on Thursday, Shankaramurthy maintained that he was not on a shaky ground. He said that he would continue in the post for the next two years. “This question arises only if the JD(S) discontinues it's support to BJP,” he added.