The year 2016 – the dawn of digital India, where from paying electricity bills to shopping for sandals is done by pressing a few buttons on the phone or laptop. It would not be wrong to say that convenience, remote accessibility and having the world on your fingertips was the mantra of the year. For India’s nature and wildlife, this meant an app that let forest guards to track and report animal sighting in an instant, or keeping an e-eye on the remotest forest areas, so that no human could reach easily. 

Unfortunately, digitisation also gave poachers, and illegal wildlife traders an easy channel not just to hunt, but also earn millions by selling claws, skins, teeth, tails, feathers, bones, scales, guts, barks, roots and every other animal or plant product they could market right from the comfort of their homes.

The United Nations declared war on illegal wildlife trade this year calling all governments and people to support Wild for Life, a campaign aimed to put an end to the destructive trade which is touted to be the third largest transnational crime in the world and a multi-billion dollar business. In India, the surprising revelation came in July when 106 reputed e-commerce sites including Amazon and eBay were named to be selling rare animals and wildlife products online. 

The list collated by India Wildlife Crime Control Bureau also found traffickers using code language to sell these products. Like dharivala chadar for a tiger’s stripped skin or ‘Australian Teddy bear’ for Koalas. While Amazon rapidly pulled down 400 such items listed on its website, this war is far from over and would need the constant vigilance of policy makers, online forums, law enforcement agencies and people to stop what is destroying nations and their natural resources.

The biggest possible threat from poaching and illegal trade was felt by not the iconic tigers of India but a lesser-known animal that is shy, scaly and also popular as a delicacy and ‘tonic food’ in several communities in India and other nations of Southeast Asia. It is the pangolin. India is home to two species of pangolin – the Chinese pangolin and the Indian pangolin, both netted, trapped, shot or snared for local trade and to meet the demand from international markets. With most people often ignorant about even the existence of these species, the pangolins are a rapidly vanishing species warns TRAFFIC, a division of World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) that deals with wildlife trade. 

Protecting the lesser known
It is due to the constant work at the ground level of numerous conservation organisations and dedicated individuals that the lesser known animals like the pangolin, the dancing deers of Manipur, the hangul of Kashmir or the Gangetic river dolphin got their due recognition and a better chance of survival in the coming years. Government policies along with conservation plans are being executed for these species that define the biodiversity of India. 

In October, the Living Planet Report 2016 identified India as an ecological black spot where around half of the wildlife lives in the danger of being wiped out. The biennial report that tracks over 14,000 vertebrate populations of over 3,700 species from across the world, highlights the pressure on water and land India faces because of unsustainable human activities. Earlier in the year, the parliament passed a historic bill called the Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) Bill unlocking over Rs 42,000 crore fund for compensatory afforestation and wildlife protection.  

Recent figures indicate that there are more than 200 million insects for each human on the planet. And yet, we have a limited grasp of the life and nature of this mammoth family of living beings. USA this year recognised the importance of insects by giving, for the first time, federal protection to yellow-faced bees of Hawaii. In India too, the year ended on a sweet note for insects when Bengaluru-based researchers created a comprehensive catalogue of 281 species of cicada found in India. This pioneering work would hopefully encourage others to try and enter the world of ants, beetles and flies.

Rising conflicts
In a year marked with dynamic governance, India’s mega river linking project has been the focal point of discussion for conservationists and policy makers who assure that the dams and canals would not jeopardise the habitats and ecosystems. Environmentalists think otherwise. The much talked about Ken-Betwa river linking project that promises to green much of Bundelkhand might submerge critical tiger habitat inside Panna tiger reserve and also pose a threat to vulture and gharial habitat. It might also permanently submerge 7.2 lakh trees, warns the Standing Committee of the National Board of Wildlife. The interpretation that development needs will always trump over environment needs does not seem unjust when we see the rising human-wildlife conflicts across the country.  

Technology for conservation
In the new India, drones have become the modern guardian of the forests. Be it Wayanad, Kaziranga, Nilgiris, or the forests of Uttarakhand, the state forest departments are rapidly incorporating these flying robots to monitor wildlife habitats. Trying to bridge the communication gap and increase information outreach to people, Maharashtra government has come up with a toll free number that would give all information related to wildlife, conflicts, plantation, encroachment to people whenever they need. The Rajasthan government has provided a mobile app to all its forest guards that can help them send critical information from the widespread field posts without delay. 

Another novel idea that has been executed this year is the formation of a canine squad for the protection of forests. 

The big five
This year, the world celebrated the rise in the number of tigers globally with India leading the list, with an approximate population of 2,500 tigers. India also lost 91 tigers to poaching, poisoning and natural deaths. This is the highest number of deaths recorded since 2010. 

Asiatic lions on the other hand are fairing well in their only home in the world – the Sasan Gir Forest National Park. As per the latest reports, the lion population is stable and growing, although lions are still enlisted as endangered animals. At least 16 rhinos have been reported to be killed in Assam this year for their horns. 

This is in addition to the 22 rhinos that drowned during the annual floods in the state. The Indian Railways — whose mascot quite ironically is Bholu, the guard elephant — has grown to become one of the most worrying adversaries of the elephant. With tracks crisscrossing elephant corridors, conservationists estimate there have been at least 200 jumbo deaths in the last decade because of train hits. 
For the other wild cat of India, the leopard, that has silently lived among human habitation for years, depleting forests and fragmented wilderness has come as a big blow to its existence. Angry mobs pelting stones, sticks, and even it burning alive reveal the worst kind of beast that remains dormant inside us, who is not ready to peacefully co-exist with this animal. 

A World Health Organisation (WHO) report in May this year put six Indian cities including Delhi in the list of the 10 most polluted cities in the world. The report, which contains data from 795 cities in 67 countries between 2008 and 2013, shows Indian cities have some of the highest concentrations of particulate pollution, which can cause fatal damage to the heart and lungs. 

New hopes
India is a megadiverse country with only 2.4% of the world’s land area accounting for seven to eight per cent of all recorded species. From unusual dancing frogs in Western Ghats to song birds of the Himalayas, from white cheeked monkeys of Northeast to Eriovixia gryffindori, the Harry Potter sorting hat look-alike spider, the rate at which new species have been discovered in this mega diverse land this year is still extraordinary. Indian wildlife photographers have had their share of glory on the world stage and so have conservationists like Bibhuti Lahkar from Assam who was awarded the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) conservationists of the year award in 2016. 

But as John Sawhill once said, “Society is defined not only by what it creates, but by what it refuses to destroy,” it is hoped that this country will not have a handful of names to look up to, when it comes to defending our natural heritage. It will be the society as a whole that would not destroy, not demolish, not degrade the India that lives in our sacred green covers in 2017.
ADVERTISEMENT