Food enthusiasts were taken on an adventure trail of sorts during the launch of ‘The Coastal Adventure’, a food festival at Monkey Bar. The festival brings together the best of coastal Karnataka and Kerala cuisine. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe spread is elaborate and one gets to taste the best of fresh seafood, spicy chutneys, traditional specialities and Southern style cocktails. 

Every dish at the festival has been carefully crafted by chef Varun Pereira, executive chef at Monkey Bar, after a lot research and thought. He hasn’t simply mixed 2 dishes together just to offer a variety but has made an effort to create something distinct with ordinary things. 

Varun says he has not only enjoyed putting the menu together but also discovered several new dishes in the process. 

Talking about the ‘Kerala Bao Uttapam’, a Kerala-inspired beef fry served with ‘bao uttapam’ and ‘coconut chutney’, Varun says, “Here, we’ve played around with the Chinese bao by giving it a Mangalurean twist, to resemble an ‘uttapam’. The ‘uttapam’ is topped with sauteed onions which enhances the taste. This dish is paired with Kerala beef which is normally eaten with ‘Kerala parota’.” 

Most of the dishes are a fusion of coastal Karnataka and Kerala flavours and chef Varun explains why he chose to mix the best of both flavours in all the dishes. “Karnataka and Kerala have their specialities and although the ingredients for both places and style of cooking are similar, we have tried to play around with the flavours to offer something new.” 

This experiment is reflected in ‘Kundapur Wings’, chicken wings tossed in ‘Kundapur ghee roast masala’ and served with sprouted ‘moong kosambri salad’. 

      “‘Kundapur Wings’ is a typical Mangalurean dish which is eaten with ‘neer dosa’ and is usually very spicy. The ‘kosambri salad’ is to soothe the palate and is a perfect contrast to the fiery wings,” adds Varun. 

Another unique dish is ‘Monkee eggs’ where the popular egg puff gets a makeover. “The dish is spiced with coriander and black pepper crusted poached egg on puff pastry with green chutney and a coconut cream hollandaise. The pepper does well to bring out the flavours,” says Varun.

He also talks about the ‘Udupi beet cutlets’ which is a delicacy in Mangaluru. “The beetroot is usually boiled but in this dish, the beetroot is roasted. It is stuffed with green peas and ‘clam sukkha’. It is then coated with rock salt, roasted and baked till crisp. Boiling always kills the original taste of the dish but roasting helps retain the flavour,” explains Varun. 

Another interesting dish is ‘Coast to Coast’ — the ‘Monkey thali’ with Mangaluru-inspired ‘gassi’ with raw mango, potato and tomato, ‘ghee rice’, ‘avial’ inspired vegetables, ‘gongura chutney,’ ‘Kerala parota’, ‘papad’, ‘kokum sharbat’ and ‘jaggery custard’. 
The food festival is on till June 30 at Monkey Bar, Indiranagar.