In a fresh development in the politically surcharged Uttarakhand state, the state High Court has directed that a floor test be held on March 31 to decide whether the dismissed Harish Rawat government really enjoys the confidence of the House. This court directive follows a petition filed by the Congress challenging the Union governments decision to impose President’s Rule in the state ahead of the scheduled March 28 vote of confidence in the state assembly ordered earlier by the state governor K K Paul. 

ADVERTISEMENTIn its directive, Court has not only asked for confidence vote but also said that the 9 dissident Congress MLAs will also vote in the House even though their ballots will be kept  separately  for counting. It may be worthwhile to mention here that the rebel MLAs’ membership was scrap-ped by the Speaker under the Anti-Defection Law. The rebel MLAs have also challenged the Speaker’s decision in the High Court. As now, the showdown of strength is scheduled for March 31, the leaders of both the parties are trading charges and both sides saying that the court order was  their victory.

The first President’s Rule in the sub-Himalayan state is the culmination of the turn of events since March18 when 9 MLAs led by former chief minister Vijay Bahuguna voted with the Opposition BJP in the 70-member state assembly against the approval to the state budget.

The state government had apparently turned into a minority government but Rawat and Speaker Govind Singh Kunjwal were of the view that it enjoyed the confidence of the House. The budget had been passed by a voice vote. In view of this developing controversy, while Governor K K Paul had asked Rawat to prove his majority on the floor of the House on March 28.

With that, the political situation in the state entered a new phase. The Delhi rule came the wake of fast developing political scenario in the state when stories after stories about horse trading including Rawat appearing in one video offering cash to disgruntled MLAs, came out. The state assembly was placed under suspended animation. 

Unfortunately, Uttarakhand has been a victim to a kind of political instability right from day one of its coming into existence way back in November 2000. Thus, one should not be surprised over this latest development in the state which has all along witnessed a number of controversies, scandals and severe infighting in the ranks of the frontline political parties.

Interestingly, the state was sought to be created basically on the premises that the hill districts of the then undivided western Uttar Pradesh – Pauri, Cha-moli, Tehri, Uttarkashi, Dehradun, Nainital, Almora, Pitoragarh and foot hill districts of Hardwar and Udham Singh Nagar had remained neglected and underdeveloped for far too long under the then UP administration since independence. 

The decades old on-going  peoples’ movement for a separate political dispensation for the region turned into an intensified Uttarakhand movement in early 1990s, which subsequ-ently witnessed an unprecedented violence and reign of terror let lose by the then Samajwadi Party government led by Mulayam Singh Yadav in 1994. 

Better deal
It was during this period that a number of people lost their lives fighting against the might of the state. The steadfast hill folks who sacrificed their lives for the cause of separate state were obviously looking forward to a better deal for themselves and  their children which was not possible under undivided UP.

Unfortunately, their dreams have not come true. Ever since the first assembly elections in 2002 when the Congress secured a majority and formed the first elected government, events after events grabbed the national limelight. Corruption and scandals sum up the 15-year old existence of this tiny state with a population of over 1 crore. Over the years, the probe panels have been appointed by both the Congress and the BJP against each others’ omissions and commissions whenever they took over the reins of power. 

From November 2000 onwards, first it was a BJP interim government which ruled  for over two years. Then, the Congress won the first assembly elections and N D Tiwari became the chief minister. This was followed by the BJP coming to power in 2007 and Maj Gen B C Khanduri (retd) who headed the government initially for over two years to be replaced by Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank. 

In the 2012 elections, the Congress won and Vijay Bahuguna became the chief minister, to be replaced by Harish Rawat after two years. All during this period, 8 politicians occupied the CM’s throne. Obviously, this is an indicator of how internal squabbles had afflicted both the part-ies in such a short period of time.

This is an indicator of how internal squabbles, opportunism and some external factors have   afflicted the political fabric of the state. Apart from political considerations and compulsions, lot of other undue extern-al influences are also said to have badly spoilt its political fibre. 

It is not a hidden fact that a few months after the formation of the state, so much was routinely heard about the indiscriminate sale and purchase of land, felling of trees, poaching and mining and illicit and monopoly liquor trade. 

(The writer is a Dehradun-based senior journalist)