Legislators of both the Congress and JD(S) will stay put in two star hotels in the city till their coalition government proves its majority on the floor of the House on May 24.ADVERTISEMENTCongress legislators are camping at Hilton Hotel, whereas JD(S) legislators are put up at Hotel Le Meridien. Senior leaders of both parties held a meeting with their legislators even as the coalition government is taking shape. While some of them, especially in the Congress, managed to go home, most of them were asked to remain in the hotel.Legislators were made aware that there was still the possibility of the BJP trying to poach them. “I know it’ll be uncomfortable, but it’s good for you and the party that you stay here. At any cost, don’t go out of the hotel. Don’t fall to any offers that may come your way,” former chief minister Siddaramaiah is learnt to have told the legislators during a meeting on Sunday.“Till the time the process of the formation of the new government is over, legislators will stay here,” Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) president G Parameshwara said. Apparently, some legislators are seeking a day’s break to visit their constituencies.“It has been decided against sending them even for a day to visit their constituencies,” Congress leader D K Shivakumar, who is looking after the legislators’ accommodation, said. Legislators were also advised to be patient even if they do not get ministerial berths.“Berths will be decided by the high command. You have to co-operate. Don’t air your frustration in public,” the MLAs have been advised.To placate legislators who are homesick, the party has allowed family members to stay with some of them. Most of the legislators at the hotel are non-Bengaluru legislators.Legislators have been away from home since May 16, when they were moved to a resort in Bidadi. They were then taken to Hyderabad by road late on May 18, only to be ferried back to the city for the floor test on Saturday. All through, the Congress has maintained strict vigil on the legislators.