Art is turning innovative with each passing day and entering spaces hitherto unknown. The lines between arts and sports too are blurring, with graphics and artwork making inroads into skateboarding. The irony is that although the circuit is in its initial stages here, doing artwork on skateboards is promising to be a huge phenomenon. 

ADVERTISEMENTA different language is clearly emerging. Bling merchandise, skateboard slang and boards loaded with funky graffiti have helped skateboarding develop its own subculture. And the artists who work on these boards are turning heads as their works are becoming distinct by the day. They take inspiration from a fusion of influences, opinions, psychedelic movements, posters and stickers, digital graphics and cartoons and skateboards.

Channy Lowang, a web designer and artist who works with digital graphics on skateboards regularly, says that artists mainly use these boards as a medium of personal expression. “I used to work on illustrations and then realised that they could be translated on skateboards. So I started doing a lot of graphics for the skateboarding community in Bengaluru,” she says.

“I showed a woman on a dragon to represent her power and feisty character. I am also an animal lover so there is a dog next to her. I digitally draw tigers on skateboards. I am very passionate about animals so my images represent their preservation. Coming from the North-East, I dislike poaching that is currently going on at Kaziranga National Park. My art revolves around such themes.” 

She says that while earlier people mainly preferred skateboard art which was similar to wall art — a style that was gaudy, heavy and grunge, smattered with huge letters — they are now accepting subtle and intricate colours.  Somanna, one of the founders of ‘Holystoked Collective’, a skateboarding crew, gives local artists the opportunity to exhibit their work on his boards. While a few artists paint by hand, ‘Holystoked’ also sells boards with graphics that are like thin sheets. They are illustrated digitally and then cut and pasted onto the board. Their boards have 3 varieties of graphics — an iconoclastic, Rastafarian theme, the cool Samurai cartoon and their logo. 

He says, “Anything colourful is popular. Boards with skulls and punk-rock themes are the ‘must-have’ ones for youngsters. The funny thing is that these graphics don’t stay for long since when one performs tricks while skateboarding, the graphics are the first to be hit. But that doesn’t stop people from choosing fancy graphics.” 

He adds that while paint might add a little bit of weight to the board, graphics are like laminations and don’t affect the board much. Somanna says that he has seen many skateboarders who buy boards and click pictures of them before and after the graphics have been added. 

Manoj Jaiswal, a skateboarder, adds that the popular skateboards are ones that represent extreme culture and dark themes. 

“Sometimes, skateboarders are required to opt for skateboards that their sponsors give them. At such times, brand names and the popular rider’s name from the brand is on the skateboard.”

 Ishan Sharma, a passionate skateboarder, says, “Anything that makes skateboarding a better experience is always helpful. I picked up a skateboard after I watched ‘The Secret Life of Walter Mitty’ so I love pop culture on skateboards. I would love to have skateboards with manga and anime characters. I also love metal and classic rock, so any skateboard with names of bands would work. Sometimes, I feel that these wooden boards are used as pieces of artwork.” 

However, skateboard graffiti artists do face the problem of space. Channy says that she can’t always translate her ideas onto the board as she has to work in a 12 ft by 12 ft space.

“So we tried out stories on skateboards. We printed a part of a story on 4 boards and this stirred the interest among many in skateboarding as well.” 

For Somanna, the challenge is the cost of printing machines while working on graphics.

 “Importing these machines is expensive. But despite these, youngsters are loving it and it is possible that it can increase their confidence while skateboarding as well.”