An eight-foot python was found trapped inside the engine of a water tanker at the Barapullah corridor extension construction site. The massive python, which was later rescued by a wildlife NGO, brought the construction work to a halt.

ADVERTISEMENTFearing for their safety, the construction workers informed the supervising authorities, who in turn contacted NGO Wildlife SOS on their 24-hour helpline number.

“We didn’t want to cause the reptile any harm so we let it remain there till we found someone who could help us out,” said Prasanna Padhi, the person who placed the call.

Following this, a team of three expert snake rescuers was dispatched to the location, which, after ensuring that the crowd of curious on-lookers were at a safe distance, carried out the rescue operation. It was identified as the Indian Rock Python and it took almost 40 minutes for the rescuers to carefully extricate the distressed python.

The Indian Rock Python (Python molurus), a large non-venomous python species is found in India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. This species is threatened by habitat loss, poaching and is a sought after species in the illegal pet trade. It is protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and listed under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES), which regulates the international trade of wildlife species.

Trained rescuers

“Although non-venomous, a python’s bite can be injurious so one has to be careful while carrying out such rescue operations. Sensitive rescues such as this one require patience and skill and we have professionally trained rescuers who are experienced in handling these snake rescues. Delhi still has a few patches of forest that are home to such unique wildlife and it is essential that we remain sensitive to their presence in the national capital region.” said Geeta Seshamani, Co-founder of Wildlife SOS.

The large constrictor was kept under observation for a few hours after which it was released back into its natural habitat.