Of the 11 hung zilla panchayats (ZPs), the Congress is warming up to the JD(S) in Tumakuru and Kolar, while the BJP is likely to join hands with the JD(S) in Mysuru, Vijayapura and Bengaluru Urban.

ADVERTISEMENTAn independent candidate has emerged as the kingmaker in Dharwad, while both the BJP and the Congress are trying to convince a Raitha Sangha member in Bagalkot to support the party as his vote is all set to become the deciding factor in the ZP. 

Elections for the post of president and vice president of the 30 ZPs in the state will be held during the first and second week of May and hectic parleys are on between the local leaders of the three major political parties. Polls held to the ZPs in February witnessed the Congress securing a majority in 10 ZPs, the BJP in 7 and the JD(S) in 2.

A hung verdict was witnessed in as many as 11 ZPs, including Vijayapura, Yadgir, Belagavi, Bagalkot, Raichur, Dharwad, Shivamogga, Tumakuru, Bengaluru (Urban) and Kolar. Elections to the posts of the president and the vice president decide the ruling party in the panchayat body.

On a tour
The BJP members elected to the Bagalkot ZP went on a tour to prevent the Congress from “poaching” them. 

Hungund legislator Vijayanand Kashappanavar’s wife Veena is an aspirant to the president’s post. Sources said Kashappanavar is leaving no stone unturned to ensure his wife heads the ZP.

In Chief Minister Siddaramaiah’s home turf Mysuru, the BJP and the JD(S) are likely to form a coalition despite the Congress securing the highest number of seats (22 out of 49). The move would surely embarrass the chief minister. In Shivamogga, the JD(S) is playing its cards close to its chest and keeping both the Congress and the JD(S) on tenterhooks. Local BJP leaders say they cannot trust the JD(S) as the party recently ditched the saffron party at the last minute to support the Congress in the Shivamogga city corporation.

Majority in 2 ZPs
Though the JD(S) managed to secure a majority in 2 ZPs – Mandya and Hassan – it will be able to hold on to power only in Mandya. The reservation for the post of the president of the Hassan ZP has been fixed for ST (woman). The JD(S) has no elected member from that community in Hassan.

Dharwad is witnessing an interesting situation. Of the 22 seats in the ZP, the BJP has won 11 and the Congress secured 10. The lone independent is in favour of the Congress. If he does vote in favour of the Congress during the elections on May 4, then there will be a tie – the winner will be declared through a draw of lots.
DH News Service

Hung verdict in 21 urban local bodies 
The BJP has secured a majority in 19 of the 51 upgraded Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) which went to polls recently. The Congress had won a majority in 10 ULBs and the JD(S) in one local body. As many as 21 ULBs witnessed a hung verdict. 

The 19 urban local bodies  in which the BJP secured a majority include 11 town panchayats and 8 town municipal councils. 

6 TPs and 4 TMCs
The 10 urban local bodies in which the Congress secured a majority include 6 town panchayats and 4 town municipal councils. Counting of votes was taken up on Wednesday. 

Of the total 985 seats in the 51 urban local bodies, the BJP won 415 seats, the Congress won 353 seats and the JD(S) won 57 seats, according to the information hosted on the website of the State Election Commission.  

In a statement issued here, state president of the BJP B S Yeddyurappa said that the verdict proved that the people had rejected the Congress party and were making a “positive choice” in favour of the BJP. 

Angry with Congress
Yeddyurappa said people in urban areas were angry with the Congress as infrastructure has not been improved. Roads and  pavements continued to be in miserable condition. 

No serious and sincere efforts had been made to mitigate the drinking water crisis, Yeddyurappa stated.