As one enters Yauatcha, Vasant Kunj, you will hear loud whistling sounds of steam gushing out from the bamboo steamers. The patrons can also see the large kitchen just on their right, from where waitresses pick up orders over the counter. One look at the busy Chinese chefs and cooks, and you heave a high of relief and satisfaction – At last! Delhi does have some authentic Chinese.
 
ADVERTISEMENTOne can also see the cultural variation from most other kitchens of the same sort, none of the chefs will be talking to each other or passing orders loudly to one another. All of them ‘diligently’ stay in their area and seem to know their business.

Yauatcha will never fall short of reviews for its ‘Unlimited Dim Sums’ menu. A new menu which is introduced only for specific customers, but even a non-foodie can wolf down at least 30 
of those, no exaggerations here! The menu has 40 dishes, 15 vegetarian and 15 
non-vegetarian ones.
 
Dim sums are a perfect choice for their variety and even a table for two can share and finish most of the dishes on the menu. Yauatcha dim sums are light on the stomach, and easily steer you away from other options on the menu. Any other Chinese restaurant in Delhi, and there are quite a few, which claims that their ‘wontons or momos’, are dim sums, will face serious competition from Yauatcha’s menu. Each of these dim sums, whether vegetarian or non-vegetarian are deliciously different from one another. Another distinction is that the vegetarian dim sums are not ‘counter-parts’ of the non-vegetarian ones, they are a new dish in themselves. So, one will always feel that they are missing something, by not 
trying out everything from this bar!

The word ‘dim’ literally means ‘point’ and ‘sum’ means ‘heart’. Join the two words and you get ‘point to the heart’. Now that really isn’t the literal meaning, but in Yauatcha you can get creative!

Chicken char sui bun is barbecued chicken and carame-lised onion-wrapper, made from flour. The Spinach roll covering prepared with spinach leaves, the inside which are tucked juicy prawns and water chestnut in black bean sauce. Another main of the delicacy is the Spicy squid cake, which is finely chopped squids and chillies shallow fried in flour wrapping. 

Dim sums are small eats which are either steamed, fried or baked. A wonton is categorised as a part of a dim sum that Yauatcha does not serve. The restaurant has different classical and modern variations of dim sums.

 Some also taste sweet, while some savoury. 

Chicken Char sui bun is sweet, covered by layer of fluffy white bread and comes under the ‘steamed dim sum’ category. Fried turnip cake with vegetables is spicy and pan fried while the Chicken and prawn shui mai is steamed and captures all the juices and flavours within itself. But all 40 of them, which Metrolife managed to dig into, were distinct in taste and appearance.

Though the chilli sauce in oil and pickled carrots were common for all the dishes, some dishes like Chicken wrapped in pakchoi and Poached peking dum-plings had their own gourmet sauces.

Also, people who have a fondness for Chinese cuisine, would know that most of these dishes can be mixed with ‘Indian sauces’ and passed off as ‘authentic’. Metrolife assures you, this restaurant will not cheat you on the quality, the quantity and dining experience. We will 
go as far as to say, Yauatcha is better (if not as good as) restaurants like Zen and Chew in 
Connaught Place.