Supreme Court red flags move to translocate African cheetah in India
 
Dhananjay Mahapatra, TNN
May 9, 2012,

NEW
DELHI: The Supreme Court on Tuesday dealt a blow to the ministry of
environment and forests (MoEF) by staying its ambitious Rs 300 crore
cheetah reintroduction project proposing translocation of the exotic
African species from Namibia to Palpur-Kuno Sanctuary in Madhya
Pradesh. 

The stay order came from a bench of Justices KS
Radhakrishnan and CK Prasad on an application moved by amicus curiae
senior advocate P S Narasimha and advocate P Parameshwar, who alleged
that the project did not have clearance from National Board for
Wildlife (NBWL) and was in the teeth of wild species relocation
guidelines by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources (IUCN). 

Quoting NBW standing committee
member Prerna Bindra, Narasimha said, "She has pointed out that Rs 300
crore have been allocated for the cheetah project, and the cost of each
cheetah is going to be Rs 2 crore, when the total budget for Project
Tiger is only Rs 80 crore for 600 national parks and sanctuaries." 

The
bench issued notice to the MoEF on the application seeking a direction
to the government "to produce before the apex court all relevant
records and decisions relating to introduction of cheetahs, including
NBWL deliberations." 

During the arguments in the ongoing
debate over NBWL's decision approving relocation of surplus lions in
Gir National Park in Gujarat to Palpur Kuno, the court was told that
MoEF has taken a decision to introduce African cheetahs from Namibia
into the same proposed habitat chosen for re-introduction of lions from
Gir. 

Narasimha said, "The decision to introduce African
cheetahs to the same habitat chosen for lions has not been either
placed before the standing committee of the NBWL, nor has been a
considered decision taken in this regard. Only feasibility studies have
been undertaken, no deliberations conducted, and no decision taken by
the Board or its standing committee is available on the public domain."


Terming the project misconceived and in breach of IUCN
guidelines, the amicus said, "The guidelines categorically warn against
introduction of alien or exotic species. The African cheetah obviously
never existed in India. Therefore, it is not a case of intentional
movement of an organism into a part of its native range." 

The
amicus also drew court's attention to the National Wildlife Action Plan
(2002-16), which specifically mentioned reintroduction or finding an
alternative home for many species such as Indian rhinoceros, Asiatic
Wild Buffalo, Great Indian Bustard, Sangai or Brow Antlered deer of
Manipur, Bengal Florical but was completely silent on reintroduction or
introduction of cheetah from Africa to India. 
more details