Move to dehorn rhinos draws condemnation
 

THE ASSAM TRIBUNE
MARCH 28, 2014

GUWAHATI,
March 27 – The Assam Government’s move to dehorn rhinos to tackle the
mounting poaching threat has drawn widespread condemnation from the
international conservation community, including rhino experts.

The conservationists have termed the move as both unethical and impractical besides contributing little to curb poaching.

A
living legend having worked intimately with rhinos for six decades in
Africa, Dr Dame Daphne Sheldrik has termed the move as "disastrous", as
a rhino without a horn would be robbed of its identity and would be
susceptible to various disorders concerning its behaviour and
activities, affecting its survival chances in the long run.

“If
evolution has not removed the horn from rhinos over millennia, it
surely means that the horns are essential to their existence and
survival. Dehorning a rhino is emasculating it, depriving it of its
means of defence and part of their anatomy upon which they devote an
enormous amount of time, shaping, sharpening, etc. It is their
identity. Removing it will dent their confidence to such an extent that
a dehorned bull rhino will never be confident and fertile to breed,”
she said.

Belinda Wright, executive director of Wildlife
Protection Society of India who has battled wildlife crime on the
ground for years, feels that apart from the risks involved to the
animal, "dehorning is not an effective way to curb poaching whereas
intelligence-led enforcement is."

Terming dehorning as a
"temporary band-aid effort" of trimming rhino horns which will again
grow back in a few months, Wright said that if excellent protection
measures were put in place, including intelligence-led enforcement and
a network of informers, that would be the best long-term investment
that Assam could make to preserve its magnificent natural heritage.

According
to Johnny Rodriguez who heads the Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force,
dehorning rhinos was a failed exercise in Zimbabwe, as poachers still
targeted the rhinos to dig out even the small stump of horn that
remained after dehorning. “I believe the best thing to do is to inject
pesticides into the horn. The pesticide does not harm the rhino but if
a human consumes it, it can make him very ill or even kill him,” he
added.

Addressing the media on Wednesday members of the Assam
Environmental NGO Forum – while referring to the views of experts and
conservationists – said that the one-horned rhino was not just Assam’s
national asset but was also ingrained in popular culture and folklore
as a natural heritage since ages, and as such, the heritage species
sans its most distinguishable feature, the horn, was unthinkable and
unacceptable.

read more