‘Respect and protect forest areas. Learn from Africa’ – Valmik Thapar



Thapar
is passionate about tigers. His love affair with the majestic big cat
is over four  decades old. He has written or edited 28 books; his
most recent work titled Saving Wild  India: A Blueprint for
Change, which was released in July 2015. 

Ramesh Ramachandran  2015-09-05, Issue 35 Volume 12 

That,
in essence, is Valmik Thapar’s advice  to the central government
for balancing  environmental concerns with the imperatives of
economic growth and development. Thapar is passionate about tigers. His
love affair with the majestic big cat is over four decades old. He
has written or edited 28 books; his most  recent work titled
Saving Wild India: A Blueprint for Change, which was released in July
2015. Thapar tells Ramesh Ramachandran in an interview that antiquated
laws rooted in India’s colonial past and bureaucratic inertia have not
only paralysed the growth of wildlife tourism but also threatened
precious wilderness with destruction. “Change and reform are not on the
agenda of any government,” Thapar rues but commends the judiciary for
its interventions. “Without them we would be in an impossible
crisis.” Edited Excerpts from an interview 

Could
you cite some specific instances of man-animal conflict which you might
have personally been a witness to and which, you think, should spur the
development-versus-ecology debate?

I think the best
example to give is from 40 years ago when I first went to Ranthambore
in Rajasthan. This was an unknown place with horse carts at the station
to ferry people. The area of the forest was dotted with villagers and
seeing tigers or any wildlife was a near impossibility. This was early
1976: bullock carts roamed the park and agricultural fields made up the
mosaic of forest and village. With single-minded determination, the
then field director resettled 12 critical villages from the core of the
area. He believed this intervention would be a game changer. It was. By
1983, the tigers grew in numbers and both tigers and wildlife became
visible. This attracted visitors. Tourism slowly boomed, boosting the
local economy. From a zero turnover from tourism, this area today
generates, directly and indirectly, anywhere between 300 and 700 crore
a year. Sawai Madhopur, the district town adjacent to Ranthambore,
is the most important destination in the world to see wild tigers. It
has changed forever. You do not need industry or highways here. 

Read more