Powerless Before Power Lines


 
4th September 2018

Whoever
discovered electricity couldn’t have imagined that the transmission
line to carry power to those who need it could someday cause death,
both of humans and animals. Most humans at least know about the dangers
of touching a power transmission line. But animals are blissfully
unaware of the inherent danger. The rapid and inexorable spread in
electrification over the years has seen power lines encroach into
animal habitats, putting animals in grave danger of getting
electrocuted. And no animal is at greater risk from power lines than
the biggest of them all: the elephant. Its mammoth size means it is
more likely to come in contact with live wire and die in the process
than any other animal.

Eight elephant deaths in the last eight
months – and three in a span of 48 hours last week alone – due to
electrocution gives a fair idea about the gravity of the threat that
the pachyderm faces from power lines in Odisha. About 15% of all
elephant deaths in Odisha are due to electrocution, which accounts for
42% of all deaths due to unnatural causes. Here are some more chilling
figures that put the issue in clearer perspective. As many as 170
elephants have been killed in the state due to electrocution since
2000, 93 of them since 2010. More worryingly, 59 of these 93 deaths
were caused by live wire traps set by poachers. (Source: Wildlife
Society of Odisha). Ironically, far from coming down, elephant deaths
actually increased after the government started earmarking funds to fix
sagging power lines since 2010. This can mean one of two things; either
the funds sanctioned remain unused or have not been used for the
purpose for which they were sanctioned in the first place.

The
saddest part of the story is that a vast majority of elephant deaths
are eminently preventable if only the officials are willing and able to
enforce existing rules. Power distribution companies routinely violate
Central Electricity Authority (CEA) guidelines on laying and
maintenance of 11X33 KV transmission/distribution lines in wildlife
habitats while the norm of having overhead power lines at a minimum
height of 5.5 meters from the ground is rarely observed. Sagging lines
are seldom reported to the discoms and are not acted upon even when
they are.Read full story here