Sea turtle Symposium calls for better monitoring and protection of habitats




Goa, April 29th, 2010 - The 30th
Annual Symposium on Sea Turtle Biology and Conservation ended today
with a strong call by participants for increased scientific monitoring
and protection of marine turtle habitats from developmental threats. 

“This
symposium has offered researchers and conservationists across the world
to share notes, both on the latest science on these enigmatic species,
and the latest threats facing them”, said Dr. Kartik Shanker from the
Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, and
President of the International Sea Turtle Society, at a press
conference to mark the concluding day of the symposium. 

The
need to involve local fishing communities in turtle conservation and
developmental decisions was a recurring theme throughout the symposium,
as restrictions on industries and mechanized fishing have the potential
to protect the ecosystem, reduce turtle bycatch and simultaneously
protect the fisheries resources of traditional fishing communities.

“Artisanal
fishers and turtles today face the same threats – rampant coastal
development and industrial fishing operations that respect neither
turtles nor small fishers. The challenge before researchers,
conservationists and political leaders is to institute mechanisms that
ensure the health of the ecosystems which both turtles and fishermen
rely on. It’s important that fishers are made partners in conservation
efforts, and have a say in decisions that could affect their
livelihood,” continued Dr. Shankar.

The symposium also saw the
circulation of a petition backed by a number of Indian conservation
groups calling for a 25 km. buffer between turtles nesting beaches and
any new ports, and a 10 km. ‘no development’ zone around all of India’s
mass nesting beaches.

“It’s clear that today, ports, oil and gas
extraction and coastal industries pose possibly the greatest threat to
turtle habitats. All of Orissa’s mass nesting areas are threatened by
upcoming or proposed ports, and this situation is being repeated in
many other countries,” said internationally renowned turtle biologist
Dr. Jack Frazier of the Smithsonian Institution. “This is clearly
unsustainable and it’s important that both the political and
conservationist establishments act to protect these habitats before it
is too late.”

Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh was extremely
supportive of the symposium, and of marine turtle conservation. The
Government of India’s Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) was
the major sponsor of the symposium, which was organised by the
International Sea Turtle Society, in partnership with the Centre for
Ecological Sciences/Indian Institute of Science (IISc), National Centre
for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Madras Crocodile Bank Trust (MCBT),
Foundation for Ecological Research, Learning and Advocacy (FERAL) and
Dakshin Foundation. The event brought together over 500 individuals
from more than 50 countries across the world, making it one of the
largest international conferences on ecology and conservation to be
held in India.
For further information, visit india.seaturtle.org/symposium2010