Turtles in trouble


THE HINDU
Opinion Editorial
21 May, 2010 Just
seven species make up the known diversity of the world's sea turtles
today, but these evolutionary marvels are encountering a growing number
of threats. The marine reptiles, all of them endangered, have persisted
for millions of years, moving from the sea to land for nesting, and
traversing the great tropical and sub-tropical ocean basins as part of
their life cycles. Yet, as the 30th Annual Symposium on Sea Turtle
Biology and Conservation held recently in Goa has highlighted, the
modern human-dominated era poses grave challenges for their survival.
With each passing year, nesting habitat is degraded or lost, feeding
grounds are polluted, more turtles die in mechanised fisheries, and the
threat of mindless port development looms large. Two environmental
crises in the past few weeks highlight the dangers. The large oil spill
in the Gulf of Mexico has turned the major feeding grounds of the rare
Kemp's Ridley turtle into a veritable death zone. In South Asia, which
hosts five species, thousands of Olive Ridleys making their annual
journey to Orissa's Rushikulya rookery for nesting had to suffer the
effects of a massive oil leak from a ship in the Ganjam port. If a
healthy population of turtles must survive into the future, there is a
need for a new conservation paradigm.

The first-order priority
is to identify and protect the nesting habitat of sea turtles on the
Indian coastline. This can be achieved through a full environmental
audit of all port projects. If the proposals discussed at the Goa
symposium are accurate, no fewer than 331 ports are planned, and
notifications have been issued for over 200. The scale of coastal
development warrants an aggressive conservationist stance on the part
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. To its credit, the MoEF has
supported the International Sea Turtle Society in organising the global
symposium, for the first time in the country. It must now strike a blow
for protection by enforcing environmental norms. For a start, it can
declare the ‘no development zone' of 10 kilometres around turtle
nesting beaches, and the 25-km buffer zone that conservation biologists
suggest. This needs to cover all new port projects and the expansion of
existing ones. A second priority relates to fisheries. While artisanal
low-intensity fishing in sensitive zones does not appear to be
unsustainable, the catchall ferocity of mechanised boats is killing
vast numbers of turtles. A regime of restrictions is, therefore,
justified. This should set seasonal curbs for intensive commercial
fishing, enforce regulations on turtle excluder devices, and control
trawler density. Only determined measures can save these wonderful
creatures.
story link