Conservationists, marine researchers call for tighter control on ports



Demand ‘No port zones’ near eco-critical areas
New Delhi, May 21, 2010Expressing
serious concern over the proliferation of large-scale development in
the vicinity of ecologically critical coastal areas, marine biologists,
sea turtle researchers and conservationists have written to Minister
for Environment and Forests Jairam Ramesh, calling on him to protect
such areas by introducing effective legal safeguards. Earlier today, a
petition to this effect signed by over 300 Indian and international
marine biologists and conservationists(1) was handed over the Minister
by Belinda Wright of the Wildlife Protection Society of India and Dr.
Kartik Shanker of the Centre for Ecological Sciences.

The
petition is backed by eleven national organizations (2) and asks that
no ports be permitted within 25 km of turtle mass-nesting areas and
other important feeding, migratory and refuge habitats. The other key
demand is for a no-development zone for all industrial activities for
at least a 10 km radius around the mass nesting beaches in Orissa. This
concern was overwhelmingly expressed at the recently concluded 30th
Annual Sea Turtle Symposium held in Goa at the end of April, which
brought together the world’s leading international marine researchers
and conservationists.

Opposition to the controversial Dhamra
port in Orissa has galvanized India’s conservation community into
addressing the potential environmental threats that ports and other
coastal infrastructure projects pose. “Unbelievable as it is, Dhamra is
just the tip of the ice berg: there are currently ports proposed at all
of Orissa’s mass-nesting sites – Gahirmatha, Rushikulya and Devi. If
the Centre does not step in, Orissa’s state government will be signing
the death warrant for these habitats,” said Belinda Wright of the
Wildlife Protection Society of India.

The call for tighter
controls on port locations comes at a time when Central and state
governments are actively pushing the construction of ports all along
India’s coast. Over 300 ports have been proposed along the coast of
mainland India (3), and over 200 have already been notified.

Dr.
Kartik Shanker, turtle biologist at the Centre of Ecological Sciences,
Indian Institute of Science and outgoing President of the International
Sea Turtle Society said, “Fragile coastal ecosystems and artisanal
fishing communities today face the same threat in terms of rampant
destructive development. The challenge before government and Indian
society at large is to institute mechanisms that ensure the health of
the ecosystems which sea turtles, other species and fishermen rely on.”

“The
recent oil spills at Gopalapur port near Rushikulya and near Paradip
Port in 2009 are wake up calls. The ecological disaster unfolding from
the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico is an example of
how badly things can go wrong(4). If we continue to locate industrial
infrastructure in ecologically critical areas, we will sacrifice what
is left of our marine biodiversity,” said Ashish Fernandes, Oceans
Campaigner, Greenpeace India. “Minister Ramesh’s response to this
petition will reflect his commitment to regulate coastal development
more effectively. The consequences of inaction are empty seas and empty
futures for our coastal populations” he concluded.

Notes to Editor:

1.    The petition is available at http://greenpeace.in/turtle/docs/seeking-protection-of-indias-marine-turtle-habitats
2.   
The petition was supported by the following organizations: Bombay
Natural History Society, Conservation Action Trust, Dakshin,
Greenpeace, Kalpavriksh, Madras Crocodile Bank Trust, Reefwatch Marine
Conservation, Sanctuary Asia, WWF India, Wildlife Protection Society of
India and Wildlife Society of Orissa.
3.   
The Working Group Report on Shipping and Inland Water Transport for the
Eleventh Five Year Plan, Planning Commission http://planningcommission.gov.in/aboutus/committee/wrkgrp11/wg11_ship.pdf
4.    Refer to http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/press-center/reports4/impacts-gulf-oil-spill

For Further Information please contact:

1.    Belinda Wright, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection Society of India, 
      +91-98111 90690, belinda@wpsi-india.org

2.    Ashish Fernandes, Oceans Campaigner, Greenpeace India, 
      +91-9980199380, ashish.fernandes@greenpeace.org

3.    Dr. Kartik Shanker, Past President, International Sea Turtle Society and Faculty, 
      Indian Institute of Science, +91-99455 65935, kshanker@ces.iisc.ernet.in