Five tigers and a sloth 
                        bear killed 
                        
                        6th February, 2003
                         A tigress and her 
                          four cubs were electrocuted to death near Sipna River 
                          in the Harisal region of Melghat Tiger Reserve in the 
                          State of Maharashtra. Though the bodies were discovered 
                          on 3rd February it is believed that the tragic death 
                          had actually taken place four days earlier. The 
                          rotting bodies of two of the cubs were found dead next 
                          to the tigress while the other two were found at distances 
                          of 80 and 100 feet. All five bodies have been sent for 
                          post mortem. 
                        The escalating and widespread problem 
                          of poaching by electrocution using power lines running 
                          though the forest has worried conservationist throughout 
                          India for over a decade. Detailed records have been 
                          maintained by WPSI for all electrocution cases reported 
                          since 1990. The records show as many as 202 cases, most 
                          of which involved endangered species including tigers, 
                          leopards, elephants, rhinos and lions. Maharashtra reported 
                          the highest with 55 cases. 
                        In another shocking incident in Maharashtra 
                          a sloth bear ensnared in a steel trap was found in Bor 
                          Wildlife Sanctuary, on 2nd February 2003. The WPSI team 
                          came to know of the occurrence and rushed to the site 
                          with forest officials. The animal was found dead with 
                          two of its claws and toes caught in a trap set in a 
                          middle of the road. 
                        The event took place on the main forest 
                          road though Khapakhori in Bor Wildlife Sanctuary. According 
                          to the veterinarian the bear had died two days ago. 
                          It is inconceivable how an ensnared animal could have 
                          gone undetected for days on a main forest road. Evidence 
                          from the area around the trap shows how the bear painstakingly 
                          struggled for some time to free itself. The forearm 
                          of the bear was broken and the shoulder dislocated. 
                        
                        The metal trap was attached to a three-foot 
                          long chain. This was fixed to a pole that was buried 
                          three and a half feet into the ground. It took six men 
                          to open the trap and free the dead animal from it. Such 
                          traps are usually used to poach tigers and have been 
                          developed by Bahellias from the Katni and Jabalpur areas 
                          in Madhya Pradesh.