Endangered bird meat 
                        dinner 
                        
                        6th February, 2003
                         It has been alleged 
                          that the menu served at the birthday dinner, organized 
                          for IAS officer Priyanabrata Patnaik at the Bhubhaneswar 
                          club on the 17th January 2003, included endangered waterfowl 
                          meat. A long list of influential individuals from the 
                          bureaucratic, political and business arena and some 
                          journalists attended the dinner.
                        The accusation suggests that nearly 
                          100 birds, of species protected under Indian law, were 
                          purchased from poachers, who operate around Chilka Lake, 
                          to serve at the dinner party. The species that were 
                          apparently on the menu included gadwalls, shoevellers, 
                          wigeons, pochards and pintails. Chilka Lake is a designated 
                          Ramsar site of international importance. The prevalence 
                          of local poaching, fueled by markets like that in Bhubhaneswar, 
                          continues to deplete the rich bird life at this lake. 
                        
                        Renowned conservationist and the State 
                          Coordinator of the Indian Bird Conservation Network, 
                          Biswajit Mohanty has demanded a CBI inquiry to identify 
                          the people responsible. Presently, the Chief Wildlife 
                          Warden of the state has been commissioned by the Orissa 
                          government to look into the allegations. However, it 
                          is felt that only an agency independent of the state 
                          government would be able to do justice to the inquiry 
                          which involves the state’s bureaucracy. 
                        This dinner is not the first of its 
                          kind. A few years ago a high profile dinner in Andhra 
                          Pradesh had faced similar accusations.