Domestic tusker targeted 
                        by poachers 
                        
                        6th February, 2003
                         In a shocking incident 
                          a domestic tusker was killed and an attempt was made 
                          to extract its tusks in Kalady, Kerala. The gruesome 
                          killing was reported on the morning of 2nd February 
                          2003. 
                        Preliminary investigations suggest 
                          that the tusker, which was tied only a short distance 
                          away from the main road was, administered a potent poison 
                          concealed in a pineapple. The poison instantly killed 
                          the large animal leaving the poachers time to hack off 
                          its forehead and trunk in an attempt to obtain the tusks. 
                          However, the movement of a lorry carrying stacks of 
                          hay in the early hours on Sunday seemed to have alarmed 
                          the culprits who left the mutilated body of the tusker 
                          and disappeared. The driver of the lorry discovered 
                          the horrific killing and informed the police. It is 
                          believed that professionals carried out the job and 
                          that the poison used was Potassium Cyanide. 
                        The 40-year-old tusker named Arun Parameswaran, 
                          reputed to have the largest tusks in the district, was 
                          owned by the State president of the All-Kerala Elephant 
                          Owners Association. He was a regular attraction during 
                          temple festivities and was much loved thanks to his 
                          docile and friendly nature.
                        This appalling incident is an indicator 
                          of both the audacity of poachers, and the profitability 
                          of ivory trade. It is perhaps the first recorded case 
                          of its kind. Targeting domestic tuskers has been unheard 
                          of in the past. In an incident with some similarity 
                          poachers in October 2000 killed a tigress inside the 
                          zoo in Hyderabad. 
                        Selective poaching of male elephants 
                          for ivory has over the years skewed the sex ration in 
                          favour of females in most parts of south India.