Forest guard killed 
                        in Gahirmatha 
                        
                        11th February, 2003
                         In a shocking incident 
                          that took place on Saturday evening, three forest guards 
                          were abducted by the crewmembers of two gill-netters 
                          that had been seized inside the Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary 
                          for illegal fishing. One of the forest guards, Shyam 
                          Singh, resisted and was pushed overboard. Shyam Singh, 
                          who was from Keonjhar, could not swim. His body was 
                          washed ashore on the beaches of Babubali Island on Monday 
                          afternoon.
                        The incident began when a forest patrol 
                          boat from Rajnagar Mangrove Wildlife Division intercepted 
                          the gill-netters inside Gahirmatha on the evening of 
                          8th February. The seized boats were brought to Babubali 
                          Island, where most of the forest team disembarked and 
                          went to their tents. Three forest guards were left to 
                          watch over the seized gill-netters and their crew of 
                          thirteen. Later in the evening, the guards were overpowered 
                          by the crewmembers and abducted. One boat travelled 
                          towards Dhamra, were forest guard Bamdev Pradhan was 
                          released. The second boat, with forest guards Sankarsan 
                          Lenka and Shyam Singh on board, moved towards the Balasore 
                          coast. Shyam Singh, who put up some resistance to the 
                          attack, was thrown overboard as the boat headed out 
                          to sea. Late in the night, Sankarsan Lenka was asked 
                          to disembark in the shallow waters near Bhadrak coast. 
                          He was able to find his way to the beach through chest 
                          deep waters. 
                        Our heartfelt sympathies go out to 
                          Shyam Singh’s family and friends. This shocking 
                          incident is also a major setback to the Orissa Forest 
                          Department’s turtle conservation efforts and Operation 
                          Kachhapa. Biswajit Mohanty, the Project Coordinator 
                          of Operation Kachhapa - WPSI’s sea turtle conservation 
                          programme, has left for Ramnagar with the Chief Wildlife 
                          Warden. We will be supporting the funeral arrangements 
                          for Shyam Singh and making an ex gratia payment to his 
                          family.