Turtle Mass Nesting 
                        Begins In Orissa 
                        
                        11th March, 2003
                         The much-awaited 
                          sea turtle mass nesting finally began in Orissa on the 
                          evening of 9th March at Rushikulya nesting beach near 
                          Kantiagada village. According to estimates by Operation 
                          Kachhapa field staff about 50,000 Olive Ridley sea turtles 
                          climbed ashore to lay their eggs on a one-kilometer 
                          stretch of beach at the Rushikulya river mouth. The 
                          mass nesting or arribada continued into the morning 
                          hours and thousands of female turtles were seen laying 
                          their eggs upto 8.00 a.m. During the last few days there 
                          had been sporadic nesting of 100 to 300 turtles a day 
                          on this beach.
                        "News of the turtle nesting has 
                          come as a great relief to conservationists", said 
                          Belinda Wright, Project Director of WPSI's Operation 
                          Kachhapa. "There was no mass nesting in Orissa 
                          during the previous turtle season of 2001-02 at any 
                          of the three important nesting sites of Nasi Islands 
                          in Gahirmatha, Devi River mouth and Rushikulya River 
                          mouth."
                        A 
                          few days ago, there was also significant nesting of 
                          turtles at Pentha beach in the Gahirmatha Marine Sanctuary 
                          when about 10,000 turtles nested there over a three-day 
                          period from 5 to 7 March. No arribada has as yet has 
                          taken place at the Nasi Islands in Gahirmatha, which 
                          is world famous for this rare natural phenomenon.
                        Operation Kachhapa field watchers have 
                          been deployed to assist the Forest Department in counting 
                          the nesting turtles as well as to protect the eggs from 
                          natural predators such as dogs, jackals, wild boar, 
                          hyenas, crows, eagles, and gulls. Last night observers 
                          noticed that a number of the turtles that climbed ashore 
                          to nest at Rushikuya, were individuals that had been 
                          tagged in earlier years nesting in Gahirmatha.
                        Due to uncontrolled illegal mechanized 
                          fishing - particularly by trawlers from Andhra Pradesh 
                          - in prohibited zones of Rushikulya River, more than 
                          2,235 dead Olive Ridleys have been counted on the Chilika 
                          mouth to Bahuda river stretch during the current turtle 
                          season (from November 2002 to February 2003). The Rushikulya 
                          River mouth nesting-beach faces an additional threat 
                          from the proposed Crude Oil Terminal project of Bharat 
                          Petroleum Corporation Limited at Kantiagada village. 
                          If this project becomes a reality the Rushikuya turtle 
                          mass-nesting site will be lost forever. 
                        Note: 

                          A 17-minute film on CD "The Killing Fields: 
                          Orissa's Appalling Turtle Crisis" by Shekar 
                          Dattatri is available with the Wildlife Protection Society 
                          of India (WPSI). Please contact us at the address given 
                          below if you would like a copy.