Two Tiger Skins Seized 
                        in Andhra Pradesh 
                        
                        March, 2003
                         In yet another seizure, 
                          two tiger skins were seized and two men arrested with 
                          the assistance of WPSI personnel in Andhra Pradesh on 
                          the night of 15th February. This takes the tally of 
                          reported tiger deaths in the first 46 days of the year 
                          to a shocking 14. 
                        The seizure was carried 
                          out by the Surveillance 
                          Cell of the Forest Department from Hyderabad, and took 
                          place near Kauthala in Kagaznagar tahsil of Adilabad 
                          district near the state border with Maharashtra. The 
                          information for the case was unearthed by a WPSI field 
                          investigator and a WPSI staff member along with Assistant 
                          Conservator Q.M. Khan carried out the undercover operation.
                        Poaching in the Karjeli 
                          and Bijjur ranges, close to Chaprala Wildlife Sanctuary, 
                          along the state border has been on the rise. Due to 
                          the presence of naxallite insurgents, forest 
                          personnel have recently faced murderous assaults during 
                          encounters with poachers and have had to cutback patrolling. 
                          Both the men arrested on Saturday have faced charges 
                          of poaching and naxallite activity in the past.
                        It is interesting 
                          to note that one of the tiger skins had been peeled 
                          off like a sock. An unknown buyer, who failed to collect 
                          the skin, had apparently put in a specific order so 
                          that the skin could be mounted as a trophy. The accused 
                          alleged that four such orders had already been delivered.