215 Kg of Raw Shahtoosh 
                        Seized 
                        
                        6th April, 2003
                         The Delhi State Wildlife 
                          Department seized 215 kg of raw shahtoosh wool on 6 
                          April 2003 from a truck that had arrived from Pithoragarh 
                          in Uttranachal. The truck was carrying 132 sacks of 
                          which 11 contained shahtoosh while the rest had sheep 
                          wool. According to the officials the truck was on its 
                          way to Majnu Ka Tila in Delhi. It had halted in Haldwani 
                          where some sacks were unloaded. Three persons, including 
                          the driver, have been arrested and attempts are being 
                          made to get more information on the delivery made in 
                          Haldwani.
                        The shahtoosh seized represented the 
                          killing of about three thousand Tibetan Antelope. The 
                          species is classified as an endangered species and is 
                          listed under Appendix I of CITES (the United Nation’s 
                          Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
                          of Wild Fauna and Flora). It is also listed under Schedule 
                          I of The Wild Life (Protection) Act in India, and as 
                          a Class I protected animal in China’s Wildlife 
                          Protection Law.
                        It is interesting to note that Pithoragarh 
                          on the Indo-Nepal border and its corresponding areas 
                          on the Nepal side have had some important wildlife seizures 
                          in the recent times, especially those of leopard skins. 
                          Investigations have revealed that tiger and leopard 
                          skins and bones are bartered for raw shahtoosh wool 
                          on the Indo-Tibetan border.