Law Enforcement Workshop 
                        in Shimoga 
                        
                        20th April, 2003
                         WPSI conducted a 
                          law enforcement workshop in Shimoga, Karnataka, on the 
                          15 and 16 of March 2003 in collaboration with the Forest 
                          Department. The aim was to update the Forest Department, 
                          the Police Department, public prosecutors and Honorary 
                          Wildlife Wardens on The Wild Life (Protection) Act (WPA) 
                          and share WPSI’s knowledge of the illegal trade 
                          in wildlife products and experience in using wildlife 
                          law in the courts. Many such workshops have been conducted 
                          though out India by WPSI over the last three years.
                        The 
                          Shimoga workshop was attended by 128 participants. Sessions 
                          Judge K. N. Phaneendra inaugurated the workshop and 
                          called upon the enforcement agencies to step up their 
                          activities in light of the recent rise in wildlife crime. 
                          He asked all forest and police officials to follow wildlife 
                          cases diligently and ensure that the guilty are brought 
                          to book. The Judge also pointed out that errors in following 
                          procedures can allow criminals to escape the clutches 
                          of the law and that this must prevented at all costs.
                        Belinda Wright held the first session 
                          with an illustrated talk on the illegal wildlife trade 
                          and enforcement. This was followed by a long session 
                          by Sudhir Misra on the use of the WPA. The presence 
                          of the Principal Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Karnataka, 
                          Mr. Chakrabarti was very encouraging for the Forest 
                          staff and at the end of the workshop some lively and 
                          constructive discussions were held between field level 
                          staff and the PCCF.
                        As reflected by the feedback received, 
                          the workshop was greatly appreciated by the many participants. 
                          They felt that such workshops were essential to train 
                          them in the legal nitty-gritty of legal prosecution 
                          and filing of complains, and that the resource material 
                          that they had received would give them the tools to 
                          enforce the law. The involvement of the public prosecutors 
                          was also extremely productive. It is hoped that the 
                          workshop has helped create a better understanding and 
                          co-ordination between the forest officials and the public 
                          prosecutors, which is essential for the success of any 
                          prosecution.