Gas facility for Van 
                        Gujjars 
                        
                        23rd April, 2003
                         In continuation of 
                          its support to the Van Gujjars who have relocated from 
                          Rajaji National Park, WPSI part sponsored 32 cooking 
                          stoves and LPG gas cylinders for Gujjar families in 
                          Pathri Colony, Uttranchal. The organisation had offered 
                          to bear fifty percent of the cost to encourage the Van 
                          Gujjars to use this facility. The distribution was carried 
                          out on 1 April in the presence of Mr. Samir Sinha, Director 
                          Rajaji National Park. The function provided a forum 
                          for a lively meeting with the Field Director, the WPSI 
                          team, and the Gujjars to discuss a number of relevant 
                          issues. Participants 
                          at the meeting were encouraged to let the women from 
                          their families come forwards and take part in community 
                          activities. The Field Director pointed out that the 
                          objective of the cooking gas facility was not just to 
                          minimize fuel wood collection, but also to help improve 
                          the lifestyle of the Gujjars, especially the women who 
                          otherwise spend many hours on wood collection.
                        In a heart warming conversation with 
                          the WPSI team an elder of the community stated, “We 
                          are old people, we have lived in the forest all our 
                          lives. We are not blind…we can see that we need 
                          the forests. If by learning this trade [cooking with 
                          gas] we can help save the forest, it is good. This is 
                          our nation…the nation’s good is good for 
                          all and the nation’s loss is a loss for all. If 
                          the forests go…there can be drought…there 
                          will be no rain…we can even go blind. The wind 
                          is filtered through it…fresh air…healthy 
                          air. We have lived in the forest and we love the forest 
                          more than you.”