Shahtoosh Seized in 
                        Delhi 
                        
                        20th May, 2003
                        Acting on information 
                          supplied by Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), 
                          the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) seized 45 
                          shahtoosh shawls including one seven metre length of 
                          uncut shahtoosh fabric and two shahtoosh kurtas in a 
                          raid conducted in Delhi on Tuesday, 13 May 2003. Bashir 
                          Ahmed Mir has been arrested and taken into Police Custody 
                          for establishing the source of supply and identification 
                          of other associates in the trade. 
                        WPSI files 
                          Shahtoosh Petition in Supreme Court 
                        The WPSI has filed a Special Leave Petition in the 
                          Honourable Supreme Court of India against the Division 
                          Bench order of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court passed 
                          on 10 February 2003. The judgement by the Division Bench 
                          was a big disappointment, as it reversed many of the 
                          advances made in the battle to save the Tibetan Antelope. 
                          Although, the judgement noted the fact that the animal 
                          was protected under law, it also stated that the trade 
                          in shahtoosh should not be banned considering the ‘human 
                          aspects’ involved. 
                        Background Note 
                          on Shahtoosh Petition
                        WPSI initially filed a Public Interest Petition in 
                          the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in April 1998. The 
                          petition requested the State Government to ban the manufacture 
                          and sale of shahtoosh shawls, and to abide by national 
                          and international laws. On 1 May 2000, the Jammu and 
                          Kashmir High Court ordered the State Government to “enforce 
                          the law against those who are carrying on business and 
                          trade in contravention of Section 43 of the State Wildlife 
                          Act and provisions of CITES.” However, the order 
                          fell short of a complete ban and WPSI appealed the order 
                          on 30 May 2003. While the appeal was still in court, 
                          the Jammu and Kashmir Government finally amended its 
                          Wildlife (Protection) Act in August 2002 and placed 
                          the Tibetan antelope in Schedule I of the Act, banning 
                          any trade in shahtoosh, including the manufacture of 
                          shawls. The Division Bench order of 10 February 2003, 
                          which was in responses to WPSI’s appeal, was particularly 
                          regrettable, and WPSI has now been compelled to approach 
                          the Supreme Court of India.