CEC Hearing on Encroachment 
                        Inside Bhoramdeo Wildlife Sanctuary 
                        
                        5th June, 2003
                        Bhoramdeo Wildlife 
                          Sanctuary was created in Chattisgarh in 2001. Early 
                          this year, Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) 
                          received information that massive encroachment had occurred 
                          inside this sanctuary. The matter was of special concern 
                          since the Sanctuary area adjoins the buffer zone of 
                          the world famous Kanha Tiger Reserve in Madhya Pradesh, 
                          and is an important corridor for wildlife. 
                        The first hand information and photographs collected 
                          by WPSI revealed a shocking scenario - thousands of 
                          trees had been felled over the last six months for the 
                          construction of a canal inside the sanctuary. A large 
                          area had also been cleared for a dam that would divert 
                          the waters of the Sakri River to villages outside the 
                          Sanctuary. Villagers, instigated by the local political 
                          establishment, carried out these activities.
                        On 19 May 2003, WPSI filed a complaint before the Central 
                          Empowered Committee, which has been set up by the Supreme 
                          Court of India to hear and speedily dispose of cases 
                          relating to environmental issues. The first hearing 
                          before the CEC was on 4 June 2003.
                        The CEC has taken serious note of the encroachment 
                          inside Bhoramdeo. It has issued notices to all the respondents 
                          in the case, including the District Magistrate, Principal 
                          Secretary of Forests, Chattisgarh, and the Chief Secretary 
                          of Chattisgarh, asking them to explain why conservation 
                          laws and Supreme Court orders have been repeatedly violated 
                          inside the Sanctuary. The CEC has also asked the Chattisgarh 
                          Government to explain why a water source was being directed 
                          away from a Sanctuary, without the permission of the 
                          Forest Department as required by The Wild Life (Protection) 
                          Act.
                        The counsel for the Ministry of Environment 
                          and Forests, Mr. A. D. N. Rao, was quick in recognising 
                          the seriousness of this issue and accepted a notice 
                          asking the Ministry to be a party to the case.
                        The next date for hearing will be on 10 July 2003.