CEC Hears WPSI’s 
                        Kaziranga Petition 
                        
                        28th August, 2003
                        On 19 August 2003, 
                          the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) heard a petition 
                          filed by Wildlife Protection Society of India on encroachments 
                          in the six Additions to Kaziranga National Park.
                        Situated on the flood plains of the 
                          Brahmaputra, Kaziranga has suffered considerable loss 
                          of land due to riverbank erosion along its northern 
                          boundary. The six Additions, created by the government 
                          of Assam to offset the loss of land due to riverbank 
                          erosion, provide vital habitats and corridors that act 
                          as escape routes to higher ground for Kaziranga’s 
                          mega herbivores during the Brahmaputra’s annual 
                          flooding.
                        However, these Additions face an uncertain 
                          future due to persistent litigation in the Guwahati 
                          High Court by the encroachers. 
                        WPSI’s petition highlighted the 
                          damage that continuous illegal grazing and encroachments 
                          had caused to the fragile and unique ecosystem of Kaziranga 
                          and its Additions. It prayed that the six Additions 
                          to the Park be cleared of encroachments. Photographs 
                          and field reports sent by WPSI staff were used to point 
                          out the ecological significance and specific threat 
                          faced by each Addition.
                        Appreciating the gravity of the matter, 
                          the CEC issued notices to all the respondents, including 
                          the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and Chief 
                          Secretary of Assam. 
                        In recognition of Kaziranga’s 
                          status as a UNESCO World Natural Heritage Site, Mr. 
                          A. D. N. Rao, Counsel for the Ministry of Environment 
                          and Forests, agreed to formulate a legal strategy for 
                          the settlement of claims in Guwahati High Court. The 
                          Ministry is the nodal agency for UNESCO in India.