Tiger Electrocution 
                        near Bandhavgargh 
                        
                        7th November, 2003
                        On 6 November, three 
                          days after the recovery of the dead male tiger near 
                          Damna village on the edge of Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, 
                          the Forest Department of Shadhol Forest Circle have 
                          arrested seven villagers who have been accused of the 
                          crime. It is now clear that the tiger died in an electrocution 
                          trap laid by the poachers for bush meat. The bamboo 
                          pegs recovered from the scene have 3 to 4 burn marks 
                          on them which clearly show that this was not the first 
                          time they had been used to electrocute animals.
                        Trip records obtained by a Wildlife 
                          Protection Society of India (WPSI) field officer from 
                          the local electrical substation show that there was 
                          a massive trip at 8.40 pm on the night of 29 October. 
                          This most likely indicates the time of the electrocution 
                          of the tiger. This was the only electrical trip at the 
                          substation between 22 October and 3 November, when the 
                          tiger was discovered. 
                        WPSI would like to congratulate the 
                          Forest Department on their swift and effective investigations. 
                          The Department is presently carrying out an intensive 
                          search for the large male tiger known as “B1”, 
                          who is suspected to be the victim of this tragic electrocution 
                          case. 
                        “This huge male tiger was one 
                          of the most photographed tigers in the world. He was 
                          a particularly handsome and bold animal and if it his 
                          him this is a loss of unimaginable proportions, both 
                          to Bandhavgarh and the world”, says Belinda Wright, 
                          Executive Director of WPSI.