OTTERS & CRANES; 
                        WETLAND CONSERVATION EVENTS 
                        
                        11th December, 2003
                        The Wildlife Protection 
                          Society of India (WPSI) and the British High Commission 
                          co-hosted the premiere of a film “…And Then 
                          There Were None”, in New Delhi on 5 December 2003. 
                          The film, which was supported by a grant to WPSI from 
                          the British High Commission’s Devolved Environment 
                          Project Fund, was produced and directed by award winning 
                          filmmaker Syed Fayaz.
                        “…And Then There Were None” 
                          investigates the rampant poaching of otters in India. 
                          These playful, inquisitive animals are being persecuted 
                          for their highly prized pelts, which are smuggled out 
                          of India to be made into fur coats and garment trimmings. 
                          The film documents hunting by professional poachers 
                          who use trained dogs to flush out otters from their 
                          wetland refuges, as well as the illegal trade in otter 
                          skins.
                        WPSI has been investigating and documenting 
                          the poaching of otters and the illegal trade in their 
                          skins since its inception in 1994. We have found that 
                          the trade in otter skins is closely linked to the trade 
                          in tiger and leopard skins and body parts; most big 
                          seizures involve all three species. Although the otter 
                          and its habitat are protected under national and international 
                          laws and conventions the species has been wiped out 
                          from many areas, particularly as a result of the wanton 
                          destruction of its wetland habitat.
                        In her address to the packed hall at 
                          the Habitat Centre, Belinda Wright, Executive Director 
                          of WPSI, said, "we are extremely concerned about 
                          the escalating poaching of otters and the illegal trade 
                          in their skins. This is also a serious environmental 
                          issue. The otters' wetland habitats are being drained 
                          and destroyed throughout the country, usually because 
                          their vital importance to the region is not understood.''
                        On 28 November, WPSI co-hosted with 
                          WWF-India the launch of the Children’s International 
                          Art Exchange India 2003-2004. The launch was accompanied 
                          by an exhibition of paintings with the theme “Crane 
                          Bird of Peace” from children around the world. 
                          The well-known ornithologist, Dr. George Archibald, 
                          co-founder and chairman of the International Crane Foundation 
                          (ICF), inaugurated the exhibition and gave a lively 
                          talk on the history of crane conservation.
                        The paintings will be displayed at 
                          18 venues across India. In the second phase of the programme 
                          painting contests will be organised; the artwork from 
                          these will then travel, via ICF, to other Children’s 
                          International Art Exchanges around the world. The aim 
                          of the programme is to increase awareness among children 
                          and adults of the importance of saving the cranes’ 
                          wetland habitats. 
                        ICF and the Indian Cranes and Wetlands 
                          Working Group (ICWWG), a project of WPSI, is coordinating 
                          the Art Exchange programme in India.
                        

                          Note: 

                          Please let us know if you would like to copies of the 
                          otter film, “…And Then There Were None”. 
                          The film is available on CD at Rs. 250/- each (plus 
                          postage).