Sansar Chand Still 
                        in Jail 
                        
                        Thanks to the diligent 
                          work of Mr Hemant Priyadarshy, the Superintendent of 
                          Police Railways in Ajmer, the notorious wildlife trader, 
                          Sansar Chand, is still lounging in jail. 
                        Chand's lawyers had earlier tried to 
                          use the tactic that the police had no authority to investigate 
                          a wildlife matter. Within 24 hours, WPSI couriered a 
                          package to the investigating police officer with a detailed 
                          legal opinion from an advocate of the Supreme Court 
                          of India on how The Wild Life (Protection) Act did, 
                          in fact, allow the police to arrest, detain and search 
                          a suspect for a wildlife crime. WPSI also supplied details 
                          on every pending case against Chand throughout India, 
                          along with a copy of his earlier conviction, and the 
                          judgment of the Supreme Court that had allowed the CBI 
                          - and therefore by inference any police agency - to 
                          investigate wildlife crimes. The papers were placed 
                          before the Additional Chief Railway Magistrate, Ajmer, 
                          who rejected Sansar's bail application.
                        The Wildlife Protection Society of 
                          India (WPSI) is currently assisting the prosecution 
                          of Chand in several states, including eight cases in 
                          Delhi, where he is has been accused of wildlife crimes. 
                          The case in Ajmer involves the seizure of two leopard 
                          skins that were seized from a man who claimed that he 
                          had been paid Rs. 5,000 by Chand to transport the skins. 
                          Chand has also applied for anticipatory bail in another 
                          case in Udaipur. The High Court of Rajasthan rejected 
                          the application, calling him 'the Veerappan of North 
                          India'. 
                        It's bad news all round for Chand. 
                          In September this year he filed a Special Leave Petition 
                          in the Supreme Court of India to appeal the High Court 
                          of Rajasthan's judgment. WPSI's lawyers were in court 
                          to hear Chand's advocate, Mr. Anil Sehgal, argue that 
                          anticipatory bail should be granted since he was ready 
                          and willing to cooperate with the investigating authorities. 
                          The Honorable Supreme Court stated that they "saw 
                          no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment", 
                          and dismissed Chand's Petition. 
                        At the same time, the wildlife traders 
                          who Sansar procures skins from, are on the run with 
                          pressure from the enforcement authorities building up.
                        A few weeks ago another notorious wildlife 
                          trader, Sidhe Singh, died in jail in Chadrapur, Maharashtra. 
                          Singh hailed from Katni in Madhya Pradesh and was an 
                          accused in several wildlife cases in central and southern 
                          India.