WPSI FILES PETITION ON POACHING BY 
                        ELECTROCUTION 
                        
                        7th January, 2004
                        On 6 January 2004, 
                          the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) of the Supreme 
                          Court of India heard a 59-page petition filed by the 
                          Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) on the electrocution 
                          of wildlife, which is now widespread throughout India. 
                          In the year 2003 alone, 28 elephants and six tigers 
                          died due to electrocution. Convinced of the gravity 
                          of the problem, the CEC asked the respondents - which 
                          include the Ministry of Power, the Central Electricity 
                          Authority, the Ministry of Environment and Forests and 
                          the various State Electricity Boards and Forest Departments 
                          - to work out a solution in collaboration with WPSI.
                        WPSI submitted its petition to the 
                          CEC in November 2003. The petition gave a state and 
                          species wise mortality count, showing that the commonest 
                          victims were highly endangered species such as the elephant, 
                          the tiger, the leopard and the Indian rhinoceros. Detailed 
                          information on poaching methods and video evidence of 
                          poaching were filed, along with recommendations to solve 
                          the problem.
                        Alarmed by the rising number of reports 
                          of animals being electrocuted, WPSI started a thorough 
                          and detailed nationwide investigation in 2001. The data 
                          compilation and analysis revealed a dreadful scenario 
                          - over the past 13 years, more than 257 wild animals 
                          had been killed by electrocution.
                        Most of these deaths were preventable. 
                          Deliberate poaching - stealing electricity from an overhead 
                          line by hooking a wire and laying a live line across 
                          an animal track - can be stopped by installing relays 
                          that trip the line if it is tapped. Accidental electrocution 
                          can also be reduced if transmission lines avoid major 
                          animal migration routes.
                        At the hearing, the atmosphere was 
                          one of consensus. The respondents all agreed that the 
                          issue was indeed serious. The CEC pointed out that the 
                          preliminary solution be worked out by the next hearing 
                          in six weeks time.