Another Tiger Poached in Bandhavgarh 

                        
                        31st January, 2004
                        Poachers electrocuted 
                          yet another tiger to death near Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve 
                          on 20 January 2004. The electric trap was set in a nallah 
                          opposite the Dhamokhar Range Office in the Umaria Territorial 
                          Division of Shahdol Forest Circle. Since April 2003 
                          Bandhavgarh is known to have has lost five tigers. 
                        According to preliminary 
                          information received by the Wildlife Protection Society 
                          of India (WPSI), the poachers killed and skinned the 
                          tigress on 20 January and sold the skin to Iqbal Ahmed 
                          of Amlai village. However, the poachers then had a dispute 
                          over the distribution of the money made from the sale. 
                          On 25 January, one dissatisfied gang member reported 
                          the incident to the Forest Department in the Territorial 
                          Division. Allegedly, his report was ignored, despite 
                          the fact that barely three months ago a male tiger known 
                          as B1 was similarly electrocuted this area. The poacher 
                          then volunteered the information to the Field Director, 
                          Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve, who sent out a team under 
                          the leadership of the Assistant Conservator of Forests 
                          to nab the poachers.
                        The poachers were arrested from their village on 26 
                          January and were transferred to the custody of Dhamokhar 
                          Range Office. Next morning, two of the poachers managed 
                          to escape. One of them was later rearrested; the other, 
                          Naresh Yadav of Kharahadand, is still absconding. At 
                          present, the Forest Department has seven people in custody, 
                          including Iqbal Ahmed. However, the main accused in 
                          the poaching case and Iqbal Ahmed’s partner are 
                          still absconding with the skin.  
                        In 2001, WPSI started investigating poaching by electrocution, 
                          and presently has records of more than 257 wild animals 
                          that have been electrocuted. In the year 2003 alone, 
                          28 elephants and six tigers died due to electrocution. 
                          On 6 January 2004 WPSI filed a petition before the Central 
                          Empowered Committee (CEC) of the Supreme Court of India 
                          on the issue of poaching by electrocution throughout 
                          India.