Tibet Wildlife Seizure 
                        - India Confirmed as Source of Skins 
                        
                        18th February, 2004
                        The Wildlife Protection 
                          Society of India (WPSI) yesterday received confirmation 
                          that all the skins that were seized in Angren County, 
                          China, in October 2003, originated and were smuggled 
                          directly from India. The seizure by the Chinese authorities 
                          was one of the biggest in history, and included 31 tiger 
                          skins, 581 leopard skins and 778 otter skins. The tiger 
                          skins represented about 1% of India's entire population 
                          of wild tigers.
                        You can view a picture of the seizure on website

                          <http://www.people.com.cn/GB/shehui/1062/2338932.html>. 
                          

                          

                          Below is a translation of an article that originally 
                          appeared in the Beijing Youth Daily on February 14th, 
                          2004.
                        Contributor: CCTV Legal Online

                          Translated from Chinese

                        
                        Seizure 
                          at Lhasa:

                          31 Bengal tiger skins; 581 leopard 
                          skins and 778 Eurasian otter skins
                        31 tiger skins, 581 leopard skins, 
                          778 Eurasian otter skins and 2 lynx skins, as well as 
                          one fake tiger skin, were seized on October 8th 2003 
                          at a police checkpoint at Sansan, a small township at 
                          Angren County, southwest of Tibet. Policemen at the 
                          temporary checkpoint stopped the truck on its way from 
                          Ali to Lhasa with the 1,393 pieces of smuggled skins 
                          of endangered species.
                        The officers also found many newspapers, 
                          mostly Indian newspapers, in these bags with the wildlife 
                          skins, clearly revealing the origin of the animals.
                        According to Li Jianwen, vice director 
                          of Anti-Smuggling Bureau of Lhasa Customs, "when 
                          questioned, the driver claimed the goods were wool; 
                          but only three bags of wool were found; and the rest 
                          were bags of tiger and leopard skins and others". 
                        
                        "Many of these tiger skins have 
                          bullet holes; and some of tiger skins are rather small, 
                          which might only be tiger cubs of several months' old”, 
                          said Li Jianwen.
                        Three people on the truck,who are Tibetans, 
                          were taken to Angren Country police station. The driver, 
                          Laba Zeren, said he was not aware what the goods were 
                          in his truck, and that he was only paid to deliver the 
                          goods from Ali to Lhasa. The other two people claimed 
                          to be only hitchhikers.
                       Suspecting it to be a smuggling case, 
                          Angren police notified Lhasa Customs. The Lhasa Customs 
                          officers soon arrived at Angren County and started the 
                          probe.
                        The three suspects did not admit their 
                          previous acquaintance, but the police detected the Chinese 
                          currency notes on each of them were in the same number 
                          series, evidence that the three might have been involved 
                          in the deal.
                        After consulting with the Customs authority 
                          at Ali, where the truck came from, the police learnt 
                          that the three had been detained before on September 
                          16th 2003, for trying to sneak into India, but they 
                          were released afterwards due to lack of evidence.
                        After their first failed attempt to 
                          receive "goods" on September 16th 2003 from 
                          an Indian supplier, the three managed to receive these 
                          animal skins late at night on October 4th 2003 at the 
                          India-China border. Four days later, the three were 
                          caught by the police at Sansan checkpoint on their way 
                          to Lhasa.
                        The profiles of the three accused are 
                          as follows - Dunzhu (age 36, Tibetan, from Mangkang 
                          County, Changdu), Gongbu (age 22, from Mangkang County, 
                          Changdu), and Laba Zeren (age 34; from Gongju County).
                        

                          (Note: The translation of the names of people and 
                          places is Chinese version.)