Asian Conservation 
                        Awareness Programme India 
                        
                        18th February, 2004
                        ACAP, 
                          a programme of WildAid, is an innovative, multi-disciplined 
                          approach to international conservation. Our objective 
                          is to reduce consumer demand for wildlife parts and 
                          products by directly influencing the attitudes of consumers. 
                          ACAP believes that through education and information 
                          we can encourage people globally to take action in support 
                          of wildlife and our natural environment.
                        The international illegal wildlife 
                          trade is estimated by Interpol to be worth US$10-20 
                          billion annually. Only the illegal trades in drugs and 
                          arms are thought to be more profitable. Many species 
                          such as the tiger, Indian one-horned rhino, Asian elephant, 
                          musk deer and sloth bear are on the brink of extinction 
                          as a result of this illegal trade. They are poached 
                          from the wild and either sold as traditional medicine, 
                          exotic meat, charms, trinkets and carvings or used for 
                          entertainment purposes. This illegal trade continues 
                          to take the lives of wildlife rangers, anti-poaching 
                          teams and poachers, all of whom put their lives at stake. 
                          In response to this, WildAid, with the support of local 
                          wildlife groups and international advertising agency, 
                          J. Walter Thompson, created ACAP to curb the demand 
                          which drives the trade. Launched in 1996, it now campaigns 
                          in the consumer markets of Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore 
                          and Thailand, with plans to launch in mainland China.
                        ACAP India 
                          is now being launched as a programme of WildAid and 
                          the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI).
                        Renowned film and sports celebrities 
                          including Amitabh Bachchan, Sachin Tendulkar, Saurav 
                          Ganguly, Shashi Kapoor, Naseeruddin Shah and Vikram 
                          Seth have shown their generous support for the ACAP 
                          India campaign and are helping to deliver our vital 
                          message, showing how we all have a stake in protecting 
                          India’s magnificent wildlife.
                        ACAP is a cooperative initiative that 
                          complements anti-poaching efforts and endangered species 
                          protection laws by leveraging long-term support from 
                          governments, the media, local wildlife groups, corporations 
                          and celebrities.
                        Our celebrity endorsement messages 
                          are seen by over 500 million people each week via our 
                          media sponsors Bloomberg Television, CNN, Discovery 
                          Channel, Animal Planet and STAR TV, to name but a few. 
                          78% of those surveyed in an ACAP poll in Taipei said 
                          that they would never buy endangered species products 
                          again after seeing ACAP’s compelling Public Service 
                          Announcements.
                        Heads of State, such as the former 
                          Prime Minister of Thailand, His Excellency Khun Anand 
                          Panyarachun have endorsed the ACAP campaign. A host 
                          of celebrities, such as our International Ambassador 
                          action-film hero Jackie Chan, Hollywood actors, Minnie 
                          Driver and Ralph Fiennes, award winning film director 
                          Ang Lee and Malaysian star Michelle Yeoh have also filmed 
                          ACAP conservation messages.
                        ACAP has a global outlook with a local 
                          agenda. We aim to work closely with governments, communities 
                          and businesses to achieve common goals through our local 
                          partners.
                        By making a collective effort, we can 
                          secure the future of endangered wildlife for future 
                          generations.
                        “When we all come together, we can do anything.”