Indian Celebrities 
                        Unite to Protect Wildlife 
                        
                        20th February, 2004
                        The Asian Conservation 
                          Awareness Programme India (ACAP) was launched on 18 
                          February 2004, at the India habitat Centre, New Delhi, 
                          in the presence of the Chief Minister of Delhi, Mrs. 
                          Sheila Dikshit, and screen legend Shashi Kapoor. The 
                          launch marks the start of a dynamic new initiative to 
                          engage public and political support for conservation 
                          in India. The audience got a preview of exclusive multi-media 
                          messages by India’s top celebrities, including 
                          Amitabh Bachan, Saurav Ganguly, Shashi Kapoor, Naseerudin 
                          Shah and Sachin Tendulkar, who appealed for the protection 
                          of endangered wildlife, their habitats and the environment. 
                          A number of television channels have generously offered 
                          free airtime to air these messages. 
                        ACAP-India is a programme of WildAid 
                          and the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI). 
                          It brings innovative new means of communication to conservation 
                          in India, believing that through education and information, 
                          people can be encouraged to take action in support of 
                          wildlife and the natural environment. Central to ACAP 
                          is its work to stop consumer demand for endangered wildlife, 
                          which is driving many species to the edge of extinction 
                          in a trade estimated by Interpol to be worth around 
                          US$10-20 billion annually.
                        ACAP is specially designed to compliment 
                          anti-poaching efforts and endangered species protection 
                          laws by leveraging long-term support from decision makers, 
                          media, businesses and public. 
                       At the launch, Belinda Wright, Executive 
                          Director of WPSI, pointed out that without greater awareness 
                          of the threats to India’s environment “we 
                          will continue to see the decimation of wildlife along 
                          with destruction of their natural habitats”. 
                        Steve Trent, Founder-Director, WildAid, 
                          added that Indian wildlife conservation measures needed 
                          “a new and determined push, and through the generous 
                          support of these stars we hope to generate long term 
                          support for wildlife and wild places”.
                        Mrs. Sheila Dikshit, commenting on 
                          the fact that India’s treasure trove of biodiversity 
                          was being systematically plundered to feed the international 
                          demand for endangered wildlife products, said that “we 
                          are committed to ensure that the world does not become 
                          a poorer place because of a few greedy people.”
                        ACAP India will seek to focus specific 
                          attention on the protection of key endangered species 
                          including the tiger; and devise and support initiatives 
                          to combat poaching, illegal trade and habitat loss.