Another Elephant Electrocuted 
                        to Death 
                        
                        26th Feb.,2004
                        Carelessness and negligence 
                          continue to take the lives of 
                          India’s wild animals. On 20 February 2004, around 
                          midnight, a wild tusker was electrocuted to death in 
                          an orchard in Mishar Pura village, under Kankhal Police 
                          Station, Haridwar, Uttaranchal. 
                        According to preliminary reports received 
                          by the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), 
                          the orchard caretaker discovered the death at 7 a.m. 
                          on 21 February, and informed the electricity department. 
                          At that time, the wire was still live. The electricity 
                          department finally shut down the power around 9 a.m. 
                          and then arrived at the spot. 
                        The tragic death was easily preventable. 
                          The Uttaranchal Power Corporation had been carrying 
                          out maintenance work on an 11,000 KV power line running 
                          through the orchard. The contractor hired for the job 
                          neglected to secure the wires at the required height 
                          of 4 metres and left them dangling at 7 to 8 feet. It 
                          was a tragedy waiting to happen when the tusker walked 
                          straight into the low slung wire.
                        The 
                          elephant was one of a group of young tuskers that would 
                          regularly cross the Tircha Bridge at Shyampur on their 
                          way to the Ganga. A WPSI project officer photographed 
                          the tuskers in October 2003. 
                        Wild animal mortalities 
                          by electrocution - both accidental and deliberate - 
                          have reached staggering proportions in India. WPSI presently 
                          has records of more than 257 large wild mammals that 
                          have been electrocuted in the last 
                          14 years. In the year 2003 alone, 28 elephants and six 
                          tigers died due to electrocution. 
                        The Honourable Central 
                          Empowered Committee (CEC) of the Supreme Court of India 
                          is currently hearing a petition filed by WPSI on the 
                          electrocution of wild animals throughout India. The 
                          respondents, which include the Ministry of Power, Ministry 
                          of Environment and Forests and several State Electricity 
                          Boards, have been asked to work out a solution in collaboration 
                          with WPSI.