Scaly Fashion; An Upsurge 
                        In The Trade In Reptile Skins 
                        
                        27th Feb.,2004
                        In the last few days 
                          the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) has 
                          learnt of a disturbing new trend in the illegal trade 
                          in reptile skins. In a recent case in Mumbai 29 python 
                          skins (Python reticulata) were seized by the Deputy 
                          Director Wildlife, Northern Region, Mr S.K. Niraj, from 
                          a leather factory in Dharavi. Three people were detained, 
                          including a Dutch lady, who stated that she had imported 
                          the skins from Italy with the knowledge of Customs officials. 
                          It is now believed that the skins were procured both 
                          from domestic and foreign sources. This is the fifth 
                          or sixth case in succession, with leads as far afield 
                          as the Netherlands, Italy, Singapore and Malaysia. In 
                          an earlier case, six handbags were seized made of snake 
                          skin (possibly keelback) that is believed to have been 
                          smuggled, via Dubai, from China. 
                        A quick browse on the Internet for 
                          exotic leathers reveals thousands of sites and companies 
                          selling and manufacturing products made from reptile 
                          skins. Exotic leather is back in fashion and taking 
                          a heavy toll on a number of endangered species. In many 
                          countries the manufacture and trade of reptile articles, 
                          such as coats, shoes, bags and belts, is permitted. 
                          There are a number of such manufacturing units of snake 
                          skin products in China, Thailand and Malaysia.
                        In India, all trade in reptile products 
                          is prohibited under The Wild Life (Protection) Act. 
                          But a clandestine trade continues. There have been a 
                          number of seizures over the last two years where quantities 
                          of skins of snakes and other reptiles have been seized. 
                          In a major case in July 2002 in Bangalore, the police 
                          arrested one person and seized 35,100 snake skins (mostly 
                          rat snake and cobra) and 12 bags containing cut pieces 
                          of lizard skins. The haul was valued at Rs. one crore 
                          (~US$ 210,000) in the international market. The skins 
                          were allegedly brought from a village in Chittoor District, 
                          in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. They were being 
                          taken to Chennai from where they were to be shipped 
                          to Singapore. Other large seizures have taken place 
                          in Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Uttaranchal.
                        India has a long history of trade in 
                          reptiles; in 1977, a staggering four million snake skins 
                          (mostly rat snake skins) were legally exported. It is 
                          believed that the trade was so extensive that it played 
                          a major role in the huge increase in the rat population 
                          which, particularly in the 1970s, decimated food grain 
                          stocks. The export of snake skin products was finally 
                          banned in 1986, and despite energetic appeals by reptile 
                          traders and a stay order, the ban was eventually upheld 
                          on 20 March 1997. In 1999, the Indian Government publicly 
                          burnt 160,000 snake skins and over 5,000 reptile skin 
                          shoes and bags in National Zoological Park, New Delhi. 
                          These stocks had been held for several years by Bharat 
                          Leather Corporation, an Indian Government enterprise 
                          dealing in the export of leather goods.
                        Similar to the trade in big cat skins, 
                          it seems that the wheel has come round again to jeopardise 
                          the future of our snakes and other reptiles.