Forest Officers Get 
                        Protection from Harassment by Wildlife Offenders 
                        
                        30th April, 2004
                        We are all familiar 
                          with incidents where enforcement authorities carry out 
                          a raid or arrest suspected criminals, and then have 
                          charges of misdemeanour filed against them by the accused. 
                          This demoralises and discourages the officers, for they 
                          have to personally bear the costs of their legal defence.
                        On 24 March 2004, a Bench of the Honourable Supreme 
                          Court of India passed a judgement in the State of Orissa 
                          vs. Ganesh Chandra Jew case. This landmark judgement 
                          will be of great help to enforcement agencies and prevent 
                          criminals from abusing the law to harass upright officers. 
                        
                        The Court clarified the interpretation and applicability 
                          of Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code. This 
                          Section states that if a State or Central Government 
                          officer is to be prosecuted for any offence allegedly 
                          committed during the discharge of official duties, sanction 
                          to do so is required from the State or Central government.
                        The case proved to be an excellent means of clarifying 
                          this point. Ganesh Jew had been arrested by the Orissa 
                          Forest Department in 1991 for the possession of ivory 
                          tusks. He later filed a case against the Forest Department 
                          officers, stating he had been assaulted and publicly 
                          humiliated during his arrest. The officers appealed 
                          against this complaint. The case went through the court 
                          of Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Baripada, and 
                          the Orissa High Court before it finally reached the 
                          Supreme Court.
                        The Court categorically stated "the cognisance 
                          of any offence, by any court, is barred by Section 197 
                          of the Code unless sanction is obtained from the appropriate 
                          authority, if the offence, alleged to have been committed, 
                          was in discharge of the official duty".
                        The Court went on to say, "very cognisance is 
                          barred. That is the complaint, cannot be taken notice 
                          of." [Italics added]
                        The Bench, consisting of Justices Doraiswamy Raju and 
                          Arijit Pasayat, opined in clear terms that while prosecuting 
                          officials have to exercise restrain when investigating 
                          a wildlife matter and arresting suspects, offenders 
                          should not be able to stop the due process of law by 
                          initiating false and frivolous complaints in order to 
                          vitiate the trial.
                        Lawyers from the Wildlife Protection Society of India, 
                          who were closely monitoring this case in the Supreme 
                          Court, believe that this judgement will go a long way 
                          in creating a safety net for enforcement personnel investigating 
                          wildlife cases.