Sansar Chand CONVICTED 
                         
                        
                        1st May, 2004
                        On 29 April 2004, 
                          the notorious wildlife criminal, Delhi-based Sansar 
                          Chand, was sentenced to five years of rigorous imprisonment 
                          by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate of Ajmer 
                          in Rajasthan. This is the highest punishment ever awarded 
                          under The Wild Life (Protection) Act 1972.
                        Sansar Chand has been associated with wildlife crime 
                          virtually all his life. He was first arrested in September 
                          1974 in a case involving a tiger skin. He was 16 years 
                          old. He was convicted in April 1982, and sentenced to 
                          rigorous imprisonment for 1½ year by the Metropolitan 
                          Magistrate. However, Chand appealed to the Delhi High 
                          Court and got bail. He returned to jail in 1994 because 
                          of a NGO/WPSI petition. He then appealed to the Supreme 
                          Court, which fined him Rs.10,000 but allowed his release 
                          after he had served 6 months on the grounds that he 
                          was underage at the time the crime was committed. Since 
                          then, Sansar Chand had been connected to, implicated, 
                          or named in, about 21 wildlife cases throughout India. 
                          Many of these have been religiously followed by WPSI 
                          for over a decade. Now, 30 years later, he and one of 
                          his associates have finally been convicted and sentenced. 
                        
                        This particular case began on 6 January 2003 when the 
                          Bhilwara Police arrested Balwan, a resident of Haryana, 
                          in western Rajasthan. Two leopard skins were recovered. 
                          Balwan confessed that he had been paid Rs. 5,000/- by 
                          Delhi-based Sansar Chand to carry the skins and that 
                          he had supplied similar consignments to him in the past. 
                          Chand has been named in a many such cases but it was 
                          thanks to the diligent work of people such as the Mr 
                          Hemant Priyadarshy, the Superintendent of Police Railways 
                          in Ajmer, that the case led to a conviction. 
                        But it was not without a tough legal battle. Chand's 
                          lawyers used the tactic that the police had no authority 
                          to investigate a wildlife matter. Within 24 hours, WPSI 
                          couriered a package to the investigating police officer 
                          with a detailed legal opinion from an advocate of the 
                          Supreme Court of India on how The Wild Life (Protection) 
                          Act did, in fact, allow the police to arrest, detain 
                          and search a suspect for a wildlife crime. 
                        WPSI also supplied details on every pending case against 
                          Chand throughout India, along with a copy of his earlier 
                          conviction, and a Supreme Court judgment allowing the 
                          CBI - and by inference, any police agency - to investigate 
                          wildlife crimes. The papers were placed before the Additional 
                          Chief Railway Magistrate, Ajmer, who rejected Sansar's 
                          bail application. This crucial input from WPSI was the 
                          culmination of decades of investigating wildlife cases 
                          across the country. WPSI’s Legal Programme currently 
                          supports the prosecution of over 150 wildlife court 
                          cases in 13 states in India and is assisting the prosecution 
                          of Chand in several states, including eight cases in 
                          Delhi.
                        Sansar Chand has filed an appeal in the Sessions Court 
                          against the recent judgment, even as more cases against 
                          him are reported from across the country. Most recently, 
                          on 3 May 2004, eight women who were arrested in Chandrapur 
                          District of Maharashtra with traps and tiger claws, 
                          were carrying papers that clearly prove their connection 
                          to Chand. Earlier in April, men that were arrested with 
                          two leopards skins in Pauri in Uttaranchal confessed 
                          that the skins were to be supplied to Rani, Sansar Chand’s 
                          wife.