Will the Environment 
                        Finally Get Attention? 
                        
                        14th May, 2004
                        The Congress is poised 
                          to form the new government, and Wildlife Protection 
                          Society of India (WPSI) hopes that it will be sensitive 
                          to the cause of the environment. 
                        Mrs Indira Gandhi was probably the most committed prime 
                          minister that India has ever had in terms of the environment 
                          and wildlife. She outlawed commercial and recreational 
                          hunting in India, banned fur exports, and pushed for 
                          the drafting and implementation of The Wild Life (Protection) 
                          Act and the Forest Conservation Act. Project Tiger - 
                          for conservationists at least - will probably be remembered 
                          as her greatest achievement. Hailed as one of the most 
                          successful conservation strategies of its time, it allowed 
                          the tiger population in India to bounce back from near 
                          collapse.
                        Unfortunately, no subsequent Prime Minister has been 
                          able to match the heady conservation successes of the 
                          early seventies, often because of a profound lack of 
                          interest in environmental issues. While Rajiv Gandhi 
                          did set up the Ministry of Environment and Forests, 
                          his successors V.P. Singh, Chandrashekhar, P.V. Narsimha 
                          Rao, H.D. Deve Gowda, I.K. Gujral and A.B. Vajpayee 
                          will not be remembered as heroes of conservation. 
                        Wildlife Protection Society of India now looks forward 
                          to the development and implementation of new policies 
                          under a new Congress led government. India urgently 
                          needs to develop a comprehensive and effective National 
                          Wildlife Management Plan and set up a strong, well trained 
                          and armed enforcement authority to deal with increasingly 
                          sophisticated and organised wildlife criminals
                        "The state of 
                          our wildlife, particularly the tiger, and our forests 
                          is in almost terminal decline," said Belinda Wright, 
                          Executive Director of WPSI. "With the election 
                          of this Congress-led coalition, we look forward to the 
                          revival of positive policies that reflect the commitment 
                          and concern of Indira Gandhi 30 years ago."