New Port on Sagar Island 
                        to be built with Japanese Collaboration 
                        
                        19th May, 2004
                        Sagar Island, one 
                          of the largest Sundarban islands, is all set to have 
                          the deepest port in eastern India, according to an Anandabazar 
                          Patrika article dated 14 March 2004. The following information 
                          has been gleaned from a Wildlife Protection Society 
                          of India (WPSI) translation of the article. 
                        Planned along the southern coast of Sagar Island, the 
                          port falls under the jurisdiction of the Kolkata Port 
                          Trust. Funds have been made available under ex-Prime 
                          Minister A.B. Vajpayee’s Rs. 1 lakh crore Sagarmala 
                          Project that aims to modernise the Indian maritime infrastructure 
                          along the east and west coasts.
                        The port will certainly need substantial expenditure 
                          on infrastructure. The Hugli channel at the port will 
                          be dredged to a depth of 125m from its current depth 
                          of 10m. A 4-kilometre bridge across the Muriganga River 
                          will connect the port to the mainland. This bridge might 
                          also be used to carry transmission lines from the mainland, 
                          since almost all power in Sagar is presently wind and 
                          solar generated. Another option is to power the port 
                          with diesel generators.
                        A low interest-rate loan by Japanese collaborators 
                          will fund 85% of the project. The port authorities have 
                          considered various options of repayment one of which 
                          is to distribute various berths to private builders 
                          on a Build-Operate-Transfer basis.
                        The feasibility report, to be prepared by the Overseas 
                          Coastal Area Development Institute, will be ready within 
                          the next 15 months. Construction will start once a global 
                          tender is awarded. The port authorities expect the dock 
                          complex to be partially functional by 2007. 
                        The actual size of the port will be known after the 
                          feasibility report is published. However, its handling 
                          capacity will be large enough to easily process more 
                          goods than the Kolkata-Haldia docks, which handled 4 
                          crore tons of goods in the 2003-04 financial year. Once 
                          completed, the Kolkata-Haldia-Sagar system is expected 
                          to attract large merchant ships that now go to Paradeep.