15 Leopard Skins Seized 
                        
                        12th June, 2004
                        Acting on information 
                          provided by WPSI, the authorities seized 15 fresh leopard 
                          skins from village Barota in Sonipat District of Haryana 
                          on Friday 11 June 2004. The 
                          raiding party that included WPSI officials found the 
                          skins hidden in a tin trunk, which was buried in a five-feet-deep 
                          pit, near the residence of the key accused Dulichand. 
                          Nine large steel traps were also recovered from a nearby 
                          pit. The accused was arrested on the spot along with 
                          Lakhmi Chand, who is also a suspected wildlife trader. 
                          The Wildlife Regional Office of Northern Region, the 
                          local Forest Department and Haryana Police jointly carried 
                          out the raid.
                        One brand new cellular 
                          phone, a diary, and Rs. 3,500/- in cash were recovered 
                          from the men arrested. The case was handed over the 
                          State Forest Department and the accused were produced 
                          in the court on Saturday morning. While 
                          interrogation, Dulichand confessed that the animals 
                          were killed in Uttranchal and the skins were to be taken 
                          to Sansar Chand in Delhi. He also admitted that this 
                          was his second consignment to Sansar Chand in the past 
                          six months.
                        This seizure has once again demonstrated the scale 
                          of wildlife trade in India and more importantly the 
                          involvement of Sansar Chand, who was only last month 
                          granted bail after being sentenced to 5 years of rigorous 
                          imprisonment. 
                        WPSI has been carrying out detailed investigation into 
                          the nexus between poachers in Katni District of Madhya 
                          Pradesh their counterparts in and around Panipat District 
                          of Haryana and traders in Delhi.