Spate of Tiger & 
                        Leopard Skin Seizures 
                        
                        16th July, 2004
                        Over the past three 
                          weeks, 10 tiger skins, 25 leopard skins, 4 sacks of 
                          fresh tiger bones, and the claws of 31 tigers and leopards 
                          have been seized in 11 cases throughout India and Nepal. 
                          The Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) was 
                          instrumental in 5 of these cases and we have been stretched 
                          to our limit working with enforcement authorities. 
                        Why this sudden upsurge in wildlife crime activity? 
                          I would like to say that it is a result of improved 
                          enforcement, but that is not the case. A worst-case 
                          scenario is that it is to fulfil orders to replace the 
                          huge seizure of skins in China in October 2003…
                        It started on 21 June 2004, when the CID Forest Cell 
                          of the Karnataka Police, in Bangalore, seized 2 leopard 
                          skins and 1 tiger skin.
                        Two days later, on 23 June 2004, 7 leopard skins were 
                          seized by the Katni Forest Department at Budhar near 
                          Shahdol in Madhya Pradesh. Acting on information collected 
                          during the seizure, WPSI facilitated raids in Madhya 
                          Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. Investigations revealed links 
                          to poachers in states as far away as Gujarat. 
                        Three days later, the Chennai city police seized 2 
                          tiger skins (which are still to be verified as genuine), 
                          2 antlers and a bottle of snake venom. 
                        On 30 June 2004, the Uttaranchal Forest Department 
                          arrested two men for possession of 28 kg of ivory in 
                          the Dhela Range of Corbett National Park and Sahuwala 
                          Range, Bijnore Plantation Division. The men claimed 
                          that they collected the ivory from a dead tusker.
                        Two days later, on 2 July 2004, WPSI assisted in a 
                          joint operation of the Forest Department and Police 
                          in raiding a house in Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh. 456 leopard 
                          and tiger claws were recovered, along with Rs. 6.04 
                          lakhs (approx US$ 13,000) in cash. The accused are absconding.
                        The very next day, the Forest Department of Pauri and 
                          Rudraprayag seized 3 leopard skins and arrested 6 people 
                          from a hotel in Roorkee, Uttaranchal.
                        The day after that, on 4 July 2004, the Special Task 
                          Force of the Madhya Pradesh Police seized a tiger skin 
                          and arrested 3 men in Bhopal. 
                        On the same day, intelligence gathered by WPSI led 
                          to the seizure of a tiger skin. Two young men were intercepted 
                          by the Forest Department and WPSI while transporting 
                          a tiger skin on a motorbike near Alapalli in the Gadchiroli 
                          district of Madhya Pradesh. 
                        A day later, WPSI assisted in a joint operation by 
                          the Forest and Police Departments which culminated in 
                          the seizure of 1 tiger skin and 3 leopard skins. Four 
                          men were arrested while transporting the skins in a 
                          taxi jeep near Made-Amgaon on the Regadi-Ghot road. 
                          Their jeep was also seized. Mr. B.S.K. Reddy, Conservator 
                          of Forests, South Chanda Division, and Mr. Shirish Jain, 
                          Additional Superintendent of Police, Aheri, directed 
                          the Forest and Police personnel.
                        On 6 July 2004, the Chennai city police seized 2 tiger 
                          skins (still to be verified as genuine), 1 leopard skin, 
                          1 leopard cat skin and 42 pairs of tiger claws in a 
                          suburban railway station. While the tiger skins are 
                          suspected to be fake, the other animal articles are 
                          genuine. 
                        On the very same day, Mr. Malik, Wildlife Inspector 
                          from Sonipat arrived in Samalkha, Haryana, to arrest 
                          an accused of the WPSI-assisted 15 leopard skin seizure 
                          in Sonipat on 11 June 2004. To his surprise, he found 
                          one leopard skin being dried on the roof of the house. 
                          The Samalkha police arrested one person.
                        And lastly, on 11 July at Bouddha in Nepal, a 24-year-old 
                          man was arrested with 2 tiger skins, 8 leopard skins, 
                          4 sacks of fresh tiger bones, and 1 sack of rhino bones 
                          and skins. 
                        What is particularly alarming is that none of these 
                          seizures are a result of a concerted, coordinated drive. 
                          They are chance encounters, based on tip offs from inter-gang 
                          rivalries. We can only speculate on how many have been 
                          missed. 
                        The tragedy is that many of the people who were arrested, 
                          or who the accused claimed they were supplying to, are 
                          well-known, repeat offenders. Much of wildlife crime 
                          in India is a traditional, family business, right from 
                          the nomadic poachers who carry out the actual killings 
                          to the city-based traders who have contacts in Nepal 
                          and China. Because of their tendency to work in their 
                          own cliques and keep everything within a close-knit 
                          circle, most major wildlife criminals are already well 
                          documented in Police and Forest Department records. 
                        
                        It is now crucial for India to set up a centralised, 
                          dedicated Wildlife Crime Unit. Ideally, we believe that 
                          it should be a multi-agency, independent unit, with 
                          highly motivated officers drawn from national forest, 
                          police and paramilitary forces. Its officers should 
                          be trained in wildlife crime investigations, including 
                          gathering and analysing intelligence. They should be 
                          well equipped and mobile. Since wildlife criminals have 
                          international links, the Unit should work in tandem 
                          with Interpol, international customs agencies and CITES 
                          enforcement officials. The key to the success of the 
                          Unit will be its ability to collaborate with State enforcement 
                          officials, while reporting to the Central government, 
                          preferably the Home Affairs Ministry.
                        We ask you to urgently email the following people and 
                          request that an effective Wildlife Crime Unit be set 
                          up immediately in India, to tackle the escalating illegal 
                          trade in endangered species. Please feel free to mention 
                          the Wildlife Protection Society of India’s figures 
                          and grave concerns:
                        Shri Manmohan Singh, Prime Minister of India

                          Email: <pmosb@pmo.nic.in>
                        Shri A. Raja, Minister for Environment and Forests

                          Email: <mef@menf.delhi.nic.in>
                        Smt. Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson, National Advisory Council

                          Email: <soniagandhi@sansad.nic.in>