Trucks Banned from 
                        Sanctuaries in Jharkhand at Night 
                        
                        5th August, 2004
                        The High Court of 
                          Jharkhand recently passed an order banning bauxite-loaded 
                          trucks from driving through Palamau Tiger Reserve, Palamau 
                          Wildlife Sanctuary and Betla National Park at night.
                        The order couldn’t have come at a better time. 
                          Mortality records maintained by the Wildlife Protection 
                          Society of India (WPSI) reveal that from 1997 to 2002, 
                          vehicles have killed at least 24 leopards, 5 tigers 
                          and 50 animals of various other species. These numbers 
                          only represent animals that were discovered and recorded. 
                          Countless other mortalities go undocumented.
                        The Jharkhand controversy started in September 2002, 
                          when the state’s Chief Conservator of Forests 
                          prohibited trucks loaded with bauxite or any other major 
                          mineral from plying in the Betla Wildlife Sanctuary 
                          at night. Immediately, the president of the Palamau 
                          Pramandal Khan Mazdoor Sangh (Labour Union) filed a 
                          petition contesting the ban, claiming it had adversely 
                          affected their livelihoods. He also claimed that the 
                          ban would only benefit the Peoples War Group and other 
                          extremist organisations in the area.
                        However, the Advocate General of Jharkhand, arguing 
                          for the Forest Department, proved conclusively that 
                          the noisy, smoke spewing trucks were a threat to the 
                          local wildlife and environment. He also pointed out 
                          that an alternative route for the trucks existed, and 
                          proved that there had been a rapid decline in the wildlife 
                          population along the disputed route. 
                        The petition was dismissed, and trucks will no longer 
                          be allowed to drive through the area at night.
                        “We need many more such pro-wildlife judgements,” 
                          says Sudhir Mishra, Advocate of the Supreme Court of 
                          India and Principal Legal Advisor to WPSI. “Now 
                          that the Jharkhand High Court has set a precedent, this 
                          order can be quoted by conservationists fighting similar 
                          court battles over roads in other parts of India.”