Ivory Poachers to Remain 
                        in Jail 
                        
                        5th August, 2004
                        Four men, arrested 
                          for the possession of 28 kg of ivory in Corbett Tiger 
                          Reserve, on 30 June 2004, were sentenced to a further 
                          14-day judicial remand by the Judicial Magistrate, Ramnagar. 
                        
                        A team from the Wildlife Protection Society of India 
                          (WPSI) was at Ramnagar to assist the Forest Department 
                          when the case was heard court on 27 July 2004. Arguing 
                          for the Forest Department, WPSI lawyer Pankaj Kumar 
                          Singh pointed out to the court that the cut pieces of 
                          ivory came from three tusks, while only one elephant 
                          skeleton had been recovered. Investigations would remain 
                          incomplete till the second dead elephant had been found.
                        Convinced by the argument, Judicial Magistrate Mr. 
                          B.B. Pandey extended the remand for a further 14 days. 
                          This extension will give the Corbett Tiger Reserve authorities 
                          time to finish their investigation in a case full of 
                          intriguing twists and turns. 
                        It appears at least 
                          one of the elephants was shot by Rai Sikh poachers around 
                          two years ago and its tusks and those of another elephant 
                          were collected by Gujjars. The ivory was split into 
                          two lots, one of which was buried. Mastu Gujjar and 
                          a trader, Hamid, were arrested by Range Officer Satish 
                          Chandra Upadhyay with one lot of the ivory on 30 June 
                          2004. The buried ivory was recovered the same day, when 
                          Gani and Manga were arrested.