Government Decides 
                        to Minimise Damage to Corbett

                         
                        
                        14th Sept., 2004
                         On 10 September 2004, 
                          in the Supreme Court of India, the Ministry of Environment 
                          and Forests (MoEF) stated that it would relocate a stretch 
                          of the proposed Ramnagar-Kotdwar highway so as to minimise 
                          damage to Corbett National Park. The State of Uttaranchal, 
                          in which Corbett National Park falls, agreed to this 
                          proposal. 
                        The controversial highway project was first highlighted 
                          when the Supreme Court of India started hearing an intervention 
                          application by the Wildlife Protection Society of India 
                          (WPSI) about the proposed construction of a highway 
                          through Corbett Tiger Reserve. 
                        The road, linking the Kumaon and Garhwal regions of 
                          Uttaranchal, would have slashed through Corbett Tiger 
                          Reserve, fragmenting one of the most important tiger 
                          and elephant habitats in India. WPSI showed that there 
                          was an alternative: since the Reserve lay along Uttaranchal’s 
                          southern border with the State of Uttar Pradesh, the 
                          stretch of road that was to go through the Reserve could 
                          be shifted south, through Uttar Pradesh, minimising 
                          damage to the Reserve. 
                        During the last hearing, the MoEF and the Government 
                          of Uttaranchal stated that after a joint survey, they 
                          proposed to align the disputed section of the road through 
                          Uttar Pradesh. Effectively, the road will pass through 
                          the buffer zone of the Tiger Reserve, avoiding the National 
                          Park. The MoEF also stated that no new constructions 
                          hotels, dhabas or repair shops should be allowed to 
                          come up in the 1.5km Eco-Sensitive Zone to be notified 
                          along the road. Uttaranchal has agreed not to let any 
                          human establishment to come up in its territory along 
                          the road. Uttar Pradesh has asked for more time to study 
                          the proposed alignment.