Urgent 
                        Need for a Specialised Enforcement Unit in India to Deal 
                        with the Growing Illegal Trade in Tiger Skins 
                        
                        9th Nov., 2004
                         India urgently needs 
                          to create a specialised enforcement unit to deal with 
                          wildlife crime if it is to tackle the illegal trade 
                          in tiger skins and save India’s wild tigers from 
                          extinction, said the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), 
                          Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) and the 
                          Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) today.
                        The skin trade appears to be spiralling out of control. 
                          The seizure of 31 tiger and 581 leopard skins in Tibet 
                          in October last year shocked the international community 
                          and revealed the true extent of the growing illegal 
                          trade in skins sourced in India. The fact that the skins 
                          were all transported in one vehicle, illustrated the 
                          confidence of these criminal gangs who are highly organised 
                          and smuggle skins across the international borders between 
                          India, Nepal and China. A number of the skins seized 
                          were wrapped in Delhi newspapers.
                        Debbie Banks, Senior Campaigner at EIA, said; “A 
                          specialised unit that can investigate the urban and 
                          cross-border trade in tiger and leopard skins and engage 
                          with counterpart agencies at a regional level would 
                          make a real difference.”
                        Belinda Wright of the Wildlife Protection Society of 
                          India (WPSI) said; “There have been many seizures 
                          made in India in the past ten years, but the lack of 
                          a dedicated agency to follow up and investigate intelligence 
                          gathered at crime scenes means that the masterminds 
                          behind the skin trade manage to escape scot-free.”
                        Ashok Kumar of WTI said; “The unit can be created 
                          in an inexpensive and uncontroversial manner by bringing 
                          together officers from a range of enforcement agencies 
                          in India, with a qualified intelligence analyst and 
                          legal officer. This is the only effective way to tackle 
                          the networks of dealers who operate outside of the forest 
                          areas”. 
                        At the 11th Meeting of the Conference of the Parties 
                          to CITES in 2000, India made a commitment to establish 
                          a dedicated unit to tackle wildlife crime; at the present 
                          time this unit has not been created.
                        WTI, WPSI, EIA and WWF India have jointly called upon 
                          the Prime Minister of India to ensure action is taken 
                          to create a multi-agency specialised enforcement unit 
                          capable of combating wildlife crime. 
                         Intelligence gathered from seizures in India, Nepal 
                          and China needs to be communicated quickly and effectively 
                          between enforcement agencies in source, transit and 
                          destination countries. India, Nepal and China need to 
                          establish effective mechanisms for sharing intelligence 
                          and they need to look closely at improving their ability 
                          to cooperate on cross-border enforcement operations 
                          if the skin trade is to be tackled in a meaningful and 
                          effective manner.