Deal Strongly 
                        with Wildlife Offences Says High Court 
                        
                        9th Dec., 2004
                         In a unique order 
                          on a bail application, a single bench of the Madhya 
                          Pradesh High Court stated that offences under The Wild 
                          Life (Protection) Act should be dealt with strongly.
                        “The rapid decline of India’s wild animals, 
                          one of the richest and most varied in the world, has 
                          been a cause of grave concern”, stated Justice 
                          S. L. Jain, in October 2004, while rejecting the bail 
                          application.
                        The two accused had moved the Jabalpur Bench of the 
                          Madhya Pradesh High Court for bail. One of them had 
                          been arrested for possession of six leopard skins while 
                          the other is alleged to be a leopard skin trader. Their 
                          lawyer tried to make the case that the offence was of 
                          a petty nature and should be tried by a Judicial Magistrate.
                        However, the opposing counsel, assisted by Advocate 
                          Dharmesh Bhatt of the Wildlife Protection Society of 
                          India (WPSI), pointed out the gravity of the offence 
                          and successfully opposed the bail application. 
                        Justice Jain opined that “… some wild animals 
                          have already become extinct in this country and others 
                          are in the danger of being so. Areas which were once 
                          teeming with wild life have become devoid of it and 
                          even in sanctuaries and National Parks the animals are 
                          not being spared.”
                        The release of accused persons on bail during the investigation 
                          or trial period is a major hurdle in the successful 
                          prosecution of wildlife offences. This is due to the 
                          fact that the judiciary is often not aware of how organised 
                          and widespread wildlife crime has become. 
                        The fact that a High Court Judge has recognized the 
                          seriousness of wildlife crime can only act as a shot 
                          in the arm for prosecutors fighting similar cases throughout 
                          the country.