Huge Wildlife 
                        Seizure in Delhi 
                        
                        2nd Feb., 2005
                         In the early hours 
                          of today, 1 February 2005, the Delhi police raided the 
                          basement of a warehouse in Patel Nagar and discovered 
                          a huge stock of wildlife products. 
                        The haul consisted of 39 leopard skins (including one 
                          snow leopard), 2 tiger skins, 42 otter skins, 3 kg of 
                          tiger claws, 14 tiger canines, 10 tiger jaw bones, about 
                          135 kg of porcupine quills, 60 kg of tiger and leopard 
                          paws, and 20 small pieces of bone that appear to be 
                          tiger and leopard 'floating' clavicle bones. Wildlife 
                          Protection Society of India personnel who saw the goods 
                          were shocked by the sheer quantity and variety of the 
                          seizure.
                        Four people were arrested, including the niece and 
                          another relative of the notorious wildlife trader Sansar 
                          Chand, and two employees at the warehouse. The four 
                          accused were brought before the Additional Chief Metropolitan 
                          Magistrate, Mr Manoj Jain, this afternoon and were remanded 
                          on judicial custody for 14 days. Advocate Anil Sehgal 
                          represented the accused in court. The case has now been 
                          handed over to the Delhi Forest and Wildlife authorities.
                        This shocking new seizure is proof that wildlife traders 
                          can operate with impunity and that Delhi is still the 
                          hub of the illegal wildlife trade.
                        Sansar Chand is presently absconding from another wildlife 
                          case in Jaipur last year. His wife Rani and son Akash 
                          were arrested in this case on 18 October 2004. They 
                          are still being held in custody in Rajasthan. In April 
                          2004, Chand was convicted to five years imprisonment, 
                          in another wildlife case in Ajmer. Three weeks later 
                          he was granted bail on a technicality. Spanning a period 
                          of at least 30 years in the trade, Chand was first arrested 
                          in September 1974, for a seizure which included tiger 
                          and leopard skins. He was convicted in this case in 
                          April 1982 to one and a half year's rigorous imprisonment. 
                        
                        "Wildlife Protection Society of India has been 
                          following more than ten court cases involving Sansar 
                          Chand for over a decade. He is probably responsible 
                          for more tiger and leopard deaths than anyone else in 
                          the country. This time we hope that his luck has run 
                          out", said Belinda Wright, Executive Director of 
                          WPSI.