Kaziranga 
                        Centenary Celebration or Elephant Circus ? 
                        
                        4th Feb., 2005
                         Billed as the 'Century's 
                          Greatest Conservation Success Story' a huge 'Centenary 
                          Celebration' is to be held at Kaziranga National Park 
                          from 11 to 17 February 2005. According to the programme 
                          on the Centenary web site www.kaziranga100.com 
                          apart from seminars, debates and exhibitions, throughout 
                          the one-week event there will also be "elephant 
                          football, elephant tug of war, mock elephant capturing, 
                          elephant joyrides, etc.".
                        An article that appeared on 29 January 2005 in the 
                          Indo-Asian New Service, datelined Kaziranga and titled 
                          'Elephants preparing for historic soccer match', says 
                          that the elephants are already "undergoing regular 
                          drills and practise sessions". An elephant soccer 
                          match is described as "one of the main attractions 
                          at the week long fest". 
                        Many of these wild-caught elephants are undernourished 
                          and have come from a long distance. To put them through 
                          this sort of torture in front of an expected crowd of 
                          50,000 people is cruel, undignified and inexcusable.
                        The article quotes the Field Director as saying "there 
                          will also be a demonstration by expert mahouts on how 
                          they catch wild elephants, besides elephant races and 
                          mock fights for the crowd". Exactly... for the 
                          crowd. This noble animal - which will be forced to relive 
                          perhaps the most traumatic event of its life - deserves 
                          more dignity than this.
                        As for the elephant who "can play the drum with 
                          perfect rhythm, while another can write a few English 
                          letters with chalk on a blackboard using his trunk", 
                          this appears to be an advertisement for a circus.
                        We have written to the Centenary management pointing 
                          out that the Kaziranga Centenary Celebration is an important 
                          milestone for conservation in India, and not a circus. 
                          We have requested them not to turn the event into an 
                          exploitive exercise for an endangered species that they 
                          strive so hard to protect in Kaziranga National Park.
                        If you wish to write to the Kaziranga Centenary management 
                          in protest, the email address is info@kaziranga100.com.