TOO LITTLE 
                        TOO LATE ? 
                        
                        The following 
                          article appeared in the Indian Express on 13 February 
                          2005.
                        The disappearance of tigers in Sariska rang the alarm 
                          bells. 

                          But India’s tiger reserves have been mauled for 
                          years writes Belinda Wright.
                        THE first sign of alarm about large-scale poaching 
                          of tigers dates back to August 1993, when 400 kg of 
                          tiger bones, eight tiger skins, and 59 leopard skins 
                          were seized in Delhi. The horrific size of the haul 
                          confirmed that organised wildlife crime had come of 
                          age in India. Since then, NGOs have documented poaching 
                          of tigers, habitat destruction and mismanagement time 
                          and again. But to little effect. Both the Central and 
                          the state governments have, for the most part, remained 
                          silent spectators to the carnage, hiding behind excuses, 
                          endless committees, and a ludicrous lack of transparency 
                          and accountability. 
                        More often than not, a tiger’s death is veiled 
                          in secrecy. And woe betide the manager of a protected 
                          area if he reports poaching or declares a decline in 
                          tiger population: All that will result most probably 
                          is his transfer. 
                        In fact, managers are actively discouraged from showing 
                          a hands-on interest in anti-poaching efforts. Last month, 
                          a senior forest officer in central India refused to 
                          cooperate in a raid involving two tiger skins. He was 
                          expecting a promotion and didn’t want ‘‘trouble 
                          in my area’’. And thus, in the world of 
                          officialdom, tiger figures rarely diminish. What a wonderful 
                          bluff it has all been. 
                        Over the past decade, I have been involved in hundreds 
                          of seizures of tiger and leopard parts. Pictures flash 
                          through my mind: Stinking piles of bones and skins; 
                          a trader in central India pulling out a crumbling tiger 
                          skin in the back of a moving car; five tiger skeletons 
                          packed in sacks; criminals like Sansar Chand (who has 
                          been convicted twice and has about 20 cases pending 
                          against him in five states) walking free from courtrooms 
                          and, yes, of officials and politicians conniving in 
                          the slaughter. 
                        After 35 years of being involved, professionally and 
                          passionately, with these breathtaking animals, I can 
                          now say with despair that I have held the skins and 
                          bones of more dead tigers in my hands, than I have watched 
                          live ones. 
                        Our wildlife criminals are bold and ruthless. And why 
                          shouldn’t they be? Nobody seems particularly interested 
                          in catching them. The tigers of Sariska must have been 
                          a piece of cake for poachers to finish off last monsoon, 
                          when there were no tourists in the park and virtually 
                          no patrolling. 
                        The Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), which 
                          I head, has documented the illegal killing of 719 tigers 
                          and 2,474 leopards between 1994 and 2004. Included in 
                          the total are 16 tigers killed by electrocution (a method 
                          now popular with poachers) over the past four years. 
                          Not included are mixed bags of claws, which would add 
                          further to the gruesome tally. Each dead tiger represents 
                          the loss of an extraordinary legacy and asset for India, 
                          like a chip off the Taj Mahal. 
                        Way back in July 1995, WPSI put forward a detailed 
                          proposal to the government for a Directorate of Enforcement 
                          for Wildlife Crimes. Despite numerous representations, 
                          the only step forward in these 10 years is a name change; 
                          what is now being discussed in those unfathomable corridors 
                          is a Wildlife Crime Control Bureau. In September 1998, 
                          the then Home Minister assured us that it would be done. 
                          In January 2000, he again said, "It will be done!’’ 
                          We are still waiting... 
                        AND so is the world. Thousands of letters have been 
                          written to the government and at least two world leaders 
                          (Bill Clinton and Tony Blair) have brought up the issue 
                          of tiger protection being a matter of international 
                          concern during official meetings. But to no avail. 
                        India recently proved that it does not care about international 
                          concerns. Exasperated by India’s sluggishness 
                          in enacting appropriate legislation, the Convention 
                          on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITE, 
                          the largest wildlife treaty in the world) suspended 
                          India from the Convention on December 22, 2004, along 
                          with Gambia. 
                        Meanwhile, the government spends huge sums on "‘tiger 
                          protection’’, money that is spent largely 
                          on infrastructure and salaries for the 4,960 front-line 
                          forest staff in the 28 tiger reserves in 17 states. 
                          Officially, there are 1,576 tigers in these reserves, 
                          so there are more than three guardians per tiger. The 
                          current annual budget (2003-3004) for Project Tiger 
                          is Rs 30.67 crore. That comes to an astonishing account 
                          of Rs 2 lakh per tiger. 
                        So why are these tiger reserves so vulnerable to poachers? 
                          Clearly, the money is not being spent effectively. The 
                          lack of accountability and independent audit are glaring 
                          lacunas. It is widely known that state governments are 
                          not releasing funds, nor are they filling posts or thoroughly 
                          investigating tiger deaths. 
                        In Delhi, there are more wildlife cases pending in 
                          the courts than in any other city; it is the base of 
                          known wildlife criminals such as Sansar Chand and remains 
                          the hub of the illegal wildlife trade. 
                        On January 31 this year came another shocking case, 
                          when Delhi police seized 39 leopard skins, two tiger 
                          skins, 42 otter skins, 60 kg of tiger and leopard paws, 
                          three kg of tiger claws, 14 tiger canines, 10 tiger 
                          jaws and other bones, and about 135 kg of porcupine 
                          quills. 
                        Four people were arrested, all related to or employed 
                          by Sansar Chand. What further evidence do we need that 
                          wildlife traders are operating with impunity? 
                        We have excellent wildlife laws, but they are not effectively 
                          enforced. Only a handful of people have ever been convicted 
                          for killing a tiger or trading in its parts, despite 
                          hundreds of pending cases. Even the big case of August 
                          1993 in Delhi is still languishing in the courts. 
                        Another major concern is the widespread encroachment 
                          of tiger and other wild habitat. Less than five per 
                          cent of India has been set aside for protection and 
                          only a little over one per cent comes under National 
                          Park protection. Many of these areas have no long-term 
                          management plan and independent research is actively 
                          discouraged, to the extent that we do not even have 
                          a clear idea of the natural treasures that we still 
                          have. 
                        To further erode these vital watersheds and banks of 
                          biodiversity is sheer lunacy. Ultimately it is the poorest 
                          communities that suffer when our natural defences are 
                          exploited. It is imperative that we achieve our development 
                          goals without further pilfering our forest cover. 
                        Belinda Wright, tiger conservationist and campaigner, 
                          is executive director of the Wildlife Protection Society 
                          of India 
                        © 2005: Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Ltd. 
                          All rights reserved throughout the world.