Release 
                        of 'Kaziranga Inheritance' 
                        
                        11th April 2005
                        You are probably all 
                          aware of the renewed tiger poaching crisis that has 
                          hit India. It was triggered a couple of months ago by 
                          the discovery that there were no tigers left in Sariska 
                          Tiger Reserve in Rajasthan, and that there was a drastic 
                          decline in tiger numbers in Ranthambhore, Panna, and 
                          a number of other important tiger habitats. These facts 
                          have not come as a huge surprise to WPSI, but it has 
                          definitely succeeded in shaking up the complacency - 
                          and in some cases, the complicity - of the authorities. 
                        
                        The good news is that the Prime Minister of India, 
                          Dr Manmohan Singh, has personally promised to take action 
                          - and that the crisis is being widely and effectively 
                          covered by the national and international media. 
                        Several of us had the privilege to be present at the 
                          release of Ranjit Barthakur and Bittu Sahgal's wonderful 
                          book on Kaziranga by the Prime Minister of India, Dr 
                          Manmohan Singh, at his residence on Friday, 8 April. 
                          The Prime Minister gave an inspiring address where he 
                          talked about his government's commitment to solve the 
                          present tiger crisis. "I am deeply concerned about 
                          what is happening in our forests," he said. "Reports 
                          of the decline in the tiger population have once again 
                          alerted us to this grim reality. I had sought a CBI 
                          enquiry into this and our government will take all the 
                          required steps to protect the tiger and other endangered 
                          species. Man and animals have equal rights in living 
                          in harmony with nature". 
                        Such a statement is music to our ears - the one thing 
                          that has been lacking in the last few years is political 
                          support for the battle to save tigers.
                        I must apologise for the lack of email messages recently 
                          to our friends and supporters. My colleagues and I at 
                          WPSI have been worked off our feet in the last few weeks, 
                          collecting and analysing information and generally trying 
                          to help curb the large-scale poaching that has been 
                          taking place. I have also been made a member, along 
                          with tiger conservationist Valmik Thapar, of a very 
                          active six member Empowered Committee that has been 
                          set up by the Rajasthan Government to look into the 
                          problems faced by Sariska, Ranthambhore and Bharatpur. 
                        
                        On a personal note last Friday I was presented with 
                          the Carl Zeiss Wildlife Conservation Award 2005, for 
                          "excellent in her campaign to save wild tigers". 
                          It was a great honour, particularly in these difficult 
                          times, and a marvellous tribute to all my colleagues 
                          at WPSI. 
                        With best wishes, 
                        Belinda