45 Leopard 
                        Skins seized in Delhi 
                        
                        The following 
                          is a copy of a Delhi Police press release. 
                        International Gang of Smugglers of Wildlife 
                          Trophies Busted
                        Date : 07, April’2005
                        With the arrest of (1) Anand @ Toshi 
                          S/o Nyima Dorjee R/o B-238, Nehru Vihar, Timar Pur, 
                          Delhi, (2) Lobsang Phuntsok S/o Tsring R/o H.NO. 165, 
                          Old Camp, Majnu Ka Tilla, Timar Pur, Delhi and (3) Jeet 
                          Bahadur Damang S/o Sahila R/o Johara Patti, Ward No.7, 
                          Kathmandu, Nepal, North District Police has busted an 
                          international racket indulging in illegal trade of wild 
                          animal Trophies.
                        INCIDENT
                        A secret information regarding illegal trafficking 
                          of trophies of wild animals from Majnu Ka Tilla was 
                          received in PS Timar Pur. On this information a team 
                          led by Inspector T.R. Mongia and consisting of SI Suman 
                          Kumar, HC Raj Singh, Ct. Jai Bhagwan, Ct. Rajbir, Ct. 
                          Ram Phal and Ct. Chhotey Lal was constituted to develop 
                          further information. A specific tip in this regard was 
                          received on 6th April’2005 that three persons 
                          in possession of trophies of wild animals can be apprehended 
                          near pontoon bridge crossing on Outer Ring Road as they 
                          were expected to pass through that side. Accordingly, 
                          a trap was laid and the three persons were arrested 
                          wit the trophies in their possession.
                        INVESTIGATION
                        On search of their bags of accused Anand @ Toshi, Lobsang 
                          Phuntsok & Jeet Bahadur, total of 59 trophies of 
                          wild animals were recovered. These consisted of 45 Leopard 
                          skins and 14 Otter skins. During interrogation they 
                          confessed to their crime and disclosed that they were 
                          given these trophies by one Shwang reportedly resident 
                          of Nepal, who had told them that he had bought these 
                          trophies from the men working for notorious poacher 
                          Sansar Chand R/o Sadar Bazar, Delhi. A case has been 
                          registered in this regard at PS Timar Pur under Wildlife 
                          (Protection) Act, 1972.
                        These trophies were to be transported to Nepal. Shwang 
                          had already left for Nepal and hunt is on to apprehend 
                          him. Further investigation in the case is on.
                        PROFILES OF ACCUSED
                        1. Anand @ Toshi, aged 30 years is a resident of Nehru 
                          Vihar, Timar Pur, Delhi & has studied upto 12th 
                          standard. He is married. He has two brothers and one 
                          sister. He has been engaged in the smuggling of trophies 
                          for the last one year. He was arranging storage and 
                          transportation of trophies to Nepal and was getting 
                          Rs.5,000/- in lieu of his services.
                        2. Lobsang Phuntsok, aged 50 years is a resident of 
                          Old Camp Majnu Ka Tilla, Timar Pur, Delhi and studied 
                          upto 5th Class. He is living alone. He has been engaged 
                          in the smuggling of trophies for the last 3-4 years. 
                          In this case, he had stored the trophies at his accommodation 
                          for a consideration of Rs.5,000/-.
                        3. Jeet Bahadur Damang, aged 30 years is the resident 
                          of Kathmandu, Nepal and studied upto 8th class. He is 
                          carried and has two children. He as been engaged in 
                          the smuggling trophies for the last 7-8 years. He was 
                          the carrier of these trophies to Nepal who would get 
                          Rs.1000/- per piece after safe delivery at Kathmandu.
                        RECOVERY
                        1. 45 Trophies of Leopard (reportedly worth Rs.36 lacs 
                          approx. in international market. 

                          2. 14 trophies of Otter (reportedly worth Rs.4 lacs 
                          approx. in internationals market)
                        TEAM
                        The team was led by Insp. T.R. Mongia, SHO/Timar Pur, 
                          assisted by SI Suman Kumar and 

                          consisted of:-
                        1. HC Raj Singh

                          2. Ct. Jai Bhagwan

                          3. Ct. Rajbir

                          4. Ct.Ram Phal

                          5. Ct. Chhotey Lal.
                       The entire operation was conducted under close supervision 
                          of Shri Rajan Bhagat, ACP/Civil Lines.
                        

                          DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF POLICE

                          NORTH DISTRICT:DELHI