Sansar 
                        Chand Finally Arrested 
                        
                        30th June 2005
                        The Delhi Police Crime 
                          Branch finally arrested the most notorious wildlife 
                          criminal in India, Sansar Chand, in Delhi today. The 
                          Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) assisted 
                          the Crime Branch with information.
                        Sansar has probably been responsible for more tiger 
                          and leopard deaths than anyone else in India. He was 
                          born in 1958, and has been involved with the wildlife 
                          skin trade virtually all his life. He was first arrested 
                          at the age of 16, in September 1974, in a case involving 
                          tiger and leopard skins and 676 other wildlife skins. 
                          Sansar and his gang members have at least 57 court cases 
                          pending against them in nine states in India - Delhi, 
                          Haryana, Rajasthan, Punjab, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, 
                          Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Karnataka, dating from 
                          September 1974 to April 2005. There are cases ­ 
                          and bail applications and appeals - that have been pending 
                          against him for up to 17 years.
                        Despite the large number of cases against Sansar and 
                          his colleagues, he has only received 2 convictions - 
                          for his first case in Delhi in 1974, and for a case 
                          in Bhilwara, Rajasthan, in January 2003. In April 2004, 
                          he was convicted to five years imprisonment for this 
                          case by the Ajmer courts. He appealed the conviction 
                          and three weeks later was granted bail. He was never 
                          seen again.
                        A key to Sansar Chand’s success is that his right-hand 
                          workers are usually family members. WPSI has identified 
                          36 family members operating in his gang. Sansar’s 
                          wife, Rani Saini, a politician in Delhi, is presently 
                          in jail in Jaipur, accused in a seizure of leopard parts 
                          in October 2004. His son, Akash, is also in jail in 
                          Jaipur.
                        Now the court battle will begin. Four enforcement agencies 
                          (the Central Bureau of Investigation, the Delhi Police, 
                          Delhi Forest and Wildlife Department and the Rajajsthan 
                          Police) are gearing up to press for the custody of Sansar 
                          Chand.
                        The accused will be produced before a Judicial Magistrate 
                          within 24 hours of his arrest. WPSI will follow the 
                          case every step of the way and plans to intervene to 
                          oppose any bail applications.