Sansar 
                        Chand Produced in Court 
                        
                        1st July 2005
                        Notorious wildlife 
                          trader Sansar Chand was produced before Mr. Manoj Jain, 
                          Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate of the Tis 
                          Hazari Court at 12.30 pm on 1st July'2005.
                        The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) applied for 
                          police custody in all the new wild life matters handed 
                          over to them by the Central Govt. Despite strong opposition 
                          by the defense lawyers Mr. Anil Sehgal and Mr. Pramod 
                          Dubey, the Court granted police custody of Sansar Chand 
                          to the CBI, and ordered that he be produced again on 
                          11th July'2005. However, the CBI stated that since Sansar 
                          would have to be taken to more than 4 states across 
                          India, a police remand of less than 10 days was insufficient 
                          time.
                        The court also took Sansar in judicial custody for 
                          the five wild life cases pending against him in Tis 
                          Hazari.
                        The Rajasthan police was represented by Sub-Inspector 
                          from Manak Chowk Police Station, Jaipur, where a seizure 
                          of leopard paws and claws took place in October 2004. 
                          The court asked the Rajasthan Police to re-apply once 
                          the CBI was through with Sansar.
                        Advocate Sudhir Mishra from The Wildlife Protection 
                          Society of India (WPSI) actively assisted CBI counsel 
                          Rajan Dahia and the Delhi Forest & Wildlife Deptt. 
                          during the court proceedings.