Illegal antler trade continues to flourish in city despite ban





The Hitavada, Nagpur

Published on 14th July'2005



The recent seizures of antlers around Nagpur has once again established
that the illegal trade in antlers, banned since 1998, is very much on.
More shockingly, Forest Department sources say, the city is the center
of this lucrative trade estimated at over Rs.100 Crores annually!



The continuing trade despite ban especially in and around the city that
has the headquarters of Forest department of the state, raises serious
questions about seriousness of the department to curb it.



Three seizures were made in the past two months of huge stock of
antlers around Nagpur (Khapa / Deolapar / Mansar). The stock had come
from adjoining states and interestingly all the shipments were headed
to Nagpur. The Forest Department is unable to find the ultimate
destination of the antlers.



There are illegal antler manufacturers in the city grouped under
Antlers association of India (AAI). The Union Government had given them
six months until July 5, 2005, to exhaust their existing stocks and
wind up their business. This was done after the ban when traders
pleaded that they had commitments to fulfill with foreign buyers and
that they should be given time to exhaust their existing stock.



"this sudden spurt in the illegal business can be linked to the
permission granted by the government to the dealers to sell off their
stocks", said a forest official not wanting to be named.



Talking to The Hitavada, Nitin Desai of Wildlife Protection Society of
India (WPSI) and the man largely responsible for imposition of the ban
on this trade, said, "I feel that the ban on collection of shed antlers
and manufacturing of antler articles has hardly had any impact on the
collection and manufacturing of those and it is continuing unabated."



More disturbing is that in some of the seizures antlers of
Barasingha  a schedule I animal  was found. The collection of
Barasingha antlers was not allowed even before the ban was imposed in
1998. it clearly indicates that some elements may be poaching animals
for antlers.



The then President of AAI and a very close aide of a Union Minister in
the UPA government Rakesh Sharma was arrested twice by the forest
officials in connection with three separate seizures of around 15,000
kgs of antlers.



Biogini International, run by Sharma, had declared a stock of only 5,325 kgs. Of antlers to the government in the year 1998.



The persons found to be in possession of these antlers had in their
written statement said that Sharma is the owner of these antlers.
However, Sharma had denied these claims and all the three cases are now
pending in courts.



Collection of shed antlers causing damage to forest flora and fauna





Antlers are prized item because they find multiple uses; particularly
in European fashion industry. At one time, collection of shed antlers
was considered harmless. However, now conservationists know that
collection of shed antlers also causes irreparable damage to the flora
and fauna of the forests as antlers are part of forest food chain.



Antlers store excess calcium for carnivores that prey on deer and
antelopes. Carnivores and scavengers are often seen feeding on them.



Picking up shed antlers may not involve killing of animals but it
deprives carnivores of their calcuium requirement. Even otherwise, they
are part of forest bio-mass and if they are not eaten, they putrefy and
return their nutrients to soil. For the human beings, antlers take the
shape of buttons in high fashion garments, cutlery items, decorative
pieces, butts of pistols, knife handles, pen-stands, and other items of
vanity. They fetch up to Rs. 2000 kgs in international market and hence
are a coveted commodity. This provides a great incentive for traders
and poachers to go after it.  They do not always wait for antlers
to be shed too. Often, poaching the animal provides an easy way to
collect the horns. A full grown sambhar can yield five to seven kgs of
antlers while a cheetal yields three to four kgs.