Ranthambhore Tiger Census Figures Released



PRESS RELEASE

New Delhi, 18 July 2005



Rajasthan Empowered Committee releases Ranthambhore Census Figures



Under the supervision of the Empowered Committee on Forests and
Wildlife Management constituted by the Hon'ble Chief Minister of
Rajasthan, census operations were carried out in Ranthambhore Tiger
Reserve during May-June, 2005. The technical input for the planning of
census operations using camera trap technique for tiger population
estimation and transect counts for estimating ungulate populations
including the training of field staff, data analyses and interpretation
was provided by a team of scientists and researchers from the Wildlife
Institute of India (WII), Dehradun. The Wildlife Protection Society of
India (WPSI), a national NGO, used for the first time in India the
Digital Pugmark Technique and a software programme for estimation of
tiger population.



Using the Digital Pugmark Technique, WPSI has estimated the population
of tiger in Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve to be 26. The WII Camera Trap
Technique has estimated the population of tigers in Ranthambhore Tiger
Reserve to be 21 with a range between 15 and 27. The traditional
analysis of tiger pugmarks carried out by the Rajasthan Forest
Department estimated 31 tigers. After analysing the data generated by
the three methods, the Empowered Committee on Forests and Wildlife
Management concluded that there are 26 tigers in Ranthambhore Tiger
Reserve.



In all eight ranges of Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve, 89 transects were
laid for ungulate counts and data was collected by the frontline staff
in the month of May 2005. A total of 1,119 km were walked by the
frontline staff and all the species observed were recorded.



"I am very pleased with the transparency of this exercise. It is a
model for the rest of India to follow - this is the first time that
such reliable estimates have been established, and an exercise of this
magnitude carried out in a tiger reserve", said Mr V.P. Singh, the
Chairman of the Empowered Committee. The study has also provided a
valuable insight to the distribution and abundance of wild ungulate
species, viz. Chital, Sambar, Nilgai, Chinkara and Wild Pig in
Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve. The Sambar density of 8.6 animals/sq. km
recorded in Ranthambhore is one of the highest in India.



The study has estimated that there are about 16,000 Chital, 9,800
Sambar, 9,500 Nilgai, 2,100 Chinkara and 2,600 Wild Pig in
Ranthambhore, which can easily support a tiger population of between
25-30.The transect study has also revealed a very high proportion of
domestic livestock in the buffer areas of RTR in which no tigers have
been observed.



The census operations have demonstrated that the close cooperation
between the State Government's Empowered Committee, the park
management, a scientific institution and a NGO can provide very
valuable and reliable information on tiger and ungulate numbers and
also enhance understanding for effective management of national parks
and sanctuaries. The permanent transects in Ranthambhore Tiger Reserve
will be used for regular monitoring of animal species.



Released by:

Shri V.P.Singh, M.P

Chairman,

Empowered Committee on

Forests and Wildlife Management,

Govt. of Rajasthan