Supreme Court Allows Joint Inspection of Corbett Bypass 

29th July 2005
                        


                        

On 29 July 2005, the Supreme Court of India allowed a joint inspection of 
the proposed road alignment that will bypass Corbett National Park. If this 
alignment is finalized, it will serve to connect the two major regions of 
the state of Uttaranchal while avoiding damage to the Park.
                        


                        

The latest alignment has already been endorsed of by the states of 
Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh.  The Division Bench of the Supreme Court, 
led by Justice Sabbarwal and Justice Arun Kumar, have now allowed the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Wildlife Protection Society of 
India (WPSI) to inspect it.
                        


                        

The controversial road project was floated by the newly created state of 
Uttaranchal (UA) to directly connect its Kumaon and Garhwal regions. WPSI 
had filed an intervention in the Supreme Court in 2001, stating that the 
proposed alignment would slash through Corbett Tiger Reserve, fragmenting 
one of the most important tiger and elephant habitats in India.
                        


                        

Since the Reserve lies along UA's southern border with Uttar Pradesh (UP), 
WPSI proposed that the stretch of road that was to cut through the Reserve 
could be shifted south, through UP. Over the past two years, various other 
alignments were proposed and shot down: mainly by UP protesting that the 
stretch of road in its territory would seriously damage the few forests it 
had left.
                        


                        

Finally, in July 2005, Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh agreed to an alignment 
that will shift part of the road south, avoiding damage to Corbett National 
Park and contiguous Reserve Forests in Uttar Pradesh. This new alignment 
will be jointly inspected by UA, UP, the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests and WPSI.