Marine experts appeal to Jairam Ramesh on proposed POSCO port
 


PRESS BRIEF8.11.10In
the wake of the Vedanta scandal comes another multinational industrial
project of epic proportions threatening both local communities and
their environment. Although an Avatar-sized war is yet to be waged,
reinforcements are on their way with several scientists,
conservationists and concerned citizens standing up against the
proposed POSCO project along the coast of Orissa. The POSCO steel plant
proposes to build a port just 12 km south of Paradip and just 25 km
north of the Devi River Mouth which is recorded mass nesting site for
endangered olive ridley turtles. Besides disrupting the annual
congregations and migration of sea turtles in this area, the port also
poses a risk of environmental damage through its impacts on the coast
and potential spills of various chemicals including oil. The MoEF
committee commissioned to investigate the POSCO’s adherence to
stipulations found that nearly all environmental laws were flouted and
clearly stated that the forest clearance given to the project was
illegal. Despite this, the Ministry of Environment and Forests have not
completely ruled out the possibility that the project will continue. In
order to show solidarity with the thousands of locals protesting their
forced relocation, and to highlight the critical nature of ecologically
sensitive area that will be damaged by these projects, a group of over
300 turtle biologists and enthusiasts raised their concerns regarding
unplanned port development in Orissa at the International Sea Turtle
Symposium on Sea Turtle Biology and Conservation in Goa earlier this
year. As these were not
heeded, several scientists and conservationists including Dr. Kartik
Shanker Indian Institute of Science, Romulus Whitaker, Madras Crocodile
Bank Trust, Dr. Bivash Pandav and Dr. Sejal Worah, WWF, Biswajit
Mohanty, Belinda Wright, Mitali Dutt Kakkar and several others have put
together a letter for the MoEF, listing their concerns with POSCO's
proposed port. This letter was sent to Mr Jairam Ramesh, Minister of
Environment and Forests, appealing for an enquiry into the CRZ
clearances
granted to the project citing faulty and incomplete impact assessment
procedures and making a fervent plea for the protection of Orissa's
natural heritage, under threat from rampant port development..

Link to text of the letterOnline petition