Stop the Slaughter – Stop Wearing Tiger Skins
                        
                        

                        13th Jan. 2006

                        

NGOS RALLY TOGETHER TO STOP THE TIGER SKIN TRADE

                        

This is the simple message behind a new initiative started this month
by a coalition of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) aimed at
raising awareness among the tiger and leopard skin wearers in Tibet and
western China, many of whom are unaware of the devastating impact the
skin trade is having on big cat populations.

                        

Information is being disseminated through an exhibition of photographs,
posters, leaflets and an awareness film in the Tibetan language. The
film, produced by the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) and the
Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) with the support of Global
Tiger Patrol (GTP), contains shocking footage obtained during a recent
EIA and WPSI survey of the trade across the Tibetan plateau where the
true and horrific scale of tiger and leopard skin use was revealed.

                        

The initiative was launched at Kalachakra, a major spiritual event in
the Tibetan Buddhist calendar, which is currently taking place at
Amravati, southern India. Tens of thousands of Tibetans from all over
the world will come face to face with the cruel reality of the trade as
the coalition displays stark images tracing the story of the tiger from
the jungles of India, to a brutal death at the hand of poachers, to the
final indignity of being reduced to a fashionable ornament for Tibetan
costumes.

                        

Posters and information leaflets, produced with the assistance of The
Fund for the Tiger, along with the awareness film will be distributed
amongst visitors to the Kalachakra by representatives of Khawakarpo
Tibet Culture Centre who are manning a stall at the festival.

                        

His Holiness the Dalai Lama has himself condemned the illegal trade in
tiger and leopard skin, and on 9th January addressed the crowds at the
Kalachakra stating that he had been very embarrassed to see photographs
of people wearing banned animal furs and skins in Tibet. He also
commended Tibetans working for animal welfare.

                        

Belinda Wright, Executive Director of WPSI, said in New Delhi today:
“We hope that the shocking images being used in the material will
encourage Tibetans to abandon the cruel practice of decorating costumes
with tiger, leopard or otter skins.”