European Politicians Call For Action to Stop the Tiger and Leopard Skin Trade


15th Feb., 2006

                        




Strasbourg, 15th February 2006; Leading Members of the European
Parliament (MEPs) are calling on China, Nepal and India to increase
efforts to break the smuggling networks involved in the international
illegal trade of tiger and leopard skins.

                        

In a Written Declaration, put down in Parliament, the MEPs expressed
concern regarding the role of organised criminal networks engaged in
trafficking tiger and leopard skins from India into China via Nepal,
and have called on EU Member States to offer assistance to these
countries to facilitate improved enforcement.

                        

Speaking at a press conference today, Glyn Ford, Labour MEP for the
South West of England, stated: “The only way that we can stop
criminal gangs exterminating tigers and leopards is by joint, concerted
government action by China, Nepal and India.”

                        

Investigators from the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) and the
Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) recently uncovered the huge
market for skins in China and Tibet which is now the main factor
driving the poaching of tigers in the wild. Costumes decorated with
great swathes of tiger and leopard skin are being worn at festivals
across the Tibetan Plateau region. EIA and WPSI witnessed hundreds of
people at these festivals wearing costumes decorated with skins. They
also brought back startling images of tiger and leopard skins openly
for sale in shops and markets in Tibet and surrounding Chinese
Provinces.

                        

Belinda Wright, WPSI Executive Director, stated: “We are
delighted that this Written Declaration has been put forward. It sends
out a clear message to China, India and Nepal that the EU is concerned
about the trade in tiger and leopard skins. Illegal trade is currently
the biggest threat to the survival of India’s wild tigers and if
no action is taken, it will mark the end of the tiger.”

                        

                        

                        For further information and images, please contact:

Belinda Wright, WPSI at Tel: 4163 5920 /21 /22 & mobile: 98 111 90690

                        

Editor’s Notes:

                        

* The Written Declaration on the illegal trade in tiger and leopard
skins’ was tabled by Glyn Ford, Labour MEP for the South West of
England, and David Martin, Labour MEP for Scotland.

                        

* The declaration requires 372 MEP signatures by the 27th April 2006 before it can be entered into the minutes of Parliament.

                        

* The Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA), based in London, is the
world’s leading organisation dedicated to investigating and
exposing environmental crime.

                        

* The Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) works closely with
Indian enforcement authorities, providing actionable intelligence on
tiger and leopard poaching and trafficking