Alarm as Tiger Habitats Vanish



                        

- By Yojna Gusai

                        

The Asian Age, New Delhi

                        

New Delhi, July 30: A survey, the first of its kind, has revealed a
drastic reduction in tiger habitats in tiger-bearing forests, a very
disturbing fact that puts a big question mark on the survival of
India’s tiger population.

                        

Tiger habitats raise the probability of the long-term survival of
tigers as they have favourable conditions required for the survival of
these big cats.

                        

The survey "Evaluating Tiger Habitat at the Tehsil Level" has been
conducted by the Project Tiger Directorate and the Wildlife Institute
of India to find out exact areas which have tiger populations. The
survey reveals that in some states, like Bihar, 75 per cent area of the
state (in terms of districts) has lost its tigers in the recent past.
The loss is attributed to increasing pressure for the diversion of
forest lands for agriculture and development purposes.

                        

Overall, tigers have become locally extinct from 97 districts of the
country, in the recent past. Obtain a precise and clear picture of the
actual tiger habitat, within the forest areas and tiger reserves, the
data was compiled on tiger presence reported at the tehsil (district)
level for the past 5-6 years only.

                        

Admitting that inadequate information on tiger habitats and associated
cofactors has been a limiting factor in developing strategies for its
long term survival, Union ministry of environment and forests secretary
Prodipto Ghosh has noted that the study highlights state level habitat
situation. Currently, tigers are present in forest areas of 17 states
in the country.

                        

While the country might boast of increasing its total forest cover,
when it come to tiger habitat within that forest area, there is a
decline causing decline in the density of tiger population in absence
of prey and favourable conditions. The survey carries a deatiled state
wise record, showing how much an individual state has lost its tiger
habitat or tiger population in the recent past.

                        

For instance, the state of Bihar has a total forest area of 5,842
kilometre square (km sq), which is mere 6 per cent of the total
geographical area of the state. Tiger population is found only in 965
km sq of the total forested area, which is only 16 per cent of the
forest area. Within this, the area of potential tiger habitat is 869 km
sq only.

                        

In the state of Rajasthan, which has 21,292 km sq of forested area,
tigers are currently reported in only 1,835 km sq, which is mere 8.6
per cent of the total forested area. Area of potential tiger habitat is
529 km sq only.

                        

Similarly, the state of West Bengal, which has 10,842 km sq of forested
area has only 2,649 km sq of area where tigers can be found. But the
actual tiger habitat is 2204 km sq only. The state has also lost tigers
from 47 per cent of its districts in the recent past.

                        

Uttaranchal, is one of the few states, where tiger habitat is found in
greater areas. The state has 24,536 sq km of forested area and tiger is
reportedly found in 13,954 km sq of area, which is 56.9 per cent of the
total forested area. Its neighbouring state of Uttar Pradesh, with
14,424 km sq of forested area, has 8,615 km sq of area where tigers are
found. And within this, the actual tiger habitat is 5,506 km sq only.

                        

In terms of tiger loss in recent past, 53 per cent of UP’s districts have lost tigers.