19 Leopard, 6 Tiger skins seized in 4 weeks



                        

Avijit Ghosh

                        

[ 8 Aug, 2006 0315hrs IST TIMES NEWS NETWORK ]

                        http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/articleshow/1869054.cms
                        

NEW DELHI: With police and forest officials seizing at least six tiger
skins, 19 leopard skins and several kilograms of big cat bones from
illegal wildlife traders across India in the past four weeks, alarmed
conservationists feel that the feeble efforts by UPA government
notwithstanding, poaching continues to be child's play.

                        

The seizures were made between July 12 to August 6 in 11 separate
incidents in the small towns and qasbahs of Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.

                        

The latest tiger skin confiscation took place near Mala railway station
in Pilibhit district on Saturday. The Uttar Pradesh forest department
seized two tiger skins and 1 kg tiger bones. A man of Bangladeshi
origin was apprehended. Two others escaped.

                        

"These are skins of adult tigers about 10-11 feet long," says Tito
Joseph of Wildlife Protection Society of India. Conservationists say
these incidents indicate that traders of tiger and leopard skins exist
in cities, towns and qasbahs alike.

                        

Some confiscations have been made from little-known towns such as
Kanker in Chhattisgarh where a 10-feet-long tiger skin was seized by
the forest department on July 12.

                        

Similarly, two leopard skins were confiscated on July 30 from the boondocks of Orissa's Kandhamal district.

                        

Tiger conservationist Valmik Thapar feels that saving the tiger is not
a priority for the UPA government. "Even today, there are 20,000
vacancies for forest staff. And the average age of forest guards is
50," he says.

                        

As per government estimates, about 3,600 tigers survive in India. But
Thapar offers a different figure. "On the basis of my 30 years
experience in conservation, my guess is anything between 1,200 to
1,500," he says.

                        

Among those arrested last month was Ashok Sharma, son of alleged
wildlife trader Ratiram Sharma. On July 25, he was on his way to Bhutan
with one tiger skin and three leopard skins when police apprehended him.

                        

Ratiram had earlier been nabbed on July 14 with four leopard skins, 11
kg of tiger bones and skulls and 16 kg of rhino skins. WPSI sources say
the skins and bones were sourced from animals poached in Assam.