Wild Tigers on the Brink; Environmentalists Call for China and India to Combat the Illicit Skin Trade  

27th
September 2006






Status of Tiger and Leopard

   Skinning The Cat (5mb)

                              download video (5mb) requires Real Player



Delhi

Environmentalists are calling on the governments of India and China to take
action against the criminals involved in the illegal skin trade. The
subject will be a major topic of discussion by the international
community attending the upcoming Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) Standing Committee, who will be meeting in
Geneva from 2 to 6 October 2006.



Recent undercover investigations by the Environmental Investigation Agency (EIA) 

and the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) revealed that the
trade in tiger and leopard skins in China and Tibet continues to
thrive, operating without any hindrance from the Chinese government
whilst driving India’s wild tigers closer towards extinction.



Investigators
discovered that while the open use of tiger and leopard skins for
decorating costumes seemed to be in decline, traders now appeared to be
catering to an increased demand for the use of whole tiger and leopard
skins as home décor and prestigious gifts. Consumers driving
this demand include Chinese tourists, local Chinese businessmen and
government officials. 



Belinda Wright, Director of WPSI stated; “Despite many
promises from both the Indian and Chinese governments, no effective
action has been taken to crack down on the hardcore criminals behind
the skin trade. The governments involved are in a state of lethargy,
and, in the case of China, even appear to be condoning the
trade.”



In the markets of China, investigators documented the open and easily
accessible trade in tiger and leopard skins. In the space of just ten
days, investigators met 11 traders who offered them whole tiger and
leopard skins. The traders were clearly aware of the illegality of
their operations, but were unconcerned about the threat of arrest or
disruption by local authorities; one trader even said that enforcement
had decreased in the last two years.  



Debbie Banks, Head of EIA’s Tiger Campaign, stated;
“This trade is run by highly organised criminal networks who
have far too much invested to let a few isolated raids and random
seizures deter them. If the governments are to stand a chance of
combating this illegal trade, they will need to recognise this and
direct their enforcement teams 

to take more proactive, intelligence-led action.”



The USA government has submitted a document for discussion at the 54th
meeting of the CITES Standing Committee on the illegal trade in tiger
parts. This document recommends that the members agree on parameters
for measuring progress by tiger range states to combat the trade. If
endorsed, Parties such as China and India would have to show that
sufficient action has been taken by April 2007, or risk the suspension
of trade in CITES listed species.



EIA and WPSI call on all Parties to CITES to recognise the urgency of
the matter. They also urge the wider international community to provide
financial support and enforcement expertise to facilitate the
development of specialised, multi-agency enforcement units capable of
tackling the organised criminal networks behind this illicit trade. 



Wright continued: “Enforcement is not controversial or the
subject of scientific debate. It is quite simply essential. The clock
is ticking for the tiger and there is only so much more talking we can
do, the time for action is now, before the last tiger
vanishes”.



















For more information please contact:


Belinda Wright, WPSI on +91 11 4163 5920/ 21

Ashley Misplon, EIA on +44 (0)20 7354 7960


Status of Tiger and Leopard
Skinning the Cat:Crime and Politics of the Big Cat Skin Trade

 (5mb)