Tiger Experts Dismayed That Tiger Meat on Chinese Menu 



                        Kathmandu
– International conservation groups are calling on the Chinese
government to open an immediate investigation into China’s
largest tiger farm, after a Beijing-based news team reported it has
proof that the farm’s restaurant serves tiger meat. 

 

The request stems from a report by Independent Television News (ITN) on
the results of DNA testing of a piece of  tiger meat served to ITN
staff in February at Xiongsen Bear and Tiger Mountain Village near
Guilin.  After ITN aired a story about the farm’s tiger
entree, the businessman who owns the farm denied the claim.  The
DNA was then tested by a laboratory in China.   

 

“China should take immediate action to investigate this
report.  It’s outrageous and shocking to think that one of
the world’s most endangered animals could be served as a trendy
dinner right under the noses of Chinese authorities,” said
Prasanna S. Yonzon of Wildlife Conservation Nepal. “It proves
what we’ve said all along: tiger farms in China have nothing to
do with conservation and everything to do with making money.” 

 

The owner of the tiger farm serving the meat was a member of the
Chinese government delegation to last week’s International Tiger
Symposium in Kathmandu, Nepal. The delegation, led by State Forestry
Administration officials, assured the meeting of government delegates
and tiger experts that the burgeoning tiger farms in China were
operating within the law.  

 

“The tiger farms are business operations. It is not surprising
that these businessmen breed tigers to sell their products. What is
surprising is that the tiger farm owners are allowed to attend the
meeting of this esteemed world body,” said Grace Ge Gabriel, Asia
Regional Director for IFAW. “While all other participants are
discussing ways to protect wild tigers, these tiger farm owners are
openly promoting the trade of tiger parts. Their shameful actions are
damaging China’s image the world over.” 

 

More than 4,000 captive-bred tigers are housed on China’s tiger
farms, several of which have breweries attached that make what they
claim is “lion-bone” wine although it is sold in
tiger-shaped bottles and openly promoted as containing tiger bone. The
wealthy farm owners are putting pressure on China to lift its 14-year
ban on trade in tiger products.  

Tiger experts believe this would only rekindle demand and open opportunities for criminals trading in products from 

tigers poached in the wild.  
                        ### 

                        
                        Additional information:  
The International Tiger Coalition, an alliance of 30 organizations
representing more than 100 organizations and millions of people
worldwide, believes reinforcement of China’s 14-year internal ban
on tiger trade is essential for securing a future for wild tigers. 

 

Aaranyak

American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine

Animal Welfare Institute

Association of Zoos & Aquariums

 Born Free Foundation

 Born Free USA

 British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums

 Care for the Wild International

 Conservation International   

David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation

 Environmental Investigation Agency

 Global Tiger Patrol

Humane Society International

 Humane Society of the United States

 International Fund for Animal Welfare

 Save The Tiger Fund

 Species Survival Network

 The Corbett Foundation

 Tigris Foundation

 TRAFFIC

 WildAid

 Wildlife Alliance

 Wildlife Conservation Nepal

 Wildlife Conservation Society

 Wildlife Protection Society of India

 Wildlife Trust of India

 World Association of Zoos & Aquariums

 World Society for the Protection of Animals

 WWF

 Zoological Society of London