Conservationists Call on India to Support China’s Ban on Tiger Trade

                        
                        

                        May 16, 2007

International Tiger Coalition

                        

An international coalition of 35 organizations is calling on India to
ask China to keep its ban on trade in tiger bone in place. A Chinese
government delegation is in India all week to discuss tigers, among
other issues, with Indian officials. This visit comes as China
considers lifting a ban it placed on trade in tiger products in 1993.

                        

“We hope that the Indian government will communicate to the
Chinese delegation how important China's 14-year ban on tiger trade has
been to the protection of India's treasured wild tiger
populations,” the International Tiger Coalition said in an open
statement. “Furthermore, we hope the Indian government will
stress the absolute necessity of keeping this ban in place in order to
secure a future for India’s tigers.”

                        

There are several “tiger farms” in China that,
collectively, house about 5,000 live tigers. Pressure to lift the ban
is coming from the investors in these tiger farms, who stand to make
enormous profits if China’s ban is lifted. The coalition
recommends an immediate moratorium on breeding at China’s tiger
farms so that the current population of captive tigers does not grow,
as well as the eventual closure of all tiger farms.

                        

The International Tiger Coalition is an unprecedented alliance made up
of environmental, zoo and animal protection organizations as well as
the traditional Chinese medicine community, which have come together to
speak with one voice in asking China to keep its successful 14-year ban
on tiger trade in place to ensure a future for wild tigers. The
coalition believes any reopening of tiger trade in China’s
booming economy will rekindle an enormous demand that will threaten the
survival of remaining wild tiger populations throughout Asia.

                        

“There are simply too few tigers left in the wilds of Asia to
risk reopening trade of any kind from any source,” said Belinda
Wright, Executive Director of the Wildlife Protection Society of India
(WPSI), a coalition member. “We dare not risk an entire species
for the financial gain of a handful of investors.”

                        

Aaranyak

American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine

Animal Welfare Institute

Animals Asia Foundation

Association of Zoos & Aquariums

Born Free Foundation

Born Free USA

British and Irish Association of Zoos & Aquariums

Care for the Wild International

Conservation International

Council of Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine

David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation

Environmental Investigation Agency

Global Tiger Patrol

Humane Society International

Humane Society of the United States

International Fund for Animal Welfare

PeunPa

Ranthambhore Foundation

Save The Tiger Fund

Species Survival Network

The Corbett Foundation

Tigris Foundation

TRAFFIC

21st Century Tiger

WildAid

Wildlife Alliance

Wildlife Conservation Nepal

Wildlife Conservation Society

Wildlife Protection Society of India

Wildlife Trust of India

World Association of Zoos & Aquariums

World Society for the Protection of Animals

WWF

Zoological Society of London