Groups Release TV Spot Urging Nations To Reject Reopening of China Tiger Trade

                        

                        29 May 2007

International Tiger Coalition













Contact: Belinda Wright, WPSI




 


91 11 4163 5920/ 21/ 23






London – In advance of the world’s largest wildlife trade
meeting next week, 35 organisations have launched a powerful, 4-minute
television spot urging China to keep its ban on tiger trade.



One of the UK’s leading actors, Martin Jarvis, lent his voice to
the spot, which details the consequences that reopening legal trade
would have on wild tigers. The public service announcement can be
viewed at www.endtigertrade.org.



Investors in massive, captive tiger breeding centers in China are
putting pressure on the Chinese government to lift its successful
14-year-old ban on trade in tiger parts so they can legally sell
products like tiger bone wine and tiger meat. The topic is expected to
be discussed next week when officials from 171 nations gather for
meetings of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
(CITES) in The Netherlands.



“Closing China’s tiger markets has helped take the pressure
off wild tiger populations across Asia,” said Steve Trent of
WildAid. “If China lifts its ban, it will make it open season on
tigers in the wild. The crime syndicates that control the black market
for tiger parts will use such a legal market to ‘launder’
poached tigers through. By keeping the ban, China will demonstrate its
continued commitment and global leadership for tiger
conservation.”



To oppose such a move, 35 environmental, zoo and animal protection
organizations, as well as the traditional Chinese medicine community,
have joined together as the International Tiger Coalition. The
coalition is calling for an end to trade in tiger parts and products
through increased intelligence-led law enforcement and strengthening
existing tiger trade bans.



“Next week’s CITES meeting gives world leaders an
opportunity to speak up for one of the world’s most endangered
and most hunted animals,” said Debbie Banks of the Environmental
Investigation Agency. “People around the world who care about
tigers must let their governments know that they want them to oppose
any resumption of tiger trade anywhere.”



 Tiger supporters can take action at www.endtigertrade.org.



 Aaranyak

 American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine

 Animal Welfare Institute 

 Animals Asia Foundation

 Association of Zoos & Aquariums 

 Born Free Foundation 

 Born Free USA 

 British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums 

 Care for the Wild International 

 Conservation International 

 Council of Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine

 David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation 

 Environmental Investigation Agency 

 Global Tiger Patrol 

 Humane Society International 

 Humane Society of the United States 

 International Fund for Animal Welfare PeunPa 

 Ranthambhore Foundation 

 Save The Tiger Fund 

 Species Survival Network 

 The Corbett Foundation 

 Tigris Foundation 

 TRAFFIC 

 21st Century Tiger 

 WildAid 

 Wildlife Alliance 

 Wildlife Conservation Nepal 

 Wildlife Conservation Society 

 Wildlife Protection Society of India 

 Wildlife Trust of India 

 World Association of Zoos & Aquariums 

 World Society for the Protection of Animals 

 WWF 

 Zoological Society of London