Conservationists send open letter to PM urging action to save the tiger 

                        


05 June 2007

Tiger United Front

                        

World Environment day over 140 tiger experts, NGOs and prominent
citizens sent an open letter to the Prime Minister expressing the
critical need to act immediately to save India’s national animal
– the tiger. Recent government monitoring studies have
unequivocally confirmed what conservationists have been been saying for
years: the tiger is in steep decline; it is not adequately protected
and unless action is taken now, it will be too late to stem the slide
to extinction.

                        

It is likely that there are less tigers in India now than there were
when Project Tiger was set up in 1973. Clearly the present system is
failing. The signatories request the Prime Minister’s
intervention in making the wildlife management system more effective,
more professional, more open and more accountable. Today’s
scenario demands change in the system: our forests and wildlife can no
longer be successfully managed by a department that was set up for
commercial forestry, a body which is closed to changing ideas and new
knowledge.

                        

The signatories believe that it is time that the Central and State
Governments recognise the crucial importance of wilderness areas and
wildlife to the well-being of the country. They have requested the
Prime Minister to give nature the status it deserves by bifurcating the
present Ministry so that wildlife and forest issues have an exclusive
Ministry.

                        

In the eyes of the world the tiger and India are synonymous. India, the
country with the largest population of wild tigers, has the
responsibility of securing its future. It would be criminal to allow
this majestic animal to disappear due to our neglect.

                        

On World Environment day we call upon the Government and the whole country to come together to save our national animal.
                        ________________________________________
                        
                        Dr Manmohan Singh

Prime Minister of India

South Block, Raisina Hill

New Delhi 110 011 

31st May 2007 

                        

                        

Honourable Prime Minister,

                        

The tiger is facing its most severe crisis to date. We must act immediately to secure its future. Tomorrow will be too late.

                        

The preliminary findings of the all-India survey, conducted by the
Wildlife Institute of India (WII), National Tiger Conservation
Authority (NTCA) and MOEF - despite its weaknesses - broadly confirm
our worst fears; India is left with a handful of tiger populations,
virtually all of which are found in inviolate areas.

                        

We believe urgent action is required on the following fronts, if the surviving wild tiger populations are to be secured:

                        

                        

                        1.     Secure the tiger’s critical breeding habitats 

                        

The WII/NTCA recently presented information on the central Indian
landscape. This data should immediately be put in the public domain so
that it may be properly evaluated and available to assist the tiger
conservation community to focus future efforts on the critical
surviving populations of wild tigers.

This WII/NTCA data shows clearly that tigers and people do not
co-exist: they survive only where human disturbance is absent or
minimal. We must focus our attention on protecting the few remaining
inviolate tracts where tigers are still found - largely Tiger Reserves
- and the connectivity between them, before all is lost. The interests
of the tiger and associated wildlife in these areas must be paramount. 

                        

                        

                        2.     Make the National Wildlife Crime Bureau operational immediately, headed by an IPS officer

                        

It is essential that the Wildlife Crime Bureau be immediately
activated. There is no time to lose – hundreds of tigers and
other species have been killed since this idea was first mooted. The
Bureau must not just exist on paper; it needs teeth to function and
should be headed by a professionally trained, reputed police officer
with relevant expertise. 

                        

                        

                        3.      Set up a specialized field force to deal with poaching

                        

Poaching is now in the hands of organized cartels, similar to the drugs
and arms trade, and it needs to be tackled by a professionally trained
and qualified force. Wildlife and forestry need this specialized force
in addition to the Forest Department, in the way that Railways and
Industry have their own specialized forces. 

                        

                        4.   Creation of a Ministry for Forests and Wildlife

                        

The recent appointment of two Ministers of State to the MOEF under your
leadership provides an excellent opportunity to resolve many of the
contradictions and conflicts that exist in the present ministry. We
believe that wildlife conservation would greatly benefit if the
ministry was bifurcated into two - one dealing exclusively with forests
and wildlife issues, and the other with broader environmental issues
such as EIA, pollution, etc. 

                        

                        5.   
Encourage wildlife research, independent audits and open lines of
communication between the MOEF and non-governmental experts

                        

India has a large pool of knowledge outside the government’s
management system. The exchange of information and knowledge is
essential for creative management. We believe that India’s
conservation objectives would be achievable if we had an inclusive and
participatory Ministry that recognized and embraced the work that is
being done across the country by qualified scientists and independent
conservationists, rather than have it impeded by MOEF-NTCA as happens
at present.

                        

The recently drafted wildlife research guidelines are restrictive and
in effect discourage research activities. These need to be re-drafted.
We require your leadership for a completely new initiative to promote
and encourage research and to develop an independent monitoring of
tigers and other wildlife populations. 

                        

                        6.      Stand firm against any move by China to re-open trade in tiger parts

                        

India has always taken a lead in international forums on wildlife
conservation issues. We urge the Indian government to vehemently
oppose, as they have in the past, any move by China to lift their 1993
ban on tiger trade at the upcoming Conference of Parties of CITES in
the Netherlands from 3 to 15 June 2007. 

                        

Leading practitioners of Traditional Chinese Medicine are also against
opening tiger trade: “ we no longer use, need or want tiger
bone”. A few tiger farm investors, who would profit from the
re-opening, are the ones instigating moves to lift the ban. 
Lifting the ban would result in a major surge in demand for tiger parts
that will make it impossible to stem the poaching menace in India, and
will drive our wild tigers to extinction. Tiger farming is not an
option: it can only fan the demand and never satisfy it.

                        

Tiger conservation should not be viewed in isolation of the broader
environmental crisis faced by the nation. The forests that harbour
tigers also sequester carbon, so keeping these areas inviolate, amounts
to a significant step towards limiting global warming, a fact that will
stand the nation in good stead in global climate change negotiations.

                        

                        7.     Take New Political and Administrative Initiatives

                        

i. An emergency meeting of the National Board for Wildlife should be
called to review the present situation and to formulate an immediate
plan for action.

                        

ii. Following this, a meeting of Chief Ministers/Forest Ministers of
Tiger States should be convened to impress upon them the imperative of
implementing national wildlife policies and pending reforms. 

                        

iii. A new and more focused national Tiger Conservation Action plan
needs to be drawn up and implemented to avert the present tiger
crisis.  We are deeply concerned that steps taken so far have
proved wholly inadequate.

                        

iv. The wildlife wing of the MOEF has been effectively leaderless for
over six months. Critical posts such as DG (Forest) and Additional DG
(Wildlife) lie vacant. These posts must urgently be filled by competent
officials to address the current crisis.

                        

                        

We earnestly request a fresh set of interventions on your part to
initiate immediate measures along the lines suggested above, in order
to arrest further decline of India’s tiger population. 

                        

Your leadership and decisive action to safeguard the future of our
national animal - the symbol of India - is urgently required. 

                        

Yours faithfully,