Do You  Understand China’s Position on Reopening Tiger Trade? 

                        

                        7 June 2007

International Tiger Coalition














 




 









                        Some CITES delegates may be confused about China’s stand on tiger trade.  There is a reason for  confusion. 

 

China banned domestic trade in tiger bone in 1993 to support the CITES
ban on international commercial  trade in Appendix I tigers and
their parts and derivatives.  This ban stopped the legal use of
tiger bone in China.  The government removed tiger bone from the
official pharmacopeia, supported research of  alternatives, and
launched widespread consumer awareness efforts.  Today, the
traditional Chinese medicine community embraces effective alternatives
and participates in tiger conservation inititatives.   

 

Despite the ban and a massive decline in the consumer market,
China’s tiger farms have continued breeding tigers at unnatural
rates in hope of capitalizing on any future reopening of
trade.   

 

                        March 2007: 

China states in CoP14 Doc. 52, Annex 1 that it “intends” to
resume “use of captive bred tigers” in the future.
Furthermore, the document states that China’s captive tiger
population of 5,000 is growing at a rate of at least 800 animals per
year and “constitutes a steady foundation for a future potential
reopen(ing) of utilization of tiger bones and fur.” 

 

                        April 2007: 

After noting that China’s trade ban had benefited wild tigers,
range country members of the Global Tiger Forum (GTF) ask through
diplomatic channels for clarification of China’s intentions
regarding trade in tiger parts and derivatives.  

  

                        May 2007:  

The businessman who owns China’s largest tiger farms makes clear
to the CITES Secretariat during its official mission to China
“that he actively seeks a reopening of commercial trade in tiger
parts and derivatives” (CoP14 Doc. 52 Annex 7).  This is
underscored in CoP14 Doc. 52, Annex 8, which was submitted to the
Secretariat by this businessman.

  

A few days before the start of CoP14, the China Daily, China’s
official English language newspaper, quotes  China’s State
Forestry Administration spokesman Liu Xiongying as saying that the
government remains committed to its tiger trade ban in spite of intense
pressure from tiger farm investors to lift the ban.  

  

                        June 2007: 

The China’s CITES delegation distributes a document to all
Parties entitled “Key Positions & General  Introduction
on Tiger Conservation in China.”  This document explains
that the government of China is conducting “research” on
the possibility of reopening trade in products from farmed tigers and
announces a workshop in July to explore the matter further. 

 

Meanwhile, in Beijing, China’s official Xinhua News Agency
reports on a State Forestry Administration(SFA) press conference during
which SFA spokesperson Cao Qingyao reiterates the message in
“Key Positions & General Introduction on Tiger
Conservation in China,” saying any change of China’s policy
regarding the tiger trade ban will be based on “benefiting”
tigers in the wild. 

 

                        It is no wonder there is confusion!   

 

If China intends to keep its tiger trade ban in place as reported by
the China Daily, why has China distributed a document at CoP14
promoting tiger farming and organized a post-CoP workshop to discuss
farming tigers for commercial purposes?   

 

If the China Daily story is a true reflection of government policy,
what is China’s plan to ensure that the number of farmed tigers
stops growing and prevent further financial losses for tiger farm
investors? 

 

“It is clear that the Government of China is coming under
considerable pressure from various sources to authorize resumption in
the use of tiger parts and derivatives from captive-breeding
operations,” according to the Secretariat (Doc. 52, Annex
7).   However, the Secretariat points out that “any
change in China’s present policy, for example with regard to
medicinal products, would bring it into a state of non-compliance with
the recommendation of the Conference of the Parties.” 

 

 

                        What Parties can do 

Facing opposition from the Parties, China withdrew proposals to reopen
tiger trade at previous CITES CoPs.  At that time, there were
hundreds of tigers on farms.  Today there are 5,000 “with a
capacity to reproduce 800-1,000 cubs annually” (“Key
Positions & General Introduction on Tiger Conservation in
China”).  If China does not act now, by CoP15, there may be
more than 7,000 tigers on farms and even more pressure to reopen
trade.  In the interest of successful implementation of the
Appendix I listing of tigers and Resolution Conf. 12.5, all Parties,
and especially tiger range countries, have a stake in seeking a
clarification from China regarding its intentions for reopening trade
in tiger parts and derivatives in the future.  

 

Maintaining the tiger trade ban through concrete steps such as
rejecting petitions from tiger farm investors to reopen trade, phasing
out tiger farms and destroying stockpiles of tiger parts and products
would demonstrate China’s true commitment to compliance with
Resolution Conf. 12.5 and the implementation of CITES. 

 

                        Save The Tiger Fund, on behalf of the International Tiger Coalition 

                        

Aaranyak

American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine

Animal Welfare Institute

Animals Asia Foundation

 Association of Zoos & Aquariums

 Born Free Foundation

 Born Free USA

British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums 

Care for the Wild International

Conservation International 

Council of Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine

 David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation 

Environmental Investigation Agency  

Global Tiger Patrol

 Humane Society International 

Humane Society of the United States 

International Fund for Animal Welfare 

PeunPa 

Ranthambhore Foundation

Save The Tiger Fund

Species Survival Network 

The Corbett Foundation  

Tigris Foundation 

TRAFFIC 

21st Century Tiger

WildAid

 Wildlife Alliance

Wildlife Conservation Nepal

 Wildlife Conservation Society

 Wildlife Protection Society of India

Wildlife Trust of India  

World Association of Zoos & Aquariums

 World Society for the Protection of Animals

 WWF

Zoological Society of London