World Governments Reject Tiger Farming and Trade
                        

                        
                        
                        13 June 2007

International Tiger Coalition


                        
                        
                        The Hague, The Netherlands Tigers
should not be bred for trade in their parts, governments gathered here
said today, approving a decision to strengthen conservation of wild
tigers.

                        

This was a major victory for wild tigers, which could be quickly wiped
out by poaching if there is a legal market anywhere, said Uttara
Mendiratta of Wildlife Protection Society of India, on behalf of the 35
member organizations of the International Tiger Coalition. The
international community has sent a clear message that the world cannot
sacrifice the last wild tigers for the sake of a handful of wealthy
tiger farm investors.

                        

The International Tiger Coalition commends delegates from four countries with wild tigers

India, Nepal, Bhutan and Russia and the United States in standing firm
on behalf of wild tiger conservation during a lengthy debate here
today. The decision was adopted by consensus, but not before China
tried to soften the language.

                        

Privately run tiger farms across China have bred nearly 5,000 captive
tigers and are putting enormous pressure on the Chinese government to
allow legal trade in tiger parts within China. They argue that their
captive tigers will meet the demand of traditional Chinese medicine
(TCM) users for tiger-bone tonic wines and medicines. But TCM
practitioners worldwide have stopped using tiger bone and reject the
argument that it is needed in legitimate medicines.

                        

The request for reopening trade does not come from TCM, Lixin Huang,
president of the American College of TCM, told the forum before the
decision was made. TCM does not wish to be responsible for the
extinction of wild tigers.

 

All international trade in tiger parts is banned by CITES, and China
has banned domestic trade since 1993. The ban has proven successful in
reducing demand for tiger bone and raising public awareness about tiger
conservation, studies have found.

                        

                        

                        
                        


                        Aaranyak

American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine

Animal Welfare Institute

Animals Asia Foundation

Association of Zoos & Aquariums 

Born Free Foundation  

Born Free USA

 British and Irish Association of Zoos and Aquariums 

Care for the Wild International

Conservation International 

Council of Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicin

David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation

Environmental Investigation Agency 

Global Tiger Patrol

Humane Society International 

Humane Society of the United States

International Fund for Animal Welfare

PeunPa 

Ranthambhore Foundation 

Save The Tiger Fund

Species Survival Network 

The Corbett Foundation 

Tigris Foundation 

TRAFFIC

21st Century Tiger 

WildAid

Wildlife Alliance

 Wildlife Conservation Nepal

 Wildlife Conservation Society

Wildlife Protection Society of India

 Wildlife Trust of India

World Association of Zoos & Aquariums

World Society for the Protection of Animals

WWF

 Zoological Society of London