International Workshop on Strategy for Tiger Conservation





6 July 2007






Jia Zhiban 

Minister 

State Forestry Administration 

No. 18, Hepingli East Street 

Beijing 100714, China 

 

Subject:  International Workshop on Strategy for Tiger Conservation 

 

Dear Minister Jia, 

 

We write today with regard to the State Forestry
Administration’s International Workshop on Strategy for Tiger
Conservation, 2-7 July, which members of the International Tiger
Coalition (ITC) were interested in attending.  We had welcomed
SFA’s idea of organizing a comprehensive review of
China’s tiger trade ban, and many of our members had hoped to
participate fully.  That “open and
transparent” review was mentioned publicly by
China’s delegation, during Committee II and Plenary
discussions, at last month’s 14th Meeting of the Conference
of the Parties to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) in The Hague. 

 

Unfortunately, key experts were unable to attend the workshop for
various reasons.  First, the dates of the workshop were only
confirmed in mid June during the second week of the CITES
meeting.  For this reason, ITC representatives had little time
for arranging their schedules and flights, registration, visa
applications and payment of fees in the two weeks between the end of
the CITES meeting and the beginning of the workshop.  Second,
others among the coalition’s most qualified experts could
only join the workshop during the discussion phase in Harbin (for
personal or logistical reasons), but they were informed that they could
not participate in the discussion workshop itself if they had not
attended the associated tours of tiger farms.  Third, we were
disappointed that some of those ITC representatives best qualified to
offer relevant professional input were not given permission to
attend.   

 

By contrast, we note with concern the participants hosted by the SFA
and believe it is unfortunate that some participants with a wider range
of knowledge and experience, in tiger conservation specifically, were
turned away. We note that the Government of China provided the
necessary funding and logistical support for some economists of
SFA’s choosing to participate, but other representatives of
civil society with decades of tiger conservation experience and
economic expertise had very little time to find the necessary funds,
arrange visas, or were told that it was “too late”
for them to register. 

 

Finally, we are concerned that the workshop itinerary includes venues
which have been alleged to be selling tiger products either directly or
through the internet in contravention of China’s laws and
which are strong proponents for relaxing China’s tiger trade
ban.  This creates the impression of a conflict of interest
which could further jeopardize the outcomes of the discussions being
viewed as open and objective as had been hoped, and as was the stated intent of your government. 



In summary, the overall result is that the workshop cannot be the open,
transparent and thorough policy review promised to CITES Parties at The
Hague.  Nevertheless, we remain fully committed to
contributing to such a 

review.   

 

The CITES Parties adopted a strong decision on the issue of tiger
conservation, as you are aware.  Thus, we write today to offer
our assistance to work with SFA, and perhaps the CITES Secretariat, to
convene later this year a more inclusive discussion of the best ways to
ensure conservation of wild tigers across their range.  We
would welcome the chance to collaborate with you to ensure that the
process is inclusive of a full array of experts and conducted
with: 
                        Scientific rigor,
so that the potential effects of any management actions on wild tigers
are fully understood and considered by the international community on
the basis of thorough research;

 Transparency, so that the international community can consider the methods and conclusions of this research;
 Conservation of tigers in the wild as a priority,
as the world’s last wild tigers are at stake, and the
international community has a core interest in ensuring that national
and international policies support full conservation of all
remaining wild tiger populations.
 We
hope that we will have an opportunity to discuss these matters with you
in person in the near future.  In the interim, we look forward
to your reply. 

 

With sincere regards,

Aaranyak 

American College of Traditional Chinese Medicine  

Animal Welfare Institute 

Animals Asia Foundation  

Association of Zoos & Aquariums  

Born Free Foundation  

Born Free USA 

British and Irish Association of Zoos & Aquariums  

Care for the Wild International  

Conservation International  

Council of Colleges of Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine  

David Shepherd Wildlife Foundation  

Environmental Investigation Agency  

Global Tiger Patrol  

Humane Society International      

Humane Society of the United States     

International Fund for Animal Welfare     

PeunPa 

Ranthambhore Foundation 

Save The Tiger Fund 

Species Survival Network 

The Corbett Foundation 

Tigris Foundation 

TRAFFIC 

21st Century Tiger 

WildAid 

Wildlife Alliance 

Wildlife Conservation Nepal 

Wildlife Conservation Society 

Wildlife Protection Society of India 

Wildlife Trust of India 

World Association of Zoos & Aquariums 

World Society for the Protection of Animals 

WWF 

Zoological Society of London

cc:  

Chairman, CITES Standing Committee  

CITES Management Authority, Bangladesh    

CITES Management Authorities, Bhutan      

CITES Management Authority, Cambodia        

CITES Management Authority, China     

CITES Management Authority, EU Member States  

CITES Management Authority, India      

CITES Management Authority, Indonesia    

CITES Management Authority, Nepal    

CITES Management Authority, Russian Federation 

CITES Management Authority, USA 

CITES Management Authority, Vietnam   

CITES Secretariat 

Executive Director, Global Tiger Forum 

IUCN Species Survival Commission 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, China   

State Administration of TCM, China 

State Forestry Administration, International Affairs 

 
Read the Chinese text here