Stockpiles of Dead Tigers Should be Destroyed, Experts Urge China





27 July 2007









Contact in USA: 
Judy Mills, International Tiger Coalition


+1 202-857-5160


Contact in India:
Belinda Wright, Wildlife Protection Society of India +91 11-4163-5921





Beijing
– Disturbing new images of tiger carcasses piled up in cold
storage at one of China’s largest “tiger
farms” raise questions about enforcement of tiger trade bans
in effect in China and internationally.  



The photos were taken by

participants invited to a government-sponsored workshop and tour of
China’s two largest tiger “farms” earlier
this month for international observers and scientists. The tour was
held on the heels of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) agreeing in June that captive breeding of
tigers should be restricted “only to conserving wild
tigers.”



“What is the point of these stockpiles when tiger trade is
banned inside and outside China?” asked Belinda Wright of the
Wildlife Protection Society of India, who participated in the State
Forestry Administration’s tiger farm tour and tiger trade
workshop. “The 171 member nations of CITES made it clear last
month that ‘tigers should not be bred for their parts and
derivatives.’”



Among the carcasses piled in a refrigerated building at the tiger farm in

Guilin, China, was a tiger that had been skinned and another that had
been gutted. CITES officials formally asked China in June to
investigate illegal sales of tiger meat at the Guilin farm.  



Tiger “farms” in China house nearly 5,000 live
tigers, and farm investors are pressuring the government to lift a ban
on tiger trade so that they can profit from the sale of skins, bones
and other body parts of tigers after they die.  The Guilin
farm’s owner submitted a report to CITES saying he was saving
the tigers in cold storage for the day when trade is legalized in
China. 



“Given that these bodies are commercially valuable and their
sale is prohibited by law, they amount to contraband,” said
Adam Roberts of Born Free Foundation.  “Why not burn
them the way other illegal wildlife products are burned in
China?”



The 35 organizations of the International Tiger Coalition stand ready
to offer guidance and technical support to China on shutting down its
tiger farms and stepping up law enforcement efforts to stamp out
illegal trade of tiger parts.  The Coalition encourages China
to invest more resources in increasing its wild tiger population, which
could rebound quickly with proper protection.


###




High-resolution photos of tiger farms and tiger carcasses in storage can also be downloaded at www.savethetigerfund.org/tigerstockpiles