Tiger and Leopard Skins Seized in Nepal
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        


14 August 2007

                        

One tiger skin and two leopard skins were seized in Nepal on 10 August
2007, as a result of an undercover operation conducted by Wildlife
Conservation Nepal (WCN), the District Forest Office and the Nepal
Police. The ten foot long tiger skin, which was soft and supple, was
wrapped in sheets of the Times of India newspaper. 

                        

Despite a stringent wildlife law in Nepal that prescribes 15 years
imprisonment or a fine of NRs.100,000 (US$1,550) or both for
individuals found trading, killing or maiming any protected animal that
is in Schedule I (Nepal has 26 mammals including the tiger in Schedule
I), the immense profit margins of the illegal wildlife trade do not
deter traders or poachers. 

                        

Prasanna Yonzon, Chief Executive Officer of WCN, says The wildlife
crime nexus is large; penetrating one group of traders does not affect
the illicit tiger trade. Sharing intelligence and information with
Indian partners can thwart the tiger and rhino horn trade. An effective
intelligence network and transparency in information on wildlife trade
issues by the governments of India and Nepal can certainly limit
wildlife trade across transnational borders. 

                        

WCN, which closely monitors the illegal wildlife trade in Nepal,
acknowledges that illegal wildlife trade is burgeoning because of the
ever growing market in China. Capacity building and intelligence
training for enforcement agencies and NGOs are now necessary to stop
the illegal wildlife trade.   

                        

For further information please contact:

                        

Prasanna Yonzon

Chief Executive Officer

Wildlife Conservation Nepal

GPO Box 20569, Kathmandu

Phone:+977 1 4289818 cell: 977 9851059244 

email: wcn@ntc.net.np

                        

                        

Please Note: The tiger (Panthera tigris tigris) is mainly found in
three places in Nepal's protected areas: Chitwan National Park, Bardia
National Park and Suklaphanta Wildlife Reserve. It is estimated that
there are 340-350 tigers in Nepal of which 123 are breeding tigers.