Tibetans no longer wearing the skins of dead tigers
 

6 Sept.2007 


Investigation at this summer's Litang Horse Festival shows Tibetans are
responding to calls to preserve endangered species - but the tiger
remains threatened elsewhere.



London - 5th September 2007: The Environmental Investigation Agency
(EIA) has found a sharp decline in the use of tiger and leopard skins
in the Tibetan region, formerly an important market for illegally
poached skins.



The change was observed on a recent visit by EIA to the Litang Tibetan
horse festival in the Chinese province of Sichuan. In stark contrast to
previous visits by EIA and the Wildlife Protection Society of India
(WPSI) in 2005 and 2006, not a single person at the festival was seen
wearing the skins of endangered species. The comparison with 2005 is
particularly striking, when hundreds of performers and officials in
Litang were documented wearing costumes decorated with the skins of
tiger, leopard and otter.



Currently all cross-border trade in tiger and leopard skins is banned
under the inter-governmental Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES), while domestic trade is illegal under
Chinese law.



Indications that the market for skins in Litang has dried-up were
supported by EIA and WPSI findings elsewhere. Early in 2007, a trip to
Lhasa, capital of the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR), uncovered a
similar decline in the number of tiger and leopard skins for sale.



The dramatic fall in the use of skins in the Tibetan region represents
a major localized success story, and comes after two years of intense
public awareness campaigns in the region, involving local activists and
international organizations. It also serves as an important indication
of what could be achieved in other areas, given the right combination
of local and international action.



Debbie Banks, Head of EIA’s Tiger Campaign, said
“Targeted
awareness campaigns really do appear to have changed attitudes, but
investigations show it is essential that these are backed-up by
intelligence-led enforcement to stop the skin traders and criminal
gangs. Otherwise they will switch to more diffuse markets in other
places, such as home decor and trophy skins.”



Although the drop in demand is good news for Asia’s big cats,
the
illegal trade in their skins and body parts continues to thrive
elsewhere. Markets in China’s Gansu and QinghaiProvince are
still
driving the poaching which threatens the existence of the
world’s
remaining wild populations. Indeed, recent reports suggest that the
number of tigers continues to fall, with only around 3000 left in the
wild, of which around half are in India. Poaching pressures remain
intense and increased efforts to tackle the criminal gangs who run the
tiger trade will be needed to ensure the future of the remaining
populations.



Belinda Wright, Executive Director of the Wildlife Protection Society
of India welcomed the news. “This shows that where
there’s
a will there’s a way. Now we need to see the same level of
commitment and investment from governments in the region to break the
criminal networks that control the trade.”



An EIA briefing, Use and Availability of Asian Big cat Skins at the
Litang Horse Festival, Sichuan, August 2007, can be downloaded from the
EIA
web site (
www.eia-international.org). 
Full
address for download:

http://www.eia-international.org/cgi/reports/reports.cgi?t=template&a=151





For further
information please contact:



Debbie Banks, Senior Tiger Campaigner, Environmental Investigation
Agency (EIA), UK

+44 (0) 20 7354 7973 (office) or +44 (0) 7773 428360 (mobile)

mailto:debbiebanks@eia-international.org



Belinda Wright, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection Society of
India (WPSI), New Delhi

+91 11 5163 5920 (office) or +91 11 5163 5924 (fax)

bwright@vsnl.net



Mike Durham, Press Officer, EIA UK

+44 (0) 20 7354 7985 (office) or +44 (0) 7882 756187 (mobile)

mikedurham@eia-international.org





For footage and still
pictures please contact:



Ingvild Holm, Visual Resource Coordinator, EIA UK

+44 (0) 20 7354 7968 (office) or +44 (0) 7984681223 (mobile)

ingvildholm@eia-international.org