India’s biggest tiger trader arrested
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

5 December 2007
                        
                        
                        
In
one of the biggest wildlife cases this decade, the Special Task Force
of the Uttar Pradesh Police with the assistance of the Wildlife
Protection Society of India (WPSI) seized three tiger skins and three
tiger skeletons in 
                        


  
    
      
      
      The
Executive Director of WPSI, Belinda Wright, with the STF Police team
led by DSP Mr Aravind Chaturvedi (in the orange sweater) and two of
the accused Jarsi and Mhd Ayyub (far left)
      
    
  
                        
                        Allahabad on Tuesday, 4th December 2007. 
                        
Sixteen people were arrested, including wildlife trader Shabeer Hasan
Qureshi who is an accused in at least four major wildlife cases. 
In 
                        
                          
                            
                              
                              
                            
                            
                              
                              Shabeer
Hasan Qureshi, the biggest tiger trader in India, is now behind bars
                              
                              

                              The
STF of UP Police with three of the accused and the three tiger skins 

and
tiger skeletons, seized in Allahabad
                              
                            
                          
                        
                        particular, Qureshi is the prime accused in the January 2000 case in
Khaga, UP, when four tiger skins, 70 leopard skins and a huge haul of
other wildlife products were seized. Three other traders were arrested
along with two tiger poachers and ten women couriers who belong to the
Baheliya community.

                        

The case is a landmark for wildlife enforcement as it includes the
arrest of the three key elements of the killing of wild tigers: buyers,
poachers and couriers.

                        

“This is a major breakthrough in the fight against wildlife crime
in India”, said Belinda Wright, Executive Director of WPSI.
“Qureshi is the biggest buyer of tiger products in India today.
We are delighted with this case and have nothing but praise for the way
in which it was handled by the Special Task Force of the Uttar Pradesh
Police. They succeeded by using intelligence-led enforcement which is
the only way to effectively tackle this growing menace”, she
added. The operation was led by Superintendent of Police, STF, Mr
Amitabh Yash, and STF’s Deputy Superintendent of Police, Mr
Aravind Chaturvedi.
                        
                          
                            
                              
                              Three
magnificent tigers reduced to skin and bones. Allahabad, 4 December
2007. © WPSI
                              
                              
                            
                          
                        
                        
                        Preliminary investigations indicate that one of the tigers was killed
in Kanha Tiger Reserve in the state of Madhya Pradesh, and another in
Tadoba Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra. It is not known where the third
tiger came from.