Batting for the Tiger
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

10 December 2007
                        
                        
The
Indian Cricket League is creating history at the Tau Devi Lal Sports
Complex in Chandigarh, and not only for its cricket matches. For the
first time ZeeSports and ICL have included social messaging and donated
advertising space to their chosen cause – the protection of wild
tigers.

                        

ZeeSports approached the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI)
and offered banner space, sight screens and passes for 15
“tigers” to attend the matches and use the venue to reach
the large audience of cricket-viewing fans. Messages in English and
Hindi capture the seriousness of the issue using a cricket theme:
“Make a loud appeal: don’t let this be our last
innings”, “You don’t need tiger bone wine to bowl a
straight line”, and CRICKET – “Calling Responsible
Individuals to Conserve NOT Kill our Endangered Tiger”.

                        

Belinda Wright, Executive Director of WPSI said, “this was a
fantastic opportunity to highlight the plight of the tiger. Our
national animal is fast disappearing and too little is being done to
stop it slipping into extinction. The tiger has no votes but if we all
join together and appeal for its protection, the government will have
to take notice. The world is watching us. It would be a national shame
to let this magnificent animal, the soul of wild India, disappear
through indifference and inaction.”

                        

With the support of the International Tiger Coalition, several
conservationists in India worked together to get the message out. The
organisers of the Indian Cricket League and tiger activists could see
the appropriateness of linking tigers and cricket: both are symbols of
India. There is little chance that we will see an India without
cricket, but an India without tigers is an awful possibility. Fewer
than 1,500 tigers are now left in the wild in India, and the species
can only be saved if we stem the trade in tiger parts, stop the
killing, and leave the tiger forests to the tigers. We appeal to all
the cricket fans in India to help make this a reality.