Two wildlife traders land in police net
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        The duo allegedly has links with wildlife poacher and smuggler Sansarchand

                        

BANGALORE: The State Police (Forest Cell) has apprehended two persons
who were allegedly involved in illegal wildlife trade in south India.
The arrest is being seen as a major success in curbing the illegal
wildlife trade in this part of the country.

                        

Talking to reporters on Monday, Inspector-General of Police (Forest
Cell) K.S.N. Chikkerur said that while Prabhakar Keshav Gajakosh was
arrested in December, his associate, 69-year-old Abdul Khader
Chowdhary, was arrested in Hyderabad on Sunday. The duo allegedly has
links with Sansarchand, the notorious wildlife poacher and smuggler,
against whom numerous cases have been registered in Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Uttranchal, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.


                        Tiger bones

                        

The two allegedly traded with another wildlife trader Shabir Hasan
Qureshi, who was recently arrested by Uttar Pradesh police for
possessing tiger pelts and 75 kg of tiger bones.

                        

Gajakosh and Chowdhary have been arrested in connection with the
recovery of tiger, leopard and common otter pelts from Gajakosh’s
residence at Hubli in Dharwad district and Haliyal in Uttara Kannada
district. In December, Forest Cell sleuths had recovered skins of one
tiger, 23 leopards and 43 common otters.

                        

The police registered cases against Gajakosh and four persons. During
interrogation, Gajakosh, who is stated to be involved in peddling
wildlife products for the past 15 years, revealed that he, along with
Chowdhary, was involved in the trade. “He said this in his
confessional statement before a police officer,” Mr. Chikkerur
said.

                        

A team of Forest Cell sleuths took the assistance of Andhra Pradesh police and traced Chowdhary in Mushirabad of Hyderabad.

                        

“There were three Chowdharys in that area. We located the person
we wanted by dialling the mobile phone number stored in
Gajakosh’s mobile phone,” Mr. Chikkerur said and added that
the police did not find any pelts in Chowdhary’s house. Chowdhary
was produced before the jurisdictional magistrate court in Hubli on
Monday and was remanded in judicial custody. Mr. Chikkerur said
Gajakosh and Chowdhary were passing on the tiger pelts to
Sansarchand’s brother Rajkumar, who was making frequent visits to
Hubli and Hyderabad. “Rajkumar was taking the pelts to New Delhi
by neatly wrapping them in newspapers to resemble a packet of
books.”

                        

Similarly the duo was sending pelts to Qureshi, who revealed the names
of Chowdhary to the Uttar Pradesh police. “I have informed the
U.P. police top brass about the arrest and has asked them to
interrogate Chowdhary,” Mr. Chikkerur said.

                        

The police, he said, has been able establish the links of the two with
Sancharchand’s wife, Rani, I.P. Singh of Hassan, and other
accused arrested by the Jaipur police in 2005 for poaching of tigers.
The duo has contacts with Hariprasad Lasakchand, the father of Durra, a
Bahelia tribe who specialised in trapping the wild animals using jaw
traps. “We are looking for persons working for Chowdhary in this
big wildlife trade racket,” he said.

                        

© Copyright 2000 - 2008 The Hindu