Multiple wildlife seizures across the country
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
4 March 2008

 

On 1 March 2008 two consecutive wildlife raids were conducted in the
state of Uttarakhand in which one Leopard skin was seized in Haridwar
that further led to seizure of another Leopard skin and a full Leopard
skeleton in Rudraprayag. Six individuals have been arrested. The raids
were carried out as a joint operation of the Anti-Poaching cell of the
Uttarakhand Forest Department, the DFO Haridwar, and WPSI (Wildlife
Protection Society of India).

 

The resulting interrogation revealed information about the existence of
illegal wildlife products in Kalagarh, Corbett Tiger Reserve. Acting on
this information the same team raided a house in Kalagarh Dam Colony on
2 March 2008 during which three Tiger teeth, three Tiger claws, and
some pieces of Tiger bone were seized. The seizure also included one
antler of a Sambar and one of a Chital. One woman has been arrested.

 

Acting on information provided by WPSI a case of Wild boar poaching was
detected in Chandrapur Division, Maharashtra on 26 February 2008. One
person has been arrested.

Acting on another WPSI tip off, one person was arrested in the
possession of two Barn Owls in Hoshangabad District, Madhya Pradesh on
29 February 2008.

 

In a raid in Madhya Pradesh on 28 February 2008, Balaghat Police seized
one Leopard skin, two Sambar skins, two Chital skins, and 60 Kilograms
of antlers. Three persons have been arrested.

 

One Leopard skin was seized and three individuals were arrested in a
raid conducted by the Police in Chandrapur town in Maharashtra on 27
February 2008.

 

Last week, members of the Kerala Forest intelligence conducted a raid
in which two litres of snake venom was recovered, believed to be that
of the King Cobra and the Common Cobra. The seizure took place in close
proximity to the Cochin International Airport, and it is suspected that
the consignment was to be smuggled out of the country from there.