Tigers to Sariska
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

5 July 2008

A
second tiger, a female, was tranquilised and successfully airlifted
from Ranthambhore to Sariska yesterday. Both tigers appear to be doing
well.

I spent a week in Ranthambhore with the tiger relocation
team from the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) and the Rajasthan
Forest Department and now that two tigers have been safely relocated to
Sariska it seems appropriate to discuss the background to this
path-breaking effort.

The operation has been in the planning
stage for over a year. It was carried out by scientists from WII, in
close collaboration with the Rajasthan Forest Department, and under the
overall guidance of the National Tiger Conservation Authority and the
State Government's Steering Committee, of which I have been a member
since 2005. To minimize the stress to the tigers, they were airlifted
by helicopter to Sariska with the support of the Indian Air Force,
Ministry of Defence.

Four tigers were collared earlier in
Ranthambhore, and during the week of 21 to 27 June the team collared
three more tigers, including the male tiger that was airlifted to
Sariska on 28 June. The two tigers that were finally selected for
Sariska - using the knowledge of forest officers in Ranthambhore - are
ideal candidates. They are young adults that were yet to carve out
stable home territories. The male came from the north-east periphery of
Ranthambhore, while the female had set up temporary home in the centre
of the Park, next to her mother who has a new family of large female
cubs. With the increasing number of tigers in Ranthambhore, it appears
that tigers such as these are having difficulty in establishing
exclusive home ranges.

Because of the high temperatures during
the summer months, the operation was stalled until the monsoon. This
brought an additional problem of thick undergrowth, and although we
came across a number of tigers during the combing operation it took
considerable time and effort to track down the individual tigers that
had been identified as the prime candidates for relocation. Once this
was done, the scientists waited inside the Park for the appropriate
moment to tranquilise and collar the tigers. I must say that the team
work was very impressive and the operation went with focused, clockwork
precision.

The two Sariska tigers have been fitted with
satellite collars and once they are let out from their temporary
enclosures their movement will be monitored intensively, by plotting
satellite signals and following radio signals on the ground, under the
guidance of WII.

Until recently I was skeptical that Sariska was
ready or safe enough for the reintroduction of tigers. But then I began
to realise that time was running out for Sariska and that although
there is still much to be done, a sincere effort had been made by the
Government of India and the Government of Rajasthan to prepare the Park
for the reintroduction of tigers. The arrival of the tigers will now
provide the impetus to do much more. One village has been moved out of
Sariska, and the voluntary rehabilitation of three more villages is
underway. New staff has been brought in and the entire protection
system in Sariska has been revamped. And for the time being at least,
it will not be worthwhile for poachers to target Sariska. Additional
problems include the two roads through the Park (State Highway 13 that
links Alwar with Thana Ghazi, and SH 29A from Sariska to Tehla. Of
these SH 13 has the heaviest traffic including trucks and buses) and
the huge movement of pilgrims to the temple at Pandupole, in the heart
of the Park. In 2005, Pandupole received over 230,000 pilgrims. In fact
there is a meeting today with the District Administration and the State
Transport Authorities to discuss these issues.

Ranthambhore of
course faces similar problems with up to 2 million pilgrims (20 lakhs)
a year to the Ganesh Temple that is situated in the fort, also in the
heart of the National Park. And yet tigers thrive there.

Any
operation such as this has its risks. But as long as the risks are
minimized - with careful planning and by using the best expertise
available - I'm sure most people will agree that it is a risk worth
taking. Sariska was the western most distribution of the tiger in
India. It is prime habitat with excellent prey density. And we must
remember that tigers did not go extinct from Sariska naturally; they
were killed by poachers. We owe it to the tiger and to Sariska to give
back what was taken away, and to ensure that the tigers are given every
opportunity to make a comeback.

Translocating tigers is not an
easy exercise. It is risky and expensive. But it is something that
should be considered for areas were tiger numbers have decreased and
the reasons for this can be addressed. In the future, translocation can
also be used to increase genetic diversity in isolated, inbred
populations. In fact, any future input to Sariska could and should
include a tiger or two from an area other than Ranthambhore.

Although
this is the first time that tigers have been translocated
scientifically in India and using a helicopter, there are other
examples. In 2004, four Amur tigers were relocated 150-300 km from
their capture sites in the Russian Far East, and in 1930 three tigers
(a tiger and two tigresses) were successfully captured in central India
and transported and released in the forests of the erstwhile state of
Dungapur in Rajasthan. These tigers settled and bred well in the wild,
and even while they were still hunted, a population of 20 to 25 tigers
was maintained. The Dungapur tigers finally disappeared in the 1950's
due to lack of protection. Over the years, a number of man-eaters,
particularly in the Sunderbans, and wounded tigers have also been
successfully relocated.

Is the translocation of tigers from
Ranthambhore to Sariska in the best interests of the future of wild
tigers in India ? I believe it is, and I salute all those who played a
part in this bold endeavour. The real test will come now, as we wait to
see whether the tigers will settle in their new home.

Belinda Wright