Tiger poacher arrested
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
28 August 2008

The
background to the story below is that Omprakash was an accused in a
case in Himachal Pradesh where two tiger skins were seized by police
from Pema Gyatso, of Tibetan origin, on 20 July 2008. The arrest
illustrates the successful collaboration between a number of agencies -
the forest department of one state (Uttarakhand), police from another
state (Himachal Pradesh), the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, and an NGO
(WPSI).

Repeat offenders are a serious problem. WPSI's records
show that Omprakash was arrested in exactly the same area near Corbett
tiger reserve five years ago, in 2003, with a number of tiger traps in
his possession. He is believed to have killed as many as three tigers
this year.

Belinda Wright
Executive Director, WPSI

Arrested poacher claims he killed Corbett tiger near parkNeha Sinha
Indian Express, Thursday, August 28, 2008 The
arrest of tiger poacher Omprakash Bawariya from Ramnagar in Uttarakhand
on Wednesday has revealed the vulnerability of the adjoining forest
areas, the poorly patrolled counterparts of the more high-profile Tiger
Reserves. Protected forests which don’t come with a celebrity tag may
just not be enough to protect India’s tigers.

A joint operation
between the Uttarakhand Forest Department, Himachal Pradesh police, the
Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and the Wildlife Protection Society of
India led to Bawariya’s arrest who confessed to killing a tiger in
Uttarakhand three months ago. Shockingly, the accused was earlier
caught in the same area in 2003 with iron traps which are used to lure
tigers. Poachers like Omprakash have taken advantage of less guarded
forests, say sources, while the same operation would be more difficult
within the actual tiger reserve.

The tiger, which sources say
originated from Corbett Tiger Reserve, was poached from an adjoining
protected forest in the Ramnagar Forest Division, scientifically
classified as Corbett landscape but not a part of the Reserve.

Though
the National Tiger Conservation Authority has asked for the above
mentioned Terai west and Ramnagar areas to be notified as part of the
reserve, the Uttarkhand Government has not yet responded to the
advisory. Becoming part of the reserve would mean additional protection
through the Tiger Protection Force.

Two months ago, officials
from the Corbett Reserve had written to the Ramnagar Forest Division
warning of the threat to tigers in the area and alleging that one tiger
had in all probability been killed. The National Tiger Census conducted
by the Wildlife Institute of India had also pegged Kaladungi, near
Ramnagar, as a poaching hot spot. But despite the warnings and the old
crime record, Omprakash was able to kill more tigers in his demarcated
area.

“Omprakash said that he is familiar with each tiger in
these forests. As his earlier record goes, he knew where to place the
iron traps,” said a Forest Department source.

newslink