Tigress found dead in Ranthambore national park
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        3.9.2008Sadly
the famed Guda tigress at Ranthambhore was found dead yesterday. The
park staff is now desperately searching for her two cubs, who are less
than a year old. Another tigress appears to be moving about in the area
and up to this evening there was no sign of the cubs.

In
the Sunderbans, a large male tiger has been repeatedly entering the two
adjoining villages of Jamespur and Annepur, killing a cow and a number
of goats. The tiger returned to the village last night - his third
night in succession - and early this morning was trapped by a Forest
Department team who have been camping near Jamespur, along with WPSI's
field officer. The tiger appears to have some injuries. A Department
veterinary team is on its way to treat the tiger, after which it is
hoped that he will be released.

Belinda Wright

 
Indo-Asian News Service

Jaipur,
Sep 2 (IANS) An eight-year-old tigress has been found dead in the
Ranthambore national park in Sawai Madhopur district of Rajasthan, a
forest official said Tuesday.

The carcass of the tigress, that had two cubs aged between eight and 11 months, was found in a mutilated condition Monday.

"Preliminary
investigations suggest that the tigress must have died two or three
days ago in a fight with another wild cat over territory," a forest
official said, adding that cause of death could only be ascertained
after an autopsy.

Ranthambore National Park, about 175 km from
here, covers an area of around 400 sq km. It was declared a wildlife
sanctuary in 1957 and got the status of a national park in 1981.

As
per a 2007 census, the tiger population in the park has increased to 32
from 26 in 2005. This number does not include cubs, which are estimated
to be around 14. This increase in population has resulted in increasing
clashes between tigers over territories.

Tigers are territorial
and fiercely defensive. A tigress may have a territory of 20 sq km
while the territories of males are much larger, covering 40 to 80 sq
km. However, territory varies from forest to forest, depending on the
ecology of that area. Male territories may overlap those of many
females, but males are intolerant of other tigers within their
territory.