Notorious Tiger & Leopard Trader Convicted
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        Katni, 11 November 2008

The
Judicial Magistrate in Katni, Madhya Pradesh, Mr Ajay Singh, today
convicted notorious tiger and leopard trader Shabbir Hasan Qureshi of
Allahabad to three years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000
on two separate counts.

Qureshi and a second accused, Ashok
Pardhi, were both absconders in a 2004 case where seven leopard skins
were seized near Shadhol in Madhya Pradesh. After Qureshi’s arrest in
December 2007 in Allahabad with three tiger skins and three tiger
skeletons, his custody was procured by the Katni Forest Department. His
trial began on the 2004 case in January this year.

The case was
fought by WPSI Advocate Manjula Srivastava on behalf of the Katni
Forest Department, with the active assistance of WPSI personnel. Within
ten months the case was concluded and the two accused, Qureshi and
Pardhi, were convicted on two separate counts under Sections 49b and 52
and of The Wild Life (Protection) Act for ‘Trade’ and ‘Attempts and
Abetments’. Qureshi and Pardhi received a sentence of three years
rigorous imprisonment on both counts (making a total of six years
each), and a fine of Rs. 10,000 on each count.

“We are
absolutely delighted that this notorious big cat trader has been
convicted. Qureshi is believed to have traded in about 600 dead tigers,
and the outcome of the case in Katni is a great victory for India’s
wildlife”, said Nitin Desai, WPSI’s Director in Central India on
hearing the news in Katni.

Shabbir Hasan Qureshi, who is a
resident of Allahabad, UP, is an accused in a number of other wildlife
cases including the major seizure in Khaga, UP, in January 2000, of
four tiger skins, 70 leopard skins and a huge haul of other wildlife
products. He is also the prime accused in the December 2007 seizure of
three tiger skins and three tiger skeletons in Allahabad. Both these
cases have been handed over to the CBI.