Centre frowns at reward for killing tiger
                        
                        
                        



                        
                        
                        
                        
                        

                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
INDIAN EXPRESS 
Dec 25, 2008

Lucknow:
The Centre has taken strong exception to the Uttar Pradesh government’s
announcement of a cash reward for killing a stray tiger.

The
state forest department had declared the tiger a maneater after the
remains of a 14-year-old boy were found in a jungle near Sarai Bilahari
in Barabanki on Tuesday. Subsequently, orders were issued to kill the
beast as the department was under pressure from the state government to
catch the animal. On Wednesday, the National Tiger Conservation
Authority (NTCA) asked the UP government not to kill the tiger and
directed a Wildlife Institute of India (WII) team to visit the spot and
catch the animal.

NTCA Member Secretary Rajesh Gopal said: “It
is unfortunate that the UP administration has announced a reward for
killing the tiger. There are specific guidelines under the NTCA that
differentiate between a ‘man-killer’ and ‘maneater’. A tiger can only
be called a maneater if it regularly kills humans.” He added: “Though
there is no rule against the declaration of monetary reward for killing
a declared maneater, the killing has to be handled by the Forest
department. It is unfortunate that the reward was announced for
‘anyone’, who kills it.”

Tiger conservationist and member of the
National Board for Wildlife Belinda Wright said: “Only a chief wildlife
warden can declare a tiger a maneater. The declaration of the reward by
the district administration for killing the tiger is against the law.”

Barabanki
District Magistrate K Ravindra Nayak, who had declared the cash reward
of Rs 5,000 for killing the tiger, said: “My words were misunderstood.
I had declared the reward to those, who would assist in the combing
operations like carrying torches during night operations.”

Forest
department sources said this is the first time in living memory, when
the department declared a big cat a maneater after it had killed merely
one person. In March, the North Kheri Forest Division had requested the
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) to declare a leopard a
maneater after it had killed five persons over three months. But the
animal was not declared a maneater.

PCCF (Wildlife) BK Patnaik,
however, denied that the tiger was declared a maneater under political
pressure. “The decision was taken to ensure the safety of villagers,”
he said.

The department, however, appeared to soften its stand
after the protest from the NTCA. Patnaik said, “Shooting the tiger is
our last option and we are making all possible efforts to capture it.
The law states that the animal can be killed if it can’t be
tranquilised.”


                        

                        news link