Death of a Gentle Giant
 

Rajajji National Park
10 January 2011

Dear All,


We
are writing with a heavy heart to announce the passing away of Rajaji’s
most famous resident Tipu, a wild elephant many of you have had the
chance to see in our company or hear the various stories about his
escapades. He was a much loved elephant who lived to a ripe old age of
over 65 years and was an integral part of our lives for the last 16
years. After
being photographed in 1992, He was radio collared in 1996 and named
after Tipu Sultan, due to his refusal to quietly accept that parts of
his home had been taken over by humans. He just considered sugar cane
and paddy grown by the farmers within his home range as just another
tasty grassland. What made him stand out among the hundreds of crop
raiding elephants across Asia were his majestic bearing, absolute
fearlessness and gentle temperament. Many a times he was found, without
a rumble of irritation or fear, resting 20 metres from old feeble women
collecting firewood or fodder for their cattle. He was not known to
charge in fear or in anger and would only, at the most extreme
provocation, would walk a few threatening steps towards the source of
noise. To our knowledge, he has never killed anyone despite being a
chronic crop raider and living in forests filled with humans. At his
peak fitness, irrespective of whether he was in musth or not, other big
bulls would give him a wide berth when he was courting a female or just
feeding. He was one of the two or three bulls, who regularly crossed
the Chilla-Motichur corridor across the Ganges, thus keeping elephants
on both sides a single population.  

 While this is a
loss, it is also a time to reflect and celebrate Tipu's well lived
life. No other wild tusker, known to researchers or park managers, in
Asia has had the fortune of living so long -  especially a bull
who loved to check people's houses for food. He lived life absolutely
on his own terms, roamed and rested where he pleased without fear or
favour. He led a full life covering a range of nearly 800 sq km, may be
mating with several females and fathering several young elephants in
Rajaji NP, was not maimed either by the train or by a truck (although
he crossed the road and the rail way track numerous times) and was not
felled by a poacher's bullet. Blind in one eye (we detected this in
2009), he was still a romeo in full musth courting a female herd as
seen in pictures taken five days ago. 

Though he died falling
down from the Motichur railway bridge, it was the result of injuries
sustained in a musth fuelled fight over females with a much younger and
fitter bull. We are thankful for the efforts of the officers &
staff of Uttarakhand Forest Department – starting from the PCCF
Wildlife, Shri S.K. Chandola and Director, Rajaji NP, Shri S.S. Rasaily
and all his staff, dedicated vets such as Drs. Satya Priya Gautam
Bhalla and Negi, Ramsaran of the elephant monitoring project and
wildlife lovers like Rajeev Mehta who did their best to ease his
suffering and to treat his wounds. We shall be grateful if a fitting
memorial is erected for him in Motichur by the Uttarakhand Forest
Department so his memory lives on long after we are all gone.  We
are sure that his genes are well represented among the many elephants
he has fathered in his long and distinguished life. But above all, to
us, he was simply Tipu, a venerable old acquaintance who allowed us a
treasured glimpse into his rich life. Tipu and Rajaji are synonymous.
For us, Rajaji simply will never be the same place without our gentle
giant's soft footsteps treading on it.

Regards,

Christy and Bivash

Bivash Pandav, Ph.D.
Department of Endangered Species Management
Wildlife Institute of India
Dehradun

A. Christy Williams Ph.D,
WWF Asian Elephant and Rhino Program