Red rampage in Tiger reserve



TIMES OF INDIA
30 March 2009

Maoists Attack Similipal Forest Offices, Assault Officials And Tourists
Sandeep Mishra & Amarendra Bose | TNN Bhubaneswar/ Baripada 

In
their first major offensive inside a tiger reserve, Maoists damaged
three forest range offices, set ablaze at least two motorcycles and
beat up tourists and forest staff inside the Similipal wildlife
sanctuary in Mayurbhanj district of Orissa on Saturday. 

They
burnt down forest department establishments at Chahala, Dhudruchampa
and Upper Barahkamuda, which boast of considerable animal presence and
are located in the core area of the 2750 sq km reserve forest. The
Maoists destroyed the VHF communication network at Meghasana, thus
ensuring no information could go outside the forest. No one was
injured. 

The Maoists, split into groups of 20 each, swooped
down simultaneously on the three forest offices around 8:30 pm and
assaulted the forest staff. “They also beat up the tourists lodged at
Chahala resthouses mistaking them as forest employees. Later, they let
off the tourists, mostly from Bengal, with a warning not to visit the
place again,” police sources said. 

Though details on the
extent of damage to the government offices are still unknown,
Mayurbhanj SP P S Ranpise said: “All tourists are safe and have
started returning to their native places.” Police sources, however,
said the Maoists looted all ornaments and money from the tourists. 

At
Chahala, which has a famous resthouse built by the Maharaja of
Mayurbhanj over a century ago, there were around two dozen tourists.
Forest staff were targeted at Dhudruchampa and Upper Barahakamuda as
there is no facility for tourists at the place. “The forest range
offices at all the three places were ransacked and set afire. 

The
tourist accommodation facilities at Chahala were also attacked,”
sources said. They said: “The extremists demanded firearms from the
forest staff. They also asked people to boycott the polls.” 

Field
director of Similipal Tiger Reserve R Nagaraja Reddy said: “We have not
received the details, but lot of damage seems to have happened.” Police
said they were finding it difficult to comb the area due to fear of
landmines and also because of the difficult terrain in the densely
forested 1150 sq km core area. “We have sealed the exit routes and
started combing operations,” sources said. The SP said: “We are
suspecting the involvement of CPI (Maoists) cadres. Some locals might
have helped them.” 

Similipal, which enjoys the status of
National Park as well as biosphere reserve, is famous for a wide range
of flora and fauna and is home to 55 species of mammals, including
tigers, leopards and elephants. Though intelligence reports have
long suggested Maoist infiltration into Similipal, the security
agencies apparently have done little to prevent the Maoists from
gaining control of the area. “Maoist had struck earlier in Palamau and
Kaziranga. Now they have done the same in Similipal. This is a big blow
to us,” Bhabagrahi Mohanty, a retired academician and wildlife expert,
said.


newslink