Trouble
in Tiger Country


THE HINDU, 12 April 2009
by
Pankaj Sekhsaria

Six tiger reserves, over 6,000 sq km of
protected forests and the highest numbers of tigers in any State in
India. Those statistics would suggest that all is well with tiger
conservation in Madhya Pradesh. Nothing can be farther from the truth?

It
is the heart of India and one of the prime destinations for tiger
tourism in the country. With more than 6,000 sq km of forests protected
as six tiger reserves and tiger numbers amongst the highest in any
State, Madhya Pradesh's claim to being the tiger State of the country
might well seem justified. The latest tiger census conducted by the
Wildlife Institute of India projected the tiger population in the State
to be between 236 and 364 and it is not surprising that huge resources
are being spent in the State for conservation and protection of
wildlife in general, and the tiger in particular. In 2008 alone, the
Central Government allocated nearly Rs. 25 crores to Madhya Pradesh for
tiger conservation and the importance shown is evident from the fact
that only Rs. Two crores were allocated to Tamil Nadu for the same
period for the same purpose.

But is all indeed hunky dory for
the tiger in the State of Madhya Pradesh? Scratch the surface a little
and there is huge evidence of mounting trouble in the heart of tiger
country. One only has to look at a range of related, but diverse,
recent reports and the challenges that lie ahead loom larger than ever.

PANNA
GOES THE SARISKA WAY

One of the most striking developments has
been the official admission that the situation in the Panna Tiger
Reserve is grim, resulting in a move in early March to translocate two
tigresses, one each from Bandavgarh and Kanha to Panna. This is
particularly significant considering that researchers studying the
tiger here had been pointing out for sometime now that the situation
was precarious and that Panna might indeed be going the Sariska way.
Writing in the June 2008 issue of the wildlife periodical Sanctuary
Asia, researchers Dr. Raghu Chundawat and Joanna Van Gruisen also
pointed out that their research had shown that approximately 80-100 per
cent of Panna's breeding tigress population had disappeared fearing the
creation of a "bachelor's park".

The translocation, however, has
been mired in controversy. Locals, including villagers, tourist guides
and taxi drivers in Kanha TR, went on strike to protest the move of the
tigress to Panna. They questioned the logic of the translocation when
resident tigers of Panna had been poached away with impunity and were
also worried of the impact on their own business if tigers from Kanha
were taken away to other parks.

In another related development,
eight prominent tiger conservationists of the country, including Mr.
Valmik Thapar, Mr. Bittu Sahgal, Editor, Sanctuary, Mr. P.K. Sen,
Former Director, Project Tiger and Belinda Wright of the Wildlife
Protection Society of India, have jointly released a statement
expressing distress over the translocation carried out by the Madhya
Pradesh authorities. "We are deeply concerned," the statement says,
"that there has been absolutely no evidence of any tigers in Panna
Tiger Reserve for over a month. The last lone male tiger was sighted in
December 2008. If the safety of this single male tiger cannot be
secured, then what is the future for any introduced tigresses"?

The
statement goes on to point out that the translocation operation was
carried out even before the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) had
completed the latest census report for the park; that advice from the
National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), and the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) guidelines (which stress the
need to identify and eliminate previous causes of decline) were not
adhered to; and there has been no reference to any of India's
experienced and knowledgeable tiger scientists and experts. An
application protesting the non-transparency of the relocation and the
breaking of the NTCA guidelines is also said to be have been filed
before the Jabalpur High Court.

GAUR RELOCATION

Another
development that has run into trouble is the MP Forest Department's
project initiated about a year ago to move about 20 gaur from the Kanha
Tiger Reserve to Bandavgarh because the animals were not being sighted
in Bandavgarh. The project was to be executed with the help of the
Conservation Corporation of Africa which has set up the Taj Safari
Company in co-operation with the Taj group and has tourism properties
around tiger reserves in MP. Questions were being asked on the wisdom
of spending huge resources (estimated to be Rs. 1.25 crore) on this
translocation and, as if on cue, some gaur were spotted in August 2008
in forests adjoining those of Bandavgarh. While the FD confirmed these
sightings, it also reiterated that it was going ahead with the
translocation project.

Unfortunately for them, however, the NTCA
too has come out against the project now. Secretary NTCA, Dr. Rajesh
Gopal, pointed to the fact that gaur had also been sighted in the
forests here during the recent tiger census and that efforts needed to
be made to revive the gaur population in Bandavgarh itself and to
restore the wildlife corridors with adjoining forest areas. The
Ministry for Environment and Forests (MoEF) has now asked the State
government to re-examine the status of the gaur in Bandavgarh and plans
for the translocation project have been put on hold for the present.

ROAD
THREAT TO PENCH

Another project that the NTCA has helped put on
hold in a similar manner is the widening of National Highway 7 (NH-7)
in areas that adjoins the Pench Tiger Reserve. In a recent decision
taken by the Supreme Court appointed Central Empowered Committee, the
Chief Secretary of MP has been asked to halt tree cutting for the road
widening project that is part of the government?s Golden Quadrilateral
programme. The order came in response to a petition filed by the
Wildlife Trust of India and following a strong recommendation by the
NTCA that it must be stopped. The stay might be temporary but has been
widely welcomed by the wildlife conservation community.

AND
TROUBLE IN KANHA TOO..

The same can certainly not be said of
other reports from Kanha Tiger Reserve, perhaps the most famous and
well known of India's tiger habitats. In what seems like a bizarre set
of developments over the last few months, the Forest Department and the
Police have been accusing each other of neglect in matters related to
those of tiger protection. This, even as six tiger deaths have been
reported here since November 2008 alone (see box for details). In a
letter to the NTCA in December 2008, Kanha Director R.P. Singh listed a
number of concerns related to the working of the police: interference
in the booking of forest rest houses inside the tiger reserve; not
providing information about investigations into tiger poaching
incidents; and even that the police seemed more interested in getting
rewards for skins seized from poachers. He also expressed apprehension
that the informers used by the police to fight naxalites in the region
might actually be directly involved in cases of poaching.

The
Police on the other hand have said that it is the forest officials who
are not following correct procedures in dealing with cases of tiger
deaths. It was, in fact, a letter sent in November to the National
Wildlife Crime Control Bureau by the Superintendent of Police (SP),
Mandla, that is said to have started this chain of responses and
reactions.
Murky waters

When
contacted, a senior wildlife
official of the State sought to downplay the matter but it is clear
that the waters are rather murky. There are fundamental issues of
transparency, responsibility and accountability that are involved here
and important questions that arise immediately. Can conservation
succeed if the key agencies responsible for it operate in such a
manner? How realistic would it be in a situation like this for the
local communities and others to trust enforcement agencies, leave alone
co-operate with them? There are many in the field, for instance, who
would vouch for the fact that the involvement of enforcement agencies,
be it the Police or even the FD in malafide and corrupt practices is
much more common than we are willing to accept. The Kanha case is
significant because differences between the agencies have actually
forced the matter onto a larger platform.

When top agencies
themselves seem to be floundering so badly in such high profile areas
such as Bandavgarh, Kanha and Panna, what, one might ask, will be the
situation in the lesser known forests and protected areas of the State?
One can't say for sure, but then, only the bravest is likely to hazard
a guess of any kind.

Recent deaths - Confirmed tiger deaths
inside Kanha TR:
Information compiled by the Wildlife Protection
Society of India

Adult male tiger electrocuted near
Sautia
village, Kanha TR - November 1, 2008
Two young tiger
cubs found dead
near Indri Camp, Kanha TR - January 3, 2009
Adult
male tiger found
dead near Salghat, Kanha TR - January 18, 2009
Adult
male tiger
found dead near Aurai Camp, Kanha TR - January 31, 2009
Adult male
tiger found dead near Dhamman Village, Kanha TR - March 4, 2009
newslink