Update from the Sunderbans - Post Cyclone Aila



6 June 2009 

The
good news is that Government and Army assistance is finally kicking in,
eleven days after the cyclone ! Our team is exhausted but still
focussing efforts on distributing drinking water (about 10,000 litres a
day) with our boats. A new priority is pumping out saline water from
the village water-harvesting ponds, so that these can fill again with
rain water. Our Field Officer, Anil Mistry, purchased three pump sets
today, and work has started immediately.

WPSI's Kolkata-based
Director, Shakti Banerjee, and Anil are also liaising with government
relief efforts to ensure that assistance reaches the most needy
communities. One or other of them has met with the Chief Minister, the
Sundarbans Development Board, Irrigation Department, BDO, senior police
officials and the district authorities. The Minister in charge of
Sundarban Development Affairs has ordered Flood Centres to be
established every 5 km, and Anil and Gopal were requested to carry out
a survey for this effort. Of course there is also lots of politics
involved - the fiery leader of the opposition, Mamta Bannerjee, refused
to attend an all-party meeting on the issue today. Shakti took another
team of volunteers from a samity into the interior on 2 June. They have
set up a camp at Amtali to prepare and distribute khichri daily for
10,000 people.

Most of the people who live around the Sundarbans
are now homeless, with their fields destroyed by the saline water. They
are camped on the embankments, thirsty, hungry and wet, and the stench
is intolerable. Many of the children now have diarrhea, and our team of
health volunteers is busy distributing basic medicines. Forty of them
did a crash medical course two days ago - not ideal, but all that could
be done under the circumstances. Of considerable concern is the fact
that water levels are expected to rise this evening, for the next 24
hours, due to the Purnima (spring) tide. We will know by Monday whether
the hasty work carried out on 6 of the 9 badly damaged embankments
around Bali Island will hold or not.

A number of organisations
and individuals have been generously sending in food, medical and other
supplies, and we are now using the donations we received to run three
large boats - they are being used for 18 to 20 hours a day - to
distribute drinking water and the supplies, and for the purchase of
pumps. Most of the logistics and distribution of the supplies are being
coordinated by Shakti, Asit (of ACT) and Anil. Raj, also from ACT, is
coordinating a garment bank, so that clothes can be distributed.

WPSI's
Board Member, Bikram Grewal, will be returning to the Sundarbans next
weekend to assess the work and give us a further update.


10 June 2009

We
have converted our Tiger Conservation Centre on Bali Island into a
field hospital, and two doctors are now stationed there, working
tirelessly day and night. Dr S. Palit (a child Specialist) and Dr
Chatterjee (a surgical specialist) were sent to Bali by the Samarpan
Foundation, and their accommodation is being provided by Help Tourism.
The doctors have generously agreed to stay there until 17 June and have
already won the hearts of the people !

The seasonal high tide of
Purnima, which started last Sunday, was fortunately weaker than
expected and the hastily repaired embankments withstood the tide. Our
boat, 'Baghini', along with two hired boats, continues to supply
drinking water and supplies to the thousands of people still stranded
on the embankments. But with government aid finally reaching the
interiors of the Sundarbans, things are at last looking up.

On
Tuesday, 8 June, a consignment of 400 kg of rice, 50 kg of dal, flat
rice(chire), jaggery, bleaching powder, some clothes and lots of
medicine, were sent to Bali by the generous Samarpan Foundation. We are
expecting another large consignment of supplies from Mr D. P. Jana (ex
Member Secretary, Sundarban Development Board) who will be visiting the
Sundarbans this week, along with a group of corporates. WPSI's Field
Officer, Anil Mistry, is coordinating their program and as per his
suggestions this additional aid will be distributed beyond Bali where
it is needed more urgently.

Also on Tuesday, there was an
impressive incident involving the staff of the Sundarban Tiger Reserve
(STR). At 11:30 in the evening, our Director, Col Shakti Banerjee,
received a mobile call from Chhotomollakhali that a tiger has strayed
into the village. There was complete panic. Shakti Banerjee immediately
contacted Mr Subrat Mukherjee, the Field Director of STR. Forest staff
reached the village within 30 minutes, armed with torches, tranquiliser
guns and other equipment.... But the 'tiger' turned out to be a dog
wading through the water ! We would like to highly commend the STR
staff for responding so quickly and efficiently, and also for the fact
that instead of berating the villagers, they gave them nothing but
courage and strength. It looks as though they are now geared to tackle
any such situation.