Tiger found dead in the Sundarbans



20 July 2009 

A
tiger was found dead on Friday, 17 July 2009, at Netidhopani in the
Sundarbans. Due to a state-wide strike, the post mortem was carried out
yesterday (18 July). The Sunderban Tiger Reserve authorities requested
Col. Shakti Banerjee, Honorary Director of WPSI, and a representative
of WWF-India to be present at the post mortem, in accordance with the
guidelines of the National Tiger Conservation Authority. The
approximately 12-year-old tiger had no external injuries. It appeared
to have succumbed to an infection, as the veterinary officer found
necrotic focci in the heart and lungs and enlarged other body parts.
Interestingly, parts of king corba, a monocled cobra and a
half-digested crab were found in its digestive system. The exact cause
of death will be known after forensic tests have been completed.

This
sad news follows four remarkable tiger conservation success stories in
the Sunderbans, since Cyclone Aila devastated the area on 25th May this
year. 

Tiger rescue operations since Cyclone Aila

The
day after the cyclone, a tiger that had been swept along by strong
currents took refuge in a house in Jamespur. Since the area was still
chest-high in water, the Forest Department had to cut a hole in the
roof of the house to tranquilise the tiger. It was caged, removed from
the village, checked for any injuries, and released in the jungle the
following day. Three deer were also rescued by the department on the
same day. On the night of 30th June, a young tigress strayed onto an
inhabited island at Adivasi para, on the eastern edge of Sundarban
tiger reserve. It was trapped, tranquilised and released on 3rd July.
On the night of 2nd July, another young tigress entered Lahiripur
village on Satjelia island. It was successfully trapped the next night
and released on 5th July, A fourth tiger strayed into Chargheri village
on the night of 6th July, and was trapped the following night and
released. The tiger had some scratch marks on its front legs, possibly
due to a territorial fight. The Forest Department fitted the last three
tigers with ear-tags and micro-chips on their tails, and gave all the
tigers a health check before they were released.

Listing these
four incidents makes it sound all too easy. But that is far from the
truth. These are delicate operations, not only in the trapping,
tranquilising and handling of the tigers, but also because of other
factors such as crowd control (the capture sites have to be cordoned
off with nets, etc.) and the lack of even basic facilities in the
aftermath of the cyclone. Remarkably, nobody was injured during any of
these operations, and in all four cases the Field Director of the tiger
reserve, Mr Subrata Mukerjee, was present during the tranquilisation
and release of the tigers. The last three tigers were tranquilised by
Mr Subrata Palchoudhury of the West Bengal Forest Department. A WPSI
Field Officer was present at two of the rescue operations.

The
NGOs and individuals, including WPSI, who have been carrying out relief efforts in the
Sundarbans since Cyclone Aila have greatly appreciated the unstinting
efforts of the West Bengal Forest Department. The Sundarban Tiger
Reserve authorities and the Forest Officers of 24 Parganas (S) went
into the field immediately after the cyclone struck, actively assisting
the local people at that terrible time. Fortunately there was little
damage to the mangrove forests, but the Forest Department has been a
pillar of strength to both the wildlife and the local people ever since.