Amendment in Wildlife Protection Act to Control Crimes: Jairam Ramesh


 

Press Information Bureau
Government of India
Ministry of Environment and Forests
Tuesday, July 28, 2009

The
Ministry of Environment and Forests is in process to amend Wildlife
Protection Act to control wildlife crimes. Speaking at the opening of
Bengal Tiger Consultation organized by Wildlife Conservation Trust,
Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for Environment and Forests (I/C)
informed there is a need to strengthen this act by introducing suitable
changes and stringent measures. Long judicial procedure and paltry sum
as penalty does not help to nab this problem. The Minister informed,
with the help of Supreme Court, Attorney General of India and other
judiciary members we will introduce sections like attaching property
and heavy fine. Responding to three points regarding conservation,
poaching and relocation of tribal villages from core areas to save
tigers and their habitat pointed out by Dr Karan Singh earlier, Shri
Ramesh said the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau is active, but we are
making local people part of these activity which will definitely help
us. He also informed about introduction of a tri-partite Memorandum of
Agreement (MOU) between the Ministry of Environment and Forests, State
governments and Tiger Reserve Management to ensure effective tiger
conservation. Recently van-gujjars have been involved into this process
and this model will work effectively, he added. He also said the border
areas will be strengthened to prevent crime. 

Regarding
conservation and preservation of forests, Shri Ramesh said the Ministry
has broken a deadlock after seven years with the help of judiciary and
got CAMPA fund released which will be used in regeneration of forests.
Within next six years, 6 million hectares of land will be brought under
green cover which will provide one of the largest carbon sink in the
world. The minister expressed hope that with expansion of forest cover,
and sustainable forest management, India’s proposal to the UNFCCC at
Copenhagen should be accepted with REDD+ aspect. Giving examples of
Silent Valley which was saved by Late prime Minister Indira Gandhi,
Shri Ramesh said it symbolizes tough challenge and tough choice too. He
said with positive vision and courage, degradation was avoided and
today we do not regret it. We soon will celebrate this vision and
courage in near future. He hoped to have more Silent Valleys in the
country. 

Informing about rejecting two proposals by the
ministry to make a six lane road via Tiger Reserve area and broad gauge
railway line in Western Ghats, Shri Ramesh said we can not destroy
tiger habitats and forests. He said the preservation of forests is a
big challenge. In last couple of years the pristine land has been
diverted for developmental activities or for other purposes but now we
will not have development at the cost of environment. He also talked
about Green Tribunal which will deal with cases of environment and
forests problems which are languishing in courts. These courts will
work as special environment courts. 

Regarding relocation of
families from the core area of Tiger Reserves, he said there are 80,000
to 1,00,000 families in total to be relocated from core areas of Tiger
Reserves. This is not an easy task. It is a prolonged, time consuming
proposition. Ministry has increased the amount of Rs 10 lakh per family
and relocation will be done after consultation with families in
transparent and democratic manner. The Minister also wished to achieve
synergy between Forest Acts and Tribal Acts. Shri Ramesh said out of 37
Tiger Reserves,17 are in precarious situation. 

More than 1500
children took part in this two day Bengal Tiger Consultation. People
from all walks of life, Environmentalists, teachers and parents
participated in “Bagh Bachao, Jungle Bachao, Mausam Bachao, Bharat
Bachao” campaign.

news story link