Centre sends teams to assess situation in 8 tiger reserves 





THE HINDU
PTI, 13th August, 2009

New
Delhi (PTI): In an attempt to avoid repeat of Panna and Sariska-like
situations where the big cats were wiped out, the Centre has send three
teams to assess the scenario in eight "critical" tiger reserves and
take adequate steps to save the carnivores

The move comes after
it was felt that tigers in sanctuaries like Dampa tiger
reserve(Mizoram), Buxa (West Bengal), Namdapha( Arunanchal Pradesh),
Valmiki( Bihar), Palamau (Jharkhand) and Manas in Assam would become
extinct if adequate and timely interventions were not initiated to save
the last species.

Indiravati in Chattisgarh and Nagarjunasagar
Srisailam tiger parks in Andhra Pradesh have also been identified for
the study purpose by the teams comprising experts from NGOs.

"The
teams will review the protection efforts initiated by the state
governments vis-a-vis advisories issued by us," a senior official from
National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) told PTI.

NTCA, an
autonomous body under the Environment Ministry, oversees Project Tiger
in the country and doles out Central assistance to over 37 tiger
reserves across the country.

The team members will also identify
administrative or ecological problems besides managerial problems in
the identified areas and will submit reports within two months on the
basis of which further corrective measures would be taken.

Besides, the teams would give suggestion for restoring the area and eliciting local support to strengthen the park area.

In
these identified parks, tigers have either vanished or are on the brink
of vanishing as each one of them is facing a different set of problems.
Some parks are facing threats from Naxalites like in Indravati and some
others from poachers.

In some reserves like in Valmiki park
state authorities are yet to appoint a conservator, the official said
and referred to Sariska and Panna reserves where the government
remained in denial mode even long after they lost all the big cats.

Hence,
its time to re-evaluate the existing strategies and explore alternative
conservation measures in these identified sanctuaries to boost the
tiger number which is around 1,400 at present in the country, he noted.
newslink