Can the Minister Take the Bull by its Horn?




HINDUSTAN TIMES, Editorial
Bahar Dutt, 19 August, 2009
 
Winds
of change are sweeping across the dusty corridors of the once quiet
Ministry of Environment and Forests. For ten years this Ministry has
been with the DMK – but election 2009 changed it all.  Now
speculation is rife on whether the environment will be better protected
in the hands of a Congress Minister? Can Minister Jairam Ramesh bring
back the golden period inIndia ’s environmental history when Indira
Gandhi with one phonecall could halt a dam being constructed in Silent
Valley, or where the first family took pride and personal interest in
saving India ’s big cats.
 
But the Congress of the 80’s is
very different from the Congress of 2009, in which Minister Jairam
Ramesh has been given the green mandate. In order to maintain a growth
rate of 8-9% it is India ’s forests, mineral and water resources that
are facing an unprecedented onslaught. And in recent years the MOEF has
earned the dubious record of being the ‘Ministry of Environmentand
Forest Clearance’.   In a short span of 2004 to 2006 India lost
over 25000 sq km. of dense forest to industrial and development
projects.  A ministry which is supposed to be the watchdog of a
natural treasury of 67 million hectares of forest and over 15000
species of wild plants and animals has been clearing projects with
virtually little or no opposition.
 
Shaking a Ministry
after years of lethargy will be the biggest challenge for the new
Minister. And shaking his own legacy even bigger.  The Minister
belongs to the school of liberalization andeconomic reforms. The same
reforms, which may have put India on the super economic highway but
with losses, that are unaccounted for.  Coal mines in tiger
reserves and elephant habitats, roads bifurcating national parks and
mega dams submerging prime tropical forests worth millions of dollars.
  India ’s forests and those who live close to them are perhaps
paying the heaviest price for the nations progress as a superpower.
Little wonder then that when Jairam Ramesh, took over the Environment
Ministry, the green lobby has been skeptical about his commitment to
the green cause.
 
But the Minister has taken his new role
seriously. Since he has taken over he has called for a review of
several projects, initiated a number of policy announcements, visits to
institutions like the Wildlife Institute, interacting with scientists,
and synergizing the work of thirty tiger reserves across the country.
He is also a Minister with new ideas. Plans are now afoot to introduce
the National Green Tribunal a single judicial body to decide on all
matters relating to the environment. With this, the functioning of two
existing bodies – the National Environment Appellate Authority and the
Central Empowered Committee of the Supreme Court could be impacted.
 While the dissolution of the former is good, the latter may not
be.  
 
The National Environment Appellate Authority (
NEAA) – the only judicial body in the country to hear grievances
against environment clearance process has the dubious record of
dismissing all but one petition in the last 12 years.  According
to an RTI filed Delhi based environment lawyer Ritwick
Dutta – no site visits have been made by any members of the
NEAA except to places of religious interest- Shirdi and Varanasi . And
none of these religious trips had anything to do with the cases being
heard by the NEAA.  
 
In contrast the other quasi
–judicial body, which may also become a victim of the National Green
Tribunal is the Central Empowered Committee of the Supreme Court, which
looks into all matters related to diversion of forests for non-forest
activities. With a motley group of forest officers and bureaucrats this
is perhaps the only body that has taken its role of a watchdog of India
’s forests very seriously- sometimes much to the chagrin of state
governments and mining companies.  Will the CEC too be dissolved
once the National Green Tribunal is set up? It is perhaps this body
that the Minister may need to save – if he is serious about his role of
protecting India ’s forests
 
Trouble for the new Minister
may arise from traditionally unknown quarters- his own government. A
case in point- the Niyamgiri hills, Orissa, where   India ’s most
controversial and long drawn out environment battle is being fought by
hundreds of indigenous tribals. Plans are afoot to chop down the rich
tropical forests of the Niyamgiri hills – for the Vedanta
bauxite-mining project.  Here too- murky dealings are on. In
letters accessed through an RTI- it is clear that pressure came from
the highest office in the country- the PMO to the Ministry in 2008, on
the status of forest clearance that was pending with the MOEF. And
herein lies the scam- since the project is being developed in a Fifth
Schedule Area- land acquisition can only be undertaken by the State. In
this case the land will be handed over once acquired by state to a
private company, which is Vedanta.  Is it ethical for the state to
be putting pressure on its own Ministry on behalf of a   private
agency? The same state, which should as per the constitution be
upholding the rights of the people. Now in 2009 will there be pressure
on Ramesh too, to make sure that the process is expedited? And when
pressure comes from his own Prime Ministers Office to dispense with
infrastructure projects on forestland will he be able to continue his
role as a watchdog of India ’s forests?

The second likely source
of conflict will be state governments particularly those where the BJP
is in power - Jharkhand, Chhatissgarh and Orissa- states with huge
mining resources as well as forests.  In 2005 Chief Minister of
Chhatisgarh, Raman Singh wrote a letter to MOEF asking for declaration
of forest in Korba as an elephant reserve to reduce human-elephant
conflict. Three months later a letter is written by the Confederation
of Indian Industry- requesting for area not to be declared as elephant
reserve as the area has huge coal deposits which could be
detrimental to industrial interests. Never mind that the same area has
had 20 elephant deaths as the elephants compete for space with humans
with their forests gone. A far sighted CM who wanted to protect
the elephants has been silenced by commercial interest. What will the
MOEF do in such cases? Support the CII or the BJP CM? 
 
These
and other such contentious issues are what Ramesh will need to bite
into- as he visits national parks and sanctuaries and poses for
pictures on an elephant in Corbett. 

In the meanwhile India ’s
green activists can take heart that in the lofty corridors of power
they finally have access to a Minister who is articulate, English
speaking much like the urban elite from which India ’s environment
movement is drawn. Perhaps herein lies Ramesh’s strength. He is a
minister who is accessible and responsive.  In the days to come
can this Minister take the much needed tough decisions  which may
sometime make him unpopular with his own government and put a clear
moratorium on infrastructure projects coming up on elephant corridors
and vital tiger habitats? Jairam Ramesh has his work cut out. And the
greens have much hope from the new Minister.

 
Bahar Dutt is a conservation biologist and environment editor of CNN-IBN
newslink