Jairam plans changes in Forest Act, depts unaware

 



The Indian Express
Wednesday, April 20 2011

Vivek Deshpande, Nagpur

Minister
for Environment and Forests Jairam Ramesh may have conducted public
consultations on Bt brinjal, but his ministry has conceived an
apparently far-reaching amendment to the Indian Forest Act (IFA)
without consulting the biggest stakeholders — the state forest
departments.
Ramesh announced at a press conference at Mumbai last
week that an amendment was being made to the IFA whereby forest
officials would have to take the consent of the gram sabha before
registering an offence against anyone for violating the Act.

When
The Indian Express contacted Alok Joshi, the state Head of the Forest
Force (HoFF), to know what the amendment was about, he said: “I will be
able to tell you only after we get the finer details.”

Joshi
answered in the negative to a question if he, as HoFF, was consulted
before the Centre decided to go ahead with the amendment.

The
Indian Express also spoke to the Principal Chief Conservators of Forest
of Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh who also said they were not
consulted on the amendment.

When contacted, Ramesh said, “There
are some draconian provisions in the Act like anyone entering a forest
being harassed and penalised. We want to change that. And we are only
amending the Central Act. The states have to follow it in their own
way.”

Asked why the heads of forest departments were not
consulted, Ramesh said, “We had invited some divisional forest officers
from Naxal-affected districts for consultations.”

A senior DFO
told The Indian Express: “Yes, there was a meeting. But never ever was
this particular point discussed. The discussion was related to the
general question if forest department work was in any way leading to a
rise of Naxalism.”

Ramesh said, “We are changing the offence
compounding provision. Now, forest officials will have the power to
compound offences up to Rs 10,000. Earlier, it was only Rs 50.”

A
senior forest official, respected for his work in districts such as
Gadchiroli, said, “When I read it in newspapers, I was taken aback.
This kind of amendment has the potential to bring the law-enforcing
functioning of the department to a standstill. The question remains why
should we not be consulted on such an important matter. After all, we
are the implementing agency.”

Nitin Desai, central India
Director of the Wildlife Protection Society of India and a leading
wildlife crime expert said: “We need to know details... What pros and
cons were discussed and among whom. Was the wildlife crime angle
thoroughly checked before it was finalised....”

.read full story here