Guards leave Assam parks - Homeguards, casual workers quit because of non-payment of 7 months’ salary

 




THE TELEGRAPH
Pullock Dutta
Thursday , September 29 , 2011

Jorhat,
Sept. 28: Security at the national parks in Assam has come under threat
with a large number of homeguards and casual workers engaged there
leaving their jobs because of non-payment of salary for the past seven
months.

The forest department could not give the actual figure
of how many homeguards and casual workers had left Kaziranga and other
national parks in the last few days. Park authorities claimed that the
personnel were leaving every day, many of them without informing them.

“Till
a few days back, 30 had left and more are set to leave,” a Kaziranga
official told The Telegraph today. Altogether 175 homeguards and 100
casual workers are engaged at the park and security at the home of the
one-horned rhino is heavily dependent on them. Kaziranga has 525
permanent workers.

Kaziranga director Surajeet Dutta said
homeguards and casual workers were regularly protesting and threatening
to leave if their salary was not paid.. “I have taken up the matter
several times with the headquarters but nothing has happened so far,”
he said.

At Orang National Park, considered to be a miniature
Kaziranga, the situation is worse with 25 of its 68 homeguards and 45
casual workers leaving in the last couple of days. The park employs 80
permanent workers.

The situation is not different at Dibru Saikhowa and Nameri national parks and Pobitora wildlife sanctuary.

The
development comes at a time when the national parks are under
tremendous pressure from poachers, who are making frequent attempts to
kill rhinos to make easy money just before Durga Puja.

Rhino
poaching increases just before the festive season. Only a few days
back, forest guards were engaged in gunbattles with poachers at
Kaziranga and Orang. Four poachers were killed and arms and ammunition
recovered during these gunfights. At least six poachers have also been
apprehended from Kaziranga in the last few days.
read more