At Least 356 Indian Leopards Killed in 2011, Half by Poachers
 
John R. Platt
March 1, 2012

India’s
leopards are dying at a rate of at least one per day, according to a
report released this week by theWildlife Protection Society of India
(WPSI). At least half of those deaths have been caused by poachers
seeking the big cats’ valuable skins, claws and other body parts.

Leopards
(Panthera pardus), which live in increasingly fragmented populations in
sub-Saharan Africa and parts of Asia,  are protected under
Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which completely prohibits commercial
trade in the animals or their body parts. But as is the case with
tigers and other species, poaching and illegal trade—along with other
factors such as habitat loss—put enormous pressure on leopards. All
nine of the world’s leopard subspecies are listed as “Near Threatened”
by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources due to declining populations. (Snow leopards, which are
endangered, are a separate species.)
According to WPSI, at least 356
Indian leopards (the subspecies Panthera pardus fusca) died in 2011, 52
percent of which were killed by poachers. The organization and its
partners warned that these numbers might represent just a portion of
the actual deaths. “The cases that we have reported are just the tip of
the iceberg,” Anish Andheria of Sanctuary Asia, which helped gather the
statistics, told New Delhi’sNDTV. “The loss could be three to five
times more because most of the incidents happened outside the forest
range and also due to improper intelligence gathering.”Outside
of poaching, 41 Indian leopard deaths last year were caused by
conflicts with humans (usually from wandering into villages that have
been established near leopard habitats), 29 by accidents (such as
vehicle strikes), 21 by other animals and 65 by unknown reasons. An
additional 14 leopards died following unsuccessful attempts to rescue
the animals from human conflicts, such as a male that died in January
2011 after being caught in a farmer’s wire snare or a female that died
in May 2011 after panicked villages threw stones at it while waiting
for forestry officials to arrive.

more details