Jamshedpur: Get ready to enjoy some quaint comfort in the lap of nature at Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary, the picturesque elephant abode around 30km from here. The state forest department has built a mud cottage at an estimated cost of Rs 7 lakh at Makulakocha village as an attractive accommodation option for tourists looking to escape the stifling city life and touch base with nature. The five-room facility with attached toilets has come up on the plot of land owned by villager Pashupati Mahto just behind the compound hosting the plush air-conditioned accommodation. "The cottage will be opened for tourists after the tariff is fixed by the landowner. Though we have built the facility, it will be managed by the villagers. The earning will go to the landowner. We will not have any stake. However, we will provide assistance whenever needed," Dalma range officer R.P. Singh said. According to Singh, the landowner will form a committee with the help of other villagers to run the facility. He will also be responsible for offering home-cooked food besides beds and mattresses to the guests for a comfortable stay. Singh, who had supervised the construction of the structure, said, "Each room will have ceiling fans and attached toilets. The idea is to let tourists spend some quality time amid natural surroundings and enable the landowner earn some money in the process." The range officer said the village committee was yet to install ceiling fans and buy beds and mattresses for the cottage. "We are waiting for them to fix these things. We will provide the items if the committee doesn't. The mud cottage will be an added attraction to the 192sqkm sanctuary," Singh added. The cottage was supposed to come at Konkadasa village but the landowner backed out following protests by local residents. "The villagers had spread a message that the forest department would grab their land in the garb of setting up the cottage. However, we intend to provide an opportunity to the villagers to earn revenue. Later, we build the facility at Makulakocha," a forester said. The cottage has been built under the eco-tourism project that involves visits to relatively undisturbed areas ensuring low impact on nature. It also involves conservation, education and participation of the local community. Besides generating income for those living in the sanctuaries, eco-tourism educates students about plant and animal life, and wildlife conservation. Besides Dalma, such a project has been implemented at Betla National Park in Latehar.