New Delhi, Dec. 30: If you are planning a wildlife safari, save up a bit more. Also, start planning right away. Visits to forest reserves and sanctuaries could become dearer after the government finally woke up to the peril of increased footfalls in these sensitive zones. The plan, officials hinted, is to pinch the pocket to spare the animals. The government could also restrict the number of visits which, sources said, means waiting in the queue longer. A committee has been formed to lay down guidelines for regulating wildlife tourism, especially in tiger reserves, following the realisation that increased tourist footfalls was seriously affecting the natural environment and ecology of reserved forests. The seven-member panel set up under the chairmanship of Sujit Banerjee, former tourism secretary, has been asked to submit its final report within 45 days. The committee is expected to assess the impact of tourism in these regions and suggest measures to regulate visits in ecologically sensitive non-forest areas in and around tiger reserves. Sources said the guidelines would be in the context of advisories issued by the National Tiger Conservation Authority, the wildlife (protection) act and the forest (conservation) act. Environment minister Jairam Ramesh had recently expressed concern over mushrooming tourist lodges around tiger reserves and cited the case of Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand. He was of the view that increasing number of tourists and tourism-related constructions in and around forest areas have been disastrous for the ecology of reserves, national parks and wildlife sanctuaries. Ramesh also took up the matter with the tourism ministry and both agreed to work on a joint initiative. “Though wildlife tourism is one of the major attractions for tourists visiting India, we have decided to curb tourism-related activities in sensitive areas as they are having a harmful effect on our ecology,” said an official with the tourism ministry. India has 38 tiger reserves, 357 wildlife sanctuaries and 96 national parks. Over 1,000 tourists visit these every day, with the Corbett National Park, Sunderbans National Park (Bengal), Kaziranga National Park and the Manas Tiger Reserve (the last two in Assam) recording the highest footfall. The official said the government would try to restrict tourism activities by raising tariff and limiting the number of visits per day. It might also fix a monthly quota of visitors. The ministry will also limit the number of new licences for hotels and resorts in reserved areas. “This means if you are planning a wildlife safari, it is likely to become dearer. You may also have to stand in the queue longer time,” he said.