I wait, crouched in a sea of sun-browned reeds, as mosquitoes tattoo every inch of my body. The ground wheezes and burps as it sucks my feet deeper into the wetland muck at 14,000 feet. But I won’t budge. Why? I’ve been instructed to hold my ground and keep as much out of sight as my nerves will allow me. Less than an hour and more than a million stings later, a clump of grass rustles and Qayoom emerges — he is coated in mud and dripping wet waist down, but his chapped lips wear a smile that smacks of success. For the past hour, Qayoom has been squirming on his tummy through the vegetation, stalking a speck he was convinced was a black-necked crane. “I was right,” he says excitedly. “Keep your camera ready. These parents have fledged chicks.” Four hours into my jaunt through the Changtang in Ladakh, I have found the first signs of wildlife. But from where Qayoom looks at the situation, I owe him lunch. It all began two days ago in a tea shop in Leh, where I was complaining about the futility of trying to spot, let alone photograph, wildlife in this high-altitude desert. As it usually happens when friends disagree, Qayoom chose the “I bet you” route to settle the dispute. And so this three-day wildlife trip, hastily cobbled together after we agree at one lunch for every animal photograph, and a dinner thrown in if Qayoom could lead me to the Tibetan wolf or the snow leopard — photograph or no photograph. So here I am, sliding over mud with camera in hand in the hope of being able to stalk a family of cranes at brunch. These birds, which rise up to a man’s height and whose haughty walk almost makes you believe they know they are protected by the Wildlife Act, are difficult to find, and not just because they nest in some of the most unreachable ends of the Changtang plateau. Extremely shy, even the click of the camera shutter is enough to spook them. The last bit I learnt a second after I start taking shots. Job done, we clean ourselves in the freezing Indus and then stew in the sun to let the numbness evaporate. The pressure cooker whistles, our tummies growl on cue... but lunch will have to wait. For blazing brown dots overwhelm the sky, white streaks glint in the sun and a mob of honking geese descends where the cranes were a while back. Qayoom can hardly control a laugh as he realises I will have to undergo another torturous bath. “You know the drill,” he says, handing me my camera. “Crawl, wait, crawl, wait, shoot. Bathe on your way back.” Aye, aye sir. I still stand by what I said about finding and photographing wildlife in Ladakh. The Changtang is so vast and the animals so well camouflaged that you could miss them unless they sauntered by. However, instead of blaming it on luck, I know now that the trick lies in knowing where to find them. That’s where Qayoom proved himself so indispensable. “We will pitch tent near the next water source tonight,” he tells me. “Tomorrow will be busy.” Next morning, Qayoom reads out the headlines for my convenience. “It’s 6am, the sun has hit the opposite mountains, the water’s frozen and kiang scouts are coming to investigate.” “… the water’s frozen and WHAT?” I blurt out, tearing out of my sleeping bag, slipping into my jacket and sliding out of the tent. And sure enough, there they are, in regimental file, wearing as much curiosity on their faces as an ass’s could muster. This was just the start I had prayed for last night... but Qayoom has more good news. There are marmots here, he says, and wolf tracks that are leading away. Suddenly, it seems as if all the wildlife in the Changtang is keen to show up for us. We decide to follow the wolf tracks and then test our patience outside a marmot burrow. The first signs of wolf activity catch our eye 30 minutes later, when Qayoom spots a swirling line of red in the waters of the stream we are following. My heartbeat soars — a kill. It’s a horse, its flank ripped open, its innards scattered but not much eaten. “Guess we scared the pack away,” Qayoom says. The Tibetan wolf, like its counterparts across the world, has had bad press. Though critically endangered, their mean look and their habit of preying on livestock do not make them the ideal mascot. On this gravel-strewn stretch, there is no way of telling where they could have gone. The only sign they were here is a solitary pugmark on the side of the stream. “No dinner for you yet,” I tell Qayoom as we head back to check on the sunbathing marmots, shy, teddy bear-like rodents only sometimes seen outside their burrows. Thankfully, we manage to get one of those “sometimes” moments before the day turned to boiling midday. Our search for wildlife had already taken us more than 200km from Hanle, which in turn is more than 250km from the last military checkpost at Nyoma. We were deep in the heart of the Changtang and with only a day to go, Qayoom felt it would make more sense to get some help on knowing where to find wildlife. Three hours and 90km later, we reach a Changpa settlement and accost one of the nomads to get straight to the point: We have till afternoon to find the ibex or the bharal or the snow leopard. Could you please show us the way? “No snow leopard,” a Changpa tells us in a tongue that only vaguely resembles Ladakhi. “No ibex, but bharals come to drink behind this hill in the evening.” We decide to wait, and what better way than to sit in a yak-hair tent with a nomad and sip chhang, a heady barley liquor. We get our high and, just as the sun begins its descent to the horizon, we get out of the tent and head up the hill. Sitting huddled at an ungainly gradient that promised to give me the shots I wanted, legs numbing with every passing minute, I grow impatient, and Qayoom senses it. “It’s their big day,” he says. “Maybe they are taking time to look their best for you.” Minutes turn to hours, shadows begin to lengthen, the temperature drops, and the wind picks up, but there’s no sign of the bharals. I am almost ready to give up when we hear the Changpa’s scream and see him waving frantically. Behind him, on the side of a hill, we glimpse the bharals trudging up, silhouetted against the sky. “Wrong hill,” Qayoom tells me as he rushes down. “Quick.” I stumble down as I skid over loose gravel and sand. My lungs feel as if they will explode as they work overtime to squeeze the last drop of oxygen from the thin air. As we approach, the bharals keep grazing. They do not run but move higher up, some shooting disapproving glances at us. I rest awhile before steadying my hands and taking the shots. But then have to do without clicking them as they lick the salt off the sides of a nearby saline marsh. “Next time,” Qayoom tells me. “If we do not reach Nyoma by tomorrow, the armymen who wished us luck three days ago will question the purpose of our visit.” As I grumble on the way back to Leh about all that we have not sighted, Qayoom tells me: “You need one last visit. Come in winter and I will arrange for a carnivore exclusive.” As for the lunches I owe Qayoom, he feels a lavish lunch is best followed by an equally lavish dinner.