Look who's making a wild card entry into Jharkhand's project groove. A proposed animal rescue centre, which was put into cold storage some seven years ago, is back on the forest department's drawing board following a recent spurt in man's conflict with wildlife. While suitable land is said to be available, foresters need to bypass bureaucratic and funds hurdles to get the ambitious plan on the ground. Insiders told The Telegraph that around 25 acres had already been earmarked in Barwe on the Ormanjhi-Kanke stretch, on the outskirts of capital Ranchi, for the animal rescue centre. "Chief wildlife warden Pradeep Kumar reviewed the plan and also did a recce of the site on yesterday (Wednesday). The 25 acres in Barwe are adequate for wildlife rehabilitation. The area also boasts proper road connectivity," a well-placed source said. Chief wildlife warden Kumar confirmed the forest department's plans to reconsider the project, but refused to divulge details before all modalities were drawn up. "The project dates back to the 2007-08 fiscal. It has been in cold storage for long, but we are considering it seriously now. An animal rescue centre is the need of the hour in Jharkhand. We will make a formal announcement only after a final draft is readied," he said. Insiders further told The Telegraph that a night safari plan, which was former environment minister Sudesh Mahto's brainchild, too had found place on the forest department's priority list. The multi-crore project had been proposed in Ormanjhi in 2011, but sank into oblivion over economical viability in a tribal state like Jharkhand. On why this sudden shift of interest to wildlife rehabilitation and tourism, foresters pointed to man-animal conflicts, poaching and illegal trade in animal body parts. "Reports of man-elephant conflicts are almost regular. Human encroachment on forests and apathy towards co-existing wildlife often results in animals getting fatally wounded," said an official. He pointed out that though unauthorised wildlife trade was rarely reported, the menace existed in Jharkhand, which houses a tiger reserve and an elephant sanctuary, besides protected forests for bears and birds. "A rescue centre is urgently needed for animal conservation," he added. The forest official's concern is not unwarranted. Last week, Latehar forest division had busted a bird racket and seized around 700 rose-ringed parakeets. Bhagwan Birsa Biological Park in Ormanjhi, the lone state-run zoo in Jharkhand, did not have room to accommodate the flock. "We have our limitations and can't take in every rescued animal and bird. If we do, we increase chances of confrontation between zoo-bred species and the wild ones," said a zookeeper, emphasising the need for a dedicated wildlife rescue and rehabilitation facility. A DFO-level officer conceded that sheer lack of will and sometimes space crunch hindered animal rescue operations in the state. "An elephant rescue centre, with an investment of Rs 40 lakh, was proposed in Dalma, but interests fizzled out as often it does. Let's hope this time the department thrashes out a solid plan and executes it too," he underlined.