Paradip: Bhitarkanika National Park authorities removed illegal prawn farmers and dismantled dykes to reclaim 175 acres of protected forest area close to the wildlife sanctuary. Illegal prawn farming in the area adversely affects the natural flow of water into the wetland site. "Prawn farming was adversely impacting vegetation in the area," said Mahakalpada forest range officer Bijoy Kumar Parida. While 100 acres of forest land was freed from prawn cultivators in the Hetamudia forest block, encroachments were removed from 75 acres in the Sanatudi forest block, said an official. We have set a target of removing encroachments and human interference from 2,000 acres and take up mangrove regeneration programmes on the reclaimed patches,"said divisional forest officer, Rajnagar mangrove (wildlife) forest division, Bimal Prasana Acharya. Orissa High Court had earlier ordered demolition and dismantling of all illegal prawn cultivation structures (locally known as gherry) in the Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary. Ironically, the state had, in an affidavit to the high court, claimed demolition of all prawn dykes in prohibited areas. By erecting earthen dykes, prawn farmers create artificial barriers that check the inflow of tidal water. This results in the inundation of fields in the nearby areas, damaging the crops. Besides, the use of chemicals also damages the region's flora and fauna, alleged green activist Bijoy Kabi. Cases have been registered against unauthorised prawn gherry owners under sections 4, 14 and 21 of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, and various provisions of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and Section 30 of the Orissa Forest Act, said a forest official. "Prawn cultivation continues in and around the national park area in gross violation of the law. The cultivators are bound by law to obtain permission from the Coastal Aquaculture Authority, which has made it mandatory for registration of all shrimp farms on either side of rivers, creeks, canals in the area up to a 5km distance from the high-tide line. Shrimp farms that are not registered are liable for punitive action and demolition," said an official.