Guwahati, April 24: The National Board for Wildlife has taken up the issue of providing more representation to district autonomous councils in the Northeast in various wildlife conservation-related committees. The country’s apex body in wildlife conservation has asked the wildlife wing of the Union ministry of environment and forests to write to the state governments sensitising them on the issue. Sources said the matter was taken up twice recently by the board members. The board suggested that adequate capacity building of such councils was necessary so that they could actively participate in wildlife conservation programmes. The secretary general of wildlife NGO Aaranyak, Bibhab Talukdar, said there should be more representation from indigenous and district autonomous councils, particularly in the Northeast, in various conservation-related committees. A member in the wildlife board, Prerna Bindra, said no blanket permission should be granted in such matters and the issue should be discussed in detail to facilitate a rational decision. At least two thirds of the forests of the region are under the authority of autonomous district councils in the Northeast. In the region, many communities still control the forest resources. In East Kameng district  of Arunachal Pradesh, the Nishi tribe has elaborate controls over critical watersheds as well as forests with  high natural beauty and biodiversity. The Nagas in Mokukchung district of Nagaland divide their forests into blocks and in the East Khasi Hills of Meghalaya, villagers of Mawphlang have sacred forest traditions for many years. “The proposal is fine but a number of issues needs to be deliberated. There were several instances where the views are different, especially in declaration of wildlife sanctuaries,” a source in the Assam forest department said. There has been a number of instances where the policies of the state were opposed in the council areas. Last year, student bodies in Karbi Anglong student bodies in Karbi Anglong had opposed the burning of a rhino horn lying in the district demanding that the animal part should be kept in museums for preservation. The source said there cannot be two laws and no forest would be permitted within any council without anapproved management plan, which should be in consonance with national and state forest policies. The state will issue necessary guidelines to put in place a monitoring mechanism to regulate compliance of the management plan, he added. The 2004 Assam Forest Policy stated that it would seek co-operation and involvement of the council authorities to avert any possible and anticipated adverse impact on largescale diversion of  forest areas for non-forestry purposes.