Tezpur, Aug. 28: Tezpur police today detained RTI activist and adviser to the Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) Akhil Gogoi here for violating Section 144 CrPC when he was about to lead a rally against the eviction drive at Amchang wildlife sanctuary in Kamrup (metro) district of central Assam. The KMSS supporters today staged demonstrations in various places of the state, including here, against the eviction drive. They assembled at Jaimati Pathar around 10am and were ready to take out a rally to the deputy commissioner's office. However, as Section 144 CrPC was in force in the town, the protesters, led by Akhil, were confronted by the security forces at Jaimati Pathar. The peasant leader got involved in an argument with the police and district administration officials present at the spot for not allowing them to stage their "democratic movement". Irate KMSS supporters also jostled with security forces, leading to a lathicharge by police and Akhil's detention. About 50 protesters were injured. Akhil was, however, released from Tezpur Sadar police station after two-and-a-half hours. Talking to The Telegraph , the superintendent of police, Sonitpur, P.P. Singh, said the protesters were violating the law because they did not have permission to organise a rally. Later, while briefing the media, Akhil alleged that under the BJP government, there is "complete anarchy" in the state and accused Dispur of unleashing a "reign of terror among the people, destroying the democratic environment". He also accused the BJP government of not having any ideology. "They do everything according to the commandment of the RSS," Akhil said, adding that the KMSS and other indigenous organisations of Assam would call off their agitation if the government stopped the eviction drive at Amchang and issued land documents on the basis of Forest Rights Act, 2006. Dismissing Akhil's allegation, the additional deputy commissioner of Sonitpur, Parag Kakoti, who was deputed to monitor the situation, said in view of law and order situation and traffic snarls in the town, Akhil was permitted to stage the protest at Jaimati Pathar but not take out any procession. "Challenging the administration, he wanted to take out a rally for which he had to be detained for a few hours," Kakoti said. Amchang is the second reserve forest after Kaziranga National Park where the eviction drive was carried out in the state.