Jamshedpur: Members of eco development committees will assist forest guards as part of an elaborate security plan to prevent killing of wild animals during Sendra or Bishu Shikar, the annual hunting festival of the tribals at Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary, on Monday. At a meeting between forest officials and members of eco development committees held at the auditorium of Dalma range office in Mango here on Saturday, it was decided that since forest guards from different divisions would be on duty outside and inside the sanctuary, members of the committees would come in handy in guiding and helping them and thus preventing any flare-ups with the tribals. Villagers, who are part of the committees, work in tandem with forest officials for protection and management of forest affairs throughout the year. Dalma divisional forest officer C.M.P. Sinha said the meeting was held to seek the help of committees in helping guards of Seraikela-Kharsawan, Dalbhum and social forestry divisions of Adityapur, Kolhan, Ranchi, Simdega and Chaibasa. Recently, 23 guards joined the Dalma sanctuary, located some 30km from here. "Dalma guards are also new to the area. Assistance from the committee members is essential for maintaining proper vigil during Sendra," he added. "The forest guards, numbering 125 in all, are not aware about the terrain and the sensitive pockets of Dalma sanctuary. Saturday's meeting was meant to bring all under one platform for maintaining strict vigil and to stop killing of animals," the DFO said. According to him, the forest guards will be deployed at 15 patrol routes and 10 check points in and out of the sanctuary. The guards have been directed to avoid confrontation with tribals and maintain vigil on entry of traps, nets and firearms. "We are keen to ensure a peaceful Sendra and see animals were not killed in the name of tradition," the divisional forest officer said. Senior forest department officers, including principal chief conservator of forests (Wildlife) L.R. Singh, conservator of forests (wildlife) A.N. Sharma, four conservator of forests, six DFOs and 10 range officers would be on duty to ensure a bloodless Sendra. Apart from Sinha, his Jamshepdur counterpart Saba Alam Ansari, Dalma range officer R.P. Singh and Chakulia range officer Gorakh Ram were among those present at the meeting.