Enumeration complements conservation projects. When conducted scientifically, such an exercise can help gather vital information about fauna. So India's decision to begin counting its tiger population as a part of, supposedly, the world's largest wildlife estimation project must be welcomed. The scale of the project is quite impressive. Over 5,000 people are expected to be a part of the survey that will span across forest areas with tiger habitation in 18 states. Funds, for once, are not a problem: a sum of 10 crore rupees has been allotted for the tiger census. Hearteningly, state-of-the-art infrastructure is also being pressed into service. Over 14,000 cameras would be deployed and mathematical models used to assess the number of tigers. This is a vast improvement from the days when such estimates used to be obtained without adequate investments in modern technology. The data that are expected to be gathered are likely to serve as an indicator of both the density of the tiger population as well the perils faced by India's national animal. Even though India's tiger population has registered a marginal increase - there were, reportedly, 2,226 tigers in 2014, up from 1,411 in 2006 - poaching remains a serious threat. A thriving international market in tiger body parts - global pressure on it remains ineffective - helps poaching cartels thrive. Numbers, however, tell only a part of the conservation story. This is because the health and, indeed, the future of India's tigers depend on interventions that need not focus only on increasing their numbers. For instance, a rise in the number of tigers in the wild must be matched by a corresponding increase in dense forest cover. The fragmentation of forests - contiguous patches are no longer numerous - has exposed tigers to such diverse threats as poachers and road and rail traffic. Expanding the network of safety corridors - the animals use them to move from one protected forest to another - will hold the key in this respect. A sufficient prey base is another requisite for a stable tiger population. For this to happen, species that remain, more often than not, out of the focus of conservation efforts must be accorded necessary protection. Then, there is tourism: its impact is mixed. The money it fetches helps fund conservation efforts. But the pressures it brings forth on forests and their inhabitants must not stay unaddressed in policy.