Guwahati, Feb. 25: The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) has chalked out a plan to have a population of 4,000 one-horned rhinos in India, Nepal and Bhutan by 2020 which would result in removal of the species from the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species. This has been stated in the WWF report, The Greater One-Horned Rhino - Past, Present and Future, which not only addresses the current status and distribution of this species but also elaborates conservation actions necessary to secure its future. The report says in a world where we are perennially on the back foot, trying desperately to slow down the rate of biodiversity loss, the experience of rhino conservation in India and Nepal shows that it is possible to recover lost ground and expand large mammal populations. "What is needed is a clear vision, strong partnerships, adequate funding and a lot of determination," it says. "We now have a historic opportunity to build on these successes. The WWF's vision is to bring rhino populations up to sustainable levels, to reintroduce them to areas where they have disappeared and ultimately to restore rhinos to their historical range. Our first goal is to increase the greater one-horned rhino population in India, Nepal and Bhutan to at least 4,000 by 2020. We hope eventually to see the species removed from the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species as its long-term future is secured," it says, adding that there are 3,500 one-horned rhinos in the wild. "Such an achievement would not only ensure that these remarkable animals will continue to amaze and inspire future generations, it could also provide significant benefits for the communities that live alongside rhinos and provide a focus for wider conserv-ation and sustainable development opportunities," it says. The conservation organisation says there are opportunities too to provide refuge for rhinos in Bhutan, particularly in the Royal Manas National Park which adjoins Manas National Park in Assam where rhinos have been successfully reintroduced. The WWF-Bhutan has a strong track record of working with the government and local people on wildlife conservation and sustainable development in the Himalayan kingdom. The first objective, the report says, is to protect existing rhino populations in seven protected areas in India, Nepal and Bhutan through improved anti-poaching efforts. This will be done by improving the management of protected areas by equipping and training rangers to use law enforcement monitoring protocols which help rangers identify and address gaps in park security. Another strategy is to strengthen anti-poaching efforts by deploying and training rangers to use new tools such as conservation drones and sniffer dogs. The third strategy is to strengthen and expand existing informer networks to collect intelligence on poachers and prevent rhinos from being killed. One of the plans is to translocate 50 rhinos from Nepal's Chitwan National Park to Babai Valley in Bardia National Park, also in Nepal , to create a new population of rhinos in Nepal. In Assam, a plan to translocate rhinos from Kaziranga to Burachapori-Laokhowa wild-life sanctuary is under way. The report says incentives have to be created for communities to support rhino-conservation initiatives, such as rhino-linked tourism and other livelihood development projects. According to the report, the capacity of local community institutions, including anti-poaching networks, needs to be improved and there should be an increase in awareness on rhino conservation through exchange programmes.