Wildlife conservation and protection will take centrestage in Jamshedpur with Tata Steel Zoological Park gearing up for the annual wildlife week celebrations beginning on September 30. The celebrations will start with an essay writing competition (1,000 words in English or Hindi) for students of classes IX to XII on the topic, Man-animal conflict: causes and remedy. The opening day event will also witness a painting competition for students of standard II to V (group of plants and animals), standard VI to VIII (forest ecosystem) and standard IX and X (a day in the wild). The best eco club teacher award for 2019-20 has also been lined up. Entries can be submitted online at tatazoo.nec@gmail.com. October 5 has been reserved for a prize distribution ceremony at the zoo education centre lawns. It will include the best eco club teacher award comprising a running trophy and Rs 3,000 cash prize for the winner and a trophy and Rs 2,000 cash for the runner-up. Prizes will also be given to toppers in the essay writing and painting competitions, as well as to the winners of the International Biodiversity Day 2020. The prize distribution will be followed (on October 6 and 7) by a talk on animal health during Covid-19 by Tata Zoo vet Manik Palit and on butterflies by zoo curator S.K. Mahato.  The event will also have a keeper talk (sloth bear, Hanuman languor and tiger). The concluding day on October 8 will also have a talk on nature by Tata Steel head (biodiversity) Hishmi Jamil Hussain and on elephants of Jharkhand (with special reference to Dalma wildlife sanctuary) by regional chief conservator of forest, Ranchi, A.T. Mishra. The talks will be streamed live on Facebook. “A formal physical inauguration on zoo campus will depend upon the Covid-19 guidelines issued by the state government at that point in time,” a zoo official clarified. Entries should be sent on or before September 30 with details (name, standard, school/organisations, contact number and e-mail ID). For more information one may call: 9297953437.