A mother elephant turned violent after failing to save its calf from drowning in the Subarnarekha river and chased and killed two elderly villagers who were part of a crowd that had been watching the ordeal in Jhargram's Nayagram on Wednesday morning. The elephant, trumpeting in despair after the death of the six-month-old calf, got agitated at the sight of the crowd and the cacophony the onlookers created. It charged at the crowd, lifted Ananda Jana, 73, and Sashadhar Mahato, 63, repeatedly with its trunk and hurled them to the ground before trampling them to death. Several residents said the water-filled ditch into which the calf fell had been created because of illegal sand mining. Foresters in the Kharagpur division said a herd of 14 elephants, including two calves, had come from the Sankrail forest range in West Midnapore and was moving towards Nayagram's Chandbila forest range. While the herd was crossing the river, one of the calves fell into a ditch on the riverbed. As the other elephants moved ahead, the mother began to frantically search for the calf. "Around 6am, we saw the elephant squatting on the bed of the river and desperately trying to drag out something. Thirty minutes or so later, we realised that its calf had fallen into a ditch. The elephant finally found the calf, pulled it out with its trunk and took it to a field on the bank of the river. When the mother realised that the calf was dead, it got agitated and began to trumpet. This drew over 100 villagers to the site," said a Nayagram resident who was among the first to spot the jumbo early in the morning. As villagers started to
gather on the field, some locals informed forest officials. A team of officials
reached the site at 6.45am. But by then, the elephant had got more
agitated at the sight of so many people and began to chase the crowd. “The
mother elephant was disturbed after losing its calf and as the crowd continued to shout, it turned angry
and violent. Most of the villagers fled when the elephant started to chase
them, but two elderly persons could not run fast enough and were caught by
the animal,” said Shivanand Ram, the divisional forest officer of
Kharagpur. “According
to the primary investigation, the baby elephant, a male aged around six months,
died by drowning in the river.
The post-mortem report will reveal the actual cause of death,” Ram added. The deceased Jana and
Mahato were residents of Deulbad village in Nayagram block. After
attacking the duo, the elephant turned its attention to the village road where
it damaged a motorbike and tried to overturn a bus parked on the road. Angry mother elephant on a rampage. 
                                                            Picture by Buddhadeb Bera The
foresters engaged a “hulla party” to monitor the movement of the elephant and
drive it towards the dense Chandbila forest. A forest official said
late on Wednesday evening that the mother elephant had been pushed into
the forest and efforts were on to reunite it with the herd. A
forester said on the condition of anonymity that the preliminary investigation
had revealed that the calf fell
into a ditch on the Subarnarekha riverbed while trying to cross it. “The
other elephants crossed the river and entered the forest, but the mother
elephant continued to search for her baby. Finally, she was able to find
the calf, but by then it had died,”
he added. Residents
claimed the ditches on the riverbed had been created due to illegal excavation
of sand before monsoon. “There
are many ditches on the riverbed because of sand mining. The administration is
aware of it but does nothing. The calf drowned in one of the ditches,” said a
villager, requesting not to be identified. A
forest official said mother elephants were very protective. “Mother
elephants are always careful and protective about their calves. It is not usual
for a calf to drown while crossing the river with its
mother. The reason behind the death of the calf will
be looked into,” a forest official said. Forest
minister Jyotipriya Mallick said he had ordered a probe to find out whether
there was any ditch on the riverbed because of sand mining. “I
know the entire incident. The deaths of two people, as well as of the baby
elephant, are unfortunate. I have already ordered a probe to find out whether
the ditch was created because of sand mining. If the investigation says so, we
will lodge an FIR against those involved in mining,” Mallick told The
Telegraph. Jhargram
in Jungle Mahal has witnessed a surge in human-animal conflict in the past
year. A source said at least 30 people and four elephants had lost their lives
over this period. The state government has taken multiple measures to
tackle human-animal conflict in the four Jungle Mahal districts. The
Bengal government has a policy of paying a compensation of Rs 5 lakh and
offering the job of a forest guard to a member of the family of a person killed
in an elephant attack.