Bhubaneswar, April 26: The government is trying to leverage the state's natural wealth, especially lakes and wildlife sanctuaries, with a view to increasing tourist footfall. Efforts are on to develop ecotourism destinations with the active participation of wildlife officials and local communities. In the first phase of the plan, 30 such spots will be developed at an estimated cost of Rs 21 crore. One of these spots is Mangalajodi on the banks of the Chilika lake, where tourists flock to watch birds. It is the second largest hotspot for birds in the Chilika after Nalabana, the biggest avian sanctuary in the state. The plan is to construct at least a dozen rooms, watchtowers and nature trails at Mangaljodi to attract bird watchers and nature lovers. "Although in initial stages, work is on at almost all the places that we plan to develop. We hope it will help increase tourist footfall," said principal chief conservator of forests S.S. Srivastava. Other sites to be developed are Barakhandia and Dhodrokusum under the Hirakud wildlife division, Kumari and Jamuani the under Baripada wildlife division, Deras and Godibari under the Chandaka wildlife division and Tarava and Chhotkei under the Satkosia wildlife division. Forest and environment department sources said an attempt would also be made to showcase the natural beauty of Daringbadi - popularly known as Odisha's Kashmir to the outside world. Dangmal, a breeding centre for saltwater crocodiles, would be made more attractive to visitors with the construction of cottages and better boating facilities. The project is also expected to generate jobs for local people, as tourists visiting the ecotourism destinations will require a variety of services that the local communities offer. "Some of these initiatives such as those at Mangaljodi and Satkosia are working well," said tour operator and travel industry expert Benjamin Simon. Simon said an ecotourism project could be successful only if local communities and wildlife officials worked in tandem. "The officials should refrain from policing these sites and instead be more proactive. They must join hands with the local communities," he said. The travel industry expert said there was no denying the state's potential for drawing tourists by showcasing its natural beauty.