In two minds about violence While there has been a series of furious protests over army atrocities, civilians hardly raise an eyebrow after the equally, if not more, brutal attacks by the militants. The people of Manipur or any other state of the Northeast have never protested the excesses by the “revolutionary forces”. Progress in the region will come by dint of hard labour and sweat and not by guns, extortion and hooliganism. While the rest of world talks about 3G, broadband, GPS and other technology, the people of the  Northeast seem to be forever engulfed in this quagmire of violence and ethnic hatred. It’s high time that the people change their mindset. If not, we are only heading towards another Bihar or even worse. Jyotirmoy Sharma
Perth, Australia Succour for disabled I would like to throw light on the problems faced by the disabled people in our country. There may be different kinds of disabilities. Their problems could be many but the treatment accorded to them by society is almost similar. These people are deprived of their rights. Yet all they need is love and understanding. But unfortunately, they are considered useless and burdensome by the family and society. The disabled people, if shown understanding and given the proper environment, can prove their potential. There is a need for people to be more conscious about the problem of this section of society. The need of the day is that they should be rehabilitated and social security be provided to them. We have to view this as an issue of development. If we truly want to be called the proud citizen of a developed nation then we must ensure that these disabled people are rehabilitated so that they can also participate in the development of the country. Sadly, it is now realised that the Persons with Disability Act 1995 has not percolated to the beneficiaries. We have the laws but they are implemented. We must remember that the law does not differentiate between an abled and disabled person. It does recognise that the disabled need assistance so that they can enjoy equal status on a par with the rest. The disabled will struggle till they are given the assistance that is their birthright. This is something which should have come naturally to them. Ranjan Trivedi
Guwahati Jet lag My daughter R. Mahanta, a student, bought a confirmed ticket from Jet Airways (Jorhat) on May 5 to take a flight to Calcutta on June 19. She reported at 3.20 pm while the departure time was 4.05 pm. Surprisingly, she was given a boarding pass for the next flight, whose departure time was 6.15 pm or 6.20 pm, for reasons best known to the company. She requested the company several times to accommodate her in the same flight as she had to catch Azad Hind Express at 9 pm from Howrah railway station, but to no effect. On being asked, it was said the company (Jet) had oversold tickets. If the tickets were oversold, who is responsible, the company or the passengers? Why should the passengers suffer? I thank Sahara Airways, which accommodated my daughter on Sahara flight S2 312 at 5.20 pm. May I request the airport authority of Jet Airways the reason for harassing passengers with confirmed tickets, even when they report on time? B.C. Mahanta
Jorhat Wildlife preservation I fully agree with Alyas Ahmed’s letter, “A plea for wildlife preservation”. In the nearby Saikhowa reserve forest where I reside, the plight of wildlife has to be seen to be believed. The poor animals fall prey to the greed of nearby slum dwellers. It is high time something is done to ensure safety of these animals. Arup Duara
Doom Dooma Road alarm I would like to draw the attention of the PWD authority regarding the extremely poor condition of roads and bridges in North Darrang district. The condition of the road from Mangaldoi to Tangla and Tangla to Bamonjuli — M.B. Road — is in a very bad shape. There are two bridges from Mangaldoi to Tangla and two bridges from Tangla to Bamonjuli. Of these, two bridges were constructed by the British government during the pre-Independence era. One bridge over Kalanadi and another over Nunai river, Kulsi bridge and also the Ramhari bridge collapsed due to erosion and overflowing river during the recent flood. As a result, the people of this area are facing a lot of difficulty in despatching tea from the tea gardens and also the labour ration. Because of disruption in traffic, the people of the locality are facing problems in carrying out their daily work. This is the most vital road in this locality and as such the communication of this locality has been hampered tremendously. M.B. Road is the main communication link for this area, so we do hope that the authority will repair this road/bridges in war footing. The North Mangaldoi tea garden is situated in the remote corner of Assam. So we would like to urge the PWD authorities to repair these bridges and the approach road of river Nunai and Kalanadi. Kanak Hazarika,
Panerihat