Fine, you take pride in having named your pet dog Moustache or Goofy. Ever fantasised christening a pure-bred African lion or a Royal Bengal Tiger? If you are wildly lucky, or so says Jamshedpur’s Tata zoo, you may just do that. Five African lion cubs — three princesses among them — who arrived in Jamshedpur last week are a year-old each, but unnamed. The daughter of the zoo’s Royal Bengal Tiger couple Shanti and Raghav, who is a little over two months, is also going unnamed so far. So, zoo authorities have thought of an innovative name game during Wildlife Week — celebrated across India between October 1 and 7 — where everyone will get a shot at naming the magnificent cubs. What zoo authorities will do is install drop-boxes, inviting people to write a name on a chit and put it in. This exercise will go on throughout the week. Once the Wildlife Week is over, the drop-boxes will be emptied of their entries. Zoo authorities will choose six names out of the many options through a random lottery. “We will keep this scheme (of naming the cubs) open to all residents of Jamshedpur,” said zoo director Bipul Chakravarty. “The idea is to let people feel that the cubs are like youngsters in their family,” he added. The scheme will need some fine-tuning — for instance, how many drop-boxes  and at which spots, whether people will write their names and addresses on the  chit besides the suggested name, whether there can be multiple entries from the  same person. They did mull over names — after all, big cats Ben, Shyamali, Shanti, Basanti, Mohini, Sher Khan and others had been named by zoo authorities — but then decided to hand over the responsibility to people. “This time, we thought of giving animal lovers a chance. And we hope many interesting names will come up from children. They have a fertile imagination,” Chakravarty said. Wildlife Week draws children in thousands to the zoo. “We host several activities such as painting contest, essay writing, debate, quiz and the ever-popular fancy dress parade,” Chakravarty said, adding that it was an apt time to seek names for cubs. The two lions and three lionesses are doing well in quarantine, added Chakravarty. Dipankar Biswas, regional officer of the animal quarantine certification service of the department of animal husbandry and dairy under the ministry of agriculture, concluded his two-day visit to Tata zoo on Sunday. “I am highly satisfied with facilities provided by the Tata zoo management at the quarantine unit for the lion cubs,” Biswas said. “Quarantine facilities are the best in comparison to Mumbai and Calcutta zoos,” was his glowing seal of approval. His words mean a lot. For he will be back next month to formally issue a certificate that will allow people to come and see the lions. Once people see the lions up close, they will be able to name them better. But no Goofy, Cuddly or Pinky please. Remember, they are jungle royalty.