Guwahati: Two wildlife species found in the Northeast - clouded leopard and red panda - have been proposed by the Union ministry of environment and forests for its focused recovery programme. The matter was discussed at the standing committee of National Board for Wildlife held in New Delhi last month and the minutes were made public on Friday. The component, Recovery Programmes for Critically Endangered Species, is for undertaking the recovery of critically endangered species in the country. At present, the following species are being taken up under this component - snow leopard, bustard (including floricans), dolphin, hangul, Nilgiri tahr, marine turtles, dugongs, edible nest swiftlet, Asian wild buffalo, Nicobar megapode, Manipur brow-antlered deer, vultures, Malabar civet, Indian rhinoceros, Asiatic lion, swamp deer and Jerdon's courser. A ministry official, in the meeting, said there is a provision in the scheme that the director, wildlife preservation, government of India, with the approval of the standing committee of National Board for Wildlife can initiate other recovery programmes or wind up an ongoing programme. In view of this, the wildlife division of the ministry proposes inclusion of clouded leopard, red panda, Northern River Terrapin, Arabian Sea humpback whale and caracal in the focused recovery programme. A wildlife activist has welcomed the proposal to include the clouded leopard and red panda in the focused recovery programme and it would give a boost to its conservation. Clouded leopard ( Neofelis nebulosa) is a wild cat found in the Himalayan foothills. Dampa tiger reserve in Mizoram has the highest density of clouded leopards in Southeast Asia, according to a study by researchers from India and the UK. The chief wildlife wardens of Meghalaya, Mizoram and Bengal have suggested for inclusion of clouded leopard and red panda under the list of species for taking up focused recovery programme. Red panda ( Ailurus fulgens) is closely associated with montane forests with dense bamboo-thicket understorey. The species is found in Sikkim, Bengal and Arunachal Pradesh. A forest official said the Arunachal Pradesh State Board for Wildlife has already approved a proposal for a comprehensive Red Panda Conservation Plan for the state. WWF (India) has been working in West Kameng and Tawang districts as part of its wildlife conservation efforts.