Jamshedpur, Oct. 2:  For visitors at the Tata Steel Zoological Park, there would be more attractions than just bird-watching and viewing animals. From now onwards, visitors can now not only see, but also read about their favourite animals. In a unique attempt, the Tata Steel zoo authorities inaugurated the library and information centre, aptly named the Nature Education Centre, in a prequel to Wildlife Week celebration at the Tata Steel Zoological Park. With a present capacity of around 800 books and various magazines, CDs and videos, the information centre would help nature lovers know more about their favourite animals free of cost. The zoo director, M.S. Jain, said that there was a rich collection on nature, animals, and birds. Shortly, the zoo would boast literature on butterflies too. The zoo had opened a butterfly park on its premises recently. On the occasion of the weeklong Wildlife Week celebrations between October 2 and October 8, more than 1,500 schoolchildren registered their participation in the various competitions. Some of the events in which the schoolchildren are participating are essay writing, debate , quiz, painting competition, and the ever-popular fancy dress  parade. Interestingly, the zoo director said that he went through all the 84 essay papers of the students of various schools of Jamshedpur and that he was amazed and impressed at their creativity and awareness  levels. “I had a great time reading the essays of all the participants and frankly, I am amazed to see their efforts. In fact, they explained the topic, “Effects of Global Warming” so scientifically and logically, that one can definitely say that our city kids are pretty ahead in their knowledge of  environment conservation. Moreover, with the inauguration of the library, children can now broaden their horizons of knowledge,” he said. Sanjiv Paul, managing director, Jamshedpur Utilities and Services Company, who was present to inaugurate the centre, seemed to be very pleased at the move within the zoo premises. “I am really very happy to see the green world of Jamshedpur. Initiatives like the inauguration of the knowledge centre and the celebration of events like Wildlife Week go a long way to promote awareness amongst people, including children,” he said.