Naga and Pangti have returned. Fitted with satellite tracking devices, they had set out on a long journey - a two-way trip from Siberia to South Africa - a distance of 44,000 kilometres that takes a couple of years to complete. This year, as Naga and Pangti and their companions descended to roost in Nagaland's Doyang reservoir, the avians - Amur falcons, a species that is protected under the Wildlife Protection Act and by the Convention on Migratory Species to which India is a signatory - scripted a rare success story in the nation's chequered history of conservation. It has been estimated that since 2006, a tenth of the falcon population - 10,000 to 14,000 birds - had been culled each day. The annual decimation had been brought about by subsistence needs that remained unmet. The birds served as a cheap source of food for local, but marginalized, communities such as the Lotha. More importantly, families were reported to have earned tidy sums of money by trapping and trading in birds. The killings were particularly worrisome because the decline in the number of Amur falcons was expected to have an adverse effect not just on the local ecology but also on agriculture. (The Amur falcon, an insectivorous raptor, is known to devour insects harmful to crops.) Remarkably, the mass killings stopped after 2012. There are two significant lessons that can be learnt from the success that has been achieved in Nagaland. First, conservation efforts bear fruit when they manage to involve such key - but often competing - institutions as the State, science and even faith. The stakeholders of the alliance in Nagaland included the state government, wildlife organizations, scientists and conservationists, as well as the Church. The injection of political will invigorated the campaign: Section 144 was reportedly ordered near the roosting sites and welfare grants to villages conditioned on their ability to check the killings. The Church pitched in by disseminating the conservation message while scientists provided the necessary technological apparatus to monitor progress. An even more commendable achievement is the manner in which the campaign mobilized ordinary people, many of whom were involved in the hunting of the birds. Significantly, penalties were not the only recourse to turn predators into protectors. Diverse, indigenous cultural traditions were tapped into to instil a sense of ownership among the people over the conservation project. The democratization of the conservation initiative also had unintended benefits. For instance, it led to renewed interest in near-forgotten folk traditions: a festival that was associated with the arrival of the falcons is now the subject of considerable public interest. Indeed, a number of festivals have been organized not just in Nagaland but also in Manipur and Assam to raise public awareness about the birds. The Amur falcon is not out of the gunman's sight yet. Discontent lingers over the lack of alternative livelihoods for the hunters. Guns are easy to find and compensation, allegedly, is yet to trickle down to the villagers from the clan chiefs. There is also the risk of public relations events - motor races or fashion shows are integral to the 'Amur festivals' - deflecting citizens' attention from the central message . The Union minister of environment and forests, who had visited Nagaland recently, should examine ways to replicate this model of conservation elsewhere in India.