Ranchi, June 25: In denial for years, Jharkhand’s wildlife guardians have been forced to turn their attention on a neglected species whose numbers have been gradually dwindling, thanks to the findings of a national watchdog panel that has pointed to growing incidents of poaching in certain parts of the state. According to Wildlife Trust of India (WTI), which is preparing a national conservation plan for the reclusive sloth bear (Melursus ursinus), barely 8 to 10 of these nocturnal insectivores can now be found in a 100sqkm area of the state, a far cry from their numbers five years ago. The state forest department has for long been denying poaching of these animals, protected under Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and listed as “vulnerable” by International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). But, WTI officials have pointed to unprotected areas in Gumla and Hazaribagh, where sloth bears have been killed at random by unscrupulous huntsmen over the last year. “Our field studies indicate at least half a dozen instances of poaching in the two districts. The idea is not to criticise anyone, but aim for greater co-operation. We are working out conservation plans for all states, but from Jharkhand we haven’t received concrete data on distribution of sloth bears, their status, crimes related to them and instances of man-animal conflict,” said Nayem Akhtar, a  scientist with Central Zoo  Authority. He, along with WTI expert A.K. Singh, met forest officials in Ranchi on Monday to brainstorm on ways to check the dwindling bear count. According to WTI statistics, there are roughly 15,000 sloth bears across India today. “Hence, like Project Tiger and Project Elephant, the Centre is eager to stop killing of this species of bear. It is time for us to work unitedly,” said Singh. Jharkhand’s dilemma was pronounced at the meeting because it had never taken any initiative to protect sloth bears. In fact, a section of state forest officials was also clueless on their existing numbers. “In a state, where 90 per cent posts of field workers and foresters lie vacant, drawing up conservation plans is baseless charade. We believe Jharkhand still has a good number of sloth bears, but they are certainly threatened,” said D.S. Srivastava, a wildlife conservationist present at the meeting. Divisional forest officer (DFO) of Dhalbhum/Seraikela A.T. Mishra, who for one has conducted some surveys on sloth bears in Dalma and its adjoining areas, maintained that habitat fragmentation and human-animal conflicts were major threats to the animal in Jharkhand. “Sloth bears target fruit-bearing trees, besides termite mounds. Conflicts arise because one of their food resources is same as humans. The animals mostly attack in self-defence and humans act in retaliation,” he said, neither accepting nor declining cases of poaching. Palamau Tiger Reserve DFO (buffer) A.K. Mishra agreed. “The maximum number of conflicts are in Mahuadanr in south Palamau region. In 2006-07, compensation paid for bear attacks was around Rs 25,000. The figure climbed to Rs 1 lakh in 2011-12,” he said. Chief conservator of forests (wildlife) A.K. Gupta admitted “ground-level challenges”, but said the department had the “clear intention” of overcoming them. “In November, the Union ministry of forest and environment will hold an all-state meeting in this regard and we hope to come up with our own conservation plan by then,” he said, adding that the WTI and state forest officials would now “work in tandem for a common cause”.