Jorhat, Oct. 24: Bobita Pao Bori had never thought in her wildest imagination that a forest so close to her home was blessed with nature’s bounty and a treasure trove of wildlife. The 45-year-old woman, head of Oyan village on the fringes of D’Ering Memorial Wildlife Sanctuary in East Siang district of Arunachal Pradesh, found herself among flocks of migratory birds, wild buffaloes and herds of deer when she along with 16 other gaonburahs (village heads) were taken on a tour inside the sanctuary yesterday. “Although I stay so close to the sanctuary, this was my first visit and I never thought it could be so beautiful inside. The place is blessed by nature,” she told The Telegraph over phone. The gaonburahs were taken on the tour to show them the rich biodiversity inside the sanctuary in a bid to win their confidence and create awareness among the villagers through them. “As the gaonburahs are the authority in their villages, we are trying to use them in our conservation efforts and make them realise the sanctuary and its denizens belong to them,” Tashi Mize, divisional forest officer of the sanctuary, said. This was the first time when most of the village heads were paying a visit to the 19 square km sanctuary which is famous for not only its Bengal Florican and hornbills but also for tigers, sambars, Gangetic dolphins and wild buffaloes. Various species of migratory birds visit the sanctuary during winter. The principal chief conservator of forest (Arunachal Pradesh), Omkar Singh, accompanied and the village heads and requested them to start conservation at the village level. Criss-crossed by the Siang and Sibea rivers, the sanctuary was a haven for poachers and timber smugglers till a year back but for the past one year, a dedicated forest staff has brought about a change. The park authorities also took the help of the Adi Baane Kebang, the apex body of the Adi community, which issued a directive to villagers near the sanctuary to give up hunting. Mize said though poaching has come down following a few measures taken up by the forest department, there are still a few pockets outside the sanctuary area where poaching continues. “Sometimes animals from the sanctuary stray to these villages and are attacked by the villagers. But now we have requested the gaonburahs to ask the village folks not to cause any harm to these animals,” Mize said. He said the gaonburahs have also been convinced the sanctuary could be a source of livelihood for the villagers as the forest department is stressing on eco tourism. “As the sanctuary gets more focus, more tourists would come to visit and the villagers could have an opportunity to earn a living by getting involved in eco-tourism projects,” the forest officer said. He said a few species of migratory birds — pelicans and ruddy shell ducks — have already started arriving at the sanctuary. “With hundreds of migratory birds visiting the park in the next few weeks, D’Ering would be abuzz with activity. We are also expecting a large number of tourists this season.” Most tourists come to the sanctuary during winter to watch the migratory birds.