Guwahati: Treasured Whe-els, a museum that boasts of an impressive collection of vintage cars and bikes, faces eviction for being located in Amchang wildlife sanctuary. A forest department source said the museum, which was set up by Pickloo Deka - a vintage car collector - in 2013 under the banner of the North East Heritage Foundation on a 10-acre plot of land at Sonapur on the outskirts here, was found to have encroached upon the forest land and therefore, an eviction notice has been served to them. The museum houses around 95 vintage and classic cars and bikes besides old fuel pumps, bicycles, telephones, clocks, gramophones, pianos, and many of the articles that belong to the World War II era. Its prized possessions include an Oldsmobile of 1919 vintage, 1921 Chevrolet, a 1922 Austin-7, a 1936 Fiat Topolino, a 1944 Volkswagon, a 1945 model Buick, and a Paratrooper bike of 1933, among others. It was gradually emerging as a tourist spot and a weekend getaway for city residents. The state forest department is carrying out evictions in Amchang wildlife sanctuary according to a Gauhati High Court order. The first round of the drive was carried out in August and the next round will be conducted next month. The source said after receiving the eviction notice, the North East Heritage Foundation recently filed an appeal in the high court and said it expected the state tourism department to provide a suitable site to relocate the museum and boost tourism. The high court has made it clear that the foundation has no option but to shift the museum outside the sanctuary area and asked it to apply to the commissioner and secretary of tourism department and the managing director of Assam Tourism Development Corporation, who on receiving the application, will have to decide on it by November 30. The high court said till November 30, the museum shall not be removed from its present site. During the tenure of the previous Congress regime, the then chief minister, Tarun Gogoi, had given a grant of Rs 2 lakh to Deka with which he had bought five cars, including a 1944 Citroen and a 1953 Morris Oxford.