Guwahati, Sept. 16: The Union ministry of environment, forests and climate change has finally admitted presence of wintering habitat of black-necked crane at the site of the Nyamjang Chu hydel project in Arunachal Pradesh and has asked the Wildlife Institute of India to commission a study for taking a final decision on the project. Sources said Bhilwara Energy Ltd, which is constructing the 780MW project, has been contending that the site is not a regular wintering ground of the black-necked crane and hence, the dam should come up at the location. A case is also pending before the National Green Tribunal where arguments were heard from both sides. The hydroelectric project is a run-of-the-river scheme with a reservoir on the river Nyamjang Chu. The barrage site is located near Zemithang town in Tawang district. The project which was discussed in the Tawang River Basin Study report by the Expert Appraisal Committee for river valley and hydroelectric projects last month, stated that a separate study for protection and conservation of the habitat of black-necked crane would be commissioned by the Union ministry of environment, forests and climate change. The ministry has engaged the Wildlife Institute of India to take a final decision on Nyamjang Chu project. The black-necked crane is classified as vulnerable on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List 2003 and listed "threatened" by Birdlife International. It is the only high-altitude crane among the 15 species found in the world. "The proposed barrage site is close to the wintering habitat of the threatened black-necked crane. Therefore, it is very important to strictly adopt some mitigation measures for the protection of its wintering ground to ensure the long-term survival of this endangered species," the committee said. Zemithang valley in Tawang district of Arunachal Pradesh is one of the only two wintering habitats of the black-necked crane in the country. The other habitat is Sangti valley in Arunachal Pradesh. A paper on "Status and distribution of black-necked crane in India", published in a journal Zoological Research last year, stated that Sangti valley and Pangchen valley of Zemithang should be declared as black-necked crane nature reserves and measures to maintain the ecological integrity of these areas should be taken up as a priority. The committee said the company which is executing the project should take several mitigation measures to protect the habitat of the threatened bird. "This should include a wide range of measures ranging from maintaining prescribed environmental flow, restricting construction activities during winter months and minimising noise pollution," the committee said.