Siliguri, Nov. 11: Go slowly to save wildlife: the request was from students as they tied bands around the wrists of train and vehicle drivers who travel through the Dooars everyday. Boards with “go-slow” warnings for drivers appear frequently along NH31 and the Siliguri Junction-Alipurduar railway track that snake through Mahananda Jaldapara and Chapramari sanctuaries, Gorumara National Park and Buxa Tiger Reserve. This time, the forest department revived the awareness campaign on the last day of the Wildlife Week to include the passengers and the common man in it. “Often passengers wonder why the trains are going slowly or may start agitating if they reach late their destination. In case of cars, they even urge their drivers to go fast. The campaign is for drivers as well as passengers. A little awareness can save precious wildlife,” said Dibakar Das, a Class IX student who had participated in the campaign today. Tapas Das, the divisional forest officer (wildlife-II), said the students had been divided into two groups — one for  Malbazar and the other for Binnaguri stations, 55km and 80km from here respectively. With each train chugging in, the students tied “go slow” bands around the wrists of the drivers, guards, railway employees and passengers on board. Speeding trains often kill elephants, deer and even leopards, known for their quick reflexes. The frequency of wild animal deaths has been so high in recent times that it prompted state forest minister Ananta Roy to threaten a rail roko. “We have insisted that drivers limit the speed of trains while crossing the forests,” a forest official said. “A few drivers tried too but had to face problems when passengers started accusing them of delay. The awareness drive was for passengers too.” At Binnaguri, students of local schools performed skits on the station. “Similar campaigns were held along the highway passing through Gorumara yesterday,” Das said. “Our staff members, accompanied by students, stopped every vehicle plying on the route, especially buses. Much like the stations, the drivers were asked to keep a standard speed while passengers were requested to alert drivers in case they drove fast.” The environmentalists have appreciated the department’s move. “Campaigns like these can be effective in making people understand some of the simplest ways by which they can contribute to wildlife conservation,” said Animesh Bose, a member of the state board for wildlife.