Guwahati, March 30:  The forests of Northeast India and Myanmar are now getting global attention. For the first time, Integrated Tiger Habitat Conservation Programme, supported by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and KfW, the German Development Bank, is undertaking a science-based conservation effort spearheaded by Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) India and its counterpart in Myanmar to increase wildlife connectivity between the forests of Northeast India and north western Myanmar. Senior scientific consultant of WCS, India programme, Varun R. Goswami, said the project was initiated with a long-term vision of reconnecting tigers and other wildlife in the Indo-Myanmar region. "Wildlife density in Myanmar is low because of threats like poaching and loss of habitat. The WCS is working with the Myanmar government to increase the number of threatened species such as tigers. For this, connectivity with the source population# in Northeast India is crucial" he said. He added that this would be the first explicit study to examine tiger (and other large mammals) connectivity between Myanmar and Northeast India as the conservation of an umbrella species like the tiger would safeguard the health of the entire ecosystem and the people who live within them. In the long run, such connectivity is critical for tigers and other animals in protected areas, both in India and Myanmar. He said there is little knowledge on where the animals are located and where they move. To obtain this information, WCS India will undertake largescale surveys to assess wildlife distribution. Goswami said they are currently planning the wildlife distribution survey only in Northeast India. "As we are in the initial stages of planning the survey, the exact size of the survey area is yet to be decided but it will be huge," he said, adding that WCS, India programme, has prior experience in surveying large landscapes for wildlife distribution. Experts say the tigers of Northeast India have more chances of sharing its genes with Southeast Asian tigers in Myanmar, Thailand and South China due to habitat connectivity in the trans-boundary areas with India. "Our objective is to survey those parts of Northeast India that lie between the source population in Kaziranga National Park and wildlife habitats in Myanmar. Therefore, our work will mainly cover the states of Nagaland, Assam and also Arunachal Pradesh," he added. He said, "Science-based conservation is the core philosophy of WCS and interventions/outputs of the project will emerge from a thorough understanding of wildlife distribution and other on-ground realities. All I can say at this point is that in Northeast India, they will be community based." The IUCN says Myanmar has slowly started opening up to international organisations after over 50 years of civil conflict and has great potential for tiger recovery. In the north of Myanmar, WCS is looking at creating a network of corridors to allow dispersion of tigers across the 35,000 square km wide trans-boundary landscape between Htamanti and Hukaung Valley wildlife sanctuaries having relatively few tigers and Kaziranga National Park, which has one of the highest tiger densities in the world.