Panscholi son plea Mumbai, June 26 (PTI): Actor Aditya Panscholi’s son Suraj, arrested on the charge of abetting the suicide of actress Jiah Khan, today moved Bombay High Court for bail. A lower court had last week rejected Suraj’s bail plea, saying that prima facie Jiah had been mentally abused by him. Suraj was arrested on the basis of a letter, purportedly written by Jiah. It was found in her bedroom a few days after she hung herself on June 3. Blood money Dubai (PTI): Two Indians got a reprieve 48 hours before they were to be executed in Kuwait on June 18 after they paid blood money to the family of their alleged murder victim. S. Shanmugasundaram and K. Chellaiyan had been convicted for a Sri Lankan woman’s murder in 2008. Child raped Faridabad (PTI): A three-and-a-half-year-old girl was allegedly raped by her neighbour in Haryana’s Faridabad, police have said. The accused, Sunil, has been arrested. The girl’s grandmother traced her to in Sunil’s house after hearing her cries. Sunil had threatened to kill the girl. Acid attack Meerut (PTI): A 22-year-old girl was injured at Uttar Pradesh’s Incholi after a youth allegedly threw acid on her face, police have said. The incident took place on Tuesday when the girl was on her way home. Prince Kapuriya of Jammu has been named in the  complaint. Goa alert Panaji (PTI): Goa is concerned about the possibility of arms-laden containers being washed ashore from a ship stranded off its coast, chief minister Manohar Parrikar said. The Japanese ship broke up in mid-sea. The navy and coast guard have been alerted. Royal pension Thiruvananthapuram (PTI): The Kerala government will give a monthly pension of  Rs 2,500 to each member of the Zamorin family, which ruled the Malabar coast till the British took over. Chief minister Oommen Chandy said the Zamorin family’s donation of their wealth for the state’s progress was considered while awarding the pension. TN prays for rain Chennai, June 26 (PTI): Temples in Tamil Nadu are holding special prayers for rain on the orders of the Jayalalithaa government. The state is facing acute scarcity of water for drinking and irrigation. “For want of rains, we have been organising the special prayers in over 200 temples across Tamil Nadu since June 18. This will go on till July 1,” said Hindu religious and charitable endowment commissioner P. Dhanapal. Pizza boy Mumbai (PTI): A 17-year-old pizza delivery boy was arrested on Wednesday for attempting to rape a girl. The 22-year-old girl had placed an order in the evening. The accused brought the pizza to her residence, and noticing that she was alone, barged in and tried to rape her. As the girl raised the alarm, he stabbed her with a kitchen knife and fled, police said. The boy was arrested later and sent to a juvenile remand home. The girl was hospitalised. Tax staff Mumbai (PTI): Bombay High Court has rebuked the income-tax office for the “casual approach” of its staff in not acknowledging letters received by them and refusing to put the inward registration numbers. The judge asked the authorities to take action against the erring clerks. The court also asked the department to issue a circular making it compulsory for the clerks to sign and put a registration number on copies of letters received by them. Crash claim New Delhi, June 26 (PTI): The family of a man, crushed to death by a speeding truck, has been awarded a compensation of over Rs 32 lakh by a motor tribunal here. The forum directed National Insurance Company, with which the truck was insured, to compensate the family of Mohd Badruddin, who died in 2011. Badruddin, who was 42, earned Rs 20,000 per month. Bus rape case New Delhi (PTI): The juvenile accused in the December 16 gang rape of a 23-year-old paramedic on a Delhi bus has denied all the charges against him. The youth refuted police’s claim in the charge sheet describing him as the “most brutal” of all the six accused. He claimed that he had been “falsely implicated” in the case. Wildlife meet New Delhi (PTI): Officials from enforcement and intelligence agencies of the eight South Asian countries will meet here next week to develop a cross-cutting operational strategy to curb the growing illegal wildlife trade in the region. Wife killer London (PTI): A 33-year-old NRI shopkeeper has been sentenced to life imprisonment in the UK for bludgeoning his British wife to death with a wooden elephant. Devendra Singh will serve a minimum of 16 years for killing Charlotte Smith, 41, during an argument at their home in Straffordshire. Drug raids Panaji: The Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB), in an effort to curb the growing menace of drugs in Goa, has launched a clampdown on beach-side shacks, eateries, discotheques and pubs. The NCB  has joined hands with the state authorities to shut down premises doubling up as narcotic dens. Cong leader New Delhi: Congress leader and former  Madhya Pradesh deputy chief minister Subhash Yadav died at a Delhi hospital on Wednesday. Yadav, 67, had been suffering from various  ailments for some time. He is survived by his wife, two sons and five daughters.