Jorhat, July 24: A herd of elephants from Gibbon wildlife sanctuary under Mariani range of Jorhat forest division is wreaking havoc in adjoining tea gardens and has damaged over five houses in the past three nights. Forest officials are having a tough time keeping the herd at bay at night when they come out of the sanctuary. Over the past three days, the guards have fired 19 rounds in the air and are distributing crackers to garden workers to ward off the animals. Forest department sources said the herd had grown to 40 members from about 25 in the last eight years. The jumbos frequently stray out of the sanctuary in search of food and wreak havoc in the paddy fields of surrounding villages, granaries and houses of labourers of adjoining tea gardens. The sanctuary, with an area of 20.48 square km, is suited for only two to three elephants, a forest official said. There are over 25 villages and over 10 tea estates in the area surrounding the wildlife sanctuary. During summer, the jumbos mostly stray towards tea gardens and in winter they head for the paddy fields to feed on ripe paddy and vegetables. Mariani range officer D. Medhi told this correspondent today that the elephants were dividing themselves into small groups and moving out of the forest to different areas. “The jumbos are very smart animals and to outwit forest staff they divide themselves into two or three groups after sunset and move out to different areas simultaneously.” Since Monday night, a group of 15 elephants has been visiting the Dukhlongia tea estate and Kathanibari division of Sycotta tea garden, causing havoc, he said. The range officer said four labour quarters (thatched houses) have been damaged in Dukhlongia and three have been damaged in neighbouring Kathanibari. On Monday night, forest officials fired 10 blank rounds to chase away the rampaging jumbos and nine rounds were fired last night to keep the animals away from the gardens. Forest guards are armed with .303 rifles and double-barreled shotguns. Medhi said the elephants had even marched towards the manager’s bungalow of Dukhlongia and were driven off  late at night after several attempts. He said the people of Dukhlongia were “frightened” because a few months ago a worker was killed by elephants. Three others were injured in leopard attacks and angry workers even killed a big cat. “Today our men held several meetings with labourers and we gave them a few crackers to use before the forest team arrives. We have asked garden officials to inform forest personnel at once (if they see any elephants),” Medhi said. He said six men in a jeep have been carrying anti-depredation duty from dusk to dawn in the garden areas. Medhi said the wild animals after being chased away do not return to the sanctuary but take refuge in a nearby plot of land in the middle of Kathanibari division. The plot, of about five hectares, has not been used for the last few years and gives the jumbos cover.