Jamshedpur, April 9: Some extra trunks and tails have been noticed in the Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary. The pitter-patter of big little paws trundling behind their jumbo mothers is a welcome sight for the staff. The increased number of jumbos before next month’s census is an encouraging sign. Foresters have recently spotted around 30 calves inside the 192sq km sanctuary. Though it is difficult to determine the age of the youngsters, it seems that most of them are new-borns who will be added to the numbers once the census takes place. Around eight calves were born in Dalma between December and February. Villagers and staff of the sanctuary witnessed the birth of a male calf at Kalajhor. They also noticed that at least a dozen of the adult female elephants were pregnant. “It is possible that these calves might belong to that herd. But we can not confirm this,” said a forester. According to him they were hopeful of the numbers  increasing. “We hope that the number of elephants will be 160, which would be a giant leap from last year’s count of 120,” he added. These babies also add to the cute factor. Foresters who have been watching them say they are a delight to watch. “They are very small and try to keep up with their mothers,” said an officer of the sanctuary. A.T. Mishra, divisional forest officer of Ranchi Wildlife Division, said it would be too premature to say that elephant numbers would reach a new high this census. “However, the signs are encouraging. A good number of calves have been spotted with different elephant herds. I came across some calves at a water body near Majla Bandh that were in the centre of a protective herd,” he added. Mishra said though there were positive indications about a leap in the elephant count it is difficult to determine the numbers. Some of the calves could be over a year old.“This means that they could have been included in last year’s elephant census,” the DFO added. He said at present there are over 50 elephants in Dalma. “More elephants are yet to return from the jungles of Midnapore in Bengal. It is possible that some of those female jumbos could be pregnant as well. This would again have a positive bearing on the census,” said Mishra. He said sufficient water is available for the elephants in the sanctuary. “We have also conducted deepening and desilting of the 50-60 seasonal water holes. It was necessary, as all the jumbos would return by April-end. Along with their water supply, adequate quantity of salt also has been spread at strategic locations inside the sanctuary,” he added.