Guwahati, Dec. 11: The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is waiting for funds to initiate a study on the habitat of black-necked cranes at the site of the proposed 780-MW Nyamjang Chhu hydropower project in Arunachal Pradesh's Tawang district. In April this year, the National Green Tribunal had asked the ministry of environment, forests and climate change to do a separate study on conservation and protection of habitat of black-necked cranes through the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, as expeditiously as possible. The tribunal, opposing the environment clearance given to the project, had said studies done should be open for public consultation in order to offer an opportunity to the affected persons, having plausible stake in environment, to express their concerns following such studies. "We are ready to start work and have written to the ministry for funds. As soon as we get it, we can begin work as we will have to appoint people for the job," WII director V.B. Mathur told The Telegraph. The project site is the winter habitat of black-necked cranes. The hydroelectric project is a run-of-the-river scheme with a reservoir on the Nyamjang Chhu river. The barrage site is located near Zemithang town in Tawang district. Black-necked cranes are classified as "vulnerable" on the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List 2003 and listed "threatened" by BirdLife International. They are the only high-altitude cranes among 15 species found in the world. Science journals have revealed that Nyamjang Chhu river valley is one of the few wintering sites in the world visited by black-necked cranes. They have started coming and two were sighted first between November 15 and 17 followed by two between November 24 and 25 and two more last week. Thus, this year, six have been sighted. The cranes were first sighted in 2009-2010 and continuously thereafter. "There is a good chance of seeing more cranes this year as there appears to be no disturbance," an official said. Last year, seven black-necked cranes could not land owing to sand mining. The Zemithang district administration has initiated steps to regulate sand mining and minimise extraction during the cranes' visit. A ban, already imposed on use of chainsaws, illegal sand mining and other activities, has helped in sighting of the two black-necked cranes last week. Local NGOs are also on the ground working to protect the cranes.