Animal lovers can soon have a closer encounter, virtually, with wildlife at Sanjay Gandhi Biological Park. The state government has decided to introduce a 3D theatre to draw more visitors to the city zoo, deputy chief minister Sushil Kumar Modi said on Tuesday. Apart from the realistic entertainment in the upcoming theatre, in the offing for the visitors would be a multi-cuisine food court and new enclosures for the animals, including one for rhinos. The electronic tickets would have images of animals as well. The zoo authority would install display boards outside the enclosures to provide information about the particular animals. A modern cactus house would also be set up. Modi revealed the plans during the concluding day programme of Wildlife Week organised by the environment and forests department at Patna zoo on Tuesday. He said the government was planning to celebrate Wildlife Week every year in a grand way. “The state government would come up with plans for wildlife conservation. As a part of our programme, we are going to set up a Patna Bird Authority, which will be entrusted with the job of protecting birds. We also plan to develop Valmiki Tiger Reserve and Sanctuary. According to plans, proper food and accommodation will be provided to the visitors. An open jeep facility would also be provided. Elephant rides, too, would be launched very soon,” said Modi. The deputy chief minister also launched the website  of Valmiki Tiger Reserve  and Sanctuary — www.valmikitigerreserve.com. “People would be able to log on and gather information related to Valmiki Tiger Reserve and Sanctuary on this portal. Frequently asked questions such as how to reach the reserve, trains, where to check in and other information have been made available on the website,” said Santosh Kumar Tiwary, the director-cum-conservator of the reserve. Abhay Kumar, the zoo director, said essay and painting competitions were organised at Patna zoo for the Wildlife Week celebrations. “Every year, we organise such contests on the occasion of Wildlife Week. This  time, around 2,000 children took part in painting while  the essay contest witnessed 800 participants turning up,” he said. The deputy chief minister on Tuesday inaugurated the electronic sensor gates and the ticketing system. As a result, the waiting time at the zoo entrance would reduce considerably. Sources added that 10 such gates have been installed, including three at gate II and seven at gate I. Sources said each gate cost Rs 7 lakh to be set up. “The tickets have been given an attractive look with images of wild animals,” said Modi. People would have to walk up to the sensor gates, called ticket kiosks. Once the ticket is kept on the sensor, the lever of the gate would open.