Guwahati, Sept. 10: The search for a second home for the sangai (Rucervus eldi eldi) — an endangered species of deer found in Manipur — has begun with five sites being examined for its suitability. The present population of sangai resides in the 40 square km-Keibul Lamjao National Park — the only floating park in the world and an integral part of Loktak Lake. The examined sites are the reserve forests of Heingang and Langol in Imphal West, Sambei reserve forest in Imphal East, Thongam Mondum hillock in Thoubal and Ikoppat in Moirang district. The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) in its study report on Conservation Ecology of Sangai and its Wetland Habitat stated that seven sites have been tentatively identified and during the present assessment, five sites were examined for suitability for reintroduction of the sangai. The assessment suggests that among the five sites, Heingang reserve forest is the most suitable but presence of factors affecting the long-term conservation of the species cannot be ignored. Though Heingang is the best site, potential urbanisation is a possibility since the reserve area is close to the highway. “The ecological and disturbance factors may not be a challenge at present but may become a conservation issue in the near future,” the report said. It said since the present population of the sangai at Keibul Lamjao Natonal Park is a single, isolated population, the proposed reintroduction to a second site needs to be expedited. Genetic monitoring of both the source and the reintroduced populations should be done prior to reintroduction in order to assess the effectiveness of the conservation programme. One of the main objectives of the study was to explore the possibility of establishing a second home of the sangai in wild in Manipur as natural calamities like wildfire, floods or an epidemic can spell doom for the deer population at Keibul Lamjao. The study also analysed the extent and quality of habitat within the park, the population, extent of dependency of local communities on the park and suggested measures to minimise conflicts arising out of use of the resource base. Though the population is increasing, there is a potential threat to the species because of the deteriorating habitat conditions. The present population of the sangai is 204 according to the census conducted in March this year. The report said changes in hydrology of Loktak Lake has reduced the carrying capacity of the lake ecosystem, enhanced siltation and adversely affected the livelihood of local people who depend on the lake. “Encroachment on the periphery by the local people, especially for fish farming, needs to be checked through a consultative process with local communities,” it said. Poaching and death from disease are other factors affecting the sangai population and appropriate protection strategy and disease-monitoring plan need to be developed and implemented to reduce mortality, the report said.