There are some places in the world that I have plotted and planned and made pain-staking efforts to visit. And then there are other places that seemed to be just waiting for me to unsuspectingly fall into.



The Rann of kutch.



Departure date fixed, I read up all I could about the Rann. I dropped in at wildlife photographer Dhritiman Mukherjee’s Bondel Road office, and drooled over his jaw-dropping pictures. So I thought I had figured what to expect. But nothing can prepare a first-time visitor to the Rann of Kutch for the unearthly splendour of one of the most arid places on earth.

It has a terrible beauty and an enthralling grandeur. It is like a hypnotic song of the soul.  You hear it in the banshee wind that blows across a landscape that is dusty and baked and cracked and hard and flat. The featureless expanse is defined only by the shallow imprint of the vehicles that have passed this way.



It’s only 9am and it’s already over 51 degrees. The memory of an air-conditioned room is a distant dream.  A wave of heat unlike anything I’ve ever experienced on any previous wildlife shoot hits me with a hammer blow, and grabs  me by the jugular. The bottle of water hasn’t left my hand. I take another gulp. Warm water in a burning country isn’t easy to drink.

Two vehicles. Four crew members. No one speaks, or wants to speak, or is able to speak. The immense heat and the immense emptiness suck the breath out of us. We’re all sitting far apart. Cameras off. Lost in spell-bound thought.



We gaze upon this immeasurably desolate expanse. We’re in the heart of the Rann, far beyond and then some more from where the salt workers are hard at work. It stupefies me how perfectly uniform the flat land is in every direction all the way to the horizon. Vacant, brown and burning, 360 degrees round.



Time stands still. I take another sip of water that seems close to boiling. Something absurd but not ridiculous comes to mind. If this were Mars, it would be another day in paradise. I’m sure Mars must look like this. 



But this is planet Earth and so I stubbornly wait for some sign of life. While I wait it strikes me that all this setting needs is The Doctor’s shiny blue TARDIS (time machine). And, yes, I’ve been tele-transported in time and space and that comes to explain how in heaven’s name I happen to be roasting to death in this god-forsaken wasteland. PLAY HARD-TO-GET TO BEFRIEND A FOX

I am also utterly convinced by now that we are in the wrong place and that Dhritiman’s jaw-dropping photographs were most definitely from some other corner of this 7,000 sq km expanse. Somewhere cooler, wetter, where life might reasonably be expected to exist. I look around and wonder how anything could possibly live here. There isn’t the slightest sign of water. Or food. Or even shade in this seemingly eternal desert of dust.



But that thought holds only until the unexpected happens. A pair of idiotically long ears pop out of the ground.



It’s a desert fox! And, of course, the driver decides to point and shriek. And, of course, our startled little vulpine friend darts straight back into the ground.



So that wildlife encounter lasted all of four seconds. Nice.



Naturally we couldn’t even turn our cameras on. But at least we now know that the desert is not as empty as it looks.

Over the next few days our luck gradually picks up. We identify some entry and exit points of active fox dens and try every trick in the book from remote cameras to hides to outfox the fox. But oddly, the only thing that eventually works is to ignore them. It’s peculiar. The less attention you give, the more curious they get. Turn your back, and this so intrigues them that before you know it they’ll be tricked right out of their dens. 



And that’s precisely what happened with one particular young fellow. I had ignored the callow youth for three straight days and sure enough, he began taking an uncontrollable interest in my presence, inquisitively inching his way closer and closer to me with every passing day. Yes, I am aware this sounds a lot like relationship advice, but playing hard-to-get is the way to go if you ever want to befriend a fox. To Little Rann of Kutch:



How to get there

By air/road: Ahmedabad is the nearest airport to Dasada. The drive from Ahmedabad airport to Dasada takes about two-and-a-half to three hours.



By rail: Ahmedabad station, 90km from Dasada, is connected to all major cities.



Best time 

Summer for fox pups. Monsoon (July-Sept) excellent for lesser floricans and flamingoes. Winter is great for bird watching.



What to wear

Day time: Light cotton, preferably earthy colours like beige or light brown. Don’t forget a hat or headscarf. On windy days, keep a cloth handy to cover mouth and nose from dust.



Night time: Night temperatures can drop sharply, even in summer, so best to carry a full-sleeve shirt and a light-to-medium jacket. 



What not to forget on a safari

Minimum 2 bottles of water for each person, if not more! Binoculars. And a good local guide to help you spot the perfectly camouflaged wildlife.



Best place to stay

Rann Riders. They take care of everything including safari-vehicles and experienced guides. They also offer other wonderful experiences like Horseback and Camel Cart Safaris. WILD ASS: UNAPOLOGETIC AND FOREVER STUBBORN 

As night falls, the Rann of Kutch’s elusive population of hyenas, wolves, caracals and desert cats venture out. By day, as I drive my decrepit 4WD Gypsy stirring up a stormy trail of dust, rare spiny lizards dart off into the distance. Hawks soar on currents rising into vivid blue, cloudless skies and beneath are the most ubiquitous animals in this land: the famous wild asses. 



Excellently adapted to this climate and terrain, experts claim they are faster than a Persian horse. But that’s not the only reason these aren’t your average donkeys. One would expect that in a place like the Rann of Kutch, where the salt pans present some of the most challenging and hostile work environments in the country, human beings would have by now tamed these wild asses to help lift the heavy sacks of salt harvested in the height of summer. But that’s not the case. 



Locals say it has been tried more times than they can remember, but a wild ass in the Rann of Kutch is impossible to domesticate. They absolutely refuse. They will not take orders and they will misbehave, kick, bite and eventually somehow make an escape and leave you even more exhausted and angry than you already are in the scorching heat. 



And so every morning the scene is set and exactly replayed during harvest season: men break their backs lifting heavy salt bags in 50 degrees of heat, while some unapologetic and forever stubborn wild ass stands around and nonchalantly watches.



We drive to a different part of the Rann, far from the salt workers, and of course it’s time to be stranded in a sand storm. The jeep provides only a pretence of shelter. My friendly guide has tied a local-style turban on my head to save me from a heat stroke. It is our last day here and we had hoped to get some bonus landscape shots. But Nature has other plans as so often she does. So we’ll wait for the storm to calm and then head back. IMMENSITY OF LIFE IN LIFELESS TERRAIN 

Hours later, we begin the two-hour drive back to air-conditioned sanity. It’s a moonless night and pitch dark by now, and I see nothing but what the headlight illuminates. The darkness seems to have sucked all light out of the world and makes the bobbing headlight look feeble and thin. With trusted directions from my local guide, I zoom through the blackness under the Rann’s big starry sky.



But even in this darkness I begin to feel that I am surrounded by an immensity of life, pulsating, breathing, animate. In the short space of a brief fortnight it astonishes me how much life we have discovered in this seemingly lifeless terrain.

From humans to animals, even the most barren places on earth tell the story of life. Life, it seems, has an incredible knack for finding ways to persist in the most hostile of places. It’s only when we take the trouble to look that we actually get to see.



And that’s the wisdom you take away from the Rann. That emptiness in Nature is but an illusion. That Nature abhors a vacuum. And that there is no place on this earth that is not called home by some quirky little creature ready to pop its pointy ears out of the earth and say hello when you least expect it. That’s the magic of the Rann, the magic of the unexpected. Ashwika Kapur is a Green Oscar winning wildlife filmmaker; she visited the Rann of Kutch to shoot a documentary