Cuttack: The Wildlife Society of Odisha (WSO) has expressed concern over the fast shrinking number of native fish species in the state. To ensure breeding of fish, the society demanded imposition of a two-month ban in rivers and natural lakes every year. A survey by the society revealed that there was a need for conserving the declining native fish population in the state. There had been a marked decline in fish catch in major distributaries of Mahanadi river - Luna, Chitrotpala, Birupa, Kathjodi, Devi, Kandal and Paika-resulting in decline in fishermen's income. "Fish catch has decreased by 80 per cent during the past two decades, forcing many fresh water fishermen to adopt other vocations. Some have even migrated for work outside the state," said the secretary of wildlife society, Biswajit Mohanty. "Many native small fish varieties such as pohola, kerandi and mahurali are going to be extinct soon," Mohanty said. "Massive use of pesticides in the farm fields has taken a toll on small fish varieties. As a result, the price for small fish has jumped to Rs 200 per kg, which used to be less than Rs 100 a few years ago," Mohanty said. The society has been demanding a ban on river and lake fishing during breeding season - June 15 to August 15 - for several years. In April, a letter was sent to the fisheries and animal resources department in this regard. "Sadly, no step has been taken on our request. It is tragic that the government is apathetic to the problem, which is directly impacting the livelihoods of Odisha fishermen," Mohanty said. The society survey also indicated that there was urgent need to ensure unhindered fish migration in the major state rivers such as Mahanadi, Brahmani and Baitarani. During monsoon floods, fish tend to move upstream for spawning purposes. Such egg bearing fishes are caught in large numbers at the barrage and dam gates. "Fish ladders can address this problem. Hence, we demand provision of fish ladders in all barrages, dams, canal locks and anicuts. Besides, fishing should be banned at least up to 200 metres on either side of fish ladders," Mohanty said.