Bhubaneswar: Environmentalists have expressed concern over increasing human interference in forests and held the phenomenon responsible for the shrinking green cover that adversely impacts wildlife. "It is not possible to eliminate human interference completely because tribal communities depend on forests for livelihood. However, we should ensure that there is least possible interference," said green campaigner Bijay Mishra, who finds the trend of diversion of forestland for agriculture disturbing. "This is happening primarily because agricultural land is being taken over by industries. But this is taking a heavy toll on forests and could have a cascading effect impacting wildlife," said Mishra. Podu, the popular slash-and-burn cultivation practiced by the tribal communities of the state, is an example of how forests are being destroyed to clear land for agriculture. The unscientific podu style of farming takes a toll on the fertility of the land. Land once used for this kind of farming is rendered barren and becomes useless for several years. But podu remains popular among the tribal residents of districts such as Koraput and Malkangiri because of the low cost involved. Environmentalists have blamed the situation on the lack of awareness among tribal farmers about modern and scientific techniques of farming. Environmentalist Shailabala Padhi said increasing human interference in forests was having a disastrous impact on environment. "Construction activities and industrialisation in forest areas have led to shrinkage of green cover. This is responsible for climatic change and also adversely affects the wildlife," she said. With forest cover getting progressively eroded, wild animals such as elephants are now regularly entering human habitations and causing large-scale damage to crops and houses. "Man-elephant conflict remains a major area of concern for the state government. Even though steps are being taken to create new elephant corridors and restore old ones that have been eroded, we are still far from controlling the problem," said a government official who agreed that ultimately human beings were at fault. Green activists have called for stricter laws to prevent human intrusion into forests. "Only those who depend on forests for livelihood should be allowed and that, too, under the surveillance of forest officials," said an activist.