Jorhat, Dec. 10: Seven Look, an NGO working for conservation of wildlife, has adopted a double-pronged strategy to mitigate the man-elephant conflict, which has increased in the Upper and central Assam districts in the past 15 years or so. As a short-term strategy, it will set up solar lights in villages at Kartik sapori here tomorrow to keep a herd of wild elephants at bay. This is a follow-up to distribution of solar lamps to a number of households and a training programme on how to deal with elephant invasions earlier this year. The solar-light programme is being organised with the help of Wildlife Trust of India, department of environment and forests, state government and Europäeische Tierschutzstiftung, Switzerland. The areas proposed for the solar street lights are Kardong suba, Regon suba, Arikati suba and Payeng suba. Located 18km to the northwest of Jorhat town, Kartik sapori and its adjoining areas are often invaded by wild elephants, which destroy huts and crops. As a long-term strategy, it is doing an extensive survey of the herds of wild elephants roaming in the Upper Assam districts of Jorhat, Sivasagar, Dibrugarh, Tinsukia (Sadiya) and central Assam districts of Lakhimpur and Dhemaji in collaboration with the WWF. Seven Look secretary general Palash Ranjan Goswami said the survey, which was 90 per cent complete had studied the routes which the herds took, the annual trek from place to place and elephant behaviour. "Unless a complete study is done of the herds there is no point taking up the short-term measures like planting bhut jolokias, thorny bamboo and exploding crackers," he said. Goswami said once the survey, which was on for the past two years, was completed they would brainstorm to find a permanent solution to avoid the conflict. "Man has indiscriminately occupied land which were elephant corridors. We have seen that elephants usually follow the same route every year and return the same way," he said. As to whether the hills of Arunachal Pradesh was the home to the herds, Goswami said some of the herds did descend from there. Forest Man of India, Jadav Payeng, who has single-handedly grown a sanctuary for animals by planting trees on an islet of over 1,360 acres adjoining the Brahmaputra, also assisted the NGO in its endeavour. "Elephants often come to the wooded area for food and stray into adjoining human habitats. The villagers also have problems going to adjoining saporis where their buffaloes and cows are let out to graze. They sometimes come face to face with wild elephants in the dark and are maimed or killed. That is why we gave them the solar lights," Goswami said.