Koel Mallick’s film Jongole Mitin Mashi, directed by Arindam Sil, is an exhilarating blend of suspense and action. In the film, Mitin Mashi goes on a vacation with her family to the Saranda forest. There she comes to know of a poaching racket of elephants and swings into her investigative mode. A t2 chat with Koel. What can the audience expect from Jongole Mitin Mashi? For me, Mitin Mashi films have always been very special. When I did the first Mitin Mashi film in 2019, the response was fantastic. So there is extra responsibility this time. After the first film, people’s expectations have gone up. This time again it’s a big responsibility for the entire team. The first film was more about gender equality. This time Mitin Mashi has come with the awareness of ecological balance, wildlife conservation and the message of anti-poaching. She gets dragged into an investigation. This time she is way more determined. The action sequences are enormously power-packed. I am very excited. When you are playing a character like Mitin Mashi, is it about giving a statement? What does she represent for you? Mitin is a winner, and I see her in every household. When it comes to the spirit of winning, I see Mitin in so many households. A Mitin Mashi film can only be released during Durga Puja. Mitin is another roop of Ma Durga. She takes care of the household. Mitin might rustle up a machher jhol and fish fry. She is very sharp, intelligent, and has tremendous intuition. She is much more than an investigator. Mitin is very androgynous in nature. Mitin is very compassionate, kind and she stands for justice. She cannot stand anything that is wrong. She has an enormous willpower and an indomitable spirit. Talking about being androgynous in nature, Mitin talks in a certain way... In her way of behaving and talking, she had to be Mitin. Which is why I thought that I would portray Mitin in such a way. Thankfully, my director and I were on the same page. The lines are such that you do not have any other way of delivering. That’s the way she is. She is so strong-willed and determined. She is very curt at times, she is not a people pleasure. Mitin is straightforward and gets to the point. She doesn’t beat around the bush. The first Mitin Mashi film came out in 2019, and you shot for the second one after a gap of four years. How did you get into her headspace? It started with the script and that really helped to get into the headspace... then we discussed some of the points in the script. Did the gap of four years affect the making of the film? You have been through your own personal journey. Did the experience of motherhood inform the way you approached the character in any way? Life and age teach you a lot, it is a beautiful journey with the experiences you go through. Now when I look back, if I get the opportunity to do the films I did 10 years ago once again, I’ll do it in a different way. It is good that we are doing this film after a long gap since in this story Mitin has to be way more mature. Over time, your expressions change, your way of thinking changes... your behaviour changes. Overall, that has an impact. You had taken a break of two years before the shoot of Chaya O Chobi, and this time also there was a gap... The funniest thing is that I did not understand the gap this time. I am amused at myself... I was immersed in my personal life. I knew this time would not have come back if I had left home and worked outside. I wanted to see Kabir (son) grow up in front of me. I did not want to miss out on it. It makes a lot of difference. Shooting and getting into a character takes a lot of time. Everything happens for the right reasons. When the shoot started, it was also the first time you were away from Kabir... Initially, I was a bit nervous since I did not know how he would react to my absence. We would video call each other every now and then. Thankfully, my sister-in-law came in with her children... I have an extended family and they were there. So the entire time he was happy around everyone. You have completed 20 years in the film industry. Congratulations! Your first film Nater Guru came out in 2003. Imagine! It seems to have gone by in a jiffy. It’s been a very fulfilling journey... it couldn’t have been better. The amount of love and blessings that I have got... in the first few years of my career, we would go for hall visits, and the audience would look at me with a feeling like they have known me forever. I had become a part of their household, a part of their family. The kind of assurance, security that I got from them... I think I have had a blessed journey. In the initial years, I had to make a name. After a certain point of time, I knew I had to be there. I have never competed with anyone in my life. I have followed my own path and focused on what I am doing. I was concentrating on how to grow, and how to improve. I took that break of two years because nothing interesting was coming my way. It was not a conscious decision. I am a person who loves to be at home when I am not working. I love to be with my family. You have accomplished so much. What drives you now? When it comes to work, I am 100 per cent serious. There is a certain amount of commitment I have for my audience who have loved me over the years. It is a commitment. My audience gives me two hours of their life, which is priceless. I have to put in my best effort for them. I don’t have any excuse when I am in front of the camera. In my house, I am an absolute family person. In the same way, when I am in front of the camera, I am a person of the audience. I am answerable to my audience for every single thing because they have put in that effort to come all the way. What are some of the changes you see in the industry? Lots of exciting stories are happening. It is great to see people accepting them with open arms. Would you like to do a dance number in a film once again? It all depends on the script and my role. It has to be convincing to my mindset, and my mentality. I can’t be doing something that I did when I was 21 (smiles)! The role should go well with me and my maturity.