Jamshedpur, Dec. 2: A team of forest department officials from Orissa, West Singhbhum and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau today interrogated a couple arrested with ivory at Sundarnagar last month. They are investigating an ivory smuggling and elephant poaching racket that seems to be operating across India. Field director of Simlipal Forest Reserve S.V. Ramana, Rairangpur divisional forest officer (DFO) A.K. Sahu, Saranda DFO S.R. Natesh and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau inspector H.S. Upadhya were part of the team. However, the couple did not divulge any new information to the team during the four-hour interrogation. Over the past year, elephant poaching and loss of ivory have been reported both from Simlipal in Orissa and Saranda forest in West Singhbhum district. The officials tried to find out where the 21-kg consignment of ivory had been brought from during the interrogation which is taking place at Sundernagar police station. “Once we are aware of the source, we can get to the root  of the problem and catch poachers active in this  area. Our first aim is to find out from where the couple got the ivory,” said a senior forest official. He said, the interrogation can help bust an inter-state gang of ivory smugglers operating in Jharkhand, Orissa and other parts of the country. Since the couple was caught while travelling from Bahalda block of Mayurbhanj district in Orissa to Varanasi via Jamshedpur, the officials have sought help from Orissa and West Singhbhum. “During the journey from Orissa, the couple crossed Rairangpur and Chaibasa before entering Jamshedpur where they were caught. This is the reason the DFOs from both these places have been called to help in the probe and get an insight into the entire smuggling episode,” said Dhalbhum DFO A.T. Mishra. The police intercepted a SUV at Sundernagar checking point during a regular vehicle-checking drive on November 20 and confiscated two bags of ivory from Ram Narayan Viswakarma and Usha, both hailing from Varanasi. The couple admitted that they used to take ivory to the burning ghats in Varanasi where they used to sell them to craftsmen who made costly idols out of them. The confiscated ivory was worth Rs 1.6 lakh, but in the international market it would fetch between Rs 5 and 7 lakh.