Jamshedpur, July 28: The spy in every adventurous heart is making jumbo discoveries. And Dalma is trumpeting new-found glory. The 192sqkm wildlife sanctuary nestling snugly at the foot of captivating hills is being swamped by visitors like never before, courtesy the new 17x13ft nook at Chotka Bandh that is thrillingly close to a favourite watering hole of Dalma’s gentle giants. Located some 30km from the steel city, the sanctuary is seeing a tourist footfall of 100 every day, not just from Jharkhand but also neighbouring Bengal and Orissa. “Saat-aath gaadiya roz aati-jaati hai. Jharkhand ke saath saath Bengal aur Orissa se bhi log yahan ghumne aa rahein hai. Log hathi dekhne ki jagah jaate hai (Seven-eight vehicles carrying tourists enter the sanctuary every day. Besides Jharkhand, people from Bengal and Orissa are also coming. They are more keen to visit the hideout),” said Chotu Sardar, who maintains the entry register at Makulakocha village. The hideout is a simple, but sturdy, stone structure reinforced with concrete. It has small windows in the front and double-grilled door for entry. Inside, there’s ample space for four to enjoy food and take rest when tired of watching tuskers barely 25ft away. Built at a cost of Rs 2 lakh by the forest department, the Chotka Bandh nook is 5km from the scenic foothills and within a 10km radius of the Pinderbera guesthouse. It is the seventh hideout dotting the sprawling sanctuary. According to him, the footfall had increased over a week or so. Earlier, very few tourists visited the sanctuary. Some came on vehicles while others took a trek. “Par ab sab kuch badal gaya hai (But now things have changed),” he added. “It has a fantastic view. I had never seen elephants up close. There were more than 15 of them, including calves,” Rakesh Sablok of Sonari recalled his recent visit to Dalma with family. Foresters too agreed that the sanctuary was teeming with visitors. Besides the hideout at Chotka Bandh, adventure junkies are also making a beeline to the nooks at Bijli Ghati and Nichla Bandh. “However, the rush is at Chotka Bandh, which is located at a vantage point. Elephants are usually seen near the water bodies between 3.30pm and 5.30pm,” said a forest official. Barring night stay, which is not allowed, visitors can use the hideout anytime for free. They can collect the keys from the staff at Pinderbera guesthouse. A guide is also made available. “People are coming to Dalma in droves also because the jumbo count has seen a marked increase in the census conducted in May this year. The current number of elephants at the sanctuary is 127, up from 90 last year,” explained DFO, Ranchi, A.T. Mishra. Besides the hideout, the refurbished guesthouse and three watchtowers are drawing tourists too. “At present, 45-50 elephants are holed up in an area close to the guesthouse. The location is giving tourists ample opportunity for close encounters,” a forest official said.