Cuttack, June 12:  The Wildlife Society of Odisha (WSO) has urged the state government to recast the State Board for Wildlife as it has been reconstituted with nine retired government servants among its 13 members. The state government had reconstituted the board on March 30. Norms prescribed in the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, stipulate that three of the nominated members should represent NGOs dealing with wildlife, while the remaining 10 members should be persons who are eminent conservationists, ecologists and environmentalists, including at least two representatives of the scheduled tribes. "There is no dearth of experts, independent wildlife conservationists and ecologists in the state. It is a pity that the state government does not want to appoint them in the board," WSO secretary Biswajit Mohanty said. The State Board for Wildlife, the apex decision-making advisory body for wildlife issues, has several vital functions under the Wildlife Protection Act. Proposals for mining, industry, canals and railway lines in wildlife sanctuaries, national parks and also within ecologically sensitive areas are recommended for clearance by the board to the National Board for Wildlife. In a memorandum to the state minister for forest and environment, Mohanty said: "The aim of constituting the state wildlife was to involve members of the public who contributed to wildlife conservation and for decision-making regarding wildlife matters. However, the state government prefers to hire retired officials which reflects a strong bias in favour of them." "We have every reason to apprehend that hiring so many retired government servants in the board will besmirch the purpose the board," the WSO said. Citing the case of a retired Indian Forest Services officer, who has been taken as a member, the WSO said: "His is a case of conflict of interest as he prepared the wildlife management plan of several large mines in Keonjhar district, including Thakurani iron ore mines of Jindal Steels, which enabled them to get forest clearance." Forest and environment minister Bijoyshree Routray said: "The question of recasting the State Board of Wildlife does not arise. Many eminent experts concerned with wildlife are members of the board."