Ranchi, June 19: It's twin cheers for Dalma as two of its men have been selected for the coveted Wildlife Warrior Awards 2015 for their contribution towards preserving the sanctuary's pristine ecosystem. Ranchi wildlife division, under which Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary falls, had recommended the names of range officer Mangal Kachhap, forester Dinesh Kumar, forest guard Kauleshwar Bhagat and tracker Mirja Shamim Akhtar Baig for the awards introduced two years ago jointly by Hem Chand Mahindra Wildlife Foundation and Saevus, an organisation catering to forest and environment with an aim to recognise individual contribution towards wildlife conservation. Of the four, Kachhap and Bhagat were chosen for the honour and will visit Mumbai on July 26 to receive a cash prize of Rs 50,000 each. "Kachhap and Bhagat made huge contributions in checking killing of animals in the sanctuary by local tribals during Sendra. It is a matter of great pride for all of us," said Ranchi divisional forest officer (DFO) Kamlesh Pandey, who is in-charge of Dalma. Pandey added that after the nominations were sent, a team from Hem Chand Mahindra Wildlife Foundation and Saevus visited Dalma a month back to physically verify their claims and interact with local villagers. The findings were forwarded to a final selection committee, which chose Kachhap and Bhagat. Kachhap was excited. "I will retire within the next two years and it is my first big award. It feels great," he said, adding that he had been looking after Dalma for the past six years. "Before this, I had worked at other forest regions. Dalma stint is special because we are almost on the verge of stopping bhishu shikar (animal killing). This was possible because of the help we received from villagers. I happen to be the first person to venture inside the villages and interact with them four-five years back. Being a tribal, I understood local cultures and rituals better," Kachhap said, thanking his DFO for giving him a free hand at work. DFO Pandey added that of all the sanctuaries and parks of Jharkhand, Dalma still commanded higher footfall round the year. "A few years ago, Dalma used to get just 7,000 tourists annually. The number has shot up to 26,000 now. This shows how well we maintain this elephant habitat," he said. In the inaugural year of the Wildlife Warrior Awards, the nominations were open to employees of forest department from five protected areas - Corbett, Gir, Kaziranga, Nagarahole and Ranthambhore. This year, the focus was shifted to frontline staff of lesser known sanctuaries and wildlife habitats.