Elections mean the annual hunting festival of tribals will have less participation this time, a fact that is being quietly cheered by forest officials who have always been uncomfortable with the annual custom where animals are targeted in deference to age-old tribal custom. Sendra, scheduled on May 6 and coinciding with voting day in the constituencies of Ranchi, Hazaribagh, Koderma and Khunti, is expected to see a turnout of only 3,000 to 4,000 tribals this time. Usually, as many as 20,000 tribals from Jharkhand and neighbouring Odisha and Bengal converge at the Dalma sanctuary, some 30 km from Jamshedpur, to celebrate the festival, also known as Bishu Shikar. Rakesh Hembrom, the chief priest of Dola Buru Sendra Samity (DBSS) that finalised May 6 as the date of the festival, said he expected low turnout this time as tribals would be busy with elections. “It is unlikely that adivasis would come for Sendra on voting day as they would be busy at the booths,” he said. Usually, most of the participating tribals are from Kapali, Chandil, Seraikela, Ichagarh and other pockets of Seraikela-Kharsawan. But since parts of the district come under Ranchi parliamentary constituency, many may not come this time, he explained. Hembrom admitted he was not that disappointed. “In a way it is good as less number of animals would be killed even though I have appealed to our tribal brethren to observe the festival symbolically, and, therefore, not come to the sanctuary with firearms and traps. I am expecting around 4,000 tribals,” he added. It’s a huge relief for the forest department that has to walk a tightrope to ensure that less number of animals are harmed, but do it in a way so as not to offend tribals who take their festivals seriously. Dalma divisional forest officer C.M.P. Sinha said as much. “In a way it is a relief for us. Less number of tribals means  there is less chance of animals getting killed. Though we always monitor the situation, less participation will help. We will have to use less manpower who will be deployed at strategic locations inside the 192 sqkm sanctuary,” he said. Dolma Buru Sendra Disua Samity (DBSDS),  a parallel tribal outfit, had announced May 13 as the date of celebrations  However, the forest department is unlikely to give permission to hold the festival that day. DFO Sinha said they met Rakesh Hembrom and agreed on May 6. “We have also given permission to the Sendra samity to enter the sanctuary. But so far, no representative from Dola Buru samity has met us. In any case, we are not giving permission for another day,” he said, adding they would have to resort to strict action if any tribal outfit tried to force its way into the sanctuary.