Guwahati: Gauhati High Court on Friday granted Dispur another month to complete a survey of Amchang wildlife sanctuary before carrying out the next round of evictions. A bench of Chief Justice Ajit Singh and Justice Manojit Bhuyan gave the state government time till March 19, when the case will be listed for the next hearing. The government had filed an affidavit in the court on February 12, seeking "a reasonable time" for conducting a survey to find out the number of landless and erosion-affected families living in the wildlife sanctuary and also to see if there was any error in demarcation of the sanctuary leading to inclusion of any revenue area on its fringes before resuming the eviction drive. The eviction was suspended on November 30 on "humanitarian grounds" in the wake of a public outcry and widespread protests. People of Jana Simalu and other villages have claimed that they have been "illegally" evicted despite living on revenue land. The government had carried out the eviction drive according to a high court order. The high court, however, allowed the state government to temporarily suspend eviction of residential houses inside the wildlife sanctuary for two months after the government stated that some of the evicted encroachers were spending the night in the jungle and refused to leave the forest area. The government said on humanitarian grounds a rehabilitation package is being contemplated for the people who had settled in Amchang after being rendered homeless by floods and erosion. "We appreciate the removal of encroachments from Amchang wildlife sanctuary and also the desire of the state government to work out a rehabilitation or compensation package or both for those genuinely affected. We, accordingly, allow two months' time to the government to take steps in this regard," the high court had said in December. The court, however, had reminded the government that it is under statutory obligation to make the sanctuary free of encroachment. The government has removed 1,015 encroachments from the wildlife sanctuary so far but over 1,000 households remain to be removed.