Sept. 28: Idols made of clay is common, but the Nambari Triangular Park Durga Puja at Maligaon is going that extra mile to make an entire pandal with earth. The Puja committee has engaged a group of terracotta artistes from Siliguri in Bengal to prepare a pandal completely made of earth with no non-biodegradable products. A group of 32 terracotta artistes led by Kamal Adhikari from Siliguri is working for the past month to prepare the pandal, a 5-foot statue of anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare and the idol of Durga. The artistes are using earth and jute to prepare and design the 54-foot high and 32-foot wide pandal and no harmful chemical or colour will be used to paint it. Even ornaments of the idol will be made of earth. “Celebrating Durga Puja in an eco-friendly way and spreading the message of Anna Hazare is our theme this year. From a distance, it will look like any other ancient temple made of bricks or stone but our pandal this year will be completely made of non-biodegradable materials. This is for the first time in Guwahati that people will be able to see a Puja pandal made of earth,” committee secretary Shankar Sarkar said today. “Huge amount of thermocol products are used in preparing the pandals and idols during Puja every year but these products harm our river after immersion. So this year, we have decided that we will use no thermocol products in preparing our pandal and instead use terracotta items which is not harmful for the environment,” Sarkar said. The Nambari Triangular Park Puja situated close to the Northeast Frontier Railways headquarters at Maligaon has been celebrating Durga Puja since 1960. This year, they have set a budget of Rs 8 lakh for the Puja. “Last year, we had made the pandal with glass which was appreciated by visitors and we hope this year’s concept will invite more appreciation from people,” he said. The Puja committee will also highlight messages of Hazare, which the social activist made during the countrywide campaign against corruption and his demand for Jan Lokpal Bill. “Like the rest of the country, Anna Hazare’s campaign against corruption received immense public support here and so we will try to highlight his (Hazare) messages inside our pandal,” Sarkar said. “We will also have attractive lighting and a group led by Uttam Bhadra from Siliguri will present the birth of Krishna and Janmasthami using lights. We hope that this will attract more visitors to our pandal this year,” Sarkar said.