Dalma’s hills will again echo with the trumpets of the prodigals. The wildlife sanctuary, 20km from Jamshedpur, will soon witness the homecoming of around 127 elephants who had migrated to the jungles of West Midnapore and Bankura in Bengal for the customary six months. Twelve elephants, including some tuskers, have already arrived at the 192sqkm sanctuary. More than a 100 are at present at the Jhunjka jungles (in Patamda block, East Singhbhum), on the Jharkhand-Bengal border. Fifteen more are still in West Midnapore and Bankura. But all of them are moving towards Dalma, covering, as foresters estimate, around 40km per day. That is some serious uphill trek, but foresters are not complaining, as this would enable tourists to see the pachyderms from inside the newly built Chotka Bandh hideout. “It's the usual homecoming time. The migratory herds — around 127 elephants in all, including calves — will all be back home by February,” said sanctuary range officer Mangal Kashyap. He added some had been spotted in the foothills. Kashyap added the elephants normally started their journey towards Dalma after the end of the harvest season in neighbouring Bengal. “Foraging for fodder gets tough for elephants after harvest. They return to Dalma where plenty of food and water awaits them. Elephants go to Bengal jungles in July and stay there till December. The rest of the year they stay in the sanctuary,” he said. Dalma sanctuary officials also said elephants stuck to their designated corridors. “Elephants amble back in small and large herds. There are many leisurely stops for food and water, But the routes are the same,” a forester said. There are two designated elephant corridors — one from Jhunjka and the other from Burudih. The first one goes to Nutandih, while the second one traverses Narsingpur (Ghatshila range), Dalapani, Suklara and Aamdapahari. Interestingly, both corridors merge at Mirjadih, from where the mammals cross Haludbani, Bhadodih, Bota and Dimna to reach Dalma. Herds follow these with clockwork precision. “They have a great memory,” smiled an official keeping watch over the pachyderms. Will you go elephant-spotting in Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary?
    Tell ttkhand@abpmail.com