New Delhi, March 19: Wildlife biologists, by analysing crop raids by elephants in Meghalaya's Garo Hills, have proposed a novel method to reliably predict hotspots for human-wildlife conflicts that could also be applied to tigers, monkeys or wild pigs. The scientists from India's Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) and collaborators in the US have developed a conflict prediction model that they say can be used to generate maps of places where wild animals are most likely to raid croplands or livestock. Their research study, just published in the journal Conservation Biology, could help farming communities living close to forests as well as wildlife to recognise potential threats from wild animals and take steps to reduce the risk of conflicts. Scientists say human-wildlife conflicts occur across the country - elephants raid paddy fields in the eastern and northern states, tigers capture livestock from Kaziranga in Assam and villages near Nagerhole and Bandipur sanctuaries in southern India, monkeys ravage farms in Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, as do wild pigs. Scientists estimate that human-elephant conflicts alone claim about 400 people and 100 elephants across the country each year. "We've got a tool that could predict where and when conflicts are most likely to occur," said Varun Goswami, a biologist who leads an elephant research programme at the WCS. "Understanding why conflicts occur is a key to mitigating conflicts." Goswami and his colleagues studied elephants in the Garo Hills for seven years, tracking the patterns of their raids on crops and trying to correlate the raids with multiple parameters - rainfall the farms had received, the proximity of farmlands to forests and the crops being cultivated. The researchers also collected information on under-reported elephant raids - at times only because a remotely accessible village simply didn't provide information about the raid to the forest authorities. The scientists tracked 636 crop raids by elephants in the hills between 2005 and 2011. The study revealed stark but some obvious patterns - elephants are most likely to raid farms about two months after bountiful rains, they raid crops along the hill slopes during the onset of the rainy season and move to flooded paddy fields after the rains. The researchers also found that the distance between a farm and a forest also influenced the probability of raids. While this is an obvious factor, the researchers point out that the presence and density of crop fields that are adjacent to forests are expected to increase as the density of villages increase. The findings are consistent with studies in Africa where researchers had found that elephant crop raids are most likely in farms within 5km of the forest habitat. Mitigation strategies to reduce the human-elephant conflicts include erecting chilli-pepper fences or physical barriers. The scientists say similar studies could be used to develop predictive models for other wild animals at other locations across the country.