The reconstruction of the famous bungalow at Holong in the Jaldapara National Park of Alipurduar district depends on the approval of the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) which is headed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, senior Bengal forest department officers said on Thursday. On Tuesday night, the 57-year-old wooden bungalow, a popular destination of many prominent personalities, including former chief minister Jyoti Basu, was gutted in a blaze. Debal Roy, the state’s chief wildlife warden (CWLW), visited the site on Thursday in Jaldapara — the largest habitat of one-horned rhinos in Bengal. “As of now, we have no plan to reconstruct the bungalow in Holong. This is because such construction can be carried out only if the NBWL approves it. Police and some other agencies are probing the fire,” said Roy. He, however, didn’t clarify whether the Bengal forest department would approach the NBWL with a proposal to rebuild the bungalow. After the incident, many people have written posts on social media, seeking the reconstruction of the bungalow the way it was. Sources in the forest department said construction of any property for commercial purposes — five rooms of the gutted bungalow were with the state tourism department and people could book rooms to stay there — is not allowed in reserve forest areas according to the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. “When the bungalow was built (in 1967), the restriction was not there. But now, the decision has to be taken by the NBWL. Even if it is reconstructed, it would most likely be for the use of the department and not for visitors,” said a retired forest officer. He said the forest bungalow at Jainti in the Buxa Tiger Reserve had also been damaged in a blaze. Later, it was reconstructed but only foresters could stay there. “No commercial booking is available for this bungalow,” the former forester added. Around 10 years ago, the state tourist department started constructing a bungalow at a location in Sajnekhali of the Sundarbans on a patch of forest land. Its construction was stopped by the NBWL. “We understand the emotions of people… but we have to abide by the law,” said Roy, the CWLW. On Wednesday, the department had constituted a five-member committee to investigate the fire. The team will reach the site soon. MP irked Manoj Tigga, the BJP MP of Alipurduar and the former MLA of Madarihat, in which Jaldapara is located, expressed his disgruntlement as foresters stopped him from visiting the gutted bungalow on Thursday. When Tigga reached the entry gate, which is off Asian Highway 48 and around 8km from the bungalow,  foresters posted there denied him permission. “I wanted to speak with senior foresters to know how the fire broke out. But they didn’t allow me. It seems the department is trying to conceal something,” said Tigga.