The annual mass-hunting ritual Akhand Sikar, which the tribal communities carry out during Maha Vishuba Sankranti in and around the Similipal sanctuary, is a major headache for the forest department. What steps are you going to take to stop the practice, which is going to be held on April 13? We cannot stop it by force alone. We are campaigning among the tribal communities to not hunt animals. We are also conducting roadside palas (a folk art form) urging them to refrain from it. Besides sensitising people, we are also taking steps to create awareness among the dehuris (tribal priests) not to ask tribals to go for the rituals, as it is not a part of their traditions. We ask them to sacrifice ash gourd instead of animals to mark the ritual. In some special cases, we will provide them hens and cocks for sacrifice to fulfil the demands of the rituals. We are also organising archery competitions to hone their skills during this period. How do you enforce all these steps? We have cancelled leaves of all our field staff members. We have set up base camps and supervision camps at strategic locations inside the Similipal sanctuary. We have deputed senior officials to supervise things. Besides, we conduct flag-marches in a number of sensitive villages located inside the sanctuary. Odisha plans to conduct a Tiger census again. What has prompted the government to do this? Before answering this question, I just want to tell you that Odisha pioneered the development of a unique counting system — the pugmark method —to count the tigers. Forest officer Saroj Ray Choudhury developed the method in 1966. A pug impression pad is also used for this purpose. Later, few people questioned its credibility. Then comes the camera-trap method. The problem cropped up after the National Tiger Conservation Authority, in its report, pointed out an alarming drop in the number of wild cats, particularly in the Similipal sanctuary.  We have raised questions stating that the exercise was done in a hurry and the number of cameras was not adequate to capture the photos of the tigers. We have decided to re-count the number of tigers in the Similipal sanctuary. We have already installed more than 500 cameras to this effect. Now, we are using both the methods. How many days will it require to complete the exercise? In order to reach a conclusion about the number of tigers in the Similipal sanctuary, we may require around two months. The exercise will start on April 17 and will continue till April 30. We will then analyse thousands of pictures captured by the cameras. We will go for elimination and matching it with pugmarks.  It’s a strenuous exercise and takes some time. There have been reports that the cameras installed by the government in different forests were damaged by the Maoists? We keep the cameras in a sealed box and try to keep it at a safe distance from both animals and people. All the camera boxes are fitted with spikes to prevent damage by animals. Despite all these things, we found a few cameras were damaged and few of them stolen in places such as Sunabeda sanctuary. However, no such incident have been reported from Similipal sanctuary. The cameras had been damaged by poachers and log thieves, as they feared that the camera would capture their images. We have noticed that cases of poaching, particularly that of tuskers, have been on the rise in the state in the past two years. Poaching is still a matter of concern but it’s not at an alarming stage. Earlier, poachers from Arunachal Pradesh were involved. We have managed to reduce outside involvement to zero. Only local poachers are now involved in it. In one instance in Athgarh, we handed over the case to the crime branch. They are looking into it. We are keeping track of them. Our ratio of male to female elephants is good. The number of makna (male elephant without tusks) is less than five per cent of the total population of elephants. In fact, the number of elephants has gone up and it now stands at 1,960. Even though the number of pachyderms has gone up, their movement has been restricted. The elephant corridors are under threat... The elephant corridors have changed with the passage of time. As they are long-ranging animals, they have started moving out of the forests. With a number of development activities taking place in and around the forests — such as train corridors, widening of national highways and mining activities — the elephant corridors are under threat.  You cannot deny development activities, but also cannot put the lives of the animals in danger. We need to have a balanced approach and are taking steps accordingly under the forest management system. Perhaps that is the reason why the government has come out with a notification insisting on foot patrolling to avoid poaching. This was an executive direction and it’s a welcome step. That does not mean that we were not doing it earlier. According to guidelines, the regional chief conservator of forests will supervise the forest for three days, divisional forest officer for five days, range officer for seven days, forester for 10 days and forest guard for 15 days in a month. But, as we already track them through global positioning system, no one can make a false claim regarding patrolling. There are vacancies in the forest department, which is a major problem in the proper management of forest… We are taking steps to fill the vacancies. Even engineering, first class BSc (honours) graduates are joining as forest guards. As a number of qualified youths are joining our department, we have introduced a capacity building programme so that they can make extensive tours inside the forest on foot and do their duty. There is a demand that forest guards be given arms and ammunition so that they can effectively deal with poachers and Maoists… I don’t subscribe to this view. Can a forest guard deputed alone in a forest with a double barrel gun check the Maoists?  Instead of giving guns, we are in the process of strengthening our intelligence network. We will have information if any one enters core areas of a forest. Maoist activities have been noticed in some areas of the state, but the Similipal sanctuary is now free of such incidents. There have been controversies regarding the number of donkeys having increased in the state? What’s the number? Donkey is not a wild animal. Donkeys are noticed in Surendranagar in Gujarat. I have no idea as to whether their number has increased or decreased in Odisha. Fire in the hills has turned into a threat to wildlife.  But your department has failed to address the issue... We are aware of it. People with vested interests are involved in this. Sometimes, they hunt animals and collect mahua flowers. Sometimes, they do it to retaliate against forest officials, who step in to check the theft of wood and hunting.