Three vehicles themed on wildlife conservation have started doing the rounds of Calcutta and three adjacent districts. The improvised five-seater mini-trucks, decked out with paintings, posters and leaflets that raise awareness about some of the animals and birds commonly found in the urban and semi-urban landscape, have been criss-crossing Calcutta, North 24-Parganas, Howrah and Hooghly. This will continue till November. “Turtle trade is illegal,” is written in a large font on a tableau atop a vehicle. “Fishing cat is our state animal,” says another. The vehicles were flagged off from Aranya Bhavan, the headquarters of the state forest department, on Sunday by state forest minister Rajib Banerjee. Recorded messages are played, too. “Forest and wildlife are inseparable parts of our environment. The creatures we see around us every day… the many birds like sparrows, common myna and animals like squirrel, turtle, snake, mongoose, civet cat and fishing cat… all these are defined as wildlife according to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. These animals and birds help maintain the ecological balance. Come, let us pledge to save them by protecting their habitat — trees and water bodies and wetlands,” says one message. “One vehicle has been moving around Calcutta. Another is doing the rounds of North 24-Parganas; a third Howrah and Hooghly,” Om Prakash, deputy conservator of forests, wildlife (headquarters), said. The idea is to generate visibility during the festive season, V.K. Yadav, Bengal’s chief wildlife warden, said. “The animals found around us are not harmful. But they are often killed out of a misplaced sense of fear. We want to give people the message, ‘please contact us if you need help’.” The vehicles are manned by forest personnel. They have distributing leaflets, posters and brochures. Some posters have turtle images. “Hath dilei hajote (Lay your hand, land in jail),” reads an accompanying message. All promotional materials have the forest department’s helpline number.