New Delhi, April 16: Four wildlife scientists today questioned a global count of wild tigers issued by two conservation agencies last week and said that forecasts that tiger numbers could double within a decade are not scientifically convincing. The tiger experts from India, Russia, the UK and the US have said the figures and the forecasts made by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and the Global Tiger Forum (GTF) could lead to "an illusion of success and a slackening of conservation efforts". They have challenged the WWF-GTF report issued last week that said the global number of wild tigers had after nearly a century of decline increased from about 3,200 in 2010 to about 3,890 by 2015 and appears on track to double within a decade. The agencies released the report ahead of a ministerial conference in India that brought environmental officials and wildlife scientists from 13 tiger-habitat countries to discuss future conservation strategies. "The numbers are based on flawed survey methodologies and the doubling forecast is unrealistic, it defies biology - nowhere on a landscape scale or a countrywide scale has there ever been any evidence of tigers doubling in numbers within 10 years," Ullas Karanth, the Bangalore-based science director of the Asia-Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), told The Telegraph. The WCS had last year claimed that India's environment ministry has been using a "statistically flawed" methodology which had led it to estimate the number of tigers in India at 2,226 in 2014, a 30 per cent increase over four years. Karanth and his colleagues claim the methodology uses a statistical approach that is not good enough to deliver reliable estimates for changes in tiger populations. In their joint statement today, Karanth and the other scientists have said there is no doubt that wildlife managers in parts of India and in specific reserves in Russia and Southeast Asia have made commendable conservation efforts and tiger populations have recovered. But rigorous peer-reviewed scientific studies in India, Thailand, and Russia have also indicated that tiger population recovery rates are "slow and not likely to attain levels necessary for the doubling of wild tigers within a decade", they said. "This is not a time for conservationists to take their eyes off the ball and pat each other on the back," the scientists said. The other signatories to the statement are Dale Miquelle, director of the Russia programme of the WCS, John Goodrich, a senior director at the tiger programme with the non-government Panthera, and Arjun Gopalaswamy, a research associate at the University of Oxford, UK. They said estimates of tiger numbers for large landscapes, regions and countries are sometimes based on extrapolations of tiger spoor (tracks and droppings) or spoor surveys alone. "While spoor surveys can be useful for knowing where tigers occur, they are not useful for reliably counting numbers." A senior WWF scientist said the count of 3,890 is the "best estimate ever" in the history of counting tigers. "The methodologies have been refined since the last count of 3,200, and the key encouraging message is that a century of decline has been halted," Carlos Drews, director of the global species programme at the WWF Switzerland, told this paper over the phone. "The methodologies may not be perfect, but these are the best estimates we have now," he said. Drews said the recent growth in tiger populations in India, Nepal and Russia "gives us hope" that their numbers could double in a decade, but future growth would depend on the level of national conservation efforts. The creation of special corridors that allow tigers to move from one core area into another, he said, has been envisaged as a key strategy to help boost tiger populations. The scientists' statement has said that source populations of tigers that occur at high densities and which are likely to produce extra animals that could disperse and expand populations now occupy less than 10 per cent of 1.2 million sq km of tiger habitat. Almost 70 per cent of tigers survive within these source zones. They said if 70 to 90 per cent of wild tigers are assumed source populations with slow growth, an anticipated doubling of global tiger numbers would demand an increase between 364 to 831 per cent in so-called sink landscapes surrounding the source zones. "We believe this is an unlikely scenario," the scientists said, pointing out that the sink populations are continuing to lose tigers in many countries due to hunting or rural and development pressures. The WCS had last year questioned India's double-sampling strategy which involves combining two sets of data - images of tigers captured by 9,735 cameras in relatively small zones of tiger territories and counts of paw-marks and scat droppings over larger areas. "There have been successes in some places and they need to be highlighted, but it is misleading to release such country-scale or global numbers," Karanth said.