THE VANISHING: INDIA'S WILDLIFE CRISIS

By Prerna Singh Bindra,

Viking, Rs 599 When was the last time you saw a firefly flickering outside your window or a sparrow fly above your head inside the house? For most people, the answer will be a long time ago. It is these disappearances from the backyard that started Prerna Singh Bindra's "tryst with wildlife". Bindra has come a long way since realization of this loss dawned on her; she began her career as a journalist and went on to serve on the core standing committee of the National Board for Wildlife. Ironically, instead of being an opportunity to bring a change from within the system, her tenure taught Bindra how steeply the odds are stacked against the natural world in India, even with some of the most protectionist laws governing its forests and wildlife. It is the experience Bindra gathered while on the committee that forms the most interesting part of this book. Bindra exposes the predisposition of the bodies set up to safeguard the environment towards economic growth, revealing in the process the shady dealings and the shoddy appraisals that lead to the denotification of protected areas and the carving up of national parks. She quotes from an environmental impact assessment (conducted to evaluate the ecological feasibility and impact of developmental projects): "It listed different tiger species (the world has only one) and unearthed two king cobra species (again, there is just the one)..." Even the fictitious animals were not considered worthy of saving, let alone the endangered red pandas and hoolock gibbons that would lose their habitat because of the project. And this indifference towards the ecology, Bindra shows - she is not afraid of naming names - cuts across political divides. While her tenure at the NBWL is discussed in detail, the work done by state bodies is sadly under-represented even though Bindra was on Uttarakhand's State Board for Wildlife. The protection of forests and wild animals falls under the concurrent list and a lot of important work is done at the state level, such as the efforts taken in Rajasthan to save the Great Indian Bustard. There are other issues that escape Bindra's attention, like the declaration of nilgais as vermin and the permission to cull them. This omission is especially glaring as she talks of the destruction of crops by wild animals as being one of the main reasons for man-animal conflict and claims that culling is "nothing short of blasphemy" in India. The effects of climate change on the ecology also fail to make the cut. The sections of the book that really shine are the ones containing accounts of Bindra's encounters with the wild. No armchair conservationist, Bindra has been in Chambal to see dozens of gharial hatchlings piggy-back on a huge male that stared right back at her (animals seem to have a strange knack for staring into Bindra's eyes, be it a leopard in Mumbai or a forest owlet in Melghat). She has also been amidst - literally - nesting Olive Ridleys in Rushikulya. Bindra's descriptions are often vivid and her language lucid. Reading the book is like travelling across India and witnessing the beauty of its wildlife. Bindra sets about establishing that this beauty is not unique to the majestic tiger or the graceful flamingos. Abhorred and misunderstood animals, from snakes and frogs to civets and hyenas, she holds, are more at risk because of the negative myths that are disseminated about them. While talking of the tiger - an animal that finds most space in the book, much like in India's discourse on conservation - Bindra speaks of the unfair burden of Corbett's legacy borne by the big cats in India. Besides the hunger for development and the apathy of the bureaucracy, it is such lopsided narratives, at times propagated wilfully by political and business establishments, that pose the biggest hurdle to protecting India's rich natural heritage. The other fallacy that Bindra tries to dispel - and this is significant in the context of present-day India - is that floods are 'disasters'. Rivers overflow to rejuvenate the floodplains. Bad water management, faulty planning and a total disregard for the ecology are responsible for the devastation that follows floods. Bindra also cautions against the ambitious river-linking project that will not just increase the pressure on the already taxed rivers but will also destroy the marine and riverine ecologies of India, not to mention lead to the extinction of the gharial and the gangetic dolphin. Bindra repeatedly stresses the importance of involving local communities in the process of conservation, citing success stories like that of the 'elephant-conflict mitigation squad' in Odisha. While there can be no contending this, Bindra's portrayal of the communities is problematic. People dwelling in and around forests and protected areas are broadly classified into either those who worship nature and live in harmony with it or those who are bloodthirsty, killing animals for sport. Such simplistic binaries are unexpected from someone with Bindra's experience. The Vanishing states little that is new to those aware of India's ecological crisis, but all of it is important and urgent enough to demand retellings.