Guwahati: Paris-based Nature and Wildlife Association and an NGO in Assam, Green Guard Nature Organisation, are launching a project on Wednesday for 50 villages along the Nagaon-Karbi Anglong foothills to reduce man-elephant conflict. The project, Lights for Life - Food to Live 2017, aims to reduce man-elephant conflict in the area by 50 per cent in the next three to five years. It promotes a message to jointly restore elephant habitat and get headlights to avoid attacks. The villagers will be provided high-powered headlamps and air horns to curb elephant attacks. In return, they will join hands in the efforts to restore elephant habitat. At least 29 people and 12 elephants have died in man-elephant conflict in the area in the past three years. "Elephants often come down to the villages from the Karbi foothills in search of food, water and salt as their habitat has been destroyed. Moreover, water sources and natural salt licks in the forests have been affected. It is difficult to restore the habitats without taking the villagers into confidence. We will distribute high-powered headlamps and air horns among 50 villages, using which the residents can chase the elephants and avoid attacks at night. In return, they will join our effort to restore the habitats," the secretary general of Green Guard Nature Organisation, Raj Phukan, told The Telegraph. Nearly 5,000 households in at least 50 villages, comprising nearly 10,000 people, are likely to join hands in the project. Apart from 29 human and 12 animal deaths, 122 people have been injured in conflicts since 2014, 798 houses damaged and nearly 30 per cents crops damaged in the attacks. "During the awareness programme to be taken up as part of the project, Andy Merk, a German elephant specialist now based in Thailand, will teach the villagers how to read the mood of elephants and avoid attacks. He had studied elephants in the Himalayan region and can be of immense help to the people," Phukan said. Assam forest minister Pramila Rani Brahma is likely to attend the function on Wednesday. She had told the Assembly in September this year that 303 people died in man-animal conflict in the state since 2011 and 137 were injured. The minister said 8,305 houses and 18,797 bigha of crops were damaged during that period.