Jorhat, April 23: Ramana Athreya, an associate professor at the Indian Institute of Science Education in Pune, who has been working on conservation of wildlife in Arunachal Pradesh for several years, has been shortlisted for the United Kingdom’s biggest and the  most  respected wildlife conservation prize. Athreya, who is credited with discovering bugun liocichla, a rare species of birds at Eagle’s Nest wildlife sanctuary spread over West and East Kameng districts in Arunachal Pradesh, is among the seven men and women from Argentina, Belize, Borneo, Croatia, Russia and Uzbekistan shortlisted for the award. Each of the finalists will now face an interview with a panel of experts in London in May after which the judges will select the winner for 2011 for the £60,000 Whitley Gold Award. Talking to The Telegraph over phone from Pune, Athreya, who is preparing for his visit to London next month for the interview, said  it would be a great news for Arunachal Pradesh if he wins the award. “I have been working in Arunachal Pradesh since 2003 and helping various tribes in that state to work for conservation of wildlife. I visit Arunachal Pradesh at least four times a year,” he said. Athreya, who has been working with the NGO Eco-System India based in Guwahati, said  the NGO has also helped a few local people near the Eagle’s Nest wildlife sanctuary, to set up a resort for tourists near Bomdila in Arunachal Pradesh. “A large number of tourists visit this resort and the local people have found a way of earning. The basic idea is to make the people learn to live with nature without causing  damage,” Athreya said. A graduate of IIT Kanpur and an ardent bird watcher, Athreya had gone to Eagle’s Nest wildlife sanctuary for a short holiday in 1995 and fell in love with the land of the snowlit mountains with its rich biodiversity. He decided to do something in Arunachal Pradesh and joined Eco-System India. But it was more than a decade later that he spotted a cuddly new bird on May 23, 2006 while working with the NGO. “The bird has shades of red, black, flaming orange, yellow, brown, olive, grey, white, flesh pink and silver which are deftly interwoven into a matrix,” Athreya said. He said the bird looked remotely like  the emei shan liocichla, which is known to be found only in a few mountains in central China, more than 1,000 km from Eagle’s Nest. Athreya’s discovery had been described as the most sensational ornithological discovery in India for more than half a century. He was awarded the Pakshishree award in 2009 for this discovery by Rajasthan government.