Tinsukia: The divisional forest officer of Tinsukia wildlife division has asked Oil India Limited not to proceed with the seismic survey at Baghjan, Barekuri, Maguri-Motapung Beel, declared as an Important Bird Area (IBA), in Assam's Tinsukia district. The development comes days after the public sector giant invited "expression of interest" for hiring services for the purpose of seismic data acquisition, processing and interpretation on the bed of the Brahmaputra in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh amid objections by several local organisations, including Barekuri village tourism. The letter issued by the divisional forest officer (DFO) said, "The area - Baghjan, Barekuri, Maguri-Motapung Beel - are declared as IBAs and falls under the eco-sensitive zone of Dibru-Saikhowa National Park. You have mentioned in paragraph four of your letter that you will use eco-friendly explosives for blasting under the earth whereas according to provisions of the Environment Protection Act, 2005, you are not allowed to use any type of explosive in such areas." The DFO advised OIL to take permission from the chief wildlife warden, Assam, under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, and also from the State Board of Wildlife followed by the National Board of Wildlife for any type of operation in the area. The Pollution Control Board of Assam has also asked OIL to clarify allegations levelled in a petition filed by the Barekuri Village Tourism and the Asom Yuva Parishad. Barekuri Village Tourism president Diplop Chutia told The Telegraph, "We welcome the directive stopping OIL from proceeding with seismic survey in the area. The letter is a proof of how OIL ignored taking necessary permission before proceeding with the work. We demand a public hearing before permission is issued by any authority." He said the seismic survey would destroy the bio-diversity and eco-sensitivity of the belt, which attracts several migratory and rare birds. "Almost 1,000 families from over 15 villages are dependent on the area for livelihood as the region has immense potential of wildlife tourism," he added. OIL had initiated such a move in 2006 as well but was compelled to abandon it following an outcry from environment groups and local organisations. The present notice inviting EOI has been issued by the chief general manager (Geophysics) of the Geophysics department of OIL, having its registered headquarters at Duliajan in Dibrugarh district.