Guwahati, Sept. 15: The vigilance and anti-corruption bureau of Assam police has charged disgraced Dhemaji divisional forest officer Mahat Chandra Talukdar with violating the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, apart from the bribery charges for which he was arrested. The bureau in its chargesheet, filed against Talukdar at the court of special judge, Assam, recently mentioned that Talukdar is liable for prosecution under Sections 39 (3)(a), 40 (2), 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act for illegal possession of animal body parts and trophies. Talukdar was arrested after he was caught red-handed taking a bribe in Dhemaji on June 13. Three pieces of elephant tusks, two pig teeth, one dry tiger skin and one deer skin were recovered during searches carried out at his official residence in Dhemaji and his house in Guwahati. "The recovery of animal parts from Talukdar's house proves that he has not declared the possession of such articles, thereby violating the provision of Section 40 (1) of the Wildlife (Protection) Act and Declaration of Wildlife Stock Rules, 2003, for which no identification mark or serial number given by the concerned authority was affixed on the recovered animal parts," the bureau said in the chargesheet. "Hence, during the course of the investigation, a prima facie case under relevant sections of the Wildlife (Protection) Act besides some provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, has been found well established against the accused," it added. Apart from the animal parts, Rs 2.71 crore cash, gold ornaments weighing 945.560gm, 155 documents related to investments to the tune of Rs 60 lakh and documents related to landed properties amassed by him were also recovered. The bureau informed the court that an additional chargesheet will be submitted in this case as the investigation is still continuing. The additional chargesheet will be filed once enough evidence to substantiate the possession of disproportionate assets and 
benami properties is collected. "The total value of his assets will be compared with his total income from known sources to ascertain the total amount of disproportionate assets," an official source said. "As #part of the investigation into his disproportionate assets, the accused will be given a self-declaration form in which he will have to declare his assets and liabilities, which will be compared with the information about his assets gathered by the bureau from different sources." The source said there were also allegations that Talukdar had accumulated assets in the name of his family members, which is also being probed. Talukdar is in judicial custody at Guwahati Central Jail since his arrest.