Guwahati, Oct. 19: Butterfly lovers from across the country are meeting at Bornadi wildlife sanctuary in Udalguri district from October 25 to share their passion for the beautiful insects and work for their conservation. The second Northeast butterfly meet will provide a forum for butterfly lovers to exchange knowledge, experience, study methods and ideas related to current and emerging issues associated with butterfly conservation. The meet was held at Jeypore rain forest in Upper Assam last year. "Participants from all states of the Northeast, Bengal, Odisha and Tamil Nadu have sent confirmation to attend the event. The response has been very encouraging across the country," said Kamal Azad, one of the organisers of the meet. The participants will visit the Khalingduar-Bornadi area. "Khalingduar lies in the Bhutan foothills and especially during the last week of October, we can expect lots of butterflies in the area. Also, there is not much information available on butterflies from western Assam. Especially, the areas important for butterflies are not highlighted properly," said butterfly expert Monsoon J. Gogoi. Gogoi said Khalingduar is one of the richest butterfly diversity areas of western Assam. The endemic Swinhoe's Flat (
Celaenorrhinus zea) has been reported from Khalingduar reserve forest in a survey conducted by WWF-India in 2009. The meet will be held over four days and conclude on October 28. The first day of the programme will focus on presentations by various resource persons. The second, third and fourth days will comprise field trips inside the forest and interaction between resource persons and participants, student talks and presentations on butterfly research and photography exhibitions. "We met with good success last year when we got a new record for India of a butterfly called Yellow Chequered Lancer (
Plastingia pellonia) by Arajush Payra, one of the participants," Azad said. In the coming years, the Northeast butterfly meet will be held in Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim. The meet is being organised by Butterflies of Northeast India group, with support from the BTC forest department, 
www.flutters.org, BAMOS (Butterflies and Moths of Sikkim), Ngunu Ziro (Arunachal Pradesh), Aaranyak and WWF-India. Isaac Kehimkar, deputy director of Bombay Natural History Society, is one of the prominent experts who will attend the meet.