Guwahati/Kokrajhar, June 13: Gauhati High Court today asked the Assam government to frame appropriate rules under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, empowering police to file chargesheets in wildlife crime cases. The move came as forest minister Pramila Rani Brahma directed officials of her department and police to act tough against all illegal activities in the state's forests, including felling of trees and encroachment. Divisional forest officer of Dhemaji, Mahat Chandra Talukdar, was today caught taking a bribe in his Dhemaji office, arrested and placed under suspension, on a day smuggled timber worth over Rs 2 lakh was seized in Kokrajhar district. An official source said around Rs 65 lakh in cash, a tiger skin and a deer skin, a piece of ivory weighing around 250gm, some Bhutanese and Nepalese currency and bank pass books and documents pertaining to investments made by Talukdar were seized during raids carried out by an anti-corruption team at his residences in Dhemaji and Guwahati. Of the Rs 65 lakh, Rs 4 lakh was seized from his residence on Pinaki Path near Zoo Road Tiniali in Guwahati this evening. "He also has fixed deposits worth around Rs 30 lakh," the source said. The high court order was passed by a single judge bench of Justice Indira Shah in connection with criminal petition number 159/2015, filed by Yaksum Nobeng, an accused in a wildlife crime case in Karbi Anglong district. She sought quashing of the case against her saying that a police officer below the rank of sub-inspector had investigated it, thereby violating the act. Advocate Bijon Mahajan, who was the amicus curiae in the case, said the court order would go a long way in preventing wildlife crimes in the state, particularly rhino poaching because so far wildlife crime cases could be initiated only at the behest of forest officials listed under Section 55 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act. The act, at present, does not empower the police to file chargesheets in a court in wildlife crime cases, as a result of which alleged poachers/criminals arrested by the police manage to go scot-free. The state government is empowered to frame rules under Section 64 of the act. "Under Section 50 of the act, police officers not below the rank of sub-inspectors can register, investigate and seize goods in wildlife crime cases but they are not empowered to file chargesheets under Section 173 CrPC. If the state government amends the act, poachers/criminals will have a tough time in facing prosecution in court," Mahajan said. The act mentions that no court shall take cognisance of any offence against the act except on the complaint of any person other than the director of wildlife preservation or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Centre, member secretary of Central Zoo Authority, member secretary of Tiger Conservation Authority, the director of the tiger reserve, the chief wildlife warden or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the state government and the officer-in-charge of the zoo, among others. Sources said lack of awareness among a section of policemen about this provision and, thereby, investigation of cases registered under the act by police personnel below the rank of sub-inspector has resulted in such cases falling flat in court. "There is an urgent need to make police personnel aware about provisions of the act and remove legal grey areas if perpetrators of wildlife crimes are to be punished," a source said. Rhino conservationist and Aaranyak secretary-general Bibhab Talukdar welcomed the order but said that since an amendment to the act is awaiting approval of Parliament, it would be prudent that the state government first pushes the Centre for the amendment. "If the chance of amendment by the Centre is low then this should be included in the state amendment," he added. In Kokrajhar, Brahma told reporters after visiting Khudhigaon area under Salkocha range of Parbatjhora forest division: "General instructions have been given to stop illegal activities in forest areas. The department officials have to ensure that no felling takes place and that encroachers are evicted. The orders have already been given." Massive destruction of forests and encroachment has been going on in Salkocha. Over 50 families have encroached upon forest land in this southern part of Chakrasila wildlife sanctuary, which is home to the endangered golden langur ( Trachypithecus geei). "Over one lakh sal trees were felled here recently and people are encroaching the forest land. I am surprised why the department did not take any action. This trend is seen throughout the state," Brahma said. Expressing concern over unabated smuggling of logs and timbers from Athiabari, Sialmari and Jharbari in her constituency, Kokrajhar, Brahma said police personnel were reportedly involved in the racket too. "I have asked the Kokrajhar superintendent of police to act tough and take the necessary steps," she said. The forest minister said officials of her department had apprised her of lack of manpower, weapons and funds and had also informed her about the involvement of some NDFB militants, who are in ceasefire with the government, in the illegal activities on forest land. Promising to look into the matter, she called upon everyone to join hands to help protect the state's natural resources. In Kokrajhar district, a Bolero pick-up van (AS01 GC 6939), laden with smuggled sal timber was seized at Karigaon along National Highway 31C during routine checking and three persons were arrested, the officer-in-charge of Karigaon police post, Narayan Boro, said. The vehicle was going towards Barpeta from Patgaon in Kokrajhar. The arrested have been identified as Saidul Islam, 19, Najrul Islam, 23 and Babul Ali, 20, all from Howly in Barpeta district. This is the third time in the past fortnight that timber-laden trucks have been seized from the area. On June 8, a truck loaded with smuggled logs worth over Rs 3 lakh was seized from Basangaon near Karigaon after it lost control and overturned on National Highway 31C. On May 30, a truck carrying sal logs, also worth lakhs of rupees, was seized by a joint team of police and forest department personnel at the same spot. The incidents once again expose the sorry state of affairs in the Bodoland Territorial Areas District (BTAD), where, officials reports say, around 40,000 hectares of forest land have been encroached upon. Haltugaon division of Kokrajhar district has the highest record of encroachment of forest land (14,538.41 hectares). Additional reporting by Vinod Kr Singh in Dhemaji