Guwahati, Nov. 25: Taiwan will be exploring opportunities for closer economic ties with Assam besides offering help for wildlife conservation. Ambassador Wenchyi Ong will be visiting Assam for the first time with a four-member delegation on November 29, and will provide financial assistance for wildlife conservation to non- governmental organisations. The delegation will be in the state for three days. A statement issued from the Taipei Economic and Cultural Centre, New Delhi, today said Taiwan was committed to supporting Assam’s effort in preserving wildlife. “A donation of US $11,000 will be made to two wildlife organisations by Ambassador Wenchyi Ong on November 30 at a function. Taiwan has supported nature conservation programmes in Assam with a total amount of $48,000 since 2007,” the statement said. The forestry bureau, Council of Agriculture of Taiwan, is offering the assistance. Of the total donation, $6,000 will be given to Aaranyak for the programme Monitoring of greater one-horned rhino in Jaldapara wildlife sanctuary, and $5,000 to The Rhino Foundation for Nature in NE India for the compilation and production of a monograph on Mammals of Northeast India- Review. “As a token of support and friendship, Taiwan wishes to make a small contribution to the daunting task of preserving wildlife in the region,” the statement said. While making his first visit to Assam, Ong will also explore opportunities for closer economic ties between Assam and Taiwan. Areas of co-operation may be in food processing, bamboo-related industry and bringing more Taiwanese tourists to Assam. Taiwan has been known as a hi-tech hub, especially in the manufacturing of IT and ICT products. It has invested $1.2 billion in Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. Ong will discuss investment potentials in his meeting with chief minister Tarun Gogoi and Pradyut Bordoloi, minister of power and commerce, for further co-operation and better relationship between Taiwan and Assam. Apart from Taiwan, a 16-member delegation from Democratic People’s Republic of Laos, representing various sectors of the economy, will visit the Northeast from November 29 to December 2. They will focus on promoting trade and investment in sectors like tourism, IT, healthcare, education and power. The visit will also strengthen relations and boost trade and culture, and will help industrialists look for avenues and opportunities to expand their businesses beyond borders.