NASHIK: Underlining the importance of banyan tree on the auspicious occasion of Vat Pournima today, corporator Sushma Pagare will distribute banyan tree saplings to married women in Upnagar area. The initiative will be implemented under the guidance of Ravi Pagare, founder president of Yugantar Social Foundation. After plantation, women devotees will be provided guidance on how to own responsibility and take care of the saplings for its safe growth. Citizens should contact Yugantar liaison office, Matoshri Nagar, in Upnagar for registration regarding saplings, appealed the organisers of the event. In Indian culture, banyan tree is worshiped by suvasini on Vat Pournima. The tree is multifaceted and provides oxygen 24 hours a day. Gives a dense shade in the scorching sun. The importance of this plant has been explained in Ayurveda. With this in mind, this initiative will be implemented to increase the number of banyan trees in the suburb, they said. Importance from ecological point of view Vat Pournima, the festival underlines immense importance of Banyan tree from religious, medicinal and ecological point of views. Banyan is one of the 750 species of fig trees, each of which is pollinated only by its own species of tiny wasps that breed only inside the figs of their partner trees. Banyans are strangler figs. They grow from seeds that land on other trees. Banyans are the world’s biggest trees in terms of the area they cover. They produce vast crops of figs that sustain many species of birds, fruit bats, primates and other creatures, which in turn disperse the seeds of hundreds of other plant species. Banyan tree along with other figs species show Asynchronous fruiting – This means that fig trees of the same species do not follow a seasonal pattern of fruiting. Each tree flowers and fruits at a different time of the year. That also means that figs are available all through the year. While most other fruits have seasons during which they fruit, figs fruit even during those times when other trees are not fruiting. This is of great help to fruiteaters, who can feed on figs even during lean periods when there is nothing else to eat! Therefore, Banyan trees are referred to as “keystone” species since they affect many other species including fruit-eating animals which would find it hard to survive dry seasons without figs. – Pratiksha Kothule, Wildlife Biologist and Project Coordinator at Nature Conservation Society of Nashik