NASHIK: District administration has been ordered to take action against the culprits regarding illegal mining activity taking place in Brahmagiri, Sahyadri mountain range. State Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Minister and District Guardian Minister Chhagan Bhujbal assured the members of the Brahmagiri Action Committee that action would be taken against the culprits and concerned soon. Members of the Brahmagiri Action Committee met Guardian Minister Chhagan Bhujbal at his office in Nashik on Friday and gave a statement regarding the mining activity taking place in the Brahmagiri, Sahyadri mountain range. Nishikant Pagare, Mahant Ganeshanand Saraswati, Dattatraya Dhage, Jagbir Singh, Prakash Nikumbh, Kuldeep Kaur and other office bearers of Bramhagiri Bachao Samiti were present on this occasion. A statement issued by the Brahmagiri Action Committee said that Brahmagiri Metghar is the first fort in the Sahyadri mountain. The mountain range declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Here, a private developer under the project ‘Brahma Green’ has illegally conducted mining activity at the core of Brahmagiri by blasting using gelatin sticks. There is a small hamlet named Suplicha Met, at the foothills of Bhramagiri. With this illegal mining activity, the concerned has violated PESA and Forest Rights Act. While illegal mining in the Brahmagiri range, a place of worship for millions of devotees, could lead to accidents like the  one in Malin village, the forest department, revenue department, mining officials and the district administration have ignored it. While the Brahmagiri tragedy is being protested from all levels, the entire mountain has been wiped out by the illegal minings that have been going on for many years in the Santosha, Bhagdi mountain range near Nashik, which is an environmentally sensitive area. The Sahyadri is being broken by illegal activities of all sort in the entire district. It is said that this has caused irreparable damage to wildlife, the environment and biodiversity and endangered the entire ecosystem. The government is also responsible for the conservation and protection of the Sahyadri Range, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and the use of tunnels/gelatin sticks, excavation and mining should be banned in the Sahyadri Range. The land on the hill slopes in the Sahyadri mountain range should be used to increase the green cover of the state up to 33% by protecting the just rights of the tribals. All the culprits in the Brahmagiri excavation should be investigated and action should be taken. It has been demanded that the gelatin sticks used in Brahmagiri and Sahyadri excavations should be investigated, the statement has said. On this occasion, Guardian Minister Chhagan Bhujbal took note of this incident and ordered to take action against the culprits regarding illegal excavations taking place in Brahmagiri, Sahyadri mountain range. Guardian Minister Chhagan Bhujbal has assured the members of Bramhagiri Bachao Samiti that soon the incident will be thoroughly investigated and action will be taken against the culprits and excavators.