NASHIK: The sacredness of Brahmagiri, the source of Godavari, is as important as the Himalayas, the source of the Ganges. The religious sentiments of the Indian people are connected. A mass movement will be set up to prevent river Godavari from being taken over by the land mafia. Before going into a large scale public agitation, there will be an attempt to get rid of the land mafia through four-point action plan, explained environmentalist and water expert Dr Rajendra Singh. Speaking in an online press conference, Dr Singh said that Brahmagiri mountain is not only a religious place but also a heritage of society, nature, saints and the masses. Efforts will be made at all levels to save it, conserve it. Some politicians and corrupt officials are secretly supporting this land mafia, he alleged. Underlining the cultural heritage of the country is not limited to Nashik only as this is a vital issue connected to the progress of six states, an organised public movement will be waged against it in the near future, he said in a virtual address. Brahmagiri is the source of Godavari river which is the cultural heritage of six states including Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Orissa. Therefore, it is necessary for the forest department to stop the encroachment of land mafia on this original source. Four-point action plan Action will be initiated against land mafia. Case will be filed u/s 51G and 48A of the Constitution. The forest department is responsible for the protection of forests, wildlife and natural resources. They need to ensure its strict implementation. At the second level, a letter will be written to the Chief Minister, Environment Minister, Water Resources Department, Forest Minister and Commissioner. At the third level, a petition (PIL) will be filed in the court against this, demanding immediate action against the land mafias encroaching on the forest land. After that, a mass agitation will be organised at the local level from the city of Thrimbakeshwar along with representatives from all the six states to raise fight for the protection of the Brahmagiri.