* Why should wait for this? need to implement other options * Awareness needed on verge of increasing human-leopard conflict – Prashant Nikale| Nashik The Junnar pattern was announced in July last year after the leopard attacks escalated in Darna river basin. It was to focus to reduce human-leopard conflict in villages along the Darna Valley. However, even after year, the Junnar pattern has not been implemented due to lack of funds. The proposal sent by the forest department has became victim of red tappism and the start of sugar plantation has added to the headaches of the forest department. During the lockdown last year the encounters between humans and leopards in the area of Darna valley increased. Especially in Donwade, Babhaleshwar, Palse, Chandgiri, Chadegaon, Jakhori, Samangaon, Chincholi, Rahuri and other nearby villages. There were about 12 leopard attacks, in which four people were killed. After that forest department trapped 11 leopards from Nashik forest reserve and Sinnar forest reserve. Soon after that the leopard attacks increased in Igatpuri tehsil. The villages Pimpalgaon Mhor, Khed Bhairav, Kanherwadi, Chichale Khaire and other villages saw increase in leopard attacks. In these leopard attacks six people have died so far in Igatpuri alone. The forest department has trapped two leopards after that, but the leopard attacks have started again in the area. The Forest Department began efforts to reduce human-leopard conflict. The year-round wildlife awareness programme, that’s is Junnar Pattern was supposed to create ‘leopard messengers’ in schools and colleges. The volunteers will carry out special responsibilities for wildlife conservation under this campaign. However, the proposal is currently stalled due to lack of funds. There are also signs that the initiative will be delayed further as schools and colleges are closed due to outbreak of Covid-19. The Junnar pattern was expected to cost around Rs 15 lakh. A detailed report has been sent to the Forest Ministry along with the Nagpur headquarter of forest department. However, due to Covid-19, the project is likely to be delayed for unlimited time period as such funds are unlikely to be sanctioned immediately.