NASHIK: Our district is blessed with the Trimbakeshwar Range of the Western Ghats, conserving a variety of flora and fauna under its roof. From the critically endangered, Long-Billed Vultures to the State Butterfly, Blue Mormon, the range encompasses all the species and mammals, not only living but flourishing in terms of population. Anjaneri and Brahmagiri, two of the most aesthetically pleasing bio-diverse mountain ranges, provide the required secured environment for these species. However, illegal human activities like land excavation, mining, turning grassland habitats into agricultural areas, air pollution due to industrial effluents, soil and noise pollution can disrupt the biodiversity of Nashik and create an imbalance in the ecosystem. Habitat loss might result in species’ extinction or shifting to the urban areas, leading to humananimal conflict. Deshdoot times interviewed Pratiksha Kothule, Member of Nature Conservation Society of Nashik, to understand the impact of destructive human activities on various species, mammals, and humans. Godavari River The northern face of the Trimbak range is the origin of India’s second-longest river, Godavari. If the river’s origin gets hampered, the district will face severe water scarcity. Industrialists, farmers, and other water-dependent factories will suffer immensely. Already the river is suffering from water pollution. People dependent on the river’s water for daily activities will suffer the most. Wildlife Our district is beautifully placed between biogeographic zones, the Western Ghats and Deccan Plateau. Western Ghat, also known as the 8th biodiversity hotspot in the world, is home to endemic species. Ceropegia varieties have their origin rooted in the Western Ghats. Pinda cocanensis, an annual herd, is also endemic to the Ghats. Flourishing fauna and flora add to the beauty of the district, and a balanced ecosystem indicates the continuous existence of organisms. Peth, Surgana, Harsul, Igatpuri, and Trimbakeshwar are beautiful villages covered with a green patch and nonpolluted air. The Trimbak Range, a section of the Ghats, houses 120+ bird species, 50 butterfly species, and 20 mammal species. Yellow-Footed green pigeon, State Bird, and Blue Mormon, State Butterfly, are also found in this beautiful range. Small Indian Civet, Porcupines, Wild Boars, and other mammals fill up the range’s biodiversity. In order to maintain nature’s balance, it is important to nurture them and let them flourish without disturbances. Indian Vulture A critically endangered bird, enlisted in the Schedule One of Wildlife Protection Act 1972, is witnessing a growth in its population due to the suitable environment. Their nestings on the vertical cliffs on the facing sides of Anjaneri and Brahmagiri are one of the highest nesting centres in India. They select the natural holes created by weathering for nesting. Even though the nesting term is eight months, they stay in their specific nests for the whole year as they consider it safe and comforting. However, if mining and other construction activities kick-start in these areas, they will most probably leave the area due to the noise and discomfort. The relocation will again affect the population of vultures. We should avoid occupying lands on mountains for human-based activities as it disturbs the species’ well-being. Road kill Indian Stripped Hyena, popularly known as Hyenas, have their dens in these mountain ranges and grasslands. By the recent Hyena Road kill Case, we can clearly understand that if humans occupy their space and homes, they end up coming to the roads due to the disturbances in the forest. Continuous construction activities or mining will increase the human-animal conflict as animals will start dispersing from their homes. One of the classic examples is Leopard, enlisted in Schedule one of WPA 1972, which is sighted frequently in urban areas. Bio-indicators Butterflies and fireflies are bio indicators as their population at a particular place defines the bio-diversity of the area. The population of fireflies and butterflies is huge in our district’s Trimbak range. It implies the rich biodiversity and no-pollution area. However, to maintain the current situation and improve it, human inference in these sacred mountain ranges needs to be stopped. It is important to let flora and fauna flourish and bloom at their own pace.