Their pretty colour, translucent bellies, and fascinating camouflage abilities have made glass frogs a popular exotic pet. This creates an incentive for locals to catch wild glass frogs in the hope of selling them into the exotic pet trade. Because they’re so small and well hidden, hunting for glass frogs disturbs their habitat, and the loss of individuals weakens populations and gene pools. Wild animals should not be kept as pets—not only does it threaten their survival as a species but it is also cruel to keep them in captivity. Glass frogs, like all wild animals, are highly dependent on the complex ecosystems where they live, and pet owners can’t give them everything they need to thrive in captivity. Glass frogs have recently been given protection under CITES because trade in America and Europe is adding to their vulnerability. Already faced with challenges resulting from habitat loss, habitat degradation, restricted ranges, disease, and climate change, glass frogs need protection from the exotic pet trade to avoid extinction. Central and South America are undergoing continuous human development, with new areas facing deforestation to make way for agriculture, aquaculture, and other forms of development. When trees are cut down in any given area, glass frogs can’t survive and have to move somewhere else. As habitable areas grow smaller, the amount of food and space reduces, forcing glass frog populations to compete for resources. Climate change is a threat to many rainforest species, glass frogs included. Without the right temperature, the right level of humidity, and the right amount of rainfall, many species will be forced to move, adapt, or die out. Scientists think that glass frogs are good bioindicators, which means we can tell how healthy an area is by observing its population of glass frogs. Species usually make good bioindicators when they need a very specific and complex set of requirements to survive—this includes certain weather conditions, plant life, and wildlife. When you spot a glass frog, you know its needs are being met, which means you know all plant species and animals associated with its needs must be functioning, too. Glass frogs are insectivores that eat a range of bugs, including ants, spiders, crickets, flies, and moths. They’ll also eat smaller tree frogs. Glass frogs are not just predators—they are also prey. They’re vulnerable to predators that can reach them in the trees, like snakes or birds, and when they’re closer to the ground during mating season, they can be eaten by lizards or small mammals. Glass frogs are native to areas in Central America, South America, and Mexico. Because they’re a type of tree frog, they live in tropical lowland forests and mid-elevation mountain forests. They can often be found sitting on tree leaves and branches. During the dry season, from late November to April, they tend to live high up in the trees where they can access the most moisture. One of the most surprising facts about glass frogs is that they live for around 10 to 14 years. This is significantly longer than the European common frog, which has a lifespan of around five to 10 years. Unfortunately, about 50% of the glass frog species that have been evaluated by the IUCN are listed as vulnerable, endangered, or critically endangered. This means they are becoming increasingly rare. However, individual glass frog species are also rare due to the sheer number of different species. New glass frog species are still being discovered, like these two species found in Ecuador in 2022, that are genetically distinct despite living only 13 miles apart. Though different species of glass frogs come in different sizes, they’re usually relatively small. The average size of a glass frog is around 20 to 30 millimetres (0.8 to 1.2 inches) long. Though small, glass frogs are not the tiniest frogs around—that title goes to Paedophryne amauensis, a species discovered in 2012 that averages 7.7 millimetres in length. It’s also currently thought to be the smallest vertebrate in the world. On the other end of the scale, some glass frogs can reach around 80 millimetres (3 inches) in length and 14 grams (0.5 ounces) in weight. The largest glass frog we’ve discovered so far is the Pacific giant glass frog. Female Pacific giant glass frogs are around 6.09 to 7.36 centimetres (2.4 to 2.9 inches) long, and the males are 7.1 to 8.1 centimetres (2.8 to 3.2 inches) long. Unfortunately, the Pacific giant glass frog is listed as critically endangered (possibly extinct) by the IUCN. The species is affected by habitat loss and degradation, but the drastic population decline they’ve experienced since the 1990s may be connected to chytridiomycosis, a dangerous and contagious disease in amphibians that is caused by a certain type of fungus. If there is still a population in the wild, it’s estimated to have fewer than 50 mature individuals. There are many different species of glass frogs, and a large number of them are endangered. The IUCN lists 11 species as critically endangered, 39 species as endangered, 19 species as vulnerable, and 11 species as near threatened. There are also 62 species listed as least concern, and 14 species are considered data deficient. Altogether, 80 species are listed as vulnerable, or worse, around half of all evaluated species. Glass frogs use transparency as a form of camouflage to protect them from predators. By letting the colours of their background show through their bodies, they can blend in with their surroundings and make it much harder for other animals to spot them. Glass frogs have two levels of transparency—partial transparency when they’re awake and their red blood cells are circulating normally, and improved transparency when sleeping and hiding most of their red blood cells in their livers. In their most transparent state, they’re almost entirely see-through, with darker patches where their eyes and internal organs are. Scientists are interested in glass frogs because they can store most of their blood in one place without suffering from blood clots. The most striking adaptation of glass frogs is their ability to blend in with their surroundings. They have translucent skin and muscles that allow the colour of the leaves they sit on to show through—making them partly invisible to predators. The effect becomes even more impressive when the frogs sleep because they direct almost 90% of their red blood cells to special sacks in their livers where they can’t be seen. Red blood cells absorb a lot of light and are, therefore, very bright and visible, so once hidden, the frog becomes two to three times more transparent. No, keeping glass frogs as pets threatens their survival in the wild. When a wild animal starts gaining popularity as a pet, it encourages more poachers to go out and capture them in the wild, damaging the population and disturbing their habitat. It’s also important to note that wild animals are incredibly dependent on the complex ecosystems they live in. Normal pet owners cannot replicate the exact conditions they need, which means the glass frogs will never be able to thrive in captivity.