Not all of my shifts involved feeding—some days I was in the kitchen helping with the endless pile of washing up, liquidizing fish, preparing the trays. My least favourite job was, undoubtedly, the cleaning. Around 2,000 chicks, all in pens, produce a huge amount of poo. It’s a smelly job and a thankless task. I’m a bit of a perfectionist, but believe me, you are never going to get all that guano off. The white streaks remain, however hard you scrub. For days your hair has that slightly pungent fishy smell! Cleaning cormorant chick poo really isn’t a nice way to spend the afternoon, so it always amazed me just how many people volunteered to do it, shift after shift after shift! The interns at SANCCOB are the ones who deserve the most credit. We volunteers can pick and choose when we want to be scrubbers! The interns have to do it day after day, week after week. After about two months of volunteering, some of the chicks were ready for release—they were strong, at the right weight and their feathers had been checked and proven to be waterproof. Release day is always the best day for anyone involved in rescue and rehabilitation. A day to celebrate, when all the hard work pays off. It was my final day volunteering before I flew to the UK, and I was invited on the release boat. The chicks had been rescued from Robben Island, so that was where they would be released. It was the most gorgeous, sunny, windless day. The chicks had been checked, tagged and boxed and were on the ride to freedom. Once on the island, they were led into a pen to acclimatise. Then the pen door was opened, and they were on their way! How poignant: these chicks were being given their freedom on an island famous for stripping prisoners of theirs. A second chance. I felt incredibly proud as we emptied all the boxes and watched our charges scurry off. Proud of all the volunteers who tirelessly give their time to save these endangered birds, proud of the SANCCOB staff and interns who work so hard and keep going from one desperate crisis to another, whether it’s penguins or cormorant chicks. Proud that there are people who want to help, who want to do the right thing, who have hope in their hearts and empathy in their souls. Proud that there is a selfless team of warriors who are happy to spend weeks of their summer smelling of fish and cormorant poo! -Michaela Strachan Michaela Strachan is a well known TV presenter in the UK. She has been presenting since 1986 on a variety of programmes from The Wide Awake Club to The Hitman And Her, The Really Wild Show to Michaela’s Wild Challenge, Elephant Diaries to Countryfile to Springwatch and many many more. She started off presenting children’s programmes but these days is known as a wildlife presenter and has travelled all over the world filming animals and conservation projects including 'The Great Penguin Rescue'.