As long as it remains legal for skeletons from captive-bred lions to be exported from South Africa, and as long as canned hunt outfitters can find holes in the laws, we have to accept the horrifying reality that many of these cubs are being bred to be killed. With a rising demand for both lion and tiger parts, not only are we seeing more captive-bred cats being slaughtered, but a number of experts believe it will result in an increase in poaching incidents. Wild big cat parts are preferred to those from "farmed” animals, so breeding lions and tigers for their parts only increases the overall demand, further threatening wild populations. When considering the socioeconomics of the illegal global wildlife trade, which is valued at an estimated $10-23 billion USD each year, there is even more incentive to poach wild big cats, as it is far less costly than farming them. Despite the fact that this information is splashed all over the internet, people still come in droves to document their encounters with lion cubs. Perhaps some do not know any better, and others do not care, but if individual nations — including the U.S. — ban cub petting, it will be far easier to help consumers and tourists make informed decisions. If education and legislation can change the way we see these animals, and therefore change our behavior towards them, it could prompt a global movement. Social media and digital publishers will be key tools for raising awareness and promoting advocacy, and while it’s an admittedly idealistic view, it is the best shot we have at re-shaping culture — and wildlife protection policies. Although it would only directly address the U.S. trade, the Big Cat Public Safety Act could influence lawmakers in Asia and Africa, where breeding of captive big cats is also pervasive. For instance, shortly after the U.S. banned the sale of African elephant ivory, Chinese leaders revised their nation’s ivory policies; so by improving our own wildlife protection laws, the U.S. can positively impact the policies and practices in countries grappling with similar conservation challenges. By enacting the Big Cat Public Safety Act, we can establish the credibility needed to help reform management of captive tigers and other big cats around the world. Put simply, if we are going to ask other nations to shut down their tiger and lion farms, we must be first be willing to stop the irresponsible breeding of big cats within our own borders. Fortunately, the Big Cat Public Safety Act has momentum. The bill passed the House Natural Resources Committee in late 2019, and a companion measure has been introduced in the U.S. Senate. If this bill is signed into law, it will be a major victory for conservationists all over the world, so it is critical that the American people educate themselves about this proposed legislation — and encourage their elected officials to support it. -Elisabeth Brentano Elisabeth Brentano is a writer and photographer based in California, but her passion for nature takes her all over the world to produce travel and environmental content. Instagram: @elisabethontheroad