Louis and Brian drove into Paradise, a town all but wiped out by the wildfire, and observed miles upon miles of damage, entire neighborhoods leveled, homes reduced to ash. A stack of over 20 call sheets was their mission for the day with notes detailing emergency hotline calls from residents requesting to have their properties searched for their beloved pets, which were separated from them in the rush to evacuate with precious seconds to spare. Many people were already at work with no way to return home as the fire raced across land at record speed and temperature. Many gave permission for rescuers to break a window or kick in a door, any action necessary to search for their pets. Some call sheets included entry details such as a key under the mat on the back porch or an unlocked living room window. But often upon arrival, Louis and Brian discovered the fire left nothing behind. The team of two wandered through a maze of burned structures, tapping periodically on walls to encourage animals out of hiding and scanning the rubble for any sign of movement. Along the way, they left bowls of water and food in places where animals may gather and for other animals safely "sheltering in place," such as goats and chickens. Inside the homes still standing, testaments of owners' love for their pets were apparent everywhere—from "rescue our pets" stickers on front doors to a massive oil painting of a Persian cat covering a bedroom wall. One of the recurring challenges confronting Louis and Brian was simply being able to find the animal. Cats especially, tramautized by the fire and confused by strangers in their home, evaded rescue by hiding under beds, inside open cupboards and drawers, and behind bookshelves. The responders found themselves on their hands and knees, relying on headlamps and flashlights, cat charming skills, and pure luck to coax the felines from hiding. All in all, they successfully rescued six cats, including a beloved white cat named Booki. All were transported to a handoff point to be reunited with their families. Louis and Brian were the last responders out of the field that day, staying until the search was exhausted and the mission complete. For a community that lost everything quickly and without warning, their pets are often the one piece of hope they can cling to. For Louis and the other responders, there's nothing more rewarding than being able to bring these deeply important members of the family home safe. Shannon Walajtys Director – Disaster Response It’s really about connecting with people--their history, their culture, their pride--that's how you grow the relationships between people and the animals in their community.