Even with decent progress made during the four years of the Action Plan implementation, wildlife trafficking still constitutes one the main threats to the conservation of species, with profoundly negative impacts also for ecosystems stability, and for the national, regional and global security. This December, a public consultation period invites citizens and organisations to provide evidence and share views on the effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, relevance and EU added value of the EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking. The results of the consultation will inform the evaluation and revision of the Action Plan. The Action Plan warrants improvement in several critical areas The European Commission’s current public consultation for the revision of the EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking is a welcome step. IFAW has high hopes that the next version of the Action Plan will address the urgent need for transformative change in the way we interact with wildlife. The critical connection between the health of nature and human health must be reflected in the new Action Plan. Now more than ever, we call upon all stakeholders to help make the next version of the Action Plan an innovative and cutting-edge policy tool: a more inclusive, effective, and accountable plan that delivers greater results on both national and international stages. The new Action Plan must of course also address the lessons learned from the current COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. As a zoonotic disease—like SARS-CoV in 2003—these viruses are transmitted from animals to people. Live animal markets, such as where these pandemics both originated, continue to exist right here in Europe and around the world. The European Commission’s evaluation of the EU Action Plan against Wildlife Trafficking will prepare the ground for a revision of the Action Plan. We invite everyone to participate in this crucial European Commission public consultation; every voice counts! Respond to the questionnaire in three easy steps Note: If you are unable to use the online questionnaire, you can email your feedback to env-cites@ec.europa.eu This public consultation has three parts: (1) about you, (2) public consultation, and (3) expert commentary. The instructions above refer to part 2, as addressed to a ‘non-expert’ general public. If you are also interested in the third part of the European Commission questionnaire—addressed to experts—or if you want to discover more about IFAW’s position for the revision of the Action Plan, please read more here.