You visited the IFAW-supported GRI (Game Rangers International) elephant nursery in Zambia. What did you witness there and was there something that particularly struck you? How did you become interested in conservation? Based on your extensive travels across Africa, what do you think is the most urgent conservation issue facing the African continent? What advice would you give to people eager to contribute to conservation efforts in Africa? What changes regarding African wildlife have you witnessed yourself on the ground over the course of your time in Africa? The worse the poaching and the trophy hunting in an area has been over the decades, the smaller the tusks of the elephants. In some places, herds don’t even have tusks any more. This is due to the fact that the so-called “big-tuskers” are highly sought after. The more ivory, the more money is to be made. As a result, only elephant genes with smaller or no tusks managed to survive the slaughter, simply because they weren’t targeted in the first place.It always saddens me to witness elephant behaviour in highly poached areas. They are terrified of humans, they are disturbed, and what’s worse, they lack the knowledge of survival which was never passed down by older generations. Rhino sightings have become increasingly rare. The Kruger National Park used to be a stronghold for white rhinos, but because of illegal poaching, you really do notice less and less of them around. A positive I’ve noticed is how local communities are successfully deploying methods and ways in which to coexist with the wildlife. Beehives and chili-farms are a great way to keep elephants at bay, for these pachyderms really detest both. Out of all your interactions with animals in Africa over the years, what experience has affected you the most? In Namibia, I once saw an elephant calf caught in a fence. It got separated from its mother when farmers chased the herd away from their crops. Although the calf was rescued, it didn’t survive the separation from its mother in the end; it was just too small. That was absolutely heart breaking. On the flipside, every encounter with wild animals, especially on foot, is such a special experience. It’s not about getting as close as possible to the animal—on the contrary: I prefer when they don’t even know I’m there. But to watch wildlife in its natural habitat always feels like being let in on a secret. It can remind us of our own place in this world; it helps us to come back to ourselves. Which personal lessons have you been able to take away from your time in Africa so far? The most important lesson I’ve learned is that we are a part of nature—not apart from nature. We are living, breathing, feeling creatures, and each and every one of our steps has an impact on this world. I think these days, it is crucial we remember this, and find ways to live alongside the other creatures who are living, breathing, feeling just like us. Which animal that you have encountered during your travels and safaris in Africa is your favourite and why? The African elephant. Yesterday, tomorrow, and today. Elephants are the most intelligent, sentient, fun, loving, caring creatures. They are like humans—only more so. We can learn a lot from the way they raise their young, interact with their environment, mourn their dead. How did you make the decision to swap your secure life in Berlin for the unknown in the African wilderness? I had long wanted to quit my job in Berlin. Life in the capital had me feeling annihilated from nature. I longed to feel the ground beneath my feet again, and most importantly, find a job where I could make a difference. I think these days more and more people are awakening to this realisation. With biodiversity loss, climate change, and deforestation threating our very existence, we’re questioning what it means to be human. I still have a while to go before I live fully in harmony with nature again—I guess we all do—but if there’s one thing I would like to do for the rest of my life, it would be to try and get as close as possible to re-wilding myself, and maybe inspire a few people along the way to do the same.