The fight to save this critically endangered species is far from over. Chronic threats, including ship strikes and entanglement in fishing gear, remain consistent to a population that once numbered in the tens of thousands at the turn of the century. Additionally, there’s been an overall decline in health as exhibited by the shrinking physical size, increased calving intervals, and reduced calf survival. The numbers released today underscore the continued vulnerability of this critically endangered species and the urgent need to rapidly increase comprehensive action on behalf of governments, NGOs, and industry to pull it back from the precipice of extinction. Additionally, the future of the species is put at risk by the small population of reproductive females, recently estimated at 72 individuals. With these low numbers, every female and calf are essential to the long-term recovery of this species. Calving season is quickly approaching, taking place between mid-November and mid-April in the warm waters off the coast of South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida. NOAA suggests that roughly 50 or more calves would need to be born per year for the species to recover. Responsible boating in the right whales southeastern calving grounds is also critical. Tools such as the Whale Alert app can help boaters, beach-goers and bystanders alike sound the alarm when a whale is spotted. The loss of even one individual represents a major blow to the overall recovery of the species as a whole. Take for example, the case of the right whale mother known as Snow Cone. Suffering from chronic entanglement for over 18 months, Snow Cone shocked the scientific community by successfully giving birth while entangled. She was later spotted without her calf, and the latter is likely to have died. Snow Cone herself was recently spotted in dire physical condition with a new entanglement that will very likely end her life. This species teeters on the verge of functional extinction. Nevertheless, there is hope on the horizon. Solutions do indeed exist. From seasonal vessel speed restrictions to regulation of fishing and implementation of on-demand gear---further mortalities are preventable if aggressive, well-targeted risk mitigation measures are expanded immediately. IFAW continues to fight for the North Atlantic right whale, tackling the crisis from all angles by collaborating with other scientists, local fishermen, consumers, and policymakers in both Canada and the United States. Hope is not lost yet, but we are in dire need of urgent action. To help save this species, we ask that you visit our dedicated site, rightwhales.org, and sign up for our action alerts to stay up to date on the recovery of the North Atlantic right whale. We will notify you if and when there are opportunities to act for the protection of this iconic, and imperiled, species. Dr. Sarah Sharp, IFAW Veterinarian Kathleen Collins, IFAW Marine Campaigns Manager Dr. Sarah Sharp Animal Rescue Veterinarian I have always been enthralled with the interconnectedness of all living things & the importance of conserving wild spaces.