what is an ecosystem? what is an example of an ecosystem engineer? On each trip, elephants eat between 140-300 kg (300-400 lbs) of bark, grass and fruit. Elephants disperse seeds as they poop on the move, which fertilizes the land and creates food and habitats for other animals. Many of the animals that share the ecosystem with elephants enjoy access to water created when elephants use their feet, trunks and tusks to make water holes. how do ecosystem engineers protect the environment? As ecosystem engineers, sharks keep oceans healthy. Without them, marine ecosystems can collapse. Without reef sharks to control smaller populations of grouper and snapper, a ripple effect occurs. These fish will overpopulate and overeat their main source of food, which are algae-eating fish. With few algae-eating fish in the ecosystem, algae can take over and destroy coral reefs. what’s the difference between allogenic and autogenic engineers? Allogenic engineers physically change biotic and abiotic materials in their habitats. Autogenic engineers alter their environments by making changes to their own structures. Beavers are an example of an allogenic engineer because when they build a dam, they modify their environment. Building dams can have multiple benefits, too. Some environmentalists call beaver dams “earth’s kidneys” because dams filter out silt, making the downstream water clean. Ponds formed from dams become habitats for fish, ducks, shorebirds, amphibians, reptiles and other wildlife. Trees are autogenic engineers because instead of changing their surroundings, they change themselves. As they mature, their trunks and branches grow. They create habitats for birds, insects, squirrels and other animals. what are keystone species? A keystone species is an organism that is critical to the survival of others in the ecosystem. Remove it and the ecosystem can collapse. Every ecosystem contains keystone species. Wolves are a prime example of what goes wrong when a keystone species is taken out of the picture. Removing wolves from Yellowstone National Park in the United States led to an overabundance of deer. The deer overgrazed the land and consumed plants like aspen. Fewer aspen forced birds and beavers to move to other habitats. In a marine ecosystem, seals are keystone species, but their impact is complex. As top predators, it’s tempting to think that removal of seals via culling could help to boost commercially important prey species. In reality a reduction in seals could cause mid-level predators like squid to flourish and decimate those commercially important mollusks, crustaceans, and fish.