solving the crime becoming a wildlife protector getting the inside scoop on poachers The volunteers immediately started saving animals’ lives. Soon after the training, community monitors reported seeing wire snares in the park to trap big game, like hippos and buffaloes. Thanks to the timely information, rangers removed six snares and arrested a poacher just after he entered the park—before he had a chance to use the spears, panga machete, and wire snares he was carrying. As a result of the positive work of the community monitors, another two were added to the mix, bringing the current number of twelve. dangerous duties On the opposite shore of Lake Edward lies another extraordinary wildlife area—the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s Virunga National Park. It’s Africa’s oldest national park, most biodiverse protected area, and home to around a third of the world’s mountain gorillas. It is also home to several militia groups, fighting a bloody conflict funded by the illegal mining, fishing, lumbering, poaching, and trafficking syndicates they control. Tragically, rare and endangered animals mean big money, whether they are alive— such as the 122 African grey parrots that were confiscated from a trafficker around Uganda/DRC border in Kisoro in April 2022—or killed for bushmeat, skins, tusks, oils, or teeth. A litre of okapi oil, for example, is estimated to fetch up to USD$50,000 on the black market in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. An okapi skin can go for up to USD$10,000. a war economy Virunga National Park calls illegal resource trafficking and poaching “a war economy that is worth an estimated 170 million dollars a year.” And it costs far more than money to fight it. Over 200 of the park’s rangers have been killed in the past 20 years, as have several lawyers and justice officials. They’ve sacrificed their lives to protect the park’s wildlife, ecosystems, and communities. IFAW’s partner IUCN NL has also trained several volunteers here. Called community sensors, they collect data on security, poaching, and other environment-related incidents. IUCN NL shares any intelligence gleaned from their weekly reports with Virunga National Park. Thanks to this and other work, the park’s security forces found and destroyed two militia camps, prevented attacks on park staff, and arrested a notorious elephant-and-hippo poacher who had escaped justice for years. According to Moses, the volunteers say they “are both proud and apprehensive. Proud that they are contributing towards the management of the park, but also worried about their safety.” the big picture IFAW’s efforts to fight poaching and trafficking in the two parks are based on the understanding that although a national border separates them, they are connected by land and Lake Edward, so animals—and sometimes poachers—migrate freely across the border. Moses said: “This gene-flow between animals of the two parks facilitates the future survival of species, which is why it’s so important to protect them.” The project, supported by the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL), has strengthened collaboration between the park managers and built the investigative, operational, and prosecutorial abilities of staff around Queen Elizabeth National Park involved in tackling wildlife crime—including these heroic community volunteers. As a result of that effort and other programs, poaching and trafficking of elephants, pangolins, and hippos has dropped significantly around the park. Although the project officially ended in September 2022, IFAW is still supporting the community monitors in Uganda with equipment and training, quarterly meetings between the two parks to plan, analyse, and share information, and coordinated patrols along the common border. The fight to protect wildlife and surrounding communities is far from over. from the case files… Volunteers’ information has led to several arrests and allowed law enforcement to seize a tremendous number of illegal wildlife products. These are just a few examples.