What are the most common injuries or illnesses you see in koalas? What are some of the rarer injuries you see? Tell us about Friends of the Koala’s rescue, rehab and release process. What was the most remarkable comeback you’ve witnessed in a koala? Is there a particular koala release that really had an impact on you? Marley: Ember had a memorable impact on me and many others. She was a casualty from the 2019-20 summer bushfires. Fortunately, a landowner spotted her walking on the fireground. She was barely two years old. Her fur was black, coated in soot and badly singed. Her lungs were congested from smoke inhalation and she suffered serious burns to her rump and all four paws. After months of ongoing treatment and fattening up, this lucky survivor was ready for release. Ember was transferred to a soft release site where we could monitor her ability to climb and forage—and she passed with flying colours. I was in awe, what a survivor! She has since been released and landowners have recently seen her happy and healthy with a joey in her pouch. What is the main threat facing koalas? Jackie: Habitat loss. As habitat becomes smaller and more fragmented, koalas are forced to travel on foot through urbanised and agricultural areas. Once on the ground they become vulnerable to vehicle strikes and dog attacks. These threats result in elevated stress levels which can cause outbreaks of infectious diseases. How has IFAW helped you to help koalas? Marley: We began working with IFAW to advocate for better protections for koalas. Our relationship has evolved over time and they now sponsor our vet team – allowing us to provide immediate care to sick and injured koalas. IFAW’s support made our dream of having a full-time veterinary team for our koala hospital come true. They first sponsored me – and I became the first member of our now four-person vet team. Through their critical support, it allowed for more consistency around monitoring and care of koalas in rehabilitation. Without IFAW we would not be able to treat koalas immediately onsite. Instead, koalas would have to endure the stress of being transported to local vets or to Currumbin Wildlife Hospital—which is more than two hours away. Because of IFAW, koalas can receive immediate veterinary care and treatment which increases their chances of survival. IFAW also provided critical support and resources during the Black Summer bushfires and deployed IFAW x USC koala detection dog Bear to help us find surviving koalas in the bushfire-ravaged land. They are helping us prepare for future emergencies through an evacuation workshop where they share resources and expertise so we can safely look after our own lives as well as the lives of the koalas we care for when disaster strikes again.