Far from resting on his laurels, however, Davies was just getting started. Under his leadership in the decades ahead, IFAW broadened its focus from saving seals to protecting and conserving whales, elephants, bears, and scores of other species worldwide in more than 40 countries. Davies was skillful in his use of cameras, celebrity glamour, and heart-wrenching animal imagery. When he recruited actors and airline stewardesses to observe the seal killing off the coast of Canada, public support for IFAW—and global opposition to the seal slaughter—exploded. In the late 1990s, Davies also formed Network for Animals, an organization that works in 26 countries and focuses on direct action to help street dogs, donkeys, and cats, and Animal Survival International, which focuses on protecting wild animals against climate change, habitat destruction, and wildlife trade. Reflecting on Davies’ remarkably successful career as a crusader to protect animals around the world, Ramage traces an evolution from radically embattled frontline activist to media-savvy strategist to highly articulate and persuasive political negotiator. “Although he had the full palette of experiences, his genius was to see that politics and policy change is where he could make the biggest difference,” Ramage says. “Decisive change for animals must ultimately involve political change,” Davies wrote. Davies also served as an inspiration to the next generation of animal welfare activists. Sheryl Fink, IFAW’s director of wildlife campaigns in Canada, notes, “The most important lesson I’ve learned from Brian Davies is that of persistence. He understood that campaigns to change attitudes and policies towards animals are not won overnight, nor in a year, but can take decades of consistent effort and perseverance.” For a man who so often got the last word, it seems fitting to conclude with Brian Davies’ own description of his life, written in a letter to supporters that was characteristically dramatic, yet humble. “I am a photographer, documentary filmmaker and the author of many articles and three books all dealing with the seal hunt,” wrote Davies. “I am also a helicopter and fixed-wing pilot and flew the media and parliamentarians to the blood-soaked ice floes (the key to ending the killings) year after year. But most of all I am a dedicated champion of animal welfare causes.”