the drama of 26 minutes the Malawi conservation masterwork The logistics of such an undertaking were almost unfathomable. Critical to the effort in moving animals of this size was faultless collaboration, precise coordination, intense skill, and a seemingly limitless supply of patience, matched perhaps only by the ability to tolerate a sense of overwhelm at the magnitude of the task at hand. The life-saving effort was part of a national conservation initiative to establish viable elephant populations in the country and to maintain healthy habitats in Malawi’s national parks, while simultaneously ensuring the prosperity of local communities living around the parks. returning home During the translocation I learned of one elephant born years earlier in Kasungu, who had been translocated to Liwonde while still a calf. She grew and thrived in Liwonde, but her family had become so large that conflicts with humans were now more commonplace and calls to cull her herd were becoming more frequent. IFAW realized that the time had come for her descendants to return home. The 2022 journey would be a mirror opposite of the trip she once made as a calf. In just 26 minutes, we would bring a new generation back to their ancestral home in Kasungu to thrive once again. To have the opportunity to save such a magnificent animal is truly humbling. And although the 26-minute increments we spent with her over our respective lifetimes are indeed finite, the impact that she and the herd she helped to create, will continue to impact us well into the future. Conservation is a perpetual struggle against a constantly ticking clock, demanding a steadfast commitment from those who choose to engage and bear the mantle of stewardship. This latest translocation—a triumph of 26-minute efforts executed faithfully by committed partners—was a milestone, a significant landmark for conservation efforts in Malawi, an act dedicated to ensuring the long-term conservation of elephants in Kasungu. This feat will not only resonate for generations of elephants to come but it will also resonate emotionally for all those in IFAW’s conservation network fortunate enough to have taken part in the event. When we choose to pursue the business of saving individual animals’ lives, it allows us to save a bit of ourselves in the process—reinforcing our own humanity as well as our own commitment and understanding that we live on a shared planet. So, thank you, to all those generations of elephants, past and present, who have been a part of this journey. And welcome home. Azzedine Downes President & CEO I have never been satisfied with just fighting the good fight. We need to actually make a difference.