Evolving from a whalers’ club to whale protection Reaching the grand old age of 75 should be a reflection point for the IWC. Born in a time where the world barely recognised there were limits to the human plunder of nature, the world the IWC inhabits today is starkly different. While we still have much to learn about whales and the ocean, recent science has shone a light on just how critical the role played by whales is in ocean health. Whales are at the centre of a complex web of life, where they stimulate ocean productivity and the growth of phytoplankton—the ocean’s superhero in absorbing CO2 and combating climate change. Decisions by members at the IWC are slowly beginning to recognise this function, and the implications for the IWC are significant. A body born out of a desire to put a number on how many whales could be killed, must now grapple with the responsibility of overseeing the full recovery of these populations, so they can once again fulfil the vital function they play in ocean ecosystems. It is this premise that must lie at the heart of the IWC’s future. If the IWC wants to remain relevant for another 75 years, it needs to embed itself at the heart of wider global ocean conservation efforts. If it wants to resolve the most pressing threats to whales today, from bycatch in fishing gear to ocean noise, plastic pollution and ship strikes, it must work hand in hand with other international bodies and agreements. And if it wants to remain relevant to all nations, it must focus on the most predominant ‘use’ of whale resources in the world today—the whale watching industry that supports the lives and livelihoods of millions worldwide. A new vision for the next 50 years That is why IFAW and more than 50 other leading marine animal organisations have joined together on the IWC’s 75th birthday to call for its member governments to use the occasion to launch a new vision for the organisation. We want to see the IWC adopt a bold vision for the next 50 years that puts it at the centre of global, regional and local efforts to ensure the full recovery and health of all whale, dolphin and porpoise populations, safeguard their welfare, and maximise their ecological contributions to a healthy ocean. Now that would be a 75th birthday present to savour. Matt Collis Deputy Vice President – Policy Policymakers’ decisions about wildlife have to be seen as an integral part of governance—not just an add-on.