Like wildlife, companion animals require better disaster preparedness. Having a plan in place to evacuate companion animals protects the many pet owners who refuse orders to evacuate without their animals, or re-enter dangerous disaster zones to care for their pets. The lives of owners and their pets are at risk from these behaviours, as are the lives of rescue workers, who also expend valuable time on dealing with the situation. Individuals who own animals, particularly those who live in areas prone to disasters, often see the necessity of having a plan in place for emergencies. They are willing to take the essential precautions, which include writing down a preparedness plan, keeping proper pet identification on hand and preparing an emergency go-bag for their pets. But in Europe, we need to scale up from personal preparedness measures to functional systems across all layers of government. Convincing authorities to add an animal rescue component to their existing crisis plans is no easy task. We understand the reluctance of governments to allocate resources to disaster planning, yet at the same time, we know it’s an investment that will save substantial money when the next disaster hits. Disasters are economic events, and like it or not, animals are crucial economic assets. One study of the aftermath of 2012 flooding in India showed that every dollar spent in early-stage intervention for animals secured US$96 of economic benefit in livestock production. At IFAW, we want to raise awareness of how preparing for disasters can reduce risk for both animals and people. In the end, it comes down to a series of choices that either lead to negative consequences or prevent them. We recently published a report where we outline key measures that policymakers in Europe should take to set the stage for successful disaster response: To keep the need for disaster preparedness planning top-of-mind, IFAW has coined October as Disaster Preparedness Month in Europe, timed to International Disaster Risk Reduction Day on 13 October. As disasters become frequent occurrences, with increasingly devastating impacts, we see a momentum building. People understand the need to consider animals now—not after it’s too late. Now is the time to plan for animals in disaster, so we can set ourselves up for successful rescue and recovery when the next one strikes. We need to set up operational tested systems before the disaster hits. Céline Sissler-Bienvenu Director – European Disaster Response