The car's occupants threw food out of the car and then drove away.                              
																														
											A video showing a wild bear poking its head inside a car during a wildlife park safari is circulating on social media. The video shows the car's occupants allowing the bear to look inside the SUV through a rolled down window and also feeding it food even though doing so is against regulations.

The shocking video, most likely recorded by a tourist in the car behind the black SUV, shows the bear standing on its hind legs against the vehicle. You can then see the car's occupants throw a food item out of the car, as if to divert the bear's attention, and then driving away.
 WATCH: Bear clings to car window & wouldn't let go after tourist opens it against regulation to feed animals at a wildlife zoo in Beijing pic.twitter.com/qtGGvoU4XP- People's Daily,China (@PDChina) July 22, 2017
According to The Beijinger, the video was recorded on Saturday at Badaling Wildlife World in Beijing, the same place a woman was attacked by a tiger last year, after she stepped out of her vehicle during a safari.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comThe wildlife park offers tourists the option to drive their own vehicles through the park, safari-style, as animals roam freely around the area. However, park rules, as stated on their official website, dictate that tourists are not allowed to get down from the car, open windows of their vehicle, and/or throw food at the animals.

Also Read"Disturbing": Viral Video Of Chicken Cake Gets A Thumbs Down From The Internet"Bathroom Slippers": Internet Reacts To Kuwait Store's ₹ 1 Lakh "Sandals"Indian Vlogger Forces Scooter Lift, Travels Ticketless In Bus In China, Internet OutragedThe Beijinger reports that a spokesperson for the park, named Liu Weishi, said that park authorities are yet to confirm the incident. He, however, confirmed that no visitors reported an injury on that day.
 Click for more trending news