The discovery was made by Ms Parveen Farzana Absar, who is pursuing her masters AMU
                                    

                                    
                                
                                
                                                                
                                    
                                        
                                                                                Aligarh: 
                                        Meghalaya is known for magical beauty, rich forests and water bodies. Now the north-eastern Indian state will be a popular station on the global biodiversity map as a new species of almost blind, cave-dwelling, albino crab has been discovered. The discovery was made by Ms Parveen Farzana Absar, who is pursuing her masters in wildlife sciences from Aligarh Muslim University (AMU). The researcher found the albino crab from the darkest corners of a 7.3 km long cave in the east-Jaintia hills of Meghalaya, while she was inspecting various caves for her dissertation under the supervision of Dr Orus Ilyas (Assistant Professor, Department of Wild Life Sciences, AMU), said a statement from the varsity.

After the taxonomy - a branch of science that encompasses the description, identification, nomenclature, and classification of organisms-, Ms Absar has named the crab 'Teretamon Absarum', which she says has been named after her parents Mr Ahsan Absar and Mrs Farzana Absar.

According to Ms Absar, Teretamon Absarum lives in dark crevices of the caves with the adults reaching a tiny size of just 2 centimetres. She also said that this crab has uniquely adapted to the dark environment of caves, which leaves them with almost no vision and colour.

She mentions in her dissertation that Meghalaya is endowed with over 1500 caves along its southern margin due to the presence of a thick limestone.

Ms Absar further states in her thesis that since Meghlayan caves are abode of various life forms from invertebrates to advanced vertebrates, they are perfect study and research areas for Biospeleologists.

Her study was primarily motivated by the fact that there could be a scope of making original contributions as biospeleological or cave biology studies have not been carried out in most of the explored caves.

She added that there was something couspicous about these crabs, while she was submitting the specimen to the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) in Kolkata. Within days it was confirmed by ZSI scientists that Ms Absar's specimen was indeed a new crab species that is now believed to be from the genus Teretamon. Ms Absar's discovery is listed to be published in Zootaxa, the ultimate peer-reviewed science journal for taxonomy. The discovery of Teretamon Absarum will now lead to more explorations of Meghalayan caves by scientists from India and the world.

Related news:

AMU Professor Discovers Molecules To Be Used As Drug For Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria

Aligarh Muslim University Signs MoU With Brooklyn College, New York

AMU Welcomes Supreme Court Decision On PG Medical Quota

Professor Tariq Mansoor Takes Charge As AMU Vice Chancellor

Click here for more Education News                                        
                                        
                                                                                
                                                                                                                    
                                                                        

                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                                                                Show full article
                                                
                                            
                                                
                                                    
                                                
                                            
                                        
                                    
                                
                                

                                                                
                                    
                                        
   
    
      
    
Comments 

                                    
                                
                                                                
                                 
    
      
        
          
            
              
                    Track Education News, 
                        Exam updates , 
                        Campus, 
                        Study Abroad related news live on NDTV.com
                
              
                                
                                                              Follow us:
                                        
                    
                       
                       
                      
                      
                                              
                        
                                                  
                                            
                      
                      
                      
                      
                    
                      
                      
                      
                    
                
              
            
          
                                  
                            
                                        Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Crab Species Teretamon Absarum