Mohan was chained and abused for the past 50 years of his life.New Delhi: 
																														
											Mohan, the world's 'unluckiest elephant', is finally home. The tusker was chained and abused for the past 50 years of his life, Wildlife SOS says.  

The 55-year-old, who was rescued from Uttar Pradesh's Pratapgarh, has finally reached Wildlife SOS's Elephant Care Centre, Mathura on Thursday.

Now in his final home, veterinarians and a dedicated team of experts have charted out a diet and treatment plan for Mohan, who is severely emaciated due to severe malnutrition and neglect.

"His digestive system has been severely compromised by worm infestation. His body is covered in wounds and his liver functioning is severely affected. With treatment equipment along with water baths, pools for hydrotherapy we are hopeful for his speedy recovery," said veterinarian Yaduraj Khadpekar.

"We appreciate the compassionate approach of the Lucknow High Court Bench who recognised the deteriorating condition of the elephant and issued necessary remedial orders to ensure his safety," said animal welfare organisation Wildlife SOS's co-founder Kartick Satyanarayan.

Also ReadShakti Mohan Is Crying Tears Of Joy After Eating Chhole Bhature In Delhi After YearsIndore Sets World Record By Planting 11 Lakh Saplings In A DayAttempt To Murder Case Against Former Andhra Chief Minister Jagan ReddyHe added that the Elephant Conservation and Care Centre in Mathura has necessary facilities to provide this elephant the care that he deserves.

Mohan, along with Raju, another elephant which had been rescued by Wildlife SOS two years back from Allahabad, was caught as a calf and sold at Sonepur Cattle Fair in Bihar.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com"Both Raju and Mohan were used as begging elephants. They were placed outside a temple or roadside, and people would throw money for receiving blessings from the elephant, through a gentle tap by its trunk on the customer's head," Suvidha Bhatnagar from Wildlife SOS told Indo-Asian News Service.