Disha Patani never fails to impress us. Be it her acting skills or love for food, she has won the hearts of many. And now, the actress has revealed her love for animals too. Disha shared a heartwarming video from her recent trip to the Wildlife SOS Elephant Conservation and Care Cente. The clip featured Disha passionately preparing a special smoothie for an elephant, which quickly captured the attention of her followers. In the video, she skillfully cuts fresh watermelon and papaya, placing the juicy fruits inside a bamboo shoot. To enhance the flavour and nutritional value, she adds dates, roasted chickpeas, jaggery, and some leaves to the mix. The sight of Disha feeding the delicious smoothie to an elephant named Suzy evoked a wave of emotions among viewers, resulting in the video going viral. This heartwarming gesture further highlighted Disha Patani's dedication to animal welfare and her influence in promoting compassion towards wildlife.

Also Read: Disha Patani Relished This Yummy Korean Dish And Left Us Craving It Too
Her video received immense love and affection from her followers. There were many comments like, "This video will encourage many young minds to conserve our biodiversity", "So proud of you, Disha" and "nice work for animal welfare". Thousands of users showered love with heart emoticons. But one comment that stole all our attention was by Disha Patani's ex-rumoured boyfriend, Tiger Shroff's mother, Ayesha Shroff. She found Disha's video adorable and wrote "Cutest!". Take a look:View this post on InstagramA post shared by disha patani (paatni) ???? (@dishapatani)

Disha Patani also shared a picture of a cartoon-themed birthday cake in her Instagram Stories, tagging her BFF Mouni Roy. We anticipate that besties already had a pre-birthday celebration of Disha Patani's 31st birthday, which is supposed to be on June 13.
Also Read: Disha Patani's Istanbul Trip Ended With This Delicious Food ComboDisha Patani's Instagram is a constant source of entertainment, but we are eagerly awaiting her upcoming 2024 release, Project K. In this highly anticipated movie, she will be sharing the screen with Prabhas, Deepika Padukone, and Amitabh Bachhan, under the direction of Nag Ashwin. Advertisement
                                             Comments  For the latest food news, health tips and recipes, like us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter and YouTube. 
                                                    Tags:
                                                Disha PataniSmoothieElephantShow full article 
                                        Comments