All across the world, we are tired of traffic jams. But what if you stumbled upon a kind of traffic jam that you liked? That sounds unbelievable, doesn't it? But listen up. Recently, the Internet has been gushing about a "traffic jam" that everyone would love to be a witness to. If that's leaving you confused, let us clarify. We aren't talking about city roads packed with motor vehicles. We are referring to a wildlife video tweeted by Indian Forest Service officer Parveen Kaswan. He posted a clip of an elephant and its calf crossing a forest path in broad daylight. The 21-second video was captioned, "Some traffic jams are good." It has already received over 29,000 views.Some traffic jams are good !! pic.twitter.com/K222RjGaIU— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) March 16, 2022Here's how the Internet reacted to this adorable elephant duo. A Twitter user wrote, "Adorable traffic jam."Adorable traffic jam— Veena Patil (@veena70850867) March 16, 2022Another commented, "I'll love this traffic jam."I'll love this traffic jam ????— JAI BHARAT???????? (@Hindust73231409) March 17, 2022Many were so mesmerised by the view that they called it a "blessing." Here's one such comment:Infact, Its a blessing !!! ❤️❤️— Prasun Bowade ???????????????? (@prasun004) March 16, 2022A person recollected his past encounter with elephants. He wrote, "On my trip to Rajaji Tiger Reserve on February 20, an elephant charged on our group. Calling it a "roller coaster ride", he added, "The driver was quick to react and reversed the car immediately."Infact, Its a blessing !!! ❤️❤️— Prasun Bowade ???????????????? (@prasun004) March 16, 2022Elephants passing through forests is quite a rare sight. A while back, a video went viral that showed a herd of elephants whose path was obstructed by a concrete wall along railway tracks. In order to reach the other side of the forest, they had to walk along the railway tracks. Also ReadRare Wildlife Moment: Old Hyena Gives Itself Up To The LionsElephants Go Out Of Control At Sri Lanka Festival, Pilgrims Flee; 13 InjuredElephant In Zambia Pulls US Tourist Out Of Safari Vehicle, Tramples Her To DeathPromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comClick for more trending news