Forest officials trying to tranquilize a Tiger moving on the roof-top of the Central Institute of Agriculture Engineering on the outskirts of Bhopal on Thursday.Bhopal: 
																														
											A wild tiger captured from a human habitat here was today carted to Panna Tiger Reserve (PTR) much to the surprise of activists who alleged that the reserve had turned deadly for big cats due to presence of canine distemper virus (CDV) at its premises.

The big cat, possibly 3 to 4 years old, was captured from the campus of Central Institute of Agriculture Engineering (CIAE) yesterday. It was today released in an enclosure of PTR in Panna district at around 7.30 AM, forest officials said.

The tiger was first brought to Van Vihar National Park cum Animal Rescue and Rehabilitation Centre here yesterday.

A city-based wildlife activist has, however, said that forest officials have taken the step of shifting the animal to PTR in a hurry and alleged that canine distemper virus (CDV) has invaded the reserve which posses a threat for other tigers.

"MP forest officials in a hurry have shifted the captured tiger to PTR. A tigress at PTR has died of CDV on September 14," Ajay Dube, founder secretary of NGO 'Prayatna' working for tiger conservation, told PTI.

Mr Dube furnished a document of National Referral Centre on Wildlife Health Care (NRCWHC), acquired under Right to Information (RTI) which stated that a feline in PTR was carrying CDV.

He said putting the captured mammal at the PTR was a "blunder".

Also Read2 Tiger Cubs Rescued After Train Accident In Madhya PradeshEmraan Hashmi On His Tiger 3 Co-Star Salman Khan: "It Is Easy To Converse With Him"Exclusive: 1st Videos Of IAF Night-Time Laser-Guided Bomb Attacks On Tiger Hill During Kargil WarThe document stated that NRCWHC on August 28 had informed PTR Deputy Director that sample of a tigress (that died on September 14) was found CDV positive.

Following this, the PTR director had informed State Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) about the presence of CDV in the park on September 8, the documents acquired by Dube, stated.

"If the captured tiger contracts CDV, I am going to drag the forest officials concerned to the court," he said.

Meanwhile, PTR deputy director Anupam Sahay said that though a tigress had died of CDV in the reserve but it now stands free of the virus.

"Yes, a tigress had died of CDV in PTR on September 14.

But there is no need to panic as the reserve now stands free of CDV," Mr Sahay told PTI.