Officials said they have removed 84 tigers so far this week and are transferring the animals to nearby breeding centres. (Representational Image)Bangkok, Thailand: 
																														
											Thai authorities intercepted a monk trying to leave the kingdom's controversial "tiger temple" with skins and fangs on Thursday, officials said, the latest discovery to fuel long-running accusations that the zoo is involved in the illegal wildlife trade.

Dozens of police and park officials have been stationed at the Wat Pha Luang Ta Bua temple in western Kanchanaburi province since Monday after receiving a court order to remove over 100 adult cats from the complex.

For decades the infamous temple has been a popular stop for tourists who pay a steep fee to pet and be photographed with the predators -- which animal rights groups say are heavily sedated.

"Today we found found tigers skins and amulets in a car which was trying to leave a temple," Adisorn Noochdumrong, the deputy director of Thailand's parks department, told AFP.

The discovery comes after authorities found dozens of dead tiger cubs inside a freezer at the temple Wednesday.

Adisorn said a search of several monks' quarters turned up more body parts, bringing Thursday's haul to two full-body tiger skins, around 10 fangs and dozens of smaller pieces of tiger fur.

Animals rights groups and conservationists have long accused the temple of secretly acting as a tiger farm and making huge profits by selling animals and tiger parts on the black market for use in Chinese medicine.

Also ReadThai Temple Tigers With Serious Symptoms To Be Operated: DoctorsThailand's Tiger Tourism Expands Despite Raid On Infamous Tiger TempleThai Police Charge 22 With Wildlife Trafficking At Tiger TempleRepeated efforts to shut down the temple over the years have been delayed and complicated by the fact that secular Thai authorities are often reluctant to intervene in the affairs of the clergy.

The temple has always denied trafficking allegations.

Officials said they have removed 84 tigers so far this week and are transferring the animals to nearby breeding centres.

But police say no charges have been filed against the temple yet, with the case still under investigation.

Previous raids of the temple revealed that dozens of hornbills, jackals and Asian bears were also being kept at the sanctuary without proper permits.

(This story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)