Work is underway to put in place 17 galvanized steel barricades in at least 17 bathing ghats.Kendrapara, Odisha: 
																														
											In a bid to prevent crocodile attack on humans, the forest department has launched a drive to install galvanised steel barricade in bathing ghats in croc-infested rivers in Bhitarkanika area of this district.
     
Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary is home to 1671 adult and juvenile crocs as per the census of these animals conducted on January 16, forest officials said.

Bathing ghats in the water bodies where crocodile attack menace is pronounced have already been brought under bamboo barricade cover, they said.

However, bamboo barricades are not durable and are not long-lasting. Every year, the department is being compelled to refurbish the barricade with new bamboo stumps as the barrier is undergoing wear and tear. Steel barricades would be strong and it will not require periodic repair work, they said.

Work is underway to put in place 17 galvanized steel barricades in at least 17 bathing ghats which are vulnerable to man-animal conflict. Around 34 villages have been identified as croc-infested zones and accordingly the local sarpanchs and GP representatives have been instructed to alert the villagers, they said.

The bathing ghats in these villages have been covered under protective steel barrier and bamboo barricades. People have been told to take bath in the barricaded areas, said Divisional Forest Officer of Rajnagar Mangrove (wildlife) Division, Bimal Prasana Acharya.

Also ReadAustralian Missing Child's Remains Found After Suspected Crocodile AttackWatch: Crocodile Seen On Maharashtra Road After Heavy RainDog-Eating Crocodile That Terrorised Australian Village Killed And Cooked For FeastThe breeding season of estuarine crocodiles would begin very shortly. The reptiles become more itinerant during the period. In search of partners, the species intrude into newer water bodies, thus exposing the people living along the riverside villages.

Residents of riverside villagers have also been asked to stay cautious while venturing into water-bodies. From village to village, public announcement system vans are on the move distributing leaflets and advisories asking people to keep safe distance from croc-infested waterbodies, he said.

"We have sounded an alert as the breeding season of these reptiles is about to begin. It's a precautionary measure to curb man-animal conflict," said the DFO.

The department is prioritising safety of local people. Local residents need to remain watchful and vigilant. People could ensure their own safety by keeping safe distance from crocodile-infested water-bodies. Since past one month, no report of crocodile attack has been reported, he said.