Goldfish can survive for days in oxygen-free water in ice-covered ponds (Representational Image)London: 
																														
											Scientists have uncovered how the goldfish produce alcohol to survive harsh winters beneath frozen lakes, a remarkable ability that makes it one of the most resilient pets under human care.

Humans and most other vertebrate animals die within a few minutes without oxygen. Yet goldfish and their wild relatives, crucian carp, can survive for days, even months, in oxygen-free water at the bottom of ice-covered ponds.

During this time, the fish are able to convert anaerobically produced lactic acid into ethanol, which then diffuses across their gills into the surrounding water and avoids a dangerous build-up of lactic acid in the body.

Scientists at the University of Oslo in Norway and University of Liverpool in the UK found the molecular mechanism behind this highly unusual ability, which is unique among vertebrates and more commonly associated with brewer's yeast.

The team has shown that muscles of goldfish and crucian carp contain not just the usual one, but two sets of the proteins normally used to channel carbohydrates towards their breakdown within a cell's mitochondria - a key step for energy production.

While one set of these proteins appears very similar to that in other species, the second set is strongly activated by the absence of oxygen and shows a mutation that allows channelling of metabolic substrates to ethanol formation outside the mitochondria.

Further genetic analyses suggest that the two sets of proteins arose as part of a whole genome duplication event in a common ancestor of goldfish and crucian carp some eight million years ago.

Also ReadNo Fish, No Wedding: Groom, Relatives Thrash Bride's Family Over Vegetarian FareHow India's Oil And Gas Exploration Offers A $100 Billion Opportunity By 2030Rare Wildlife Moment: Old Hyena Gives Itself Up To The Lions"During their time in oxygen-free water in ice-covered ponds, which can last for several months in their northern European habitat, blood alcohol concentrations in crucian carp can reach more than 50 mg per 100 millilitres, which is above the drink drive limit in these countries," said Michael Berenbrink from the University of Liverpool.

"However, this is still a much better situation than filling up with lactic acid, which is the metabolic end product for other vertebrates, including humans, when devoid of oxygen," said Berenbrink.

"This research emphasises the role of whole genome duplications in the evolution of biological novelty and the adaptation of species to previously inhospitable environments," said Cathrine Elisabeth Fagernes, from the University of Oslo, and lead author of the study published in the journal Scientific Reports.

"The ethanol production allows the crucian carp to be the only fish species surviving and exploiting these harsh environments, thereby avoiding competition and escaping predation by other fish species with which they normally interact in better oxygenated waters," said Fagernes.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com"It's no wonder then that the crucian carp's cousin the goldfish is arguably one of the most resilient pets under human care," she said.

(Except for the headline, this story has not been edited by NDTV staff and is published from a syndicated feed.)Click for more trending news