Activists claim that despite presence of wildlife and rare plants in the area, clearances have been given for the project.Ahmedabad: 
																														
											Jayanti Bhai, a 45-year-old farmer in Dudhal village in Gujarat has been trying to get a new power connection for his fields for the last five years but the wait seems endless.

"I applied in 2011 but I've been told that the list is long and I will have to wait till 2018. I doubt if I will get the connection even by that time," lamented Jayanti Bhai.

But barely a kilometre from Jayanti Bhai's fields and little over a kilometre from the Gir Wildlife Sanctuary, a 400 acre-plot belonging to Wildwoods Resort and Realities already has a power connection despite no commercial activity.

A controversial tourism project is supposed to start at the plot. The project is backed by a company owned by Dakesh Shah and Amol Sheth - business partners of Anar Patel, daughter of Chief Minister Anandiben Patel.

Wildwoods had obtained 250 acres of government land in 2009 allegedly at a throwaway price and later bought a further 150 acres from private farmers in 2011.

But according to activists opposing the project, the project is too close to the eco-sensitive Gir sanctuary. They also claim that despite presence of wildlife and rare plants in the area, clearances have been given for the project.

"The state forest department gave its nod to the project in 2009 without carrying out any on spot inspection," alleged environmental activist Bhagabhai.

Also ReadGujarat Government Announces Partial Rollback Of Fee Hike In 13 GMERS Medical Colleges2 More Children Die Of Suspected Chandipura Virus In Gujarat, Death Count Reaches 8Watch: Hardik Pandya Receives Hero's Welcome In Hometown After T20 World Cup WinIronically, some people are still waiting for clearances. Anirudh Makrana, a resident of Dudhal village, said that he applied for a clearance for a resort barely a kilometre from the Wildwood project site in 2008 but still has not received it.

"First I was told that my site is 1.85 km from the sanctuary. I filed a review that showed it was about 3.85 km from the site but despite that the permission has not been given," said Mr Makrana.

But the government insists the deal and the clearances have been above board. It has filed an affidavit in the high court following a petition challenging the deal.

All necessary clearance has been given following due process of laws and even the valuation of the land has been done as per rates arrived at by duly authorised evaluation committees, it maintains.

Management of Wildwoods has also denied any wrongdoing.

But the statement has barely dispirited an Opposition eager to seize an opportunity to take on the government.