You wouldn't ordinarily see a pet alligator living in a house with humans who are still alive to tell their tale. But one Florida woman is fighting hard to dispel this notion, and keep her pet alligator at home in the process.

Mary Thorn, a pro wrestler from Lakeland, Florida, claims her 15-year-old pet alligator, named Rambo, "isn't just another gator," he's part of her family. 

Rambo is six-feet-long, wears cool jackets, understands sign language, rides ATVs and is apparently potty-trained. "He's human more than he is gator," says Ms Thorn on Facebook, as she appeals for support from friends and family to be allowed to keep her pet with her.

Ms Thorn has been asked by the Florida Wildlife Commission to find a new home, which has at least 2.5 acres of open space, if she wants to keep the reptile. Alligators can grow up to 11-feet in length and weigh nearly half-a-ton in some exceptional cases.

In her post shared on Facebook on March 14, Ms Thorn explains that she had four alligators in the beginning and of them, only Rambo survived. She also mentions that she did treat them as reptiles should be treated, but three of them died due to sun sensitivity and bad immunity. "Rambo is the last one. I never believed that he would live to be 6 feet," she says in her post.

She also claims that the land requirement wouldn't make sense considering Rambo wouldn't be able to survive outside anyway.

Also ReadMeta Removes Restrictions On Trump's Facebook, Instagram AccountsMeta Warns News Block On Facebook For Australia Over Licensing FeesMeta AI Chatbot Is Finally Rolling Out to India, Will Be Powered By Llama 3 AI ModelAbout the safety involved in keeping an alligator at home, Ms Thorn claims she has trained Rambo not to bite or hurt humans. "He loves kids and when kids come around he shuts his mouth really tight so fingers can't go in his mouth," Ms Thorn told Telegraph.
  

Ms Thorn has been posting several pictures of the "friendly" alligator to rake up sympathy within her community for her situation.
     

If you still think this is hard to believe, take a look at the video below. It shows Ms Thorn cuddling with her pet and Rambo waving at the camera.

We'll have to wait and see if Ms Thorn gets to keep Rambo, though.