Kerala: 
																														
											With over 1,60,000 dog bite cases reported in Kerala in one year, the problem of street dogs has preoccupied even political parties in the state.

It was discussed in an all-party meet last week. The state's Congress-led UDF government is being closely watched by animal activists even as they deal with anger and fear among dog bite victims.
  
"It's become a big menace. We will be following the animal birth control technique recommended by experts but the dangerous street dogs have to be culled and it is not against the existing laws," Urban Affairs Minister Manjalamkuzhi Ali said. 

"We are aiming at sterilizing 500 dogs in each district every day," he said.

After a series of discussions, the government has decided to vigorously pursue animal birth control procedures and set up 50 centres across Kerala, which will eventually be increased to 500.

With a street dog population of nearly 2.68 lakhs, veterinary doctors will be hired on contract-basis, to add to the 1,200 government vets trained to sterilize animals. 

Also ReadVideo: Foreigner Claims She Was Denied Entry Into Kerala Temple, Congress' Karti Chidambaram ReactsFreedom Of Press May Not Include Sting Operations In All Cases: Kerala High Court"Operator Was Like God's Messenger": Man Who Was Stuck In Lift For 42 HoursOfficials say dogs assessed to be dangerous will be culled. Supporting that view is PR professional Henna Antony, who was bitten by a dog. "I was walking just few minutes away from home when I was surrounded by a pack of dogs. One bit my chunni and took it away and another bit my toe. I had to take a full course of anti-rabies injections. Street dogs need to be culled," she said.

Animal activists, however, disagree. "It's the friendly dogs that get caught by dog catchers and how is it possible to ensure that they won't get culled instead of the so-called dangerous ones," Animal Welfare Board of India member N Jayasimha said.

Nikita, a volunteer with People For Animals says, "It's the undisposed and untreated garbage all over the streets that attracts this street dogs. Let's deal with the basic issues first, rather than be populists."