Raveena Tandon shared this picture. (Image courtesy:  officialraveenatandon)New Delhi: Raveena Tandon is on a nature trail with her daughter Rasha Thadani. The mother-daughter duo is on an adventurous and thrilling trip, experiencing the beauty of wildlife first-hand. The actress shared some pictures on Instagram giving us a glimpse into their exciting holiday at the Bandhavgarh National Park in Madhya Pradesh. Raveena, who on many occasions has been vocal about her love for nature and wildlife, is seen enjoying the serenity of her surroundings and sharing the experience with her young daughter. She posted the mesmerizing pictures along with the caption, “An amazing time and lovely memories. #bandhavgarhdiaries another early morning and the thrill and excitement continues.” She also added, “Cheers, till another jungle to explore soon.”Take a look at the pictures here.View this post on InstagramA post shared by Raveena Tandon (@officialraveenatandon)On Sunday, the stunning actress shared an amazing video on Instagram of a tiger named Bajrang, crossing the road and heading into the forest. Raveena Tandon expressed her concern over the safety of animals having to cross the road running through the middle of the forest. The actress urged state governments to ensure that the inflow of traffic along forest roads is lessened and asked them to enable the beautiful wildlife to stay protected and safe.  PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comIn the caption along with the video, the actress wrote, “And great days are made of these. Off on a late start, but got lucky as we were entering the park through the #magadhigate. Saw the magnificent #bajrangthetiger leaping over and crossing the road into the other part of the jungle. Luckily these truck drivers were decent enough to respect and give him his space for a safe crossing, a lot of our wildlife isn't that lucky, we lose a lot of our beautiful wildlife in roadkill, the need of the hour for our state governments is to lessen traffic movement on these roads stop cutting through forests and make more overhead wildlife crossings.”Also ReadSonam Bajwa Makes Us See Stars In The Day With Her In A Black Salwar SuitIleana D' Cruz On Staying Away From Films: "Want To Give Time To My Son"Weekend Binge: Sarfira And Other Biopics To Add To WatchlistWatch the thrilling video here:View this post on InstagramA post shared by Raveena Tandon (@officialraveenatandon)Giving us yet another sneak-peek into her jungle adventures, Raveena shared a beautiful selfie of herself looking resplendent and radiant in the sunlight. The actress looked like a professional wildlife photographer from her attire. Dressed in a dark camouflage print t-shirt and black jacket along with a cap, Raveena Tandon looked pretty as she pouted for her selfie. She posted the selfie along with some stunning images she captured of the tiger in the national park.View this post on InstagramA post shared by Raveena Tandon (@officialraveenatandon)Raveena Tandon married film distributor Anil Thadani on February 22, 2004. The couple has three daughters and one son. On the work front, the actress is awaiting the release of her film KGF: Chapter 2 starring Sanjay Dutt and Kannada film star Yash.