The monkey's body was pulled out from an area close to the campus mess by animal rights activists.Vellore: 
																														
											Months after a dog was thrown off a terrace by medical students in Chennai, another horrific case of animal brutality has emerged - this time just over 100 kilometres away, in Vellore. Students of the Christian Medical College tortured and killed a monkey on campus last week and buried the body close to the college mess.

A video, shot by animal rights activists while exhuming the body, shows the hands of the monkey tied behind its back and a telephone cable wrapped around its neck.

"Students say they inserted a sharp object into the animal's genitals," said Antony Rubin, co-opted member of the Animal Welfare Board of India.

The college authorities, on finding out about the incident, immediately suspended four students who were allegedly involved. However, no arrests have been made so far.

The Vellore district police have registered cases both under the Wildlife Protection Act and for killing or maiming cattle. A police officer investigating the case added "We are probing. We understand there is monkey menace on the campus. Around 40 to 50 monkeys have been disturbing hostel inmates in their rooms and mess."

Also ReadMumbai Filmmaker's 'Monkey-Style Protest' Against Animal Welfare BoardCan't Direct People To Celebrate February 14 As 'Cow Hug Day': Delhi Court7 Tamil Nadu Medical Students Suspended After Video Shows Sex HarassmentA college official said "All these students are in their third year. We are probing. We will not tolerate this. There would be tougher action if they are found guilty."

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comThe monkey's body was pulled out on Sunday from an area close to the campus mess by animal rights activists in the presence of police and forest officials, and has been sent for post-mortem.

Animal rights activist Shravan Krishnan, who was also investigating the incident of a dog being thrown off the rooftop in Chennai in June, said, "I've not seen anything more shocking. How can medical students get cold towards animals, and to a baby monkey which is literally like a child in every way."