A zoo official had claimed that the chances of the resident birds contracting the virus were meek.New Delhi: 
																														
											Thousands of exotic migratory birds are set to fly in the capital and surrounding places grappling with Avian influenza, sending alarm bells ringing among wildlife experts who warn that it would be difficult to curb the mess if the visitors contract the virus.

The National Zoological Park, which has been shut down temporarily over the death of 12 water birds due to H5 Avian Influenza, is bracing for the migratory season this winter, wherein thousands of exotic birds from different countries flock to the zoo for breeding.

Wildlife experts claimed that extra caution needed to be taken when exotic birds descend to the zoo amid a bird flu scare.

"Exotic birds transcend from their places of origin to various wetlands of India during the winters. They also cohabit during migratory season, thus making it easy for the infection to spread. Thus extra caution needs to be taken," ecologist Vinay Menon said.

He said it would be difficult to curb the mess if any exotic species contract the virus, thus the "zoo needs to be sanitised thoroughly before the migratory season begins next month."

Zoo curator Riyaz Khan told Press Trust India, "The migratory birds from Siberia and southeast Asia come to Delhi zoo every year for breeding during November-December. The migratory pattern may get disrupted due to climate change, delayed onset of winter or a ban on hunting in countries en route to the city."

As per an informal enquiry conducted by the zoo officials into the recent deaths of 12 water birds, including painted storks, pelicans and ducks, it came to the fore that the "pathogenic strains" of the H5 Avian Influenza might have been carried by local migratory birds.

Also ReadAll You Need To Know About Bird Flu Virus Found In Humans In 2024McDonald's Slashes Breakfast Hours In Australia After Nationwide Egg Shortage From Bird FluMcDonald's Australia Adjusts Breakfast Hours Amid Bird Flu OutbreakA zoo official had claimed that the chances of the resident birds contracting the virus were meek.

"The chances of the migratory birds carrying the pathogenic strains are very likely, though a conclusion cannot be made without analysing specific cases. In the meantime, we are taking all steps for the upcoming migratory season wherein thousands of exotic birds fly to the zoo," Dr Abhijeet Bhawal, Veterinary officer told Press Trust of India.

Delhi Zoo houses around 642 birds of 51 different species (as per 2015 inventory report). Exotic birds like Dabchik, Northen Pintail, Common Teal, Red Lapwing, Coot, Shoveller Duck come to the zoo for breeding.

White Ibis, Night Heron, painted storks, Tailor bird, green pigeon, Blue-throated Crystal, Spot billed ducks are some of the local winter visitors at the park.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comThe zoo, one of the largest in the country, has been hit by a spate of animal deaths in the recent past. It lost 46 spotted deer to rabies in January, while 12 water birds died last week. It also lost its sole King Cobra recently.