The book launched in Rajasthan means to start a discussion on conservation tourism.New Delhi: 
																														
											A book launch in Delhi transpired into a constructive discussion on wildlife conservation, where among other participants, Rajasthan Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje called for a public private partnership to facilitate conservation tourism in the state.

The book highlighted as a unique example the Jawai region of Rajasthan's Pali district, home to an astonishing array of wildlife peacefully co-existing with humans. Illustrated with pictures taken by author Jaisal Singh and Anjali Singh along with the visitors of Jawai, the book means to start a discussion on conservation tourism.

Sitting in the audience, naturalist and writer Valmik Thapar spoke of Jawai as a rare example. "In Jawai, the local communities have protected the leopard. It is the guardian of all their holy sites and temples found on the rocky out crops of the Aravallis. It is an example where there is no government, no forest department and no forest land. It's a unique example in this country.

Reiterating Mr Thapar, Mr Singh said Jawai is a place where people and animals were at peace with each other. "It is rare example where so many people and animals including the big cats coexist in a semi-agrarian landscape. In this stunning 850 million year old granite formation, you have people and animals live without any conflict. That's rare!" he said.

Also ReadVasundhara Raje, Kirodi Lal Meena Skip Assembly As Rajasthan Budget Unveiled"Era Of Loyalty Was Different When...": Vasundhara Raje On Political GrowthWatch: Baby Elephant Gets "Z++ Security" As Family Stays In Forests Of BonaiSouth African conservationist, Dave Warty, one of the panelists, said, "I believe the government, the private sector and the local communities should  partner since that's what is required to safeguard India's wildlife in the future. We have seen how this model has worked successfully in Africa."

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comFormer Deutsche Bank co-CEO, Anshu Jain also took part in the discussion.

Reflecting on the issue as a priority of Rajasthan government, Ms Raje said the development of conservation tourism must be explored further.