The pecock is the national bird of India (Representational Image)New Delhi: 
																														
											An injured peacock, with a severe gash on its right wing, was found at the official residence of Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment- Thaawar Chand Gehlot. The peacock was rescued by Wildlife SOS after security personnel at the residence noticed the distressed peacock in the garden and contacted them.

"The peacock was struggling to move and appeared to be in considerable amount of pain," said Gourav Singh, a staff personnel at the residence.

According to the Wildlife SOS, a two-member team reached the garden and carefully transferred the bird to a rescue vehicle. The peacock is currently undergoing veterinary treatment and will be released back into its natural habitat once it has recovered.

 "I thank the staff for alerting Wildlife SOS to this emergency. This indicates a high level of compassion on their part and sets an example for many others to follow," said Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder & CEO of Wildlife SOS.

Peacocks - the national bird of India - are not an uncommon sight in the capital. In August this year, the Delhi High Court had asked the government to protect peacocks in the national capital region. "We have seen peacocks on the roads of Delhi ... They are seen without food," judges of the Delhi High Court said in August. "You have to protect the birds and animals roaming on roads. We have seen peacocks on the roads of Delhi's Lutyens' zone. They are seen without food. Nothing is being done by the authorities."

Also ReadMore Than 30 Displaced Animals Rescued Amid Rains In Mumbai, Nearby AreasAssam Floods: 114 Wild Animals Dead In Kaziranga National Park, 95 Rescued28 Peacock Deaths In Delhi Since June 4 Amid Extreme HeatOnly a few days ago, an injured monkey was rescued from the Rashtrapati Bhavan by Wildlife SOS.  

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.com(With PTI Inputs)

 Click for more trending news