This combination picture of two photographs show the landmark India Gate monument before (L) and after (R) the lights were turned off to mark Earth Hour in New Delhi on March 29, 2014. (AFP photo)New Delhi: Seeking to spread the message of energy conservation, on Saturday, Delhiites will join a billion people in over 6,000 cities across the globe to observe the Earth Hour by switching off their electrical appliances between 8.30 pm and 9.30 pm.

Power discoms in the city are gearing up for 9th edition of the event by sending mobile text messages and memos to individual households, RWAs, business houses and communities urging them to switch off all lights for an hour to conserve energy.

The discom appeals to its customers to unequivocally support the event and voluntarily switch off their non-essential electricity on the March 28 for an hour starting 8:30 pm.

Discom is trying to reach out to maximum number of people through various platforms. BSES' monthly newsletter goes to over 34 lakhs customers and the information is also available on their website.

"We are sending SMSes to over 10 lakh customers to participate in the Earth Hour," a BSES official said.

Also ReadAdmission Deadline Extended For EWS And Special Needs Children In Delhi Schools'Hashim Baba', Gangster Behind Delhi Hospital Shooting, Faces 16 CasesCongress To Go Solo In Delhi Assembly Polls: State Chief To Party Workers"As a responsible organisation, BSES is committed to reduce green house emissions and the impact of global warming. We should all strive for the day, when we don't need an Earth Hour. BSES and its consumers are once again gearing up to take up the challenge and take the Earth Hour event to greater heights," a BSES spokesperson, said in a press release.

Earth Hour is an annual international event created by the WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature/World Wildlife Fund), that urges households and business establishments across the world to turn off their non-essential lights and electrical appliances for an hour at the appointed time to raise awareness towards the need to take action on climate change.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comLast year, Delhi saved around 250 MW (175 MW in BSES area).

On their part, BRPL and BYPL will also switch off all non-essential lights at their over 400 offices, spread across an area of around 950 sq kms, during the appointed hour.