Five jungle cat cubs were reunited with their mother.Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer Parveen Kaswan often shares informational posts on forests, agriculture and animals. In a Twitter thread on Wednesday, he shared a clip from the rescue operation of five jungle cat cubs from an agricultural farm. Mr Kaswan did not disclose the location of the rescue - as is his policy in most cases to avoid undue human interference. The Jungle Cat (Felis chaus) is a protected species, according to the IFS officer.Sharing a video of the cubs, he wrote: “And all the five jungle cat cubs were saved. Found by farmers during harvesting in a field.” In the clip, we see a close-up of one of the cubs. Then, we are shown the five cubs lying on a field. Farmers and local people are seen making arrangements for the cubs.And all the five jungle cat cubs were saved. Found by farmers during harvesting in a field. pic.twitter.com/OvKeUNNnJB— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021Mr Kaswan followed it up with more information. He wrote that the cubs were too small to survive without their mother, so the villagers decided to help reunite the family. The land was “cordoned off” for this purpose, and the “villagers decided to stop harvesting for the time being”.All were so small that they could not have been survive without mother.

So we decided to reunite them with mother.

The area was cordoned off. Where they were found villagers decided to stop harvesting for the time being.— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021“Camera traps were established in the area,” wrote Mr Kaswan. Villagers and rescue teams were also stationed near the location at night.Camera traps were established in the area carefully.

Teams and villagers stationed for the night near the location. So that they can be monitored and no disturbance occur. pic.twitter.com/WMSPvriQXM— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021In the next tweet, he shared an image of the mother cat. Mr Kaswan stated that at night the mother came and took all the cubs into the forest. “She started this process in evening and by middle of the night shifted all her cubs to the forest. Without any disturbance,” he added in the caption.In night mother came and took all the cubs to Forest. She started this process in evening and by middle of the night shifted all her cubs to the forest. Without any disturbance. Today. pic.twitter.com/FCRRR3XvsF— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021Farmers temporarily stopped harvesting in the area where the cubs were found. By 2 pm things were in place, resulting in an “undisturbed” location for the remaining day and entire night, said Mr Kaswan in the next thread of the tweet.People were convinced not to do harvesting for that patch. For the time being. All agreed and supported very well. By 2 PM all things were at place. So undisturbed place was provided for remaining day and whole night. pic.twitter.com/BPSg0oKjZi— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021Mr Kaswan ended his Twitter thread on a funny note by mentioning that the mother had to so “some overtime” while trying to shift the cubs to the forest, but she managed to do so within a few hours.Mother did some overtime but shifted all the cubs to Forest within few hours.

‘Jungle Cat' (Felis chaus) is a protected species. pic.twitter.com/bm6BPJtCHT— Parveen Kaswan, IFS (@ParveenKaswan) November 10, 2021At the time of writing, the video clip had been viewed over 30,000 times, and liked by more than 1,600 users. A user commented that the incident revealed a “beautiful bonding between our farmers and officials”.How a beautiful bonding between our farmers and officials ! And the result is all the cute lives secure & safe. ????????— Kamalakanta Mohakud???????? (@kamalakanta_Ind) November 10, 2021Another user was grateful to the rescue team and every person who was involved in dealing with the situation.Thank you very much ???? ???? ????
Thanks to the rescue team and all the people who worked with them.????????????????????????????— pipichan (@myunpipilove) November 10, 2021One user called it “lovely work”.Lovely work. You made my best day— Dev Kumhar (@DevKumhar) November 10, 2021Another user was relieved to see the cubs reunited with their mother. The user commented, “Happy reunion.”Lovely work. You made my best day— Dev Kumhar (@DevKumhar) November 10, 2021According to Mr Kaswan, Jungle Cat, or Felis chaus, is a protected species.Also ReadBureaucrat Shares Cub's Pic After Sariska's Tiger Population Goes Up To 40Video: Adult Bison Tosses Man Into Air After Being ProvokedWatch: Leopard And Bear Spotted Roaming In Ooty Residential AreaPromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comClick for more trending news