The man filmed in the attack is believed to be the owner of the park.                              
																														
											A horrifying video, definitely not for the faint-hearted, shows the scary moment a man was mauled by a lion at a wildlife park. The video circulating on social media shows the man being attacked and dragged by the lion after he walked into its enclosure. The man is reportedly in critical condition after the brutal attack.

According to DailyMail, the video was recorded on April 28 at the Marakele Predator Park in South Africa. The video shows the man walking dangerously close to the big cat inside its enclosure.

Believed to be the owner of the park, he got inside the enclosure to investigate a strange smell, reports BBC.

The lion was facing away from the man and walking in the opposite direction at first. However, the man is suddenly seen running away from the lion who chases after the man. While the man tries to get out of the enclosure, the lion, too quick for him, grabs and drags him away.

Also Read"Completely Blank...": Rohit Sharma Reveals Turning Point For India In T20 World Cup FinalCourt Says Some Games Fixed During India vs South Africa Series In 2000After Gautam Gambhir Appointment, His Rumoured Kolkata Knight Riders Replacement Shares ThoughtsAs onlookers are heard screaming and begging for help, the lion stops and then tries to drag the man further inside the enclosure. It's only after some shots are fired that the lion leaves the man and runs towards a different part of the enclosure.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comThe man is currently in critical condition, reports The Sun. The lion has reportedly been put down after the terrifying attack.

Almost two months ago, a similar lion attack was filmed in Saudi Arabia's Jeddah. As part of the Jeddah Spring Festival, the six-month-old lion cub was kept inside a cage and children were allowed to "play" with it. Mobile phone footage captured shows the cub cornering a little girl before pinning her to the ground. Thankfully, the animal trainer managed to pull the beast off the little girl and she escaped with just a few cuts and bruises.Click for more trending news