In this photograph taken on July 6, 2015 Indonesian police inspect a baby eagle that was seized during a raid against a suspect who was selling eagles on Facebook in Surabaya city on July 8, 2015. (Agence France-Presse)Jakarta: 
																														
											Indonesian police posing as wildlife buyers have arrested a suspected trafficker for selling protected eagles on Facebook, an official said today.

Acting on a tip-off, authorities in Indonesia's second-largest city of Surabaya swooped on the man's home on Monday, where they discovered 14 eagles in cages and cardboard boxes, provincial police force spokesman Argo Yuwono told AFP.

Among the various species were white-bellied sea eagles and spotted kestrels, as well as five baby eaglets, Yuwono said.

"Before arresting him, we went undercover and acted as buyers to confirm he was selling the birds on Facebook," he said.

"Eagles are protected animals in Indonesia. Selling these birds is illegal and a serious crime."

It's the first known case in Indonesia of wildlife being sold through the popular social networking site, the spokesman said.

Also ReadIndia, Indonesia, Australia Resolve To Work Towards Free Indo-PacificTo Enjoy "Days Of Peace" In Indonesia Like Tanishaa Mukerji, Visit These 5 Scenic IslandsIndonesia Safari Park Visitor Throws Plastic Bag In Hippo's Mouth, Sparks OutragePolice claim the man had been running his online operation for six months, selling eaglets for 750,000 rupiah ($56) and fully-grown birds for up to five million rupiah each.

Yuwono said four of the eaglets had since died from illness, but the other birds had been sent to Indonesia's natural resources conservation office, which deals with wildlife-trafficking cases.

If found guilty of possessing and selling the protected animals, the trafficker could face five years prison and 100 million rupiah in fines.

Indonesian police in May arrested a suspected wildlife smuggler after discovering nearly two dozen live birds, mostly yellow-crested cockatoos, jammed alive inside plastic water bottles in his luggage.