Filr Photo IIT-Delhi.New Delhi: 
																														
											IIT-Delhi is all fired up about its various 'green initiatives', ranging from organic waste management, paper recycling, car-pooling and wildlife conservation.

"Our team 'Sustainable IIT-D' has carried out a range of eco-friendly initiatives on the campus. We have reduced our hostel mess wastage up to 50 per cent. A bird audit was conducted and we maintain an online portal detailing the biodiversity here.

"We are currently working on a car pooling project and planning to launch it formally next month," Archit Raj, Project Lead, Sustainable IIT-D told PTI.

Planning to take the 'green message' forward, the IIT Delhi students have refused to hand over the waste generated on the campus to the usual garbage pickers.

"Usually the waste generated here is dumped at the Okhla landfill. But we have decided to treat the waste here itself. We, with the help of NGO Green Bandhu, convert the waste into organic waste, which is later used as manure," he said.

The 'Sustainable IIT-D' initiative has also forayed into paper and plastic recycling. While students are offered discounts if they bring back their eco-friendly cups, PET bottles are being converted into 'eco-designs'.

"We ran the 'Take you cup campaign', wherein the students who recycle their cups, are given 'green incentives'. You have to take your eco-friendly cups to the nearest food outlet on the campus to get your discount," Siddharth Rajan, project coordinator said.

"We are also working extensively on paper recycling. Students collect posters from the campus and use the non-used side of it. The idea is to minimize wastage. In another interesting initiative, we are converting used PET bottles into a renewable source of energy. The bottles are converted into bulbs, providing 750 W of power. These have been installed in the slum areas," he said.

As part of the 'eco-design' or sustainable architecture, Rajan said the PET bottles are also converted into 'PET bottle chairs'."We have installed such chairs at many places on the campus," he said.

Also ReadHimachal Chief Minister Urges PM Modi To Support State's Green InitiativesIIT JAM 2025: Joint Admission Test To Be Held On February 2, Check DetailsWatch: Baby Elephant Gets "Z++ Security" As Family Stays In Forests Of BonaiTalking about the much successful 'car pooling' drive in the campus, Archit Raj said that the institute has started an online portal for the exercise, wherein the students and faculty can offer a ride or avail one by registering on the IIT-D website.

"We started the car polling drive as a pilot project and it has become a hit with the students and faculty. We feel that apart from being an important step towards environment protection, car pooling can also be an excellent socialization tool. We will launch the project officially next month," Mr Raj said.

Not leaving behind the flora and fauna, the students undertake regular nature walks and wildlife exploration trips.

A bird audit is an added attraction.

"IIT-D boasts of rich biodiversity. The bird audit on the campus was initiated by the bird enthusiasts here. We have independently counted 56 varieties of birds. The number of those counted by experts stands much higher. Migratory birds like Indian Golden Oriole, Rosy Starling, Wagtail, Sandpiper and Black Redstart have also been spotted here," the Project Lead said.

"The nature walk, on the other hand, is conducted by Professor Surya Prakash of School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU). The objective is to make students aware about the diverse wildlife species and their dwindling habitat. We have covered almost all the Delhi locations and also made our stop at Jim Corbett, Nainital etc," he added.

As the future engineers of our nation continue with the noble cause, they only have one message for the people.

"Be the green change you want to see, however small it may be."