Activists battling illegal mining in the area claim it has increased of late.Ahmedabad: 
																														
											The Gir wildlife sanctuary, home to the rare Asiatic lion, is facing threats from illegal mining. Five years after RTI activist Amit Jethwa, who was spearheading the fight against illegal mining was shot dead, activity in and around the sanctuary is continuing unchecked, NDTV has found.

Mining is not allowed within 10 km of the reserve, since it can upset the fragile ecology of the area.

But at Surva village in the Gir Somnath region, barely 2 km from the sanctuary, an NDTV team heard deafeaning sounds of heavy equipment. A group of labourers, seen mining limestone, feigned ignorance about who owned the quarry.

But they stopped work when a man, who came on a bike, asked them to.

Questioned by NDTV, the man refused to give his identity, claiming he was a buyer looking for a limestone consignment.

At Aankalwada village near the protected sanctuary, no labourers could be seen, but there were tell-tale signs of mining.

Also ReadAmit Shah, Bhupendra Patel Offer Prayers To Lord Jagannath In AhmedabadCop Mowed Down By Tractor Carrying Illegally Mined Gravel In Rajasthan"Ahmedabad Smart City": Congress Takes A Swipe After City Road Caves InA local environmentalist said the operators have an excellent information network and the labourers fled before NDTV could reach, leaving behind heavy equipment and their food.

Activists battling illegal mining in the area claim it has increased of late.

"In the last five to six months, there has been a spurt in mining, which has gone unhindered. We have informed various government departments repeatedly, but no action has been taken," said activist Razzak Baloch.

The geology department, responsible for keeping tab on mining, admits it is not allowed within a 10-km radius of the reserve and promised a probe.

"As per a high court order, no new licences can be given for mining within 10 km... since this has been brought to our notice, we will look into it," said Ravi Mistry of Veraval geology department.