Kaziranga National Park - a world heritage site famous for one-horned RhinosGuwahati, Assam: Assam Forest Minister Atuwa Munda allegedly entered the Kaziranga National Park - a world heritage site famous for one-horned rhinos - with a firearm dangling from his waist, "violating" the wildlife act.

Mr Munda, accompanied by top forest officials, reportedly went to the park on Friday at around 10 pm and was surrounded by forest guards besides his personal bodyguards provided by Assam Police.

This action of the minister reportedly drew flak from conservationists and wildlife lovers.

Wildlife NGO Natures Beckon condemned the incident, saying "the minister has not only failed to protect the rhinos but also failed to respect the provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act."

"The minister's move to enter the park with a firearm is a kind of political gimmick to impress people and cover-up their (the government's) failures," said Soumyadeep Datta of Natures Beckon.

He said the act clearly stated that except forest officials and guards, no one can enter wildlife sanctuaries or national parks with a firearm.

Also Read"Real-life Harry Potter Snake" Found In Assam, Himanta Sarma Shares Pics6 Rhinos Among 137 Animals Dead In Kaziranga National Park Amid Assam FloodsAssam Floods: 114 Wild Animals Dead In Kaziranga National Park, 95 RescuedThe minister's sudden visit to the park came after poachers on Thursday night killed a female rhino at the Kohora range of the park and took away its horn.

Park director MK Yadav, however, refrained from making a statement about his superior. "I cannot comment on my superior. There is no violation of any act," Indo-Asian News Services (IANS) quoted him saying.

The forest minister could not be contacted for comment.

PromotedListen to the latest songs, only on JioSaavn.comHowever, a section of park officials reportedly said the minister had violated guidelines under the act.

"We do not allow police force to enter the park with guns. Atuwa Munda is a minister and not a forest official who should be allowed to enter the park with a gun," a park official told IANS on the condition of anonymity.