San Francisco, April 3, 2024 – WildAid, the trailblazing wildlife conservation nonprofit committed to reshaping human behavior to protect wildlife and vital habitats, is delighted to announce its dynamic leadership team poised to spearhead growth and amplify its influence. Leading the charge is Meaghan Brosnan, Chief Executive Officer , a renowned expert in global marine enforcement with over two decades of experience combatting illegal fishing and empowering coastal communities to manage priority marine areas sustainably. Meaghan, who served in the U.S. Coast Guard for 20 years and retired as a Commander, joined WildAid in 2017 as Marine Program Director and became Chief Operating Officer in 2023. John Baker, President and Chief Program Officer , brings over thirty years of experience as a veteran wildlife conservation executive. He excels in program strategy, international program management, media and communications, fundraising, and impact evaluation. John joined WildAid in 2013 and has led its powerful communications campaigns in China, Southeast Asia, and Africa to reduce demand for illegal wildlife products, as well as overseeing significant growth in the Marine and Climate programs. Completing the trio is Leila Melody , Chief Financial and Administrative Officer, a seasoned executive with over twenty years of experience in strategic financial management, organizational management, and business administration. As the CFO for the past two years, she has been responsible for all aspects of financial management for WildAid’s global programs, and will be adding oversight for human resources, information technology, legal, and other corporate matters. “Conservation is a team sport, and I’m humbled to lead the incredible team that makes WildAid’s impact a reality, including our staff and our partners,” Brosnan said. “Our work spans five continents, and the oceans in between them, and I look forward to continuing to serve our mission which has evolved to also include critical threats to wildlife such as climate change and habitat destruction.” Building on the tremendous momentum after WildAid’s Marine Program won Prince William’s prestigious Earthshot prize in November 2023, this formidable team, united by experience, passion, and dedication, is set to lead WildAid into a new era of impact. Their collective vision and proven track record position them as catalysts for positive change. “We are proud and excited to elevate Meaghan Brosnan, John Baker, and Leila Melody to lead WildAid’s Executive Team,” said Alan Chung, WildAid Board Chairman. “Their global leadership and experience are integral to our mission to inspire and empower the world to protect wildlife and vital habitats from critical threats. We are confident that their devotion, enthusiasm, and expertise will guide us toward meeting our ambitious goals.” For more information, please contact: press@wildaid.org