China recently removed the species from the official traditional Chinese medicines list and raised its protected status to the highest level on par with the giant panda. This has become the unofficial year of the pangolin – the shy and reclusive creatures have harnessed global attention after being identified as a possible link in the coronavirus pandemic. The new focus may end up being a relative blessing for conservationists who for years have urged greater protection for the endangered species. In 2017, the status of all eight species of pangolins was upgraded in the UN Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (Cites), barring international trade. They remain one of the world’s most heavily trafficked mammals, driven by demand for its meat, considered a delicacy in parts of Asia, and its keratin scales, an ingredient in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Pangolin scales, made with protein similar to human hair and nails, are believed to cure arthritis and cancer among other ailments, without any scientific evidence. China recently removed pangolins from the official TCM list and raised its protected status to the highest level, on par with the giant panda. Hunting, killing, smuggling or trading pangolins now carries a 10-year prison sentence. It also announced it will strictly enforce its current ban on live wildlife markets and has signalled it will take steps to end consumption of wildlife. There are only small numbers of pangolins left in the wild in China but the government plans to bring back populations with habitat restoration. The increased protections were encouraging signs, said WildAid CEO Peter Knights, during a webinar on pangolins this week, with chief program officer, John Baker, and hosted by Amy Tan, wildlife advocate and author of the best-selling novel, The Joy Luck Club. “Hopefully with that class-one classification, there will be increased enforcement effort,” Mr Knights said. “The panda is a great success story. If [China] takes it as seriously as they did with the panda, then things should be looking up for the pangolin finally.” Pangolin populations have been decimated by the illegal wildlife trade (IWT) in their natural habitats in Africa and Asia. All eight species, four found on each continent, are threatened with extinction. The number of pangolins killed every year is hard to quantify. Conservationists estimate 200,000 pangolins annually but that is likely to be an underestimate. Mr Baker said: “We’ve seen in the last few months major shipments of pangolin scales coming out of central and west Africa, mostly through Nigeria. These amount to eight tonnes per shipment. There were multiple shipments interdicted in Singapore, Vietnam and Hong Kong on their way into China. When you tally up the number of pangolins, it’s unsustainable, to say the least.” As growing populations push further into diverse ecosystems for housing and industry, the natural habitats of pangolins are being lost. Poaching is also a grave threat. Pangolins, which are roughly the size of a small dog, move slowly and curl into a protective ball when threatened. Their scales can inflict wounds on predators such as big cats but offer little protection against poachers, with tracker dogs and weapons, who beat them and stuff them into bags. Some early evidence suggests that pangolins, and bats, were a source of the coronavirus. Research has found bats and pangolins are hosts of coronaviruses in general. In total, almost three-quarters of emerging infectious diseases come from wild animals. Mr Knights said: “It seems very likely that the bats are the primary source of Covid-19, as they were with SARS and MERS and some other diseases.” He said that the pangolins’s role was “more questionable”. “We do know that it could have been pangolins this time and it could definitely be pangolins the next time. So I think regardless of that, we need to act to stop these live animal markets and to curtail the risky bushmeat trade in some of these species.” Initial reports suggested that Covid-19 originated in Wuhan, China. Of the initial 41 people admitted to hospital with the coronavirus in the city, 27 patients had been exposed to Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, according to a study in medical journal The Lancet. However in the earliest case, the patient had no reported link with Huanan market and, in total, 13 of the 41 cases had no association. A section of Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market reportedly sold 30 species of animals including pangolins according to The Guardian. China closed the market in January. Scientists may never find the exact origins of Covid-19 (and one new report states there is “zero evidence“ that it came from a laboratory). On the whole, researchers agree that the most plausible explanation is that the virus made the jump from an animal to humans in a “zoonotic spillover” event. “If animals are in the wild and not coming into close contact with human beings, then there isn’t really a risk,” Mr Knights said. “It’s when we confine them, and particularly when we stress them out by bringing many species together, overcrowding them and having nocturnal animals in bright lights. All of these things bring out what could be latent diseases.” At wildlife markets, animals are often malnourished and dehydrated. “The animals become infected and they start shedding the disease. Their proximity to human beings is then the next impact. If you bring them into a major city, like Wuhan, the chances of it spreading like wildfire are much greater than it is in the bush. All these are factors which make the likelihood of a disease pandemic more likely.” To have the best chance at preventing the next pandemic, pointing the finger is entirely detrimental, he said, and instead countries needed to work together.