Gustavo Manrique, Minister of Environment, Water, and Ecological Transition stated, “ ” This new marine reserve will also serve as a living laboratory to conduct scientific research, which will allow a deeper understanding of the biosphere. The expansion of the GMR will involve the repurchase of Ecuadorian debt bonds by three large international entities, which would be exchanged for blue/conservation bonds . This type of transaction entails forgiving part of a developing nation’s debt in exchange for local investment in conservation programs. It is expected to be the largest debt swap that has taken place in Ecuador. The announcement was quickly followed by additional commitments from the Presidents of Costa Rica, Panama, and Columbia to further protect the region as a biodiversity hotspot and as a migratory route to allow safe passage for iconic marine species. This transnational marine protected area (MPA) will link the four countries EEZs with 500,000 sq km (200,000 sq mi) of protected waters. The ‘Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor’ (CMAR) is an initiative to properly manage the marine and coastal resources found between the Galapagos (Ecuador), Cocos (Costa Rica), Malpelo (Colombia), and Coiba (Panama) islands. Map 2: , known as the Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor in English. Red dashes show country’s EEZs and the dark blue represents the new mega-MPA. Manuel Bravo, Latin America Regional Director for WildAid Marine said, He emphasized, According to Ecuador’s t he four countries will have the support of the Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) and approval of a technical cooperation of $1 million for the management, conservation, and sustainable use of CMAR. Minister Manrique told The Guardian Despite the creation of new global MPAs every year, the fact remains that many countries are ill equipped and under-resourced to properly manage and enforce their MPAs. Often times, the critical step from declaration to implementation falls short – resulting in limited conservation benefits and parks in name only. WildAid Marine is working with government, nonprofit, and community partners around the world to strengthen protection and enforcement of MPAs .” said Meaghan Brosnan, Director of WildAid’s Marine Program. Not only is this important for threatened marine wildlife, but also to sustain essential economic drivers such as tourism, fishing, and maritime transport – which generates close to USD $3 billion annually. The leadership demonstrated by this Latin American partnership sets the stage to achieve the global goal of protecting .