Celebrate With #NoSharkFin As WildAid has long-recognized that urgent action is needed in Thailand before consumer demand escalates further, we launched our “#NoSharkFin” initiative July 2018 with Pong as the campaign ambassador. His billboards and PSAs, which can be seen all over Bangkok, call on the public to forgo shark fin at all celebratory events, such as weddings, family celebrations and business meetings. According to WildAid’s survey findings, more than half (57%) of urban Thais have eaten shark fin and, even more alarmingly, 61% plan to consume it again in the future. Survey respondents said they consumed shark fin most often at celebratory events such as weddings (72%), family meals at restaurants (61%) and business meetings (47%) “Since, the campaign launch we have seen that the Thai public are increasingly aware of the threats facing sharks which is why the news of a government-sponsored dinner serving shark fin was received with considerable criticism on social media platforms,” said John Baker, Chief Program Officer at WildAid. “As a country with such a rich marine heritage, which supports important coastal resources and tourism, we hope that Thailand can become a leader in shark protection and ocean conservation.” The shark fin trade is depleting shark populations, putting many species at risk of extinction, while also causing environmental degradation and fisheries collapse. An estimated 100 million sharks are killed every year and fins from up to 73 million end up in shark fin soup. Consumer Demand Reduction Works In 2013, the People’s Republic of China banned shark fin soup at official banquets nationwide. That year, the Hong Kong SAR government also followed suit with a complete ban on the consumption of shark fin by all government officials and civil servants. Various media and trade sources estimate around a 50-70% reduction in China due to our campaign and subsequent government bans on shark fin at state banquets. This is further substantiated by reports of reductions of up to 80% in fin prices at the dock compared to 2007 levels, leading to decreased fishing efforts for sharks. Estimated wholesale shark fin sales in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou also declined by 81% from 2010 to 2014. Unsustainable Fisheries Threaten Ocean Health Shark fin consumption not only is pushing shark species to the brink of extinction, but destroys marine biodiversity in the process. They function as the immune system of the ocean, and like white blood cells they combat diseases by feeding on dead, weak, or sick animals, strengthening the gene pool by keeping lower trophic level populations healthy and in balance. “Sharks are vital to the balance of the ocean’s ecosystem and we need to realize that before it’s too late,” said Pong. ”I urge everyone to say no to shark fin and all shark-related menus, and help protect the oceans by making no shark fin the new norm for all occasions.”