WildAid has launched a new campaign in China to inspire action on simple steps we can all take to reduce our carbon footprint through daily choices around meals. This new “action starts the movement” campaign is a partnership between WildAid and the China Green Carbon Foundation and is supported by UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). WildAid has launched a new campaign in China to inspire action on simple steps we can all take to reduce our carbon footprint through daily choices around meals. This new “action starts the movement” campaign is a partnership between WildAid and the China Green Carbon Foundation and is supported by UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Whether it’s the staggering amount of food wasted around the world every year, or the plastic pollution from disposable cutlery and take-out containers, or the unsustainable amount of land and resources used for livestock agriculture, all of these impacts come back to the choices we make as consumers. Whether it’s the staggering amount of food wasted around the world every year, or the plastic pollution from disposable cutlery and take-out containers, or the unsustainable amount of land and resources used for livestock agriculture, all of these impacts come back to the choices we make as consumers. According to the FAO, global food waste accounts for the equivalent of 3.3 billion metric tons of CO2 released into the atmosphere each year. Meanwhile, a World Economic Forum report notes that the equivalent of a truck-load worth of plastic is dumped into our oceans every minute. Furthermore the FAO, calculates that livestock agriculture accounts for 7.1 Gigatons of CO2 equivalent per year, which can be greatly reduced by more well balanced or plant-based diets. According to the , global food waste accounts for the equivalent of 3.3 billion metric tons of CO2 released into the atmosphere each year. Meanwhile , a report notes t hat the equivalent of a truck-load worth of plastic is dumped into our ocean s every minute. Furthermore the , calculates that livestock agriculture accounts for 7.1 Gigatons of CO2 equivalent per year, which can be greatly reduced by more well balanced or plant-based diets.