The sniffer dog is trained to detect wildlife contraband such as ivory, meat, bird species, snakes, and even weapons  
 ​
 Bandipur Tiger Reserve has been a favourite of poachers and smugglers from the time of forest brigand Veerappan. All efforts of the government like installing cameras and increasing patrolling by guards has not put a stop to wildlife-related crimes here. Now, the state forest department is getting its first specially-trained sniffer dog squad to do what humans and technology have failed to achieve.
 
 Rana, a one-and-a-half-year-old German Shepherd, trained at Bhopal’s 23rd Battalion of Special Armed Reserve Forces, which will exclusively detect and prevent wildlife crimes, is on its way to Bandipur along with its handlers and will be attached to the Special Tiger Protection Force. If this experiment succeeds, the same will be replicated across other tiger forests in the state. More dogs will be deputed in Bandipur in future.
 	  	Rana will leave Bhopal on June 25 and is expected 8to 8reach Bandipur on June 27, forest department brass told Bangalore Mirror. The forest department's dog squad was among 14 sniffer dogs, which cleared the passing out parade on June 20 to serve wildlife and anti-poaching squads. This will lead the 8patrolling team in the tiger reserve.
 	
 	 		Sniffer dogs specially trained by 28 handlers are part of the squads to spread across the seven tiger-bearing states. They were trained under a project conducted by New Delhi-based Wildlife Trade Monitoring Network (TRAFFIC) and World Wide Fund for Nature–India at 23rd Battalion of Special Armed Reserve Forces.
 		 	 		The squad will scour and scan sensitive forest areas to catch criminals, according to the department brass, and is trained for sniffing out wildlife products such as tiger and leopard bones and skins, meat, bear bile etc. These sniffer dogs are also trained to detect wildlife contraband such as ivory, deer meat, live bird species, red sand boa, blackbuck, hare, python, rat snake, porcupine and even weapons. A strong arm in the wildlife sleuths, they will also help them in wildlife cases, henceforth.
 		
 		 	 		Rana, the first in state
 It’s been a rigorous nine-month training for Rana and his handler, 24-year-old Prakash S Honnakore (who hails from Bijapur) from the STPF. The training started last October at the dog training school attached to the 23rd Battalion of Special Armed Reserve Forces. Having endured a strict regime from 6 30 am till 5 30 pm in the evening, this is going to be a huge asset to the state wildlife with special training imparted to it by wildlife experts. “The specially-trained dog squad will be stationed in Bandipur and this is the first in the state. In future, for all our investigations, we will use these dogs and also for wildlife crime controlling issues,” Ajay Misra, additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) told Bangalore Mirror.
 		 	 		A Bandipur Tiger Reserve official told that the state’s first dog squad to be led by Rana will be placed in Bandipur or Handpost and ferried based on wildlife calls.
 		 	 		“Two of our staff attached to STPF have been trained rigorously. While Prakash is the caretaker, Kala Kalkara Mage will assist him. Both are attached to STPF, Tittimatti camp. Their controlling officer is A C F Keshav Murthy. These four form the first squad. The squad will be used for prevention and detection of wildlife crimes. The squad will be on patrolling once it reaches us,” H C Kantharaju, director, Bandipur Tiger Reserve told BM.
 		 	 		“We are expecting the team shortly and the handler will be attached to the squad around the clock and it’s going to be a major wing to protect our wildlife by checking poachers,” said Keshava Murthy.
 		 	 		‘Proud to have undergone sniffer dog training’
 		 	 		Rana’s handler, 24-year-old Prakash, was equally delighted. He said that Rana was trained rigorously on issues pertaining to wildlife and was now capable of detecting and preventing crimes.
 		 	 		“Rana is very smart and originally hails from Hyderabad. Both of us have undergone sniffer dog training for over nine months now and are coming back to the state shortly. He is trained to reach the source even if a small clue like footprint is left by poachers. He can detect traces of any wildlife articles. He can also detect cutting of trees. He is trained to detect poaching cases involving tiger, leopard and elephants. I’m delighted to be part of the state’s first dog squad,” Prakash told BM.
 		
 		
 		
 		 			Rana’s training schedule of nine months
 			 		 			06 30 am: Training starts with PT 		 			10 00 am – 11 00 am: Grooming 		 			11 00 am – 02 30 pm: Break 		 			02 30 pm – 05 30 pm: Training 		 			05 30 pm: Training ends 		 			Rana’s diet includes Pedigree, meat, milk and rotis.
 			 		

 		 			Expense on dog and handler training
 			 		 			On an average Rs 3,00,000 is spent per dog squad (ie, one dog and two handlers). This includes the cost of procuring the puppy, training charges for the dog and orientation and training of the handler including welfare measures of the dog and of handlers.
 			 		

 		 			State-wise dog squad distribution
 			 		 			Of the 14 sniffer dogs trained, Maharashtra got three – Pench National Park, Melghat National Park, and Chandoli National Park. Madhya Pradesh got three – Indore Special Task Force, Sagar Special Task Force and Satna Special Task Force. Assam got two – Kaziranga Assam Police Rhino Special Task Force and Pobitora Wildlife Sanctuary. Uttarakhand got two – Rajaji National Park and Corbett National Park. Tamil Nadu got one for Grizzled Giant Squirrel Wildlife Sanctuary, Srivilliputhur, and Jharkhand got two for Palamau National Park.
 			 		 			Source: TRAFFIC