Ground staff equipped with advisory powers, seek police protection in most cases
 
  	After Ammu the stray’s eight puppies were flung to their deaths by a woman recently, animal protection groups are demanding more stringent laws and powers to help them do their jobs better.  	KB Harish, cruelty inspector at Cupa (Compassion Unlimited Plus Action) and honorary animal welfare officer of the AWBI (Animal Welfare Board of India), who has handled over 70 cruelty cases, says he has no powers to arrest a culprit or confiscate an animal. He added that it has not been an easy task on the ground, and that he has been abused and threatened by animal assailants. “Sometimes, people claim it’s their dog and they can treat it the way they like. Mobs gather to counter us since we are given only advisory powers and not penal ones. A uniform can bring about a lot of change in protecting animal rights.” He said penal powers would equip them with the authority to seize the abused animals. “We have to go through the police for everything. This is why animal protection initiatives are not taken very seriously by abusers,” Harish told Bangalore Mirror.  	Top bureaucrats have also called for changes in laws to address challenges faced by animal protection agencies since irrespective of offices held by them, they were rendered powerless. R Raju, commissioner of textile development, a senior IFS officer and a pet lover told Bangalore Mirror that strong laws to protect domestic, labour and orphaned animals were the needs of the hour. He said, “Animals have to be guarded by more stringent laws. The laws have to give animal rights enforcement agencies powers to arrest. Aspects like insurance and retirement should be brought in especially for stray and domestic animals.”  	CN Shivaprakash, joint commissioner of commercial taxes, and a pet owner, said, “It is not only laws that are weak, they have to be enforced too. With a very small exception, pets have no priority in civic society. Since there are archaic laws, some attention should be paid to amend and strengthen them with stringent punishment for the accused.”  	Except for the police, currently, no agency has penal powers to punish the accused in crimes against domestic animals. “An alternative agency (like the Forest Department which also functions as a police station in wildlife crimes), or an act on par with Indian Wildlife Protection Act (IWPA), and change in police functioning, can change things with regard to animal rights protection,” said Mohan K, a wildlife rescue volunteer, who has been involved in stray dog burial.  	“In cases pertaining to IWPA, the police swing into action instantly and get results based on mere tip-offs. But complaints on cruelty on domestic animals tend to be neglected. This has to change. Police, being an exclusive agency, should give an exclusive attention to cases of cruelty against these animals,” he said.