To help crack wildlife crime cases, govt makes it mandatory for telecom service providers to share on demand, information such as call details of suspects with forest officers
 Forest sleuths probing wildlife crimes under the Wildlife Act such as poaching and trading in wildlife products had to rely on police to help track mobile phones of suspects or obtain information such as call details from telecom service providers. But that is set to change. The government has now made it binding on telecom service providers to share — on demand — information such as calls details with three officers of the forest department.
 
 Telecom service providers will have to divulge information with the additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), conservator of forests, Nagarhole and conservator of forests, BRT. “The government passed the order only recently,” said R Gokul, conservator of forests and director, Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. “We (the three authorised personnel) will act as a bridge between telecom service providers and the forest department. Although there is a provision under CrPC, the order enabling us to access information from telecom service providers comes under provisions of the IT Act.”
 
 Nabbing a suspect by tracking his/her mobile phone using tower location has emerged as a major tool in cracking crimes. But wildlife crime cases often involve six or seven levels between the source (the person in possession of the product like elephant tusks or tiger skin etc) and the person who negotiates the deal with a potential buyer. Also, a wildlife crime is declared solved only when sleuths find the carcass of the animal and the weapon used to kill it.
 
 Nabbing the source has often proved a difficult task for forest officials since they have to rely on police to help track the person’s mobile phone. “Using provisions of the CrPC we used to rope in the police to try and crack the final level and reach the source,” a forest official said. “But relying on the police is often a dicey proposition. If the local police are hand in glove with the source, then the probe is doomed to fail.”
 
 Unlike other investigating agencies like the Lokayukta, the forest department did not have a nodal officer who could liaison with an outside agency like telecom service providers. But the government has now remedied that situation.
 
 “The order is a big boost for forest sleuths,” a range forest officer said. “A case is never complete if a prime accused is not nabbed. But now, not only with the probe move swiftly, but also enable us reach the source.”