Conservationists question appointment criteria, allege honorary wardens are flouting norms
 
 Wildlife conservation enthusiasts have knocked on the doors of Rajbhavan asking the government to withdraw its newly-appointed honorary wildlife wardens.
 The state government had appointed 37 honorary wildlife wardens across state in June and one in August under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. One more honorary wildlife warden was appointment in September.
 
 Crying foul over the entire process, a section of wildlife conservation enthusiasts has approached the government seeking a list based on merit as espoused by the Act. Conser-vationists allege that the posts of honorary wildlife warden are being given to ‘near’ and ‘dear’ ones of the ministers instead of those who have experience in the field. Two complaints have been lodged so far in this regard.
 
 Nagraj Gowda, a wildlife enthusiast who has filed a petition in this regard, says in his petition, “There have been several cases where, despite the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) Wildlife and local Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) recommending eligible names for the honorary wildlife wardens post, the state government made sure the names were replaced with names of their near and dear ones. This list was created politically without considering merit.”
 
 Nagraj has cited three cases in the petition. In the first case, a resident of Bengaluru has been appointed an honorary wildlife warden for Chamrajnagar from 2017 to 2019 while the person neither had knowledge nor experience serving in the region. In second case, it has been alleged that a teenager has been appointed only on the grounds that she was CM’s relative. In the third case, it has been alleged that an appointment has been made based on caste.
 
 “We’ll be grateful if you could reconsider the honorary wildlife warden list,” Nagraj’s petition states.
 
Read Also:
Hyderabad: Maneka Gandhi inaugurates India's first animal law center at Nalsar university 
 
Former honorary wildlife warden, Bengaluru city, Sharath R Babu, too has written seeking governor’s intervention in reviewing the list. Sharath said the criteria for selecting honorary wildlife wardens has not been diligently followed by the government.
 
 The criteria
 
 The act states that ‘the right persons are selected’ and a Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) should recommend the names of suitable persons. The members of the State Wildlife Advisory Board too should be requested to suggest suitable names, especially from their own areas.
 
 The government list, Sharath said, has people who have no knowledge or experience in the area.
 
 Other criteria include genuine concern for wildlife conservation, a personal record that is free of involvement in any activity detrimental to the interests of nature and wildlife conservation, non-consideration of persons involved in commercial exploitation of wildlife, capacity to render help to the official machinery, local standing which makes them effective, especially in conveying the conservation message.
 
 “If a person is not a native or has no first-hand information about the flora, fauna and geography, how can he help the machinery in wildlife conservation, and more importantly, prevention of wildlife crimes? Further, accommodating a non-meritorious person over meritorious one is denial of opportunity to a deserving wildlife enthusiast. Such appointment goes against the spirit of the policy and proves detrimental to wildlife conservation. Hence hon’ble governor’s intervention has been sought,” Sharath R Babu, a former wildlife warden, told Bangalore Mirror. 

Read Also:
Short film on Daroji bear bags award