Wildlife activists are up in arms after the Chennammanakere Achukattu police recently seized two huge elephant tusks in Bengaluru and arrested three for trying to sell the tusks for ivory. But while the three confessed to their crimes, the matter doesn’t end there as several forest officials are alleged to be involved in the matter.
 
Based on the information from the accused, the city police went to Veerapura in Salagame Hobli in Hassan taluk and dug up the carcass of the elephant and took the skull samples for laboratory certification and then handed over the carcass for disposal to the Hassan Forest Department staff as per the court’s directions.
 
Earlier this year, this 23-year-old tusker is believed to have been deliberately killed by electrocution by a farmer in Hassan who used a JCB to dig a trench and bury the dead elephant in his field.
 
Member of Parliament and animal rights activist Maneka Gandhi who was apprised of these developments by the animal welfare officials, recently wrote to the Karnataka Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai mentioning the corruption in the Forest Department which needs to be investigated immediately.

In her letter to the CM, Gandhi wrote that the local Hassan forest officials mischievously filed a new case applying the same Wildlife Act, arrested two and encouraged the rest to abscond so that the CK Achchukattu police could not arrest them.
 
According to the letter, the accused approached the court claiming ‘duplication of work by two different agencies,’ and the accused were able to obtain bail with the active connivance of the Hassan forest officials. The accused are now seeking quashing of the police case, Gandhi went on to state.
 
Conservationists are, understandably, infuriated. “With each tusker getting killed, the female elephants mate with non-tuskers and their offsprings also turn out to be non-tuskers (male elephant without tusks), and this is a serious concern of genetic modification in elephants,” wildlife expert Sharath Babu told Bangalore Mirror.