Forest squad arrest 2 for selling pelt, horns of black buck; scales of pangolin

Poaching of wildlife and its trade continues unabated in several parts of Karnataka due to the lack of awareness among villagers and their cluster heads regarding wildlife crimes and its punishment, say senior officials from CID Forest Mobile Squad (FMS).
 
Earlier several districts in the state were managed by FMSes of a nearby major district, but since the start of this year, upon ADGP Sharath Chandra’s directions, the number of FMSes have been bolstered. With this, there has been a spurt in wildlife crime detection.

In a recent case detected by the Forest Mobile Squad, Ballari, a team of police inspector headed by DySP Muthanna and PSI Maruthi SV apprehended two men for selling the pelt along with the skull and horns of a black buck, and scale chips and dried up bones of a pangolin. The two arrested have been identified as HK Veeresh, a resident of Sandur in Ballari district and Hulikuntappa, a resident of Gudiakote in Vijayanagar district. While the Black Buck’s pelt, skull and horns are used as trophies, the scales of Pangolin is used in the fashion industry and its bones are used in medicinal extracts, sources said.
 
According to the police sources, the two of them are farmers and even argued with the police about what was wrong in selling an already dead animals’ pelt, horns of other parts after swearing to the cops that they have not killed any wild animal. The CID Forest Mobile Squad, Ballari team had to spend much time counselling them that they have committed a crime.

Even though the FMSes keep a tab on information regarding wildlife crimes, the awareness about them by the forest department officials do not trickle down to the grassroot level.

“The Indian Rock Python is a protected species under Schedule one, but soon after any villagers in any of the districts in Karnataka stumbles on a Rock Python, they don’t spare them. They just kill it because they are venomous,” a CID forest cell officer told Bangalore Mirror.

Wildlife crimes

 It’s only been a little over six months since the Davangere district police arrested eight people and seized 67 kilograms of Pangolin scales from them. They were nabbed from a dhaba near Harihar on Shivamogga road in November 2021 The Annapurneshwari Nagar police had arrested two persons, Ibrahim and Mariswamy, with a bag full of pangolin scales weighing 8.2 kg in October last year