As laws that protect wildlife and forests get diluted, conservationist Prerna Singh Bindra’s latest book decodes the crisis that India currently faces ​
 
 Sitting in Bengaluru, far away from the forests, it feels like all is well with the wildlife. Karnataka, after all, has the largest number of Asiatic elephants as well as tigers in the country, giving it an enviable status as far as wildlife is concerned. However, wildlife conservationist and author Prerna Singh Bindra, who was in town recently for the launch of her book, The Vanishing, states that India’s wildlife is in trouble. Calling her book a “wake up call”, Bindra says that as a nation we pretend that all is well. Author of four books, including King and I (2004) which was a travelogue focusing on tigers, Bindra has been scouring even the remotest forests of India over two decades to study the status of wildlife. She cites the reasons for the crisis as poaching, habitat destruction and a collapse of political will to conserve wildlife.
 
 But the most important reason, she says, is the waning of our age-old culture connect with nature. “We have traditionally worshipped elephants, tigers, vultures and even rats.” But the story on ground belies everything we believe in. Bindra talks of poaching that is ruthlessly exterminating animals although it is tigers or leopards that make it to the news. “The market is driving many species to extinction – from turtles and beetles to owls. The pangolin, an elusive, nocturnal animal also called the ‘scaly anteater’, is being trapped, snared, and killed by the thousands to meet a demand for its meat and scales for international markets in the Far East and South East Asia.” With the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau inadequately empowered and woefully staffed, the conviction rates of poachers less than one per cent; it is not surprising that poaching continues with impunity.
 
 The other threat is habitat destruction. City based wildlife conservationist and author, Saad Bin Jung, who has been working on conservation in Bandipur since 1990 (besides running an eco-resort), talks of two clear distinct parts of the forest. It is in the tourism zone that the sightings of tiger and leopards have increased primarily because of ample movement of tourism vehicles and increased eyeballs on the ground. “Elephants and gaur are still pretty much the same. Large herds of sambar have all but disappeared. The big tuskers keep coming and going. Sightings of barking deer has reduced but cheetal have increased. Wild dogs have always been around, the same pack that runs through our farm in Bandipur is still there and we see them quite often. Partridges and quail have certainly increased their numbers along the buffer. In general the health of our wildlife in this tourism zone is excellent,” he says.
 
 But it is in the other zone of the forest, the core zone as Saad calls it, not just in Karnataka but across India, which has taken a beating. Bindra describes this as lethal. “Only about five per cent of India is under protection as a sanctuary or national parks and these are small islands in a sea of people, and face tremendous demands and pressure. Reckless development is fragmenting even this minuscule part of India, which is the refuge of India’s spectacular and rare wildlife, with railway lines, highways, canals, wires crisscrossing the reserves; plus there are villages, temples, townships, reservoirs, mines within these areas, and in their immediate vicinity.”
 
 But most of the conservation, Bindra points out, has to happen in the corridors of power. “India has perhaps the finest conservation laws (The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and the Forest Conservation Act, 1980), but they are poorly implemented; they are by-passed, ignored and circumvented,” she rues. “The other problem is that the laws and conservation policies are being diluted, largely to accommodate the ease of doing business, to facilitate faster approvals for industry and infrastructure, and in fact there is a move to over haul these laws which are essentially to safeguard environment, forests and wildlife.”
 
 She says nothing is sacrosanct now, be it a chunk of Panna Tiger reserve which will be submerged by the Ken-Betwa river link, the Palamu Tiger reserve that is threatened by submergence of its most pristine of forests, the expansion of NH7 which will bisect and break one of the world’s finest tiger landscapes: the Kanha-Pench corridor, a road through Kutch Wildlife Sanctuary threatens the only nesting site of flamingos, and there is the looming prospect of uranium mining in Nagarjunasagar Tiger Reserve.
 
 However, the picture is not yet hopeless. As Bindra writes in her book, India has done a remarkable job in conservation. The country is looked upon as a global leader in conservation having pioneered initiatives to protect tigers and other rare species. It is also the custodian of species that are extinct or found only in very low numbers elsewhere. Like the Gangetic dolphin, over 80 per cent of the global population inhabit the Ganga–Meghna–Brahmaputra river basin. In India, predators like tigers and leopards, and mega fauna such as elephants and bears, continue to persist among a human population of 1.3 billion all contained in just over 2 per cent of the global land mass. While Europe lost most of its predators and mega fauna, for instance the wolf and lynx are extinct in Britain, which incidentally even had lions and elephants in the interglacial period. In the 19th century, India lost just one big mammal, the Asiatic cheetah which went extinct in 1947 and birds like the pink-headed duck, and the mountain quail.
 
 According to Saad, in case of Karnataka, if a tiger or a leopard dies in Kabini or Bandipur along the dividing line between tourism and core zone, that void is filled in days by another from the core. “Adding to this, the regular report of cattle lifting in the buffer regions, outside the D-line between revenue and forest lands in literally all protected forests of Karnataka, we would have to safely assume that there is ample stock of healthy predators in the core that is pushing the older cats out to feed on cattle with the younger and healthier predators taking over prime areas in the parks.” In Karnataka this ability, over the years, of the core to replace voids created by dead animals with healthy ones has augured well for Karnataka.
 
 The future of wildlife, as it finds itself in a crisis, depends largely on improved policies and legal structures that is in the hands of the government. “The dilution of the laws is seeing a faster pace since 2014,” Bindra notes. It is now that an individual should step in. She urges every citizen to speak up for wildlife and spread the word how endangered wildlife is. Protecting forests, which absorb 11 per cent of the greenhouse gases, is important. “Just as we value the Taj Mahal – we wouldn’t stand by and watch its destruction even though it could conceivably be built again – a fallen forest cannot rise again, and extinction is forever.”