Forest department officials and wildlife conservationists are miffed with the police department for putting the value of ambergris (commonly known among wildlife poachers/smugglers as floating gold or whale vomit) into public domain after the cops seized it from four persons from Kadugondanahalli, East Bengaluru, last week. 
During a press conference held on June 9, the top cop addressed the investigation as a ‘great catch’, lauding his east division police officials who headed a special team responsible for tracking, tracing, detecting and arresting the four culprits and recovering 6.7 kg of ambergris.
 
The top cop subsequently mentioned the value of the wildlife seizure of ambergris which sections of media published and broadcasted.
 
Ambergris is a solid waxy substance produced in the intestines of the sperm whale -- a protected species. The whale ejects this intestinal slurry into the ocean. The ambergris starts floating and in a rare occurrence, gets collected on shores.
 
Agencies such as CID Forest Cell, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) say criminals who were earlier unaware of the cost of ambergris are now aware of it. Searches for ambergris on the internet and on the darknet have also increased, said R Sharath Babu, wildlife advisor to Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP).
 
Wildlife law enforcement agencies are now getting calls from their informers who say there are wildlife poachers who are, at present, looking for ambergris, and are even paying advance sums of cash to their hunting sources for procuring it.
 
“With the police department giving out the worth (Indian value) of ambergris, that too for a piece weighing only 6.7 kg, miscreants have started searching for it on the internet and are also running around gathering information about such products. This has increased its demand encouraging middlemen who will now get into this illegal trade. Knowingly or unknowingly, they have created a demand now which is unethical,” Babu told Bangalore Mirror.
 
In a government order, dated October 2016, addressed from the state police chief’s office DG-IGP headquarters to all police heads of districts and cities of the state, the order had instructed that the price (market value) of any wildlife recoveries should not be revealed as this would encourage people to engage in poaching and 
smuggling.
 
However, sources from the Forest Department alleged that only when the value of the recoveries is revealed by the police, they are entitled to a suitable reward. The more the value of recovery, the higher the reward, sources added. Another forest source said that now, the police were calling up their informers to find cases relating to ambergris.
 
Information on wildlife crimes can be made public but without quoting the cost of the articles as they are invaluable and also the revelation of cost would attract more people into the trade,” Kirupasankar M, Regional Deputy Director (RDD) Southern Region, WCCB told BM.