How are crime, data privacy, forests, and the sea interlinked? Absurd you may say. But they are linked in the world’s most populous nation for reasons that may not be in the best interests of poor, disenfranchised, marginalised, those on the fringes and those fence-sitting, indecisive souls entangled in the never ending political drama that may leave us all on the wayside before it all may come crashing down. Do you get the drift?

The case is of the bills passed in haste in the Parliament - 22 in the Lok Sabha and 25 in the Rajya Sabha - without adequate discussion or debate amongst the people’s representatives in the houses, lack of critical public consultations notwithstanding. The absence of transparency in critical planes of lawmaking that may affect individual citizens of this vast nation in the near future is somewhat disconcerting - the clandestine, hurried, scramble that is employed to pass crucial legislation after legislation. Every time such a thing transpires you wonder why such a smoke and mirrors approach is warranted for an absolute-majority dispensation.

Transparency must be a priority as there are no coalition partners that you must deliberate with. You must lay bare your intentions on the table as you have the absolute mandate to push through legislation within the constitutional framework. In such a scenario, the average citizen is left with a feeling of suspicion.

Data today is personal information commodified and put up for sale in vast quantities. If this data is exclusive the more value it commands. So control over this data is critical and everyone is vying for it, especially governments. The personal data privacy bill pushed through in the monsoon session, according to experts, ensures the proliferation of personal data in all spheres that the government operates. 

This means that the bill rather ensures the powers that be have easy access to personal data than the mechanism to protect and safeguard it against the misuse. Many of the safeguards and mandated protections against the misuse of personal data were overlooked in the long periods of time that lapsed in debate and discussion around the same. This left a lot of space open for big tech and telecom players to proliferate and gain access to vaults of information in the public domain. Essentially what the bill will do is to codify it for better use by these entities.

Since the inception of the current dispensation, commercial entities have been gnawing at forests just as years of conservation have been pushing wildlife out as space shrinks. Precisely at this opportune time we have a forest act amendment after 40 or so years to make the encroachment a tad easier for commercial entities. Proper consultation with all the stakeholders involved is the primary step that should have been adopted when amending a law that has been in place for almost four decades and has indeed helped in sustaining the forests, wildlife and communities that have lived for aeons in these spaces. But the intent and motive behind the amendment point to a direction that is not so rosy.

Perhaps a bit more unexplored is the space around the peninsula - the two seas and the ocean. A bill is here to explore the eco-sensitive zones for the purpose of development that we cannot do away with.
 
Perhaps the first and foremost priority should have been the rehabilitation of communities whose livelihoods are being shaken by the fallout of the climate emergency. But the intent is to handover this space and evict communities if need be.

And of course there is the proposed Indianisation of the law and order mechanism proposed through a set of laws by the home minister in the parliament. Death penalty for lynching and rape of minors alongside doing away with the controversial colonial relic of a law that is the sedition section figure in the proposed amendments. The acknowledgement that there is indeed a need to relook at the law and order mechanism envisaged for the ‘natives’ is indeed a welcome move. But when a large set of legislations is pushed through without mandated debate and discussion, the intent always comes under the shadow of doubt. So is the case here too.

Another welcome change that came alongside these vast amount of laws to come into effect sooner was the Supreme Court rethinking the parlance when it comes to gender stereotypes and indeed releasing a handbook for the members of the judiciary and the larger public to herald a much needed change in how we look at gender identities that are now far more fluid than it were before.
 
In effect we see the country being pulled in all directions coming under immense pressure from the outside and within even as the political and social dynamic constantly evolves just as the climate crisis wreaks havoc in the mountains up north.