As of 2022, more than 1,400 cases related to environment remain unresolved, says data; experts say environmental offences are not treated seriously

According to the data released by the National Crime Records Bureau, over 1,400 environment-related cases were pending trial in Karnataka in 2022. While 1,392 cases were pending trial from the previous year, 313 cases were sent to trial in 2022. Out of these, only 239 cases were disposed of, leaving behind 1,466 cases pending trial at the end of the year.

To clear this backlog, the state will have to clear nearly four environment-related cases every day. However, going by the current disposal rate of 0.65 cases every day, Karnataka will take at least six more years to clear the current backlog.

Experts say the low rate of disposal is because environment-related offenses are not taken up earnestly by agencies such as the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board and the Karnataka Forest Department.

“There is a lack of seriousness right from the beginning. Cases under various environmental acts are being filed just to show that some action has been taken. Many cases involve influential private parties, and in such situations, cases are booked because it is difficult to avoid, especially when the violation is blatant. However, soft-peddling begins thereafter, and they get dragged. For instance, while multiple cases against tree felling get filed in the city regularly, they do not reach a logical conclusion,” said Dattatreya Devare, trustee of Bangalore Environment Trust (BET).

  .
More often than not, these departments are not adequately staffed, leading to long periods of pendency. Environment-related cases require intensive investigation, but the shortage of manpower and other resources leads to many unresolved cases and a slow disposal rate. Experts opine the solution is to strengthen these departments by filling up vacancies.

Interestingly, a performance audit report by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) a couple of years ago showed that KSPCB had been reeling under a severe manpower crunch, with more than 50% of its scientific and technical posts lying vacant. Over 60% of administrative posts were not filled as well. As per the report, while the board had 682 sanctioned posts, only 297 posts were found to be occupied.

  There is a lack of seriousness right from the beginning. Cases under various environmental acts are being filed just to show that some action has been takenDattatreya Devare
According to a city-based wildlife conservationist, while the Karnataka Forest Department itself is also reeling under a staff crunch in critical positions in various divisions, including vigilance, it keeps deputing IFS officials to external departments—at times to irrelevant posts. In 2022–23, as many as 58 officials were on deputation, and 60 officials were on deputation in 2021–22.

Currently, out of 164 IFS-sanctioned posts in KFD, only 111 are occupied.

“These officials, mostly IFS and SFS, hold the charge of deputation posts in various departments and government agencies such as Forests, Environment and Ecology Department, KFDC, KSFIC, KCDC, Tourism, Lake Development, Karnataka Biodiversity Board, Karnataka Medicinal Plant, Jungle Lodges and EMPRI, MGIRED, CADA, Karnataka Pollution Board, KSHDC, MPM, BDA, BBMP, and KBJNL. Keeping the sanctioned posts vacant while deputing IFS and SFS officers to external departments only hampers the goal of forest and wildlife conservation, including taking forest offence cases to a logical end,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.