Rana and its handler Prakash save the department from the embarrassment of robbers making away with the seized contraband from its very premises
 
 
 By cracking a mysterious case of missing sandalwood stock within hours, the state’s first sniffer squad Rana-Prakash has showed its prowess yet again.
 
 The indispensable German shepherd Rana and his handler Prakash SH cracked the challenging case shortly after over 60 kg of the precious sandalwood went missing from within the forest department’s range office premises in Srirangapatna.
 
 The sandalwood smugglers had planned the daring robbery to the last detail and executed it to perfection on Saturday. They went to the extent of timing it during the holiday season, knowing fully well that the place would not only be short staffed, those present would be in a festive mood, and so could be caught unaware. But that they could be tracked down by the capable beast-man team, they had not taken into account.
 
 Baffled by the daring robbery, the forest department called upon Rana, known for his competence at cracking tough wildlife crime cases, to get it out of the spot. Only in March this year, requisitioned by Tamil Nadu forest sleuths, Rana had sniffed out a man-eater from its hideout in the forests of Gudalur.
 
 Rana was trained at the 23rd battalion of the Special Armed Reserve Forces, Bhopal in June 2015 and is stationed at the Bandipur Tiger Reserve.
 
 
 The robbery
 
 A huge shed in the range office premises served as a storehouse in which seized sandalwood was kept locked. Sandalwood is one of most sought-after products in illegal wildlife trade, its seizure as part of the forest department’s enforcement activity for over a period of 5-6 years, had turned the department’s storehouse into a hidden treasure. Sandalwood seized from smugglers is stored amidst high security and then auctioned from time to time.
 
 Armed with this knowledge, the smugglers are said to have planned the robbery accordingly. In the meticulous robbery, no vehicle was used even though the quantity was huge. In its bid to distract guards protecting the valuables, the gang first lit two fires near the godown. Though they realised that it was not a season when accidental fires raged, and so this could be an attention diverting tactic, two staffers still had to go and extinguish the fires.
 
 After doing the needful, when they got back to the storehouse, they found it broken into and its most valuable consignment stolen. Knowing fully well that carrying away 60 kg of sandalwood would require a number of persons, the department felt confident that for large numbers to stay unnoticed would not be an easy task.
 
 “Our staffers got back to the storehouse within half an hour of going away to put out the two fires, but by then the sandalwood had been stolen,” an official of the forest department told Bangalore Mirror.
 
 “We then cordoned off the entire premises and requested the services of the dog squad,” he added.
 
 
 Rana in action
 
 The case was a tough one, for the miscreants had not left behind any tell-tale marks, nor are there any CCTV cameras in the crime scene to fall back on.
 
 By the time Rana and Prakash reached the spot, a dog squad attached to the police department got there. However, not specialised in wildlife crimes, that squad proved of little help. Immediately after he arrived, Rana walked around the scene of crime, sniffed at a piece of sandalwood left behind from the lot and darted on its trail.
 
 He ran into the dense forest and to an isolated place. As Prakash guided the forest department, the team found 4-5 bags lying scattered in the isolated area about one-and-half kilometres from the range office. The sandalwood found in it was indeed the stolen one.
 
 Rana was not done yet. A towel lay along with the bags. Rana sniffed this and headed straight for Siddapura village, about 12 km away. He went into a shack that proved to be that of a former forest department staffer, one who had recently been suspended. Rana had cracked the case within three hours.
 
 “If it was not for Rana, the case would have gone on for years and recovery of the stolen sandalwood may have not have been possible. Without the recovery, cracking a case becomes impossible,” the source added.
 
 A complaint under Indian Wildlife Protection Act has been registered. Local range forest officer Mariswamy KM said, “Further investigation is on and some suspects are being scrutinised.”
 
 
 Forest brass say
 
 The department brass can’t stop praising Rana.
 
 “He is a very intelligent member of our team. Earlier, he had detected a case of leopard poisoning. Now in Srirangapatna, he has played an important role in recovering stolen sandalwood. He has been playing crucial roles in detecting wildlife crime cases and is a great asset of our department,” said T Heeralal, director of Bandipur Tiger Reserve.