Wildlife crime investigations in the state have hit a deadlock as the Veterinary College in Hebbal – the only place that certifies the authenticity of seized wildlife products (which is all important in any wildlife crime) -- has decided not to do it anymore. 

 A tiger skin seized recently by the Chennammanakere Achkattu police was the first to be sent back, officially, on Thursday. Some elephant bones seized recently were also returned. With Bangalore alone witnessing close to 100 wildlife product seizures a year, and nearly 200 across state, the sudden stoppage has come as a shock to sleuths. 

 Ironically, 42 years after the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act came into force in 1972, the state that witnesses so many wildlife recovery cases every year doesn’t have an exclusive wildlife lab or a wildlife forensic section. “We had been to the veterinary college as it’s the norm followed for the past few years. However, the brass closed doors stating they won’t do it anymore. Even as the case had progressed more than expected, it has now hit a standstill. We don’t know how to go about it,” a police official probing the case told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	“There are two aspects here. The first thing is that we are not an accredited centre to certify these products. Secondly, all these days, the cases were given on an individual basis. We had a professor in the anatomy department who was an expert and did it. Now, he has taken charge as dean at Shimoga. As we don’t have experts, we have stopped taking samples,’’ S Yathiraj, dean, veterinary college, Hebbal, told Bangalore Mirror. 

 	Yathiraj pointed out that his staff were questioned in courts whether they were an accredited centre, and it embarrasses them. ‘’All these years, it was a goodwill gesture from us. Such certification has to be done by a wildlife lab or a wildlife forensic section that has pharmacology, pathology, ethics and jurisprudence, anatomy and medicine wings. In fact, we have sent a proposal to the government in the past in this regard. If it is approved, we can carry them out. Further, as one who gives the report has to be present during the hearings in court, with the skeletal staff in the anatomy department, the teaching part suffers if our staff (currently one in number) is at court often,’’ he explained. 

 	Others too close doors 

 The college suggested that the forest cell officials try the Institute for Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals to test the wildlife products. However, one of the directors of institute, Dr MD Venkatesh, maintained that they couldn’t do it either as their certification didn’t pass the test in court of law as the centre was not accredited with certified experts. 

 	“Where should the investigating officials go if nobody wants to share responsibility. Now they ask us to go to centre to the Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad. It’s unfortunate that we don’t have a single lab here,’’ a forest official said. 

 	When contacted, Minister for forest, ecology and environment in state, R Ramanatha Rai, said he was unaware of the deadlock between wildlife sleuths and the veterinary college and on the need of a wildlife lab or a wildlife forensic section in state. ‘’I will gather information on the issue and act as per requirement," Rai said.