They were trained at the BSF Training Centre in Gwalior by elite Border Security Force (BSF) officers, and now these sniffer dogs are raring to catch poachers and smugglers. German Shepherds Nero and Qwipper and Belgian Malinois dog Progan (nickname Jackie) have ‘graduated’ from the BSF academy in Tekanpur after 10 months of training. The Malinois – considered to be one of the best sniffer breeds -- is even breaking the department’s tradition of using only German Shepherds.
 
 
 All three dogs are 15 months old and were part of a programme funded jointly by TRAFFIC (a joint conservation programme of the World Wide Fund for Nature and the World Conservation Union) and WWF India, to promote the use of modern tools and technology to fight wildlife crimes. The programme was founded by TRAFFIC in 2008. Most dog squads have delivered outstanding performances leading to seizures and arrests in more than 100 wildlife crime cases, across India.
 
 
 “The dog squads will scour and scan sensitive forest areas to catch criminals,” said a department official, “they are trained to sniff out wildlife products such as tiger and leopard bones and skins, meat, bear bile, and more.” “Usually German Shepherds are the main sniffer breed, but this time we have added the Belgian Malinois, which is even sharper than the German. Malinois are excellent sniffers, good detectives, quick, powerful, and aggressive. The BSF trained these sniffers for almost 10 months along with their six handlers. We are sure they will work hard in controlling wildlife crime,” Dr Shekar Kumar Neeraj, chief, TRAFFIC, told BM. The Belgian Malinois is already used to combat poaching and smuggling in the jungles of Africa. “TRAFFIC is taking care of all the expenses of the sniffers and the handlers. These sniffers will surely help the state control wildlife crimes,” Sharath Babu, honorary wildlife warden, told BM.
 
 
 The training schedule
 
 
 6.30am: Training starts with PT 10am-11am: Grooming 11am-2.30pm: Break 2.30pm-5.30pm: Training The Diet: Pedigree dog food, meat, milk and rotis.
 
 
 Money spent on each dog and its handler 
 
 
 On average `3,00,000 is spent per dog squad (one dog and two handlers). This includes the cost of procuring the puppy, training charges for the dog, and orientation and training of the handler, including welfare measures for dogs and handlers.
 
 
  The Belgian Malinois
 
 
 The Belgian Malinois breed was originally bred to be herding dogs. They also work as police dogs, protection dogs, and family companions. In the hands of an experienced dog person, they are intense, intelligent and athletic companions. The Belgian Malinois (pronounced MAL-in-wah) is a medium-sized Belgian shepherd that at first glance resembles a German Shepherd. Malinois are shorthaired, fawn-colored dogs with a black mask. They are one of four types of Belgian herding dogs and have been shown in the US as a separate breed since 1959. Originally developed in Malines, Belgium, Malinois have a great deal of stamina and truly enjoy working. They are intelligent and very active dogs that excel at many tasks. In addition to herding, they also do well with police work, search and rescue, and in performance events, such as agility. Malinois are quick learners and eager to do whatever their people ask of them. They excel at obedience, tracking, agility, flyball, herding, showing, Schutzhund and other protection sports, search and rescue, and police work. Trainers describe them as having a high “play drive,” which means that they love to play, and just about anything you ask them to do is considered play to them.
 
 
 Source: TRAFFIC