By Prakash VL

Mysuru police deploys 1,600 personnel along with 11 check-posts set to ensure order

The ten-day festival season is back and Mysuru is all decked up to play host. This year’s Dasara is special as it will be celebrated lavishly after a two-year lull due to covid restrictions.
 
The cherry on the cake is that President Droupadi Murmu will inaugurate the festivities. As Mysuru gears up to welcome hundreds of visitors, police are now gearing up to prevent any untoward incidents and keep miscreants at bay.
 
For the first time, police have decided to use high-tech methods to keep a tab on criminals.

As a first step, the Mysuru city police have set up check-posts at 11 places where the cops are deployed for 24-hour surveillance. The police say that any suspicious vehicles will be stopped and the drivers have to cooperate for checking.

Mysuru Deputy Commissioner of Police, Pradeep Gunti said, “We have deployed more than 1,600 personnel to ensure law and order in Mysuru during Dasara besides setting up 11 check-posts.” The check posts have been set up at Belavadi, Kalasthavadi, Nanjangud Road, Mananthavady Road, Bannur Road, Mahadevapura Road, and T Narasipura Road. The police are also noting down the names, mobile numbers and addresses of the people at the check-posts.

Besides this, Mysuru police have been equipped with fingerprint scanning devices to check for criminal antecedents of any individuals found suspicious. Earlier, fingerprints of any suspect had to be sent to designated bureaus which took more than 10 days to give results. The policemen will also use Mobile Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System apps. Police said that they have kept extra vigil at popular places in Mysuru like Chamundi hills, zoo, railway station, palace, bus stands etc. A police force from neighbouring towns and districts has been drawn for patrolling in Mysuru.

The police have also sounded an alert to rowdy sheeters of Mysuru and neighbouring areas and have warned them of strict action if they indulge in any trouble or illegal activities during Dasara.

Alternative routes
Meanwhile, the authorities are expecting a huge influx of tourists causing traffic congestion on the roads. As a preventive measure, the traffic police have come up with alternative traffic plans. These alternative traffic routes will be implemented between 4 to 11 pm from September 26 to October 4.

Cannon firing drills
Meanwhile, the last phase of cannon firing drills was successfully completed in Mysuru. During the drill, the CAR police fired 21 shots in three rounds.
 
The Dasara elephant herd led by Abhimanyu and Kumki elephants-Cauvery, Vijaya, Arjun, Gopalaswamy, Dhananjaya, Gopi, Bheema, Mahendra, Srirama, Sugreeva, and Partharasarathi were part of the drill. 34 horses were part of the drill.
 
Sources said that elephants Parthsarathy, Sugreeva, and Srirama who were scared during the first two rounds of cannon firing had now gotten used to the cannon sound. The highlight was that Abhimanyu, who will be the howdah bearer, was calm and confident during the cannon firing drill. Mysuru city police commissioner Chandragupta said that the elephants and horses have got acclimatized to the cannon firing sound.

Srirangapatna Dasara
Meanwhile, the state government has directed the forest department to send five elephants to Srirangapatna Dasara.
 
DCF (wildlife) V Karikalan said that it was yet to be decided as to which five elephants will be headed to the neighbouring Srirangapatna. The SoP for elephants would be that no one will be allowed in ten feet periphery of the elephants. The bursting of crackers and the usage of drones are prohibited.-