Specially trained canine squads will beef up anti-naxal ops and industrial security force
 
 
 After state’s armed reserves and tiger reserves, now two vital wings of state police force — the Anti-Naxal Force (ANF) and Karnataka Industrial Security Force (KISF) — are all set to embrace canine power through dog squads.
 
 	
 	While ANF handles Naxal operations in the forests, the KISF oversees security to sensitive installations like Vidhana Soudha, banks like the RBI, IT firms like Infosys and dams like KRS, Almatti, and the Raichur Thermal Power Plant. 
 	
 	  	Dog squads — specially trained to handle and detect wildlife crimes, added to the forest department last year — have proved to be a hit. They help sniff out wildlife products such as tiger and leopard bones, skins, meat, bear bile, ivory, deer meat, live bird species, red sand boa, blackbuck, hare, python, rat snake, porcupine and even weapons. Dog squads with the City Armed Reserve (CAR) in Bengaluru and the District Armed Reserve help with the security and vigilance activities.
 	
 	  	Following the success of the canine squads in these departments, the state ISD (Internal Security Division) will procure the two canine teams. “We will procure specialised dog squads for both ANF and KISF. A proposal has been sent to government and the process will begin soon after its clearance,” T Suneel Kumar, additional DG of police, ISD, said.
 	
 	  	These squads that include handlers and the dogs will be deployed at vital installations where 1,200-plus KISF security personnel are on guard across the state, and 700-plus ANF personnel on guard in six districts, the brass explained. However, before being inducted, the squads and their handlers will be put through intense training for a year followed by a test run. “The ANF dog squad will be mainly trained on aspects like combing, tracing human activities and unusual movements, and sniffing out weapons in forests. The KISF dog squad will be trained in activities like sniffing out explosives and weapons,” a source in the department said.