324 cases were registered under environment-related acts in Karnataka in 2021 - activists term it ‘eyewash’

According to the National Crime Record Bureau’s (NCRB) latest data, the number of cases registered for environment-related offenses in Karnataka is going down. A total of 324 cases were registered under Environment and pollution-related acts in the state in 2021. The number of such cases in 2020 and 2019 was 413 and 549, respectively.

The maximum number of cases under the environment category in the state were registered under the Cigarette and Other Tobacco Product Act (232 cases), followed by the Forest Act and the Forest Conservation Act (79 cases). When it comes to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, while only 13 cases were registered in the state during the year, no cases were recorded under the Environment Protection Act (EPA), the Air and Water Prevention and Control of the Pollution Act, Noise Pollution Act, and the national green Tribunal Act. Experts say 324 cases are too low a number. Either the government has not collected the actual data or authorities have not furnished the numbers properly, they say.

According to Sharath Babu, a wildlife activist, 13 cases under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 is not even a drop in the sea.

“I can provide the FIR numbers of the cases registered under the Wildlife Protection Act and it will easily exceed 13. For instance, I have records of 27 cases under the Wildlife Act filed in a year by one forest officer in a district of Karnataka. The data they are showing is incomplete,” said Babu.
 
The report also shows that out of the 324 cases, as many as 126 were from Bengaluru.

What is startling is zero cases recorded under the Environment Protection Act, Environment Protection Act (EPA), air, and water pollution acts across the state.

“EPA applies to the industries. The harmful waste that is being discharged into our water bodies or being released into the air has surely not reduced over time. Zero crime under these acts is virtually impossible. NCRB data is not giving the right picture,” said Ramesh Belagere, wildlife activist, Foundation for Ecology and Education Development.

According to researchers and environment experts, an on-ground investigation will only prove that these numbers are an eyewash.

“Time and again, we have always witnessed many reports by the government with improved crime rates, which only serve certain agendas. For instance, if you look at some of the financial inclusion schemes, while the government data promise 100 per cent implementation of these schemes among forest tribes, the ground reality is different,” said a city-based environmentalist.

Avinash Krishnan, director, science and conservation, A Rocha India, opined that while several such cases might be going down due to various protection strategies taken up by the Forest Department and other agencies to curb wildlife and forest crime, the rate of conviction is an important aspect to consider.

“These cases seldom come to the courts. Even when they do, lack of evidence and other hurdles result in a delay of conviction. Moreover, in such cases, the burden of proof lies on the accused and the procedure has a lot of shortcomings. The cases that made it to the NCRB list might be the ones whereby all the legal procedural aspects were completed,” he said.