Despite directions to all not to share location of tigers on social media to protect them from poachers; Bannerghatta Biological Park Executive Director puts out pictures of wild animals

Forest officers are supposed to save forests as well as wildlife. They are, as per the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) directive, expected not to share photos and locations of tigers on social media. The objective of the directive is to prevent the poaching of tigers.

The Assistant Inspector General of Forests (NTCA) issued the directive on June 17, 2017, directing field directors of all tiger reserves across the country to take measures to avoid photographs or information on tigers being shared on WhatsApp and Facebook. The directive stated that the information on WhatsApp and Facebook has the potential to be used to commit wildlife crimes.

However, Bannerghatta Biological Park Executive Director Surya Sen allegedly shared photographs and locations of a tiger and leopard that were spotted at Bannerghatta Biological Park. According to reliable sources, the NTCA has already written a letter to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Subhash Malkhed, to take appropriate action against those responsible for sharing photos of a tiger and a leopard and their locations on social media.

Wildlife activists are up in arms against sharing photos of a tiger and a leopard on social media. They demand the authorities act toughly against those responsible for posting those photos and information on social media.

A former member of the State Wildlife Board, Joseph Hoover, said that it is obvious that DCF Surya Sen wasn’t aware of the National Tiger Conservation Authority’s June 17, 2017 advisory to forest departments across India.

“The NTCA was concerned about camera trap images of tigers being shared on media platforms, as poachers would know the specific location of the tiger’s movements. We have written to the NTCA and Government of Karnataka underscoring the callous indulgence of the executive director of the Bannerghatta Biological Park,’’ said Hoover.

Demanding the authorities act tough against the forest officer responsible for sharing the photos and location of a tiger and a leopard, Arun Prasad, an animal activist, has said that there should not be separate rules for ordinary people and forest authorities. “The forest officer is supposed to advise tourists and the public not to share photos of tigers and locations. What do you expect from a forest officer who has shared information on social media about a tiger and a leopard? As per the NTCA guidelines, forest officers can share information on tigers and their locations with their senior officers and certainly not on social media, which will make tigers vulnerable to poaching,’’ he said.

The NTCA was concerned about camera trap images of tigers being shared on media platforms–Joseph Hoover, conservationist

Meanwhile, Surya Sen, said that he posted the photos of a leopard and a tiger on a WhatsApp group created for the benefit of media persons. However, Subhash Malkhed said that no information on tigers and their locations should be posted on social media. “It is pardonable if a tourist posts a photo of a tiger on social media. Forest officers are not supposed to share photos and locations of tigers on social media. The NTCA has already issued guidelines on this subject. I will issue an advisory to forest officials on this issue shortly,’’ he said.When asked about the NTCA letter for the violation, he added that he was on leave for a few days. “I will look into the matter as soon as I join duty,’’ he said.