Will remain in Parappana Agrahara till Dec 23, unless lawyer can bail him out
 
 Ravi Belagere, the editor of regional tabloid ‘Hai Bangalore’ who was arrested on charges of giving supari to kill his colleague Sunil Heggaravalli, has been remanded in judicial custody till December 23. The Central Crime Branch police produced him before a judge of first additional chief metropolitan magistrate court on Monday afternoon.
 
 Belagere may be taken into police custody again in another case that has been registered against him.
 
 Belagere was arrested on Friday based on the statement given by supari killer Shashidhar Mundewadi.
 
 He has been moved to the hospital ward in the jail and given a separate room. His daughter, Chetana, said she was not allowed to meet her father.
 
 Another plaint against Belagere
 
 Heggaravalli has filed a complaint against Belagere at Subramanyapura police station, alleging that Belagere had called him from police custody on Sunday night. Heggaravalli told the police that that he feared for his life since Belagere could call up some anti-social elements too if he called him so easily.
 
 DCP (Crime-2) Jinendra Kanaghavi is conducting an enquiry against police inspector Yathiraj BR, an ASI, a head constable and a police constable who were on duty on Sunday night. It is alleged that these four policemen allowed Madhu, who brought food, and also permitted Belagere to make calls.
 
 On cigarettes
 
 The home minister, who saw visuals of Belagere being provided a cigarette in the police vehicle while being escorted to the CCB office, has asked for a report on this too.
 More trouble
 
 The CCB police will give a report on finding deer skin and tortoise shell in his office when they raided it on Friday. The forest department officials may take up a fresh case against Belagere under Wildlife Act and investigate. If they register the FIR, they may go to court and take him into custody.
 
 Subramanyapura police may also take him into police custody on body warrant for investigation in the case filed by Heggaravalli, alleging of threat. There may be more cases registered against him for having connections with other notorious criminals.
 
 Badigar on the run
 
 The Police team that has gone to Vijayapura to catch Viju Badigar, an associate and brother-in-law of Mundewadi, is yet to trace him.
 
 Journalist Malagonda questioned too
 
 The CCB police team that is in Vijayapura called journalist TK Malagonda to a hotel and recorded his statement as Belagere had reportedly taken Mundewadi’s phone number from him. He was questioned about how he became friends with Belagere and other killers of Bheema Theera for almost five hours. The hitman that tabloid editor Ravi Belagere gave a killing contract to was once a karate teacher. While teaching karate to children, Shashihar Mundewade, came in touch with Bagappa Harijan, a notorious killer of Vijayapura. Bagappa was a dreaded name in Vijayapura, Kalaburgi and Maharashtra; the name Bheema Teera (bank of Bheema River) still strikes terror in the hearts of residents of Hyderabad-Karnataka region.
 
 As their links strengthened, Bagappa asked Mundewade to kill Basappa Harijan, his rival; Bagappa promised to pay him Rs 25 lakh for the murder and Mundewade pumped seven bullets into Basavaraj on January 2, 2013 on the banks of the Bheema River. But Bagappa did not pay up; Mundewadagi then turned to his friend Suresh Lalasangi to mediate and get him the money.
 
 Then one fine day, Suresh was shot outside his house. The police suspected Bagappa’s hand in the killing and the case was handed over for investigations to Sindagi circle police inspector.
 
 Mundewade was summoned to the station and asked about Suresh’s murder as he was his close friend. But they couldn’t find anything on Sashi to detain him and were about to let him go when the phone rang – the person on the other end of the line said that Sahshi was involved in Suresh’s murder. The police then turned the screws and subjected Mundewadagi to “intense interrogation” as they say in police parlance. Mundewadagi then admitted that he had indeed killed Suresh. This admission earned him his rightful place in the world of crime.
 
 
  Shashi’s hitlist
 
 2006: Allegedly killed Muttu Master, gangster Chandappa Harijan’s brother-in-law
 
 2013: Basappa Harijan, a notorious killer of Bheema Theera
 
 2014: Killed friend Suresh Lalasangi
 
 2016: Accused in a robbery case in Indi police station limits
 
 
  Daughter defends dad
 
  Ravi Belagere’s second daughter, Bhavana, on Saturday rushed to her father’s defence, claiming he was innocent. She said that no FIR had been filed and police had taken up a suo moto case based on Shashi’s (the contract killer’s) statement.
 On Friday, Belagere’s elder daughter Chetana accompanied him in the police when he was taken to the Subramanyapura police station. She also waited outside the magistrate’s house when Belagere was produced on Friday night. Belagere’s son Karna too was with her.
 
 No affair, says target’s wife
 
 The arrest of Ravi Belagere has set tongues wagging in Karnataka. It is being alleged that the tabloid editor wanted Sunil Heggaravalli, his employee, bumped off as the latter was having an affair with Belagere’s wife. Heggaravalli’s wife, Suchita, on Saturday appeared before media to scotch all rumours.
 “My husband did not have any relationship with Belagere’s second wife. He used to call Sunil ‘his second son’,” she said in Heggaravalli village of Mudigere taluk.
 She demanded that the government provide security to the family. “They may cause us trouble in the future,” she said.