A video of two men, playing with two leopard cubs, has gone viral in Koppal. While the source of the video is yet to be ascertained, wildlife enthusiasts suspect the video was recorded last year and has resurfaced now. But the video has raised a concern — the need to map the wildlife of Koppal district.

Since the movement of leopards is more in places such as Koppal, Yelburga, Ballari, Hospet and Chitraduga, wildlife activists feel that the video could have emerged from one of these places. Most of these places have similar topography. 

#ViralVideo: Leopard cubs video has forest department in a spot in #Karnataka's Koppal: While the source of the vid… https://t.co/vcnbhjU1Dw— Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1541073765000 

Sujit Shettar, a businessman and wildlife enthusiast, is spreading awareness among villagers on the need to conserve wildlife in Koppal. He said: “This video is an eye-opener indicating that there is a need to map the wildlife in Koppal district. The region is known for its wildlife and often the favourite destination of poachers. By mapping the wildlife of this region, the government will get a clear idea on the areas that are densely populated based on which appropriate measures can be taken. When it comes to dealing with wildlife cases in the district, officials simply pass the responsibility from one department to another.”

While there is a section of wildlife enthusiasts who feel that poachers have created this video, Sujit said, “I suspect they are not poachers. They are probably local shepherds. Poachers will see to it that they are nowhere in the picture. Since there are dogs in the background, I suspect that this incident could have taken place when shepherds took cattle for grazing and stumbled on these cubs. 

No snares can be seen in the video. The manner in which they are treating the cubs must be condemned. They should definitely be punished for this. But just imagine the situation in case the mother of the cubs had come and attacked them. In that case, villagers would strike down the leopard. The usual chain of events will follow. This is why along with punishing those involved, awareness is needed and villagers must be educated that it’s a crime to even touch a wild animal,” he said. 

Sadik KNK, a civil engineer and wildlife photographer from Yelburga, also suspects this video to be shot in the regions where the leopard movement is high. Yashpal Kshirasagar, DCF, Koppal district said, “I came across the video this morning and necessary action would be taken to track down people involved in the incident.”