Karnataka probe shows tiger was killed in TN forest, but ‘neighbour denied the crime and delayed post mortem’
 
 Karnataka and Tamil Nadu are caught in a scuffle over the crackdown on poachers, who prey on thriving population of tigers in South India. The arrest of three poachers from Sathyamangala (Tamil Nadu) by the RMC Yard police in Bengaluru last week has triggered a bitter confrontation between the two neighbours’ forest departments and is creating an inordinate delay in conducting the post-mortem of the carcass of a tiger that was allegedly poached recently.
 
 The three people were arrested while they were allegedly trying to sell off a tiger pelt at Flower Market bus stop near Yeshwantpur. During interrogation, the accused Balakrishna D, Mahesh and Rangaraj had revealed they had collectively killed a tiger by setting up snares in the forests around their native Sathyamangalam in Tamil Nadu. The trio had even confessed that they had skinned the big cat in the same forest and brought the pelt for sale in Bengaluru.
 
 The police had vowed to expose the network of poachers, but sources in Bengaluru police told BM officials of the Tamil Nadu forest department initially refused to accept that a tiger had been killed within their jurisdiction and refuted the statements of RMC Yard police that was based on revelation by the accused trio. However, later the police team from Bengaluru was allowed to do a check on the crime scene deep in the Sathyamangalam forest where the carcass of the tiger was identified.
 
 Though the Bengaluru police were successful in identifying the crime spot last week, there has been an inordinate delay in conducting the post mortem of the carcass to ascertain whether it belonged to a tiger or some other animal. Even as the officials in Tamil Nadu were caught in confusion, the Bengaluru Police had raided the houses of the poachers and recovered tiger claws and canines which further strengthened the case that was grossly disputed initially.
 
 According to sources in Bengaluru police, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Wildlife Punati Shridhar had visited the RMC police and was convinced about the findings. “The Karnataka PCCF had to speak to his counterpart in Tamil Nadu to be able to pursue the case so that the interrogations can throw much light on poachers’ network who could be settled either in Karnataka or Tamil Nadu,” revealed a senior police official.
 
 Conservationists working in and around Sathyamangalam Reserve dug into their camera traps to confirm that the killed tiger was a female from Talwadi Range, based on the stripes on the recovered pelt.
 
 RMC Yard police Inspector Mohammed Mukaram told BM, “We have conducted the mahajar and recovered some of the tiger parts like claws and teeth from the houses of the accused near Sathyamangalam.” Sources in conservation circles told BM that TN forest officials conducted the post mortem on Monday almost three days after the mahajar by Bengaluru police.
 
 However, CH Padma, District Forest Officer and Deputy Director, Hassanur Forest Division, Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve, told BM the allegations were far from the truth. “There was no such delay,” she said.