While the number of sparrows has dropped considerably, the increased awareness and conservation efforts in recent times seem to have made these poachers focus on sparrows. Sending shocks to the conservation movement, Andhra Pradesh police on Friday busted a major racket producing ‘Pichhuka Lehyam’ (Sparrow Paste) as ultimate cure for sexual diseases with a well established network in Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, West Bengal and certain parts of Uttar Pradesh.
 
 According to the police, the culprits used the brains of sparrows, especially the male ones, to prepare powder and paste to be used as aphrodisiac apart from the meat of the birds. 
 
 Threatened by poachers   
 
 Conservationist Mohammed Esmail Dilawar who is widely known as the ‘sparrow man’ says, “Though I was aware about sparrows being the target of poachers for various treatments, preparation of paste and powder from the brains of male sparrows is disgusting. Keeping in mind these practices, I had held talks with the forest departments of various states. But so far we haven’t really got any feedback on this.”
 
 The culprits justify their heinous crime saying there is a demand. “Not just in AP but there is a demand in neighbouring states as well. It  cures cough, asthma, acidity problems and ulcers. If one uses this paste continuously for the 21 days it will increase one’s sexual appetite,” is the bizarre claim made by one of the arrested. Each kilogram of paste made out of the sparrow’s meat costs Rs 1,000.  “Though there are references to treatments using meat in Ayurveda, particular reference to sparrows is rarely illustrated. Under the category of aharavarga (types of foods)  mamsavarga (meat) is also one type of treatment. We generally prescribe ajamamsa lehya (goatmeat paste) for some diseases and for vadhikarana (aphrodisiac) purpose practitioners can use the meat of animals and birds. But a few quacks have been misleading people by taking the names of endangered species,” explains Dr Shobha Rani, an ayurvedic practitioner from Bangalore.
 
 “Our efforts should not go waste. While we are striving hard to bring them back, incidents like these are causing major setback to our efforts. Government must look into these issues. Sparrows have been listed under the schedule IV of the Indian Wildlife Act and department concerned must take adequate measures to ensure suitable ambience for these species to live in,” opined Dilawar who is also the president and founder of Nature Forever, which is working towards sparrow conservation at the national level. Citizens hasten, officials slacken
 
 While the newfound threats are jeopardising the conservation movement, apathetic officials are also a concern. According to biodiversity experts, Bangalore is leading at the national level on sparrow conservation front. “Bangalore has been the leader in this regard. People have shown more interest in bringing these birds back. Last year when I was in city to create awareness I had sold more than 100 nesting boxes and got orders for a few hundred as well. Moved by the response, this year we decided to have the celebrations of World Sparrow day in Bangalore itself,” explains Dilawar.
 
 Harish Bhat, a biodiversity expert and a scientist at the Indian Institute of Science says, “People’s perception is gradually changing. In spite of their hectic schedules they find time to feed these birds. People feed sparrows, mynas and robins in their balconies through artificial nests. Their efforts have succeeded in bringing back these birds in very small numbers in Bangalore. Today 10 to 15 areas are home to a growing sparrow population. In Yeshwantpur alone, there are close to 50-60 sparrows.”
 
 But officials at BBMP are yet to make a mark. Last year special awareness programmes were conducted for RFOs and ACFs for sparrow conservation by roping in the sparrow man Dilawar. However, the technical sessions seemed to have no impact on the BBMP officials as there was no programme subsequently. “I was hopeful of hearing from them and anxious to know about the results. But I did not hear anything from BBMP officials afterwards. I hope they are carrying on the message among the urbanites,” says Dilawar.