By: Ikram Khan
 
 ​Govt downs shutters on 30 out of 56 vet centres, citing an illogical guideline 	
 	
 	 		No vet, no pet’ is the line pet lovers are being forced to toe after the state government shut down 30 veterinary hospitals in the garden city last month. Not just pet owners, the decision has hit cattle- and sheep-breeders as well, who say lack of timely treatment has already cost them a sizeable number of livestock.
 		 	 		The decision to close down 30 of the 56 primary veterinary centres was made on the recommendations of the National Agriculture Commission. “The guidelines are clear. A population of 3,000 cows in an area necessitates a vet centre. And after taking a census of animals in all the areas and the number treated each day at the centres, we decided to close down centres which were treating only a small number of cases,” said an official spokesman of the Department of Animal Husbandry.
 		 	 		He defended the move, saying the government had opened more than 10 hospitals in Kolar, Doddaballapur, Tumkur and a couple of other districts and towns to facilitate treatment of animals. In addition, the government has promised to set up 10 mobile units with on-call service in city, he added. 
 		 	 		But owners of companion animals like dogs, cats and exotic birds are not impressed. They point out that it is not fair to close down centres only on the basis of cattle census. “Bengaluru is the new ‘petapolis’, ahead of Mumbai and Kolkata, the two big pet cities of the country. Enthusiasts here own the best and most exotic breeds and a lot of dog- and cat-breeders have made Bengaluru their home, setting up big breeding units after ascertaining that the climate here is conducive for breeding,” says M Sathyanarayan whose pet dogs were treated at the recently shuttered Jeevanahalli centre. 
 		 	 		He said most of the centres had good, qualified vets. Another factor is costs. “We could get rabies and hepatitis shots administered at subsidised rates.
 		Now, we need to seek the services of private vets and it is a costly exercise,” Sathyanarayan said.
 		 	 		However, the ones beefing the most are cattle owners, especially the few with pedigreed cows like Jerseys and Holstein Friesians, along with the Indian breeds. An ailing cow now means coughing up a huge sum on transportation, besides subjecting the animal to the trauma of longer travel. 
 		 	 		“Earlier we could easily walk an ailing cow to a centre in our area or seek the services of a government vet who would willingly come over to administer medicines to the animal in our backyards. Now, it’s become a big challenge in terms of time and distance and the result is lower milk 	 		supply,” said K Muniraju, owner of 10 Indian cows.
 		 	 		The move has brought separation pangs for bird lovers who are selling off their winged friends for a song. Gulab, owner of the famed Wet Pets shop on Infantry Road, house to many exotic birds including cockatoos, macaws, and Amazon parrots and a variety of pigeons and lovebirds, said, “Business is down following the closure of 30 primary vet centres and that’s simply because pet lovers are no more confident . They feel that after paying fancy prices for exotic birds, the upkeep will now cost them a fortune and they just can’t depend on private vets. Closing down 30 centres taking only cattle census into account is wrong. It is clear from the medical registers at most centres that a sizeable number used to be treated each day,” said Gulab. 
 		 	 		Veterinary doctor Mahmood Abbas from the Jayanagar centre, who recently operated on a cow that had been hit by a bus, felt 24/7 multi-speciality vet hospitals were needed urgently. “Most centres close at 6pm and there is no service at night which, sometimes, becomes crucial for the treatment of livestock.”
 		 	 		When asked about his opinion on the closure of the centres, Abbas said, “It is not really helping cattle-and sheep owners.” He pointed out that with more than 45 government vets shifted out of the city, a space had been created for quacks to enter the field. He said they had set up shop and were doing good business. “Getting livestock treated from such quacks who have not kept pace with the new advances is risky business,” said Abbas.
 		 	 		Abbas has another pertinent point to make. He says more than 10 lakh sheep are brought into Bengaluru from neighbouring states, cities and towns ahead of the Bakr-Id festival. Since they are herded around in large numbers on roads and in slushy areas, they are prone to injuries and fever. Abbas says a week before the festival, each of the 56 government units used to treat 40-50 sheep a day. “Next month is Bakr-Id and sheep owners are going to be in a soup; they are even likely to lose a big percentage of their animals.”
 		 	 		Also, a couple of NGOS were doing a good job on the CNVR (Catch, Neuter, Vaccine and Release) programme for stray dogs. With limited number of government vets in the city, Abbas says things are going to get tougher for them too.
 		
 		
 		Country’s first vet forensic lab to come up in Bengaluru
 		
 		 			Alarmed by the rising incidents of veterinary crime across the country, Bengaluru-based Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary Biologicals (IAHVB) – an affiliate of Animal Husbandry Department – has decided to set up Veterinary Forensic Laboratory in the city. 		 			The lab – the first one in the country – is proposed to be in the sprawling campus of IAHVB in Hebbal. A detailed proposal has been submitted to the Animal Husbandry Department for necessary approval. Minister of the department T B Jayachandra who visited the IAHVB campus on Thursday to inaugurate Good Manufacturing Practises (GMP) facilities at the institute agreed in principle to set up the lab in the city. 		 			Dr SM Byregowda, director, IAHVB, confirmed that a proposal has been submitted to the government. “Probing into unnatural deaths of animals in zoos and wildlife, we have proposed to set up an exclusive lab on veterinary forensic at a cost of Rs 6 crore. The minister has also responded positively over the proposal. It will be the first ever veterinary forensic lab in the country,” Dr Byregowda explained.