Wildlife conservationists call for need to appoint full-time Chief Wildlife Warden in state

The Karnataka wildlife circle is abuzz with talk of the statutory post of Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) practically lying vacant following the promotion of incumbent Rajeev Ranjan to the head of the forest force recently.

While Karnataka’s principal chief conservator of forests (head of forest force) is currently double-hatting as CWW, wildlife conservationists said that the position is statutory and has to be notified by the government. They further highlighted that CWW has an extremely important role to play when it comes to the protection and conservation of wildlife and habitats. Such posts should not be held by an officer with a concurrent charge.

“It has been a week since the incumbent was promoted as head of force and has been double-hatting as CWW. The post is extremely critical and must have a full-time officer without a delay of even one day. It is surprising to know that despite Karnataka having many PCCFs, the government has yet to appoint a full-time PCCF Wildlife and Chief Wildlife Warden. It is important that the state fill the position with an officer with experience in the field of wildlife conservation and a proven record of accomplishment,” said a wildlife activist.

The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, confers various powers to CWW, including protection, conservation, and management of wildlife sanctuaries and wildlife. The official is thus responsible for the overall supervision of the tiger reserves, national parks, sanctuaries, conservation reserves, etc.

The post also serves as the main point of contact with various agencies, such as the National Tiger Conservation Authority, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, Wildlife Institute of India, Central Zoo Authority, etc., concerning various issues about wildlife.

“The Chief Wildlife Warden is also the member secretary of the State Board for Wildlife and is thus responsible for the formulation of various policies, guidelines, and decisions pertaining to wildlife-related matters. They make recommendations concerning the diversion of forest lands in protected areas for various development projects and also grant permits for scientific research, tourism, and education purposes in PAs,” said a city-based wildlife conservationist.

According to the Karnataka Forest Department, the process of filling in the position is already underway.

It is vital that the state fill the position with an officer with experience in the field of wildlife conservation and a proven record of accomplishment ­–a wildlife activist
“The current head of the force still holds the CWW position in the state. However, we are aware of the importance of the role, and the department has already sent the file to the Chief Minister’s office. We are expecting the orders to arrive in a couple of days,” a senior official from the department.

When BM reached out to Karnataka’s Environment, Forest, and Ecology Minister Eshwar Khandre, he said, “My discussion with the Chief Minister on this issue is pending. However, a preliminary dialogue exchange has already happened, and the position will be filled as early as possible.”