Red Sand Boa is being illegally farmed by people to swindle those who believe in a myth that the non-venomous snakes will make them rich

The state’s forest department officials have a growing worry over Red Sand Boa farming said to be existent at villages in remote Karnataka. The farming is tied around a strong propaganda by a section of religious fraternity and snake charmers who spread myths on using wildlife for trade and puja rituals as a means to get wealthy in a short span.

According to CID Forest cell officials, these myths are spread among circles of devotees attached with religious institutions. The myth is that if one get the reptile for puja purpose or on hire if he/she cannot afford it, then soon after the rituals, money will rain on the person on whom the puja was performed. Gullible devotees from all sections of life including NRIs, both serving and retired bureaucrats, politicians and several rich businessmen are sending their men who travel all over south India in search of the Red Sand Boa snake, that also well known by a code name ‘Double Engine.’ Along with the Red Sand Boa, even the flap shell turtles that goes by the code name is 20 channel and the Barn owl that has 2-wheeler as a code name is also traded for pooja rituals, the forest officials added.

These species are protected under the Indian wildlife Protection Act 1972. Whenever forest officials apprehend the accused based on information, in most of the cases, the accused are found carrying huge amounts of cash on them as the ongoing price of these species range from Rs 1.5 crore to 2 crore, the officials pointed out.

On Wednesday, the Forest Mobile Squad of the Chikkamagaluru and Udupi forest division, busted two cases of wildlife poaching crimes and apprehended three people, one of them a student and recovered two Sand Boa snakes from them that they were attempting to sell for over a crore rupees to customers. In one of the two cases, the arrested has been identified as Ramesh (24), a resident of Channagiri in Davanagere, who had finished his BBM course but had backlogs so he started helping his father with agriculture in his village. In another case, the accused are Krishnaiah (50), a resident of Tiptur taluk in Tumakuru, a farmer who stumbled on the snake during work in his field and an agent identified by the police as Raju from Devanur village in Kadur taluk in Chikkamagaluru. “In both the cases, they have procured the Red Sand Boa from the agricultural fields and nurtured it at their houses. After they come to know that suh reptiles can be traded, they start looking for customers,” said Sharath, a police sub-inspector with the Forest Mobile Squad in Chikmagalur-Udupi forest division.


In both cases, they have procured the Red Sand Boa from the agricultural fields and nurtured it at their houses–Sharath, sub-inspector 
Forest sources also said that many households in villages in and around Bagepalli, Hiriyur, Kanakapura, Chitradurga, Madikeri, Tumkur, Davangere, Chikkamagaluru have a huge clay pot filled with soil at their yard with one or more Red Sand Boas in them ready to be sold or even hired for rent. The snake is most of the time overfed or force-fed with edible and non edible stuff to increase its weight thereby proportionally hiking its cost, the officials added.

Due to this menace, the forest department officials have even written to several religious mutts in the state educating the seers about such wildlife crimes. Officials said the devotees who carry lumpsum cash for these reptiles end up getting conned by men who disappear with the money promising them these reptiles. Forest officials have stumbled on devotees from places like Coimbatore and Vellore in Tamil Nadu, places from Kerala, Andhra Pradesh also.
 
“Though the snake is not found in Bengaluru, our team of authorised snake rescuers get almost one genuine enquiry regarding the Red Sand Boa snake a day as our
 phone numbers are easily made available by helplines to the public for wildlife rescues,” said Sharath Babu, a wildlife expert. The situation has reached such a alarming proportion, Babu added.