Trekking through forests           Those long hours spent on trekking through forests could earn you rewards – at least the tangible kind. Faced with a constant threat to flora and fauna, the forest department has decided to get regular trekkers involved in the battle to save forest resources. The department will reward trekkers who detect and report on offences such as poaching, smuggling and forest land being encroached on by land sharks. 
 
 The new forest policy of the state, likely to be launched on June 5 – World Environment Day – has underscored rewards for efforts to help detect forest crimes in various parts of the state and advocates trekking related activities. Trekking is a passionate pastime for scores of city dwellers, especially techies, and the move to get the community involved in safeguarding forests is being seen as a positive step as it comes in the backdrop of a raging debate on whether trekking in forest areas should be banned altogether. 
 
 The new policy states, “It is important to associate the common public, students, people working in private organisations etc in understanding the role of forests in environmental conservation. To achieve this, a system of award may prove useful.”
 
 The policy goes on to say: “Variety of competition and trekking events should be organised annually and a few best performers should be awarded in due process. This will bring the forest closer to people. Besides, a substantial reward should also be allowed (sic) to those who not only help in detection of forest offences, but also help in the conviction of the accused and in confiscation of the forest produce.”
 
 “The move is an interesting one,” said Madhavi Iyengar, an avid trekker. “It will certainly help in promoting awareness about the forest and about environment conservation. On several occasions we trekkers have come across illegal tree cutting and timber logging. We had informed forest officers about these activities. Now to be rewarded for providing this kind of information is great idea,” she said. 
 
 Others such as Arun Gowda felt the move would not help detect offences.
 
 “Rewards for trekkers is a great idea although illegal activities in areas where trekkers are permitted rarely happen,” said Arun Gowda, a software professional. “However, the initiative will boost interest in forest and wildlife. Trekking is hard work and trekkers brave several challenges during such expeditions. The rewards initiative would encourage them to undertake more of these activities.” 
 
 Commenting on the policy guidelines a senior official from the department said, “Although sensitive areas will remain closed to trekking-related activities, other areas will be kept open provided trekkers obtain prior permission from officials concerned. Trekkers could turn out to be great informers on degradation of forests, poaching and death of wildlife, the illegal timber lobby and sand smugglers who operate deep inside jungles. All they need to do is to inform our field staff and officers about what they have seen and suitable action will be taken thereafter.”
 
 Forest Minister C H Vijayashankar too is optimistic about the new initiative, but refused to disclose details on what the rewards might be. Sources close to the minister said: “The department is yet to take a final decision on the nature of the award. While a few vouched for monetary rewards, a few have argued for rewards in kind.”
 
 Several firms in Bangalore organise packaged trekking expeditions to various forests. Regular trekkers navigate and communicate through modern GPS-enabled gadgets. Kudremukh, Baba Budangiri, Bannerghatta, Kodachadri, Kemmannugudni, Biligiri Ranga hills, Male Mahadeshwara hills, Agumbe, Charmadi, Shiradi forest and Bisile ghat forests are preferred destinations.