A raid at a store in upscale Koramangala on Saturday threw up birds and animals protected under the Indian Wildlife Protection Act. Cobras, corals and rana - a frog species – were among the wildlife discovered during a joint operation by the forest mobile squad and wildlife sleuths of two states including officials of the National Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (NWCCB).   Sleuths found over 100 species at Laboratory Traders, an outlet trading in laboratory equipment on Hosur Road. They also recovered at least five wildlife species listed under various schedules of the IWPA like cobra, mynah, rhinoceros beetle, sea horse etc. Not only was the store putting a price on the animals, but it even gave receipts for the transactions involving wildlife.   “It comes as a shock. Possessing wildlife, exhibiting and trading, especially those listed in the IWPA, is a punishable offence, but these people did it openly,” a source, who was part of the raid, told Bangalore Mirror. “The most shocking part is they also traded wildlife protected under Schedule I.”   “An initial probe revealed several details. The outlet reportedly supplied the species to reputed schools and colleges in Bangalore. As much as selling is an offence, purchasing is too. Further probe will reveal the names of schools and wildlife products sold,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert who was part of the raid, told Bangalore Mirror.   
  Well-planned operation The Saturday raid was the result of a well-planned, month-long operation. Wildlife sleuths, including the forest mobile squad officials and NWCCB, started work after getting information from Christ College. After visits and placing orders in the guise of people setting up schools, the wildlife sleuths finally raided the premises.   They will book the owners for acquiring, exhibiting and selling protected wildlife and later decide if action has to be initiated against schools and institutes which created the demand.   “It all started with Christ College, which had some wildlife. All these institutions will come under the scanner, as the outlet has supplied to these institutes. Despite a clear notice from the central government, educational institutions are encouraging the trade, which is unfortunate,” added the source.   Those involved in the trade will be booked under Indian Wildlife Protection Act and if charges are proved, they may face imprisonment between three and seven years.   “We have to probe the matter. If they reveal details on those who bought wildlife products, we will act against them too. We will probe and recover the wild products sold, if any,” N D Sudarshan, DFO with the forest mobile squad told Bangalore Mirror.