By:Niranjan Kaggere
 
 Forest department has ordered zoos and sanctuaries to hand over cadavers of wild animals to the Bangalore Veterinary College
 
 Wannabe veterinarians will now gain a more rounded classroom experience with the state forest department directing zoos and sanctuaries to provide cadavers of wild animals to the veterinary college in Bangalore. 

 	The Karnataka Veterinary, Animal and Fisheries Sciences University, headquartered in Bidar, has four veterinary colleges in Bangalore, Bidar, Hassan and Shimoga. The colleges conduct anatomy classes involving livestock and domesticated animals, but find it difficult to procure cadavers of wild animals. Compounding the problem, the forest department routinely burns cadavers after taking visceral samples for forensic and documentation purposes. The non-availability of wildlife cadavers has turned out to be a major handicap for graduates and post-graduates specialising in zoo and wildlife veterinary sciences. 

 Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Gayathriprasad S Prabhu, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), said, “Last week we issued an order directing all zoos, wildlife sanctuaries and national parks to hand over cadavers of wild animals to the veterinary college in Bangalore. This will help them conduct dissection classes for their students in wildlife biology and zoo sciences. Department officials will inform the college of the availability of cadavers, and the college will have to look after the logistics and expenses of transporting the cadaver to its premises. This apart, the college will have to abide by certain conditions pertaining to disposal and maintenance of the body parts.” 

 When asked the reason for the forest department’s decision, Prabhu said, “All these days we were burning the cadavers of wild animals. Sometimes, cadavers in the wild would not come to our notice as they would have decomposed completely. But at times we do get cases that can be handed over to the college for academic purposes. This would in turn benefit us as these students, once they join government services, can serve the forest department on deputation. Irrespective of the schedule of the animals under the Wildlife Protection Act, we will hand over cadavers to the college.” 

 	According to sources in the forest department, veterinary students in zoo and wildlife specialisation are currently given an understanding of wildlife anatomy based on diagrams. “Very rarely do they get a chance to visit our zoos when we conduct an operation or a post-mortem. Henceforth they will be able to conduct dissections on cadavers of wild animals. The pugs and pelts can be retained in their laboratories with due security as it will come in handy in solving wildlife-related crimes and identification of animals. Presently the forensic identification of pugs or pelts is based on diagrams. Having samples in their laboratories would be of immense help to the students and teachers,” Prabhu said. 

 	Sources in the animal husbandry department said that every year around 300 undergraduate and more than 100 post-graduate students graduate from the veterinary colleges in the state.