Los Angeles: Hollywood star George Clooney has called upon the US government and the international community to return their attention to the ongoing conflict in Darfur.
 
 The actor and activist, 53, teamed up with John Prendergast and Sudan policy analyst Akshaya Kumar from the Enough Project -- a nonprofit that works to end genocide and crimes against humanity -- to author an opinion piece for the New York Times that details the escalating violence imposed by army officials onto Sudanese civilians, reported People magazine.
 
 “Mass atrocities continue to occur in Darfur with no external witness,” Clooney and his co-authors penned in the piece, which runs Thursday in the NYT print edition, noting that the Sudanese government has continuously blocked the access of journalists, humanitarian workers and peacekeeping missions.
 
 “Any window into life there is limited,” they wrote.
 
 The trio also mention travelling to the country and hearing firsthand about sexual violence at refugee camps.
 
 “During our own visits to Darfur, the Nuba Mountains and refugee camps in neighbouring countries, we have heard story after story like those from Tabit,” they wrote.
 
 The article continued, “These 'torture rapes' are just one tool in Sudan's criminal arsenal, which also includes aerial bombing of hospitals and agricultural fields, burning of villages and the denial of food aid.”
 
 The 'Tomorrowland' actor has been a longtime activist against the violence in Sudan. He was arrested in 2012 for participating in a staged protest outside the Sudanese embassy in Washington, DC, and contracted Malaria during a 2011 trip to Africa, where he pushed for more diplomacy to end genocide.
 
 Clooney's wife Amal also boasts a professional resume full of social activism.
 
 STAR STUDDED CAUSES
 
 
 	MATT DAMON 	Water.org a charity co-founded by actor Matt Damon works to provide water and sanitation in the world. In 2006, Damon co-founded H2O Africa Foundation, which served to bring attention to clean water initiatives in Africa
 	
 	  	 		SEAN PENN
 		 	 		Penn is not afraid of controversy, and of questioning those in power. He knows his position in popular culture can benefit the causes he believes in, leading to his humanitarian and activist work in countries including Haiti and Pakistan 
 		
 		 	 		 			SHARON STONE
 			 		 			Apart from being spokesperson for the American Foundation for AIDS Research since 1995, Stone co-wrote “Come Together Now” after the tsunami disaster; made the song available to download after Hurricane Katrina. Donated $10,000 at the World Economic 		 			Forum to help with malaria-related health efforts, and raised $1 million from the rest of the crowd within minutes of her donation. 		 			
 			
 			 				BRANGELINA
 				 			 				The Jolie-Pitt Foundation, dedicated to eradicating extreme rural poverty, protecting natural resources and conserving wildlife, donated $1 million to Doctors Without Borders, an international medical humanitarian organization created by doctors and journalists in France in 1971.
 				
 				JAVIER BARDEM
 				 			 				 					Oscar-winning Spanish actor Javier Bardem has addressed the U.N. General Assembly on the issue of Western Sahara in October 2011.