Police recovered two tiger pelts, paws and tiger bones, all worth about Rs 15 lakh, from the poachers           For a country which wants to slap a fine of Rs 1-crore on citizens who are cruel to their pet dogs, chickens and buffalos, poachers of India’s national animal — tiger — have been let off rather lightly. But the unthinkable happened last week: For the first time in Karnataka, the nation's tiger capital, three tiger poachers were convicted and sentenced to three years' imprisonment by the 9th Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate's court in Bangalore.  
 
 Prior to this, it was only arrests of wildlife poachers that made news as conviction eluded sleuths of the CID Forest Cell and other police personnel. 
 Nabbing the culprits
 A team from Upparpet police station comprising inspector M R Mudavi, sub-inspectors S D Shashidhar and Sridhar K Poojar and some constables nabbed a three-member gang on August 17, 2008, in Gandhinagar. Acting on a tip-off, the police contingent arrested M David Kumar (29), Kodandapani (29) of Koramangala and P Venkataswamy (33) of Krishnagiri and seized two tiger pelts, tiger paws and a few pieces of tiger bones worth Rs 15 lakh. The booty was sourced from Chandapura, on the city outskirts. The three were booked under various provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972.
 
 Upparpet police station inspector Lokeshwar, who took over as investigating officer in the case, said, ""We provided enough documents to the court and are happy that the poachers have been convicted. This will teach other poachers a lesson.""
 
 
 Conservationists smiling
 The rare conviction has put the smile back on the faces of conservationists. Sanjay Gubbi, member of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board, said: ""The conviction is a welcome change on the conservation front. All these years, it was only reports of arrests which made news but culprits would eventually go scot-free. Even though the punishment is inadequate, I am happy that it has started happening."" 
 Upparpet: Wildlife trade hub
 For years, areas within Upparpet police station limits including Gandhinagar, Majestic, KG Road, Avenue Road and the infamous Tulasi Thota were the hub of wildlife trade in IT city.
 
 In 2008 alone, 24 cases relating to the wildlife trade were registered including the trading of six tiger pelts, nine leopard pelts and one rhinoceros horn. The numbers kept increasing over the years.
 The high number of cases gave the area the dubious distinction of entering the national wildlife crime database managed by the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI).
  
 
 Poaching unabated every year
 Even though the dwindling tiger population set off alarm bells and led to calls for stringent laws, poaching in various national parks and tiger reserves continues unabated. Last year, in Karnataka alone, the forest department recovered as many as six tiger pelts and arrested a couple of poachers. And 50 tigers have fallen prey to poachers in the last 30 years, says Sanjay.
 
 It's only in the last couple of years that tiger deaths have been properly tracked in India after the setting up of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). Till then, there were no efforts to keep track of the big cats' mortality rate even though their population was slowly being decimated.
 
 Karnataka, with more than 390-400 big cats, has four tiger reserves including Bandipur, Nagarhole, Anshi-Dandeli and Bhadra Tiger reserves. Recently, the central government also notified Biligiri Ranga Temple Wildlife Sanctuary as a tiger reserve. Bandipur, Nagarhole and Dandeli were once the hub of poachers though such incidents have come down in the last one year due to the efforts of forest officials.
 
 
 Poachers and their code words
 Chamda: Pelt
 Chamda ded Get me the pelts
 Fancy item: Tiger pelt and tiger paws
 Rose products: Leopard pelt and paws
 Kutta chamda: Otter skin
 
 
 Veerappan of the North
 One of the first high-profile convictions for tiger poaching in India came in January 2003 when Sansar Chand was arrested on a train in Rajasthan while carrying pelts. Known as ‘Veerappan of the North,’ Sansar established a strong network in Karnataka and succeeded in poaching dozens of tigers. However, none of his men were convicted in any of the courts in the state.
 
 Chand, who took to the illegal trade at age 16, has killed 250 tigers, 2,000 leopards, 5,000 otters, 20,000 wildcats and 20,000 wild foxes. It was Chand who turned the Sariska Tiger Reserve into a tiger-free zone.
 
 His confession to the CBI revealed that in 2006 alone, he had sold 470 tiger and 130 leopard pelts to customers in Nepal and Tibet. With strong family support from mother Manuka Devi, wife Rani and son Akash, Chand decimated the population of tigers and other wildlife across the country.
 
 He and his associate Yakub Chacha were grilled by the state forest cell sleuths in connection with the arrest of Karnataka’s notorious wildlife traders – Prabhakar Gajakosh from Hubli and Abdul Khader Chaudhury of Hyderabad.