Sunil Heggaravalli, to kill whom tabloid editor Ravi Belagere is said to have hired a contract killer, met police commissioner T Suneel Kumar and submitted a petition that his family and he be provided with protection. Heggaravalli claims Belagere has contacts with criminals and may be able to harm him even from jail.
 
 Meanwhile, police continued questioning Belagere on day four of his being in custody and even questioned his wife Yashomathy on Sunday. Yashomathy is said to have denied that she was in any kind of a personal relationship with Heggaravalli. Central crime branch (CCB) police sources told BM Belagere was mostly cooperating with the probe, but continued to deny any wrongdoing.
 
 
 A team has been dispatched to Vijayapur to nab Viju Badigaar, an associate and relative of Shashidhar Mundewade, who allegedly took up the contract killing from Belagere. The team has spread in to Indi, Sindagi taluks of Vijayapura, but is yet to trace him.
 
 
 Belagere’s health is stable except for a small wound on his toe that he probably sustained while getting into the jeep. He was subjected for medical tests at Victoria Hospital on Sunday according to the magistrate order. He has been brought back to CCB office after a thorough check-up, deputy commissioner of police (crime-2) Jinendra Kanagavi said.
 
 A team of officials, headed by assistant commissioner of police and a woman police inspector, visited Yashomathy’s house at Rajarajeshwari nagar. Woman police inspector Ayesha Begum questioned her about Belagere and her relationship with Heggaravalli. It is said Yashomathy said she had only communicated with Heggaravalli on official work. She also pleaded to the police not to question her about this as the media is already ‘maligning her by trying to prove she was intimate with Heggaravalli’. The officers questioned her for more than three hours. According to sources, Yashomathy was not as cooperative.

Read Also:
Senior citizen arrested for clicking women's photos in metro  
 
 A team of officers also summoned Heggaravalli for questioning. The officers asked Heggaravalli about his friendship with Belagere outside of and at work. They also grilled him about his relationship with Yashomathy. Police also questioned him about his statements before the media that Belagere had tried to kill him in 2014 too. 
 
 Sources in the CCB told BM, Belagere told them on Sunday not to waste their time and his too by questioning him and claimed he has not hired anybody to kill Heggaravalli. The source said Belagere told police circumstances has forced Mundewade, his employee, to become a killer. Belagere is said to have told the police that just because he has contact with a murderer doesn’t mean he gave him a contract to kill. “Belagere speaks nicely to the officers sometimes, but at other times he loses patience and shouts at them,” the source said.
 
 The officers are also trying to find out why and how Belagere had live bullets at his place. Kanagavi clarified to BM the police have not registered any FIR against Belagare under the Wildlife Act.
 
 Belagere has been provided a separate room in the CCB office where he has been given all basic facilities. He is being given home food brought to him by his daughter and son. Belagere is reading the newspapers and getting to know what is being written about him and is said to be asking for cigarettes sometimes.
 
 Police say Belagere or Mundewade are not involved in Gauri Lankesh’s murder, but investigation will look at all angles. The CCB may ask the magistrate to extend Belagere’s police custody by two more days.

Read Also:
Corporator's husband arrested for assault