Kulkarni’s letter flag 71,255 of pending wildlife cases, impacting conservation efforts

A Karnataka-based wildlife conservationist has written to Karnataka Environment Minister Eshwar Khandre to establish a fast-track court for speedy disposal of forest and wildlife-related offences.

The letter written by Giridhar Kulkarni on May 25 pointed out that thousands of cases related to forest, environment, and wildlife have been filed in Karnataka and are pending for several years and this is negatively impacting conservation efforts.

“Thousands of forest and wildlife offence cases have been filed in the state and hearings of these cases are pending in the Supreme Court, High Court, and district courts. This is when new cases are being registered every year. The slow disposal rate impedes conservation efforts,” noted the letter.

According to the Karnataka Forest Department (KFD), as many as 71,255 forest offence cases under various categories such as encroachment, sandalwood, red sandalwood, wildlife, rosewood, and others are pending disposal. Between April and December 2023, over four thousand new cases were registered.

Experts underline that the recommendation to establish a fast-track court for speedy disposal of wildlife and forest-related crime cases was also recommended by the elephant experts task force formed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in its report in August 2010.

Similarly, the Center’s Parliamentary Standing Committee on Environment and Climate Change recommended in 2006 that the Center and respective States establish fast-track courts for speedy disposal of forest, environment, and wildlife cases.
 
Further, the National Wildlife Action Plan (2017-31) has also recommended that the Central Government and respective states should take the required steps and establish fast-track courts for speedy disposal of wildlife cases.

, the committee constituted by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to improve and strengthen the working conditions of frontline forest staff has recommended setting up fast-track courts for speedy disposal of wildlife cases. An official order has been issued to the chief secretaries of all states.

“Assam has already set up a fast-track court for trying wildlife offences. An affidavit has been submitted to the Odisha High Court to set up such a tribunal. In the past, a Supreme Court Judge has also emphasised the need for fast-track courts for forest and wildlife-related crimes. It is time even Karnataka comes up with this provision as cases are piling up fast. The state government and forest department should submit a proposal to the Ministry of Law and Justice and State Law Department in this regard,” said Kulkarni.

    Assam has already set up a fast-track court for trying wildlife offences. An affidavit has been submitted to Odisha high court to set up such a tribunal ­–Giridhar Kulkarni
Notably, a few months back, the forest department had plans to appoint a team of special officers to ensure speedy disposal of forest land encroachment cases in the state. The idea was to formulate a team of retired KFD officials that would not only file forest encroachment cases but would also take them to a logical end in an expeditious manner.

The department was planning to get the proposal approved by the state government and appoint a team of 80 officials. However, there has been no further development on that front.