Wildlife volunteers of Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) resorted to a flash protest on Friday after a snake-catcher was allegedly thrashed and harassed by the police. 
 
 The protests, spanning more than 12 hours, led to complete shutdown of wildlife rescue activities across the city. Wildlife volunteers decided not to rescue snakes in and around Konanakunte limits henceforth after an ASI challenged them that their services are no longer required.
 
 Manjunath, a BBMP-recognised snake rescuer was on his job at Royal Hermitage near Bannerghatta when he was suddenly bundled into a patrolling Hoysala.
 
 “At the spot, I rescued the snake safely. The cops, witnessing the entire episode, had it recorded on their mobile phone. Later, they forced me to board their vehicle to release the snake into the forest. However, they took me to Konanakunte police station. The constables in mufti belonging to crime wing not only snatched my phone and belongings, but physically abused me at the station whenever I asked for the reason that why I was brought to the station,” said Manjunath.
 
 Soon, word spread and other wildlife volunteers started arriving at the police station. Angered by the move, the police allegedly beat up Manjunath. According to Manjunath and other volunteers, the cops told them that they never release snakes into the wild and they are only interestd in scaring people. The incident took a turn when some of the celebrities staying in the locality, who know Manjunath personally, called up Home Hinister Ramalinga Reddy and informed him about the police high-handedness.When wildlife volunteers landed up at the police station demanding explanation, the police had no answers. Subsequently, he was released.
 
 According to Manjunath, the police not only released Manjunath, but threatened him not to reveal or say anything about police brutality at the station. “If this how we are treated, why should we respond to distress calls?“asked Manjunath. 
 
 A senior police officer from Konanakunte police station told Bangalore Mirror that they acted on a telephone complaint [made to 100] by one of the women residents. “A resident dialled up 100 and said a snake was spotted in her residence five times in the last few months.
 
 As Manjunath was also a resident of the locality, our personnel had brought him to the station. Having realised that he is a BBMP recognised volunteer, we let him go,” the officer told BM.