By Rachana Ramesh

Report analysing state of environment in country over last decade calls it exacerbating crisis

Fridays for Future (FFF), Bahutva Karnataka and People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) in collaboration have come up with a report analysing the state of India’s environment in the past decade. The report deemed it an “exacerbating crisis”.

The report began by noting that India has ranked last in the world, that is, 180 out of 180 countries on the 2022 Environmental Performance Index (EPI), a sustainability ranking system developed by Yale and Columbia university. India’s ranking has plummeted from 125 in the 2012 EPI to the bottom in the course of a decade under BJP’s rule, it said. The EPI ranks countries on their national efforts to protect environmental health, enhance ecosystem vitality, and mitigate climate change and our country’s dismal performance is only telling of its sustainability efforts.

The report noted that the total number of Environmental (EC), Forest (FC), Wildlife (WL) and Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearances granted by the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) increased 21 times, from 577 in 2018 to 12,496 in 2022.

“The only obstacle to the destruction of the environment, cutting of trees, polluting activities by industries, businesses and adverse impact of projects by state and private interests, are the protective laws. In an ideal system, projects that damage the environment would not be allowed or granted clearance under the laws. 

However in the same period that environmental pollution and climate change impacts were on a steady rise in our country, destructive developmental activities were given an impetus by diluting the environmental protections in law,” it explained, citing that more than 100 amendments were made to the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006 between 2018-2023 alone.

Ease of doing business
It further pointed out that Draft Environmental Impact Assessment Notification, 2020 was introduced in the midst of the covid-19 pandemic with an aim to supersede the existing EIA Notification of 2006 and further enhance the “ease of doing business” by easing approval of project applications and granting licenses.

Among the various drastic regressions proposed under the law, the 2020 notification removed 40 types of projects from the requirements of the prior EC. It also removed the requirement for mandatory public consultation for most projects, thereby taking away the right of affected communities and local stakeholders from being consulted on the project.

“The Forest Conservation Act, 1980 (FCA) is crucial in conserving forest and biodiversity in India. It mandates obtaining prior approval from the central government for any project or activity involving clearing of forest. The Government introduced amendments to the FCA in 2023 changing the very definition of forest, to narrow the scope of lands covered under the definition. 

It also limited the applicability of FCA to eliminate safeguards for areas classified as deemed forests and community forests, thereby placing approximately 25% of India’s forested areas at risk of urbanisation, mining, and infrastructure expansion. 

This change infringes upon the rights of indigenous tribes and forest-dwelling communities to be mandatorily consulted before granting approval for diverting forest land for non-forestry activities, and to self-govern as outlined in the Forest Rights Act of 2006 (FRA) and under the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) - rights already diluted considerably by this regime,” the report elaborated.

Cut down forests
Another astonishing statistic mentioned in the report is that between 2014 and 2020, less than one percent forest clearances (allowing forest diversion for non-forestry activities i.e. facilitating deforestation) were rejected by the government.

Highlighting the silencing of activists working towards sustainability, the report noted that India was ranked as the fourth deadliest country by environmental activists as per the Defenders of the Earth report released by Global Witness in 2017.
 
It also made a mention of the 22-year-old climate Bengaluru activist Disha Ravi, who was arrested by the Cyber Crime unit of the Delhi Police on charges of sedition and criminal conspiracy for her involvement in a “toolkit” in support of the farmers protesting against the contentious farm laws in 2021.
 
The arrest was based on no evidence and no charge sheet has been filed by the police in her trial so far.

For more information on other regulatory amendments, reports regarding mining, pollution and climate change, one can access the report through the social media handle of Bahutva Karnataka.