By Manoj Sharma 
 
 They are accused of trading in his canines
 
 Facing flak from conservationists and wildlife buffs over the mysterious death of tiger Prince, Karnataka Forest Department (KFD) on Thursday achieved a major breakthrough in the case by arresting three poachers.
 
 The poachers were arrested on charges of chopping Prince’s face and canines to sell them in the wildlife trade racket.
 
 Prince was the most photographed tiger in Bandipur Tiger Reserve (BRT) and he was found dead earlier this month with his body parts being mutilated.
 
 Despite the crackdown, KFD is at the receiving end for messing up the entire incident while hiding the fact that its face was severed when they discovered Prince’s carcass a few days ago.
 
 Buckling under intense pressure from all quarters, the KFD officials nabbed Soma (Swamy) and Bomma, both natives of Cheluvanarayanapura and Pinniswamy from Hindupura.
 
 While Soma and Bomma have been charged for cutting the three canines of Prince and selling it in the open market, Pinniswamy has been accused of buying the canines for Rs 3,000.
 
 After recovering the canines and weapons used for the crime, the officials produced all the accused before the magistrate.
 
 The sudden death of Prince a few days ago left many wildlife buffs rattled. Even as many were in a state of shock, KFD officials summed it up saying that Prince died of starvation in the wild. The department released photographs too supported their claim. However, the incident took an ugly turn when the pictures of Prince’s
 bludgeoned face was circulated on social media. The bludgeoned face revealed that either Prince would have been hacked to death or must have been a victim of meat bomb which is widely used by local farmers to kill wild boars.
 
 Upset over what had happened to Prince, wildlife volunteers and conservationists staged protest against KFD for trying to hush-up the case and demanded inquiry into the entire episode. It was only when the images of mutilated body parts of Prince went viral; the KFD got to know about the seriousness of the case and began cracking down.
 
 “Initially they claimed that Prince died of starvation. But the pictures revealed something else. It was only when we pressured that they realised something has gone
 wrong and got into the abyss of the case. Even then they could have admitted their mistake and revealed what exactly they observed when they discovered the carcass. If not for our protests and campaign, the incident would have gone like yet another death of tiger in the wild,” lamented an activist.
 
 Replying to the allegations T Hiralal, director, BRT said, “We have arrested three people in links with selling and buying the dead tiger’s teeth. But they have mutilated the parts only after Prince was dead. Hence, Prince did not die due to meat bomb as suspected by the wildlife activists.” However, Hiralal acknowledged that they did not reveal to the media about mutilation of body parts. “We have not hidden anything in the entire issue. Though there was no trace of meat bomb we observed that his body parts were chopped and found within a few yards from his carcass.
 
 We had appraised our higher officials about the mutilation of body parts,” Hiralal justified.
 
 Will poachers go scot-free?
 
 While the arrest of poachers has brought some respite to activists, many opine that they would go scot-free in a few days of time.
 
 Two persons among three who were arrested on Thursday were previously arrested on charges of poaching and were out on bail.
 
 “Soma was previously arrested on charges of poaching an elephant tusk in Omkara range a few months ago.
 
 Pinniswamy too was booked for trading Tiger pelt in November 2016,” said Poovaiah, range forest officer. Both Soma and Bomma, inhabitants of a remote hamlet inside Bandipur used to roam around the same area on pretext of grazing livestock.
 
 “Soma was a habitual poacher and both of them found the carcass of Prince and decided to chop off Prince’s mouth for want of canines. With Pinniswamy known to both of them was convinced by the duo to buy the canines for Rs 3,000. Since he had only made a payment of Rs 1,000, the duo had sold only one canine while preserved two canines,” revealed a KFD official.