Bangalore Mirror delves into the clandestine and ugly world of illegal parakeet trade

Illegal trade, especially online trading of Alexandrine parakeets (talking parakeets) is raising concern among wildlife conservationists who say that these birds face more than double the risk of getting endangered when compared to other birds in the wild.

Avinandan, India Representative, World Parrot Trust and also a parrot researcher says though India has been blessed with 12 different parrot families including the Alexandrine ones and is home for a considerable numbers, in terms of their population, these birds could be on their way to extinction, and the primary reason is said to be the illegal trade.

“Birds in the wild like the woodpecker face up to 17 per cent of risk of threats or getting endangered due to the usual factors such as climate change, habitat loss, infections, pollution (dirty water) etc, but the percentage of the risk of threats to the parrots species or getting endangered, is 45 per cent (more than double is this threatened species) which includes around 20 per cent of the natural factors and the rest - illegal trading,” Avinandan says.

Alexandrine parakeets were found to exist originally 300 to 400 years ago, and they are found all the way from Northern Afghanistan to southern Vietnam and to Sri Lanka and Andaman’s Islands and India. They are also found in the Himalayas and some of the parrot families have migratory aptitude. Alexandrine parakeets have become a little scarce in South India, says bird experts. “Earlier, the type specimen was found in Senjikottai also known as gingee fort in Tamil Nadu, but at present it is completely extinct from that spot and around,” adds Avinandhan.

Not only illegal trading of parakeets but also keeping these birds as pets is considered crime under the Wildlife Protection Act, but still the trade thrives as there is demand and naturally a supply chain exists, say other bird experts.

.

Young parakeet hatchlings are snatched away from their nests while waiting for their parents to return with food. Poachers know of their breeding seasons and this happens every year like a clockwork, experts say. In January, the poachers get on to the trees when they find parakeet hatchlings and snatch them away from their nests that are mostly found on coconut trees in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and take them to Chennai. Here the birds are handed over to a separate group of caretakers who are also a part of the trade. As the initial one month is crucial for each parakeet’s survival, it’s a challenge and a delicate affair with care being given through expertise as the birds are prone to infections and die. The hatchlings are fed with baby food until they grow a little in size and then photographs are taken and the online trading happens.

Experts say, on an average, for every 500 parakeet hatchlings only around 150 of them make it to households after they are sold. In this trade, the poachers also use students as a part of their trade as they are tech savvy and they are the ones who upload on online portals for sale and earn exploiting wildlife. While Chennai is one of the old hubs of illegal parakeet trading, now all the Metro cities like Bengaluru are turning into hubs with this illegal parakeet training rampant through online portals, the experts said.

****************************************

26 Alexandrine parakeet hatchlings rescued

Rescued hatchllngs at the Bannerghatta Rehabilitation Centre
The city police, on Monday, arrested two persons and rescued around 26 Alexandrine parakeet hatchlings that have been taken to the wwhere they are being nurtured. The arrested have been identified as Bharath and Akshith — one of who is just out of college and looking for a job while the other one is a part-time student and a part-time worker, the police said. The two told the police that they sourced these birds from their contacts in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu and they were selling them to customers online in Bengaluru. The Varthur police have registered a case under the Wildlife Protection Act along with IPC sections involving Prevention of Animal Cruelty etc and are investigating. Wildlife conservationists are requesting members of the general public to not buy parakeets because the trade flourishes only when the demand is more in the market.