Customs officials at the Bangalore International Airport (BIA) were left stunned when they seized what appeared to be a massive number of tiger skins, teeth and claws on Sunday night. But the ‘tiger trail’ quickly petered out. What they had stumbled on was a case of elaborate fakes!   Officials had seized over 500 skins and a large quantity of teeth and claws from nine people, believed to be tribal folk from Hunsur near Mysore, who were bound for Bangkok on a late-night flight. The ‘wildlife’ products were stuffed in 28 bags, but a closer inspection of the haul revealed that the skins were dyed cow and calf hides and the teeth and claws were chiselled out of cow horns and camel bone.    The products have been sent to National Wildlife Crime Control Bureau officials and wildlife sleuths for authentication. The nine travellers have been detained pending their reports. “These seem to be hides of cows and calves dyed to look like tiger skins,” T V Ravi, joint commissioner, customs, told Bangalore Mirror. “They were being taken by locals who hail from villages around Hunsur to Bangkok. Wildlife experts are examining the haul.”   Tiger teeth and claws are believed to have medicinal properties and are also used as pendants in chains. There is steep demand for these products in the international market. Officials say that the passengers were planning to peddle these fakes off as the real thing.    Sources say the products are so well made that it is difficult to tell if they are real or fake. The skins came to light while scanning the baggage of the nine passengers.    “The passengers say they are taking these products to sell on the streets of Bangkok,” Ravi said. “If they are indeed cow, calf and camel products, the nine will not have violated the Wildlife Act and will be let off. However, they need a licence to transport animal skins abroad. If they don’t, they will be penalised.”    Wildlife experts say such cases are common.   “Locals in forests around Mysore are exclusively into this business and run factories that make fake products,” Sharath R Babu, a wildlife expert, said. “They earn a living making these fakes and by cheating people into buying them. It is not the first time. However, there is the concern that genuine wildlife products might be found in the haul. Even if there is one genuine tiger skin, the implications are grave.”