A potent ammunition has been added to the arsenal of forest sleuths in their hunt for poachers. The state government has decided to allow forest officials to obtain Call Data Records (CDR) of culprits from telecom service providers. 

 	This move, forest officials said, will help them in cracking the whip on poaching activities and help forest officials probe possible role of global networks behind illegal trade in wildlife in Karnataka. 

 

 	Easy to track poachers 

 	“It would be easier for the investigating officers to track poachers’ affiliation to any of the global illegal markets and thereby establish the logical link behind poaching activities. Police have been using CDR details to trace most of the crime incidents. We will also be able to understand if the poachers had been in touch with traders in any of the Asian or European countries,” said a DCF rank official attached to one of the tiger reserves. 

 	This is for the first time in the country that CDR, which was hitherto available only with select agencies including Defence and Home department personnel for investigation, has been made available to forest officials. 

 	A senior forest official said, “Till now, we had to obtain CDR from police personnel, though registering cases under the Forest and Wildlife Protection Act. A prolonged wait to get CDR affected the pace of investigation of some important cases. Hence, the forest department had submitted a proposal before the home department to empower forest officials to get CDR details from telecom service providers.” 

 	The home department granted access to CDR on a pilot basis. Sources in the forest department said the project was successfully tested in Biligiri Ranga Temple (BRT) Tiger Reserve and Rajiv Gandhi Tiger Reserve (Nagarahole). 

 	Impressed with the success, the state government has now decided to extend the service on a permanent basis to forest officials using its powers under the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rule 2009.