Illegally collected wildlife items to be returned; special cell to be created to ensure speedy disposal of forest land encroachment

If you have a wildlife article without an ownership certificate, you can surrender the artefacts at your nearest office of Karnataka Forest Department starting January 16. The announcement was made by Karnataka Forest, Environment and Ecology Minister Eshwar Khandre on Tuesday. This after the state government, in a recent cabinet meeting, gave a nod to provide a three-month window to surrender wildlife items to those in illegal possession of wildlife articles.

“Illegal collection of wildlife items such as tiger body parts, leopard claw, deer horn, elephant tusks, hair, etc., is a crime. 30 days was given under Wildlife (Conservation) (Karnataka Rules) in 1973, followed by a six-month window in 2003 to obtain a certificate of possession of wildlife items. However, there are still many who illegally possess these items without declaration, which is a punishable offense. The government has decided to provide another opportunity to surrender these items and avoid getting booked under the Wildlife Act. These items can be returned to the nearest forest department office from January 16, for three months. An acknowledgment receipt will be issued to such people upon the surrender,” said Khandre and added that any person found in possession or involved in the trade of wildlife products after the expiry of this period will be prosecuted under the Wildlife Protection Act.

Special team for speedy disposal of encroachment cases

The Minister said that a special cell will be created to ensure speedy disposal of forest land encroachment cases in the state. He also informed that an amount to the tune of Rs 2,000 crore is pending against leased forest land in Kodagu, Chamarajanagar, and other districts. To recover this amount, another special team will be created. The forest land was leased to various companies before independence for growing coffee, tea, and rubber before independence.

 “It has been noticed that there are arrears, and it has been decided that a special team under the leadership of BP Ravi, the Principal Secretary of the Environment Department, will be formed to recover this amount. Our state forest area has more than 5500 acres of forest land leased at Rs 2 per acre. As many as seven long-term leases of 99 years were granted to various companies and individuals during British rule. Some leases were renewed before the Forest Protection Act came into force after independence. In 1997, the lease rate was increased by Rs 5,000 per hectare. These companies have not paid the lease for decades,” said Khandre.

“If all the lease payments, including interest, compound interest, and penalties are paid by all these companies, the department would get a total amount of more than Rs 2,000 crore. All necessary steps will be taken to recover this amount and to claim back the land on which the lease period has expired,” added the Minister.