The Forest Department officials are now closing in on journalist and tabloid editor Ravi Belagere, and have registered an FIR against him under the Wild Life Act. The case was taken up after the special enquiry squad of the central crime branch (CCB) police handed them a deer skin and tortoise shell found in the possession of Belagere. The Range Forest Officer of Kaggalipura Varun Kumar SV filed the complaint in this regard.
 
 Forest department officials visited Belagere’s office and house in Kadirenahalli of Padmanabhanagar on Friday along with the seized deer skin and tortoise shell.
 
 The officials have filed the case under Sections 2 (1) (2) (16), 9, 39, 43, 44, 48, 49A(b), 50 & 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 against Belagere for keeping the shell of Hawksbill sea turtle and the deer skin.
 
 The forest officials verified the seized property and identified the shell to be that of a Hawksbill sea turtle (Length 41cm and Width 39 cm.) and spotted Deer Skin (Length- 101cm and Width 80 cm.) The officers are going to investigate how Belagere got these. They will check if the animals were killed by him or he bought the shell and skin. The officials will also compare the bullet mark on the deer skin and if it matches with the bullets of Belagere’s licensed weapon, the tabloid editor will be in a bigger soup that he already is in. His licence will have to be cancelled, a forest officer said.
 
 Meanwhile, Belagere is continuing to receive treatement for diabetes and fluctuations in blood pressure. The colleague he is accused of having hired someone to kill, Sunil Heggaravalli, has moved a petition to City Civil Court number 65. He has filed a petition before the court requesting it to consider their petition and contest against bail for Belagere. He also requested the court to cancel interim bail to Belagere. His interim bail ends on Saturday.
 
 The latest issue of Belagere’s tabloid ‘Hi Bangalore’ hit the market on Friday. The cover story ‘Shani Mukhi Kolege Supari Ondu Kedu’ mentions ‘notes from central jail’. The issue was selling like hot cakes on Friday as many were curious to know what Belagere has written about Heggaravalli and the entire supari episode.