Rajkot: Displaying abject dearth of humane values, four villagers are seen deriving sadistic pleasure by harassing a leopard cub, not showing any contrition for their heinous crime. In fact, the video shows the tormentors bursting into hysterical laughter as the cub struggles to break free from their clutches.

The video which has gone viral on WhatsApp and social media, shows how the men have pinned the cub in the fork of a tree, and while poking and torturing it with sticks, filmed the innocent creature's hapless cries for help. 

“Be careful, its mother must be nearby,” warns one of the culprits, who is seen holding it by the neck. 

“It has bitten me, but its teeth are too soft,” another culprit is heard exclaiming in the video that is roughly 46 seconds long.

However, what is unclear is the location of the video, as the place is not very specific. The forest department officials have, however, ruled out the location to be anywhere from near Gir Wildlife Sanctuary. 

“Primarily, the video doesn’t seem to have been shot in Gir, said D T Vasavada, chief conservator of forests (CCF), wildlife, Junagadh.

Vasavada further said that the villagers are heard using words like ‘meku’ and ‘bachhku’ — indicating a dialect spoken in some other parts of the state. 

But, in any case, we have also alerted our local intelligence staff to check if such an incident happened in and around Gir. If the culprits are found here, they will surely be arrested,” he asserted.

A cash award of Rs 25000 was announced for catching the culprits soon after the video caught the attention of Greater Gir Task Force.

"A cash award of INR 25000 for providing information or help in catching these culprits is announced by Greater Gir Task Force. Contact concerned DCFs or DCF Greater Gir Task Force at 7574950055. @CCF_Wildlife @JunagadhCcf @HoffPccf @drrajivguptaias @CMOGuj," a Deputy conservator of the Gir forest wrote on Twitter.

 	A cash award of INR 25000 for providing information or help in catching these culprits is announced by Greater Gir… https://t.co/lq8KqvS0dj— DCF_GirWest (@DCF_GirWest) 1571035986000