The animal is categorised as ‘vulnerable’ by global nature conservation body
 
 In the last one week, two sloth bear cubs have been rescued in the State. In an rescue reported near Vittalapura village in Tumakuru on Tuesday, a cub was found trapped with a deadly snare around its left forelimb in a barbed fence. About 10 months old, the male bear was desperately struggling to free itself but was helped by Wildlife SOS and the forest department. After receiving the necessary medical treatment for injuries, the cub was later released into its natural habitat.
 
 On being informed of the situation, a four-member team from Wildlife SOS accompanied by five forest officers rushed to the aid of the animal. After a quick assessment of the situation, the team immobilized the cub before they could carefully extricate it from the fence and cut the snare. The bear had sustained cuts and bruises on its limb and was bleeding from the mouth as a result of it gnawing at the barbed wires. After treatment, the animal was kept under observation for a few hours and later released into the forest. Dr Arun A. Sha, Director, Veterinary Operations, Wildlife SOS, said, “Apart from external injuries, the left forelimb was swollen. The bear was also bleeding in the mouth as it tried to cut the wire fencing in an effort to escape. We administered topical treatment for the wounds along with anti-inflammatory injectables.” Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder of Wildlife SOS, said, “We are extremely fortunate that the bear did not sustain any severe injuries and was able to return to its natural habitat. Farmers often set up barbed wire fencing around their fields to prevent wild animals such as sloth bear, nilgai or wild boar from raiding their crops. Poachers often exploit this situation to get easy access to wild animals by strategically placing snares and traps around these areas.”
 
 Laxminarayanappa, Range Forest Officer Chikkanayakahalli, Tumakuru district, said, “Measures have been taken to create awareness amongst the local community about learning to co-exist with the wildlife and punishements that result from crimes against them.”
 
 On November 4, the Wildlife SOS team at Bannerghatta Bear Rescue Centre received a call from rfo Dinesh Gowda about a sloth bear caught in a metal snare near Kanakapura road. The bear had wandered into a large millet field when it got stuck in the snare while climbing a tree.
 
 The bear had been struggling for hours to break free. Shocked villagers immediately reported the matter to the forest officials, who took steps to free the animal. Over the years, the natural habitat of the sloth bear has reduced due to human encroachment, leading to frequent man-animal conflict. The sloth bear is listed as a ‘vulnerable species’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).