Last week, a man posing as a sub-inspector, CoD forest cell, took the staff at Nagarhole Tiger Reserve for a ride. The fake cop, however, was caught red-handed with a pistol, which amounts to a serious crime.   The man, identified as Ramachandran R, a resident of Bangalore and an MSc student at Gandhi Krishi Vignana Kendra, was arrested on charges of impersonation.    The PG course is offered by Centrefor Wildlife Studies. He was later granted bail.   It all began on July 11, when Ramachandran called the Mysore RFO (range forest officer), A V Sathish, and introduced himself as a CoD sub-inspector visiting D B Kuppe, which is in Nagarhole tiger reserve. Ramachandran also asked the forest staff to arrange for his overnight stay there. They obliged immediately.   At around 3 am, Ramachandran, posing as a CoD sub-inspector at Dummanakatte checkpost, went to Balle and halted there.    The next morning, he visited the Bavali checkpost, which is near the Karnataka-Kerala border and guarded by both police and forest officials.   There, he reviewed their work, sought details about their performance and enquired if officials maintained a diary of their activities every day.    As he began to take the staff to task, they grew suspicious.   “He questioned us why the safari was closed, besides reviewing our work. The checkpost staff grew suspicious as no forest officer was accompanying the ‘CoD officer’. That’s when they informed the RFO. He, in turn, asked them to engage him till he verified his identity. Later, he found there was no such official in the forest cell. Immediately, the police was alerted. He was arrested on charges of impersonation,” said a source from the forest department. He was later granted bail.   Beechanahalli police registered a case against Ramachandran. Sathish, the RFO, and the police were taken aback when they searched him. They found a pistol on his person.   “We got information that someone impersonating as a CID forest cell officer was caught by forest officials. The issue is being probed by the police,” said Arun Chakravarti, IGP, CID (forests).   Meanwhile, it was learnt Ramachandran was armed with an identity card and a letter of appointment as a special police officer signed by former ADGP, CID (forests) K S N Chikkerur.
 
 
 To face music
 Experts say Ramachandran will face action under the Indian Wildlife “This (his actions) amount to a violation of Indian Wildlife Protection Act. As per Section 51 (1-C), a person who commits an offence in relation to the core area of a tiger reserve shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but may extend to seven years, and also with fine which shall not be less than Rs 50,000 but may extend to Rs 2 lakh,” a wildlife expert told Bangalore Mirror.