New Delhi, April 14: India has offered to help countries that have lost or depleted tiger population rebuild suitable habitats and sizeable prey counts and assist in conservation management programmes for the reintroduction of tigers in their landscapes. Indian environment and forests minister Prakash Javadekar, wrapping up a three-day international ministerial conference on tigers here today, said India is "ready to help" countries that would like tigers back on their historical landscapes. "We're ready to help in habitat improvement and in capacity building... if we get a proposal, we will help in all possible ways," Javadekar said. Cambodia - which is among countries that have lost or nearly lost their tigers - is keen to bring back tigers both in its eastern plains and western mountains, a senior Cambodian official told The Telegraph on the sidelines of the conference. The World Wildlife Fund says there has been no confirmation of tigers in the wild in Cambodia since 2007, but Cambodian officials assert that the country still has about 20 tigers in the wild, conceding that the population is dangerously low to grow on its own. "We want more wild tigers in Cambodia, we have two landscapes with suitable area and habitats," said Ty Sokhun, secretary of state in Cambodia's agriculture, forestry and fisheries ministry. "We believe more tigers will be good for both conservation and for eco-tourism." A senior official with the Indian environment ministry said the nature of India's assistance would likely depend on the proposals received from countries that have lost tigers. He declined to say whether India is prepared to send tigers to such countries as part of the reintroduction process or from which Indian reserve they might come from. "We'll need to analyse the habitat being proposed for (the reintroduction of) tigers, and the conservation management systems in place," the official said. Besides Cambodia, according to a January 2015 WWF report, Kazakhstan is also examining proposals to reintroduce tigers along the southern shore of Lake Balkash, a region with vast woodlands and reed thickets that were populated by Caspian tigers until the middle of the 20th century. "Historical evidence from hunting records and encounters indicate that the Caspian tiger population in Central Asia was similar to tiger densities in India," the report said. "Restoration of the tiger population in the Balkash region could make a considerable contribution to the Global Tiger Recovery Programme." But a senior WWF official cautioned that restoration would require years of preparatory work. "I'm excited by the Cambodia's intent to restore tigers, but this would need to be preceded by establishment of solid anti-poaching activities and good enforcement," Carlos Drews, the director of the global species programme at the WWF, told this newspaper in a telephone interview from Gland, Switzerland. "The current enforcement capacity is weak, the landscape is also just starting to grow a base of prey such as deer and wild boar, this could take time, I would imagine it could take eight to 10 years before the tigers can actually be reintroduced there," Drews said. The WWF and the Global Tiger Forum had earlier this week estimated that the world's wild tiger population at 3,890 with 2,226 scattered in forests across India. The WWF-GTF report estimates Lao has two tigers, while Vietnam has less than five. The Indonesian islands of Bali and Java have lost their tigers, but Sumatra has 371 tigers.