Bollywood stars like Alia Bhatt, Rajkummar Rao and Kriti Sanon came up with rewind reels on the last day of 2022 to share memorable moments from the year. Here’s a look at some of them. Shefali Shah shared her year-end reel that showcases her successful run this year. Starting with the Disney+Hotstar thriller series Human, Shefali shares photos with her Jalsa co-star Vidya Balan and moments from the sets of Darlings. Shahid Kapoor shared a stylish recap to the year, showing off his suave outfits at film promotions and behind-the-scenes moments from the sets of Jersey. Kriti Sanon, who shone throughout the year, and shared moments from Bhediya and Bachchhan Paandey promotions to walking the ramp for Lakme Fashion Week 2022. Alia Bhatt’s year-end reel was quite different from the rest as she shared unseen photos from her life in 2022. The 29-year-old actress took to Instagram to share a video compilation of photos from her wedding to travel vlogs. “A year full of love and adventure” — that’s how Rajkummar Rao described 2022 as he recounted his roles in Badhaai Do, HIT and the Netflix noir-thriller Monica O My Darling. The 38-year-old actor also won countless awards throughout the year for his performance in films and shared his achievements with fans. Arjun Kapoor’s year-end reels comprise a medley of moments where the actor showed off his work for advertisements and films, his visit to the Stamford Bridge stadium and moments well spent with Malaika Arora. Tiger Shroff took out ample time this year to focus on his body and shared the results via a video on Instagram. “This year has def made me stronger,” the Heropanti actor wrote, flaunting his gains from this year. Kartik Aaryan made his goodbye simple with three pictures — a photo of him dancing to the Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2 title track, a thrilling moment from Freddy and an adorable photo with his furry friend Katori. “Thank you for giving me my biggest blockbusters #BhoolBhulaiyaa2 #Freddy and #Katori,” the actor wrote, looking forward to the new year.