For reel brothers Amar Akbar and Anthony, the story had ended on a happy note with family reunion. But, real-life Amar, Akbar and Anthony — the three white tiger triplets at Jawaharlal Nehru Biological Park in Bokaro — weren’t as lucky. A little more than a month old, Anthony was accidentally crushed to death by mother Ganga during lunch on Thursday. According to zoo employee Mohammad M. Beg, who serves food to the six-year-old white tigress, the tragedy took place around 12.30pm. “As we served Ganga lunch, her cubs — though they are still breastfeeding — huddled around her as they do often. But, suddenly we heard whining and realised that the 210kg tigress had stepped on Anthony,” Beg said. By the time zoo officials could take the weight off the 3.1kg cub, he was almost lifeless. “Ganga’s claws had pierced his little body and punctured one of his lungs. Anthony’s ribs too were broken too. He bled to death within a couple of minutes though the vet attended to him immediately,” said an official. A post-mortem revealed internal haemorrhage and two broken ribs as reason behind the cub’s death. Zoo chief Dr Gautam Chakravarty said the incident was very unfortunate and they did their best to save Anthony. “But, we couldn’t. His mother’s weight was too much for him. Ganga and Satpuda have lost a son. We are really sad,” he said. According to Chakravarty, Ganga’s not-so-good eyesight — a genetic defect often seen in white tigers — may have been the reason behind the accident. “The hungry mother was lured into the cage from the nursery field with food. It was past noon and as she came from light to darkness in a hurry, she failed noticed her son and stamped on him,” he said. Chief of communications of Bokaro Steel Limited Sanjay Tewary confirmed the death was an accident. “Despite their best efforts, zoo officials could not save Anthony. He was killed by his mother Ganga, though inadvertently,” he said. Zoo officials said Ganga was restless ever since the incident. “She is feeding Amar and Akbar, but is looking here and there for Anthony. She is definitely missing him,” an employee who looks after the tigress said, warning that if the tigress realised that her cub was dead, it would be difficult to keep her under control. “Maybe, she will refuse food altogether. Maybe, she will become aggressive. We don’t know what will happen yet… tomorrow will tell,” the employee added. Chakravarty admitted that the tragedy was a lesson learnt the hard way and from Friday, they would not allow the cubs to enter Ganga’s cage when food is served. “Besides, we have posted our staff near the tigress’s enclosure to keep close watch on her movements. We do not want a rerun of this at any cost,” he said. The white tiger siblings were born on May 17 and named after the famous 1977 Bollywood characters played by Vinod Khanna, Rishi Kapoor and Amitabh Bachchan just a couple of days ago. And they became heroes no less overnight.