Alipurduar: A senior Bengal forest officer said on Thursday that a nation-wide tiger consensus would be conducted across all 50 tiger reserves in India from January next year. The decision to count the big cats using direct sighting, camera traps and other methods was taken at a meeting of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) in New Delhi on October 30. N.S. Murali, the field director of the Buxa Tiger Reserve, said the census would be a lengthy process spanning over three months, followed by an analysis of the data. "The NTCA will publish the final figures in January 2019. A representative of the NTCA will be present in each tiger reserve during the census," said Murali who had attended the October 30 meeting. He said the BTR staff would be trained for the tiger count from December 6 to 10 in the Kaziranga National Park in Assam. They will, in turn, train the volunteers of different NGOs who will join the census. "Next month, we will install trap cameras across the BTR. Earlier, a pair of trap cameras was put in each 4sqkm. This time, a pair of cameras will be installed in every 2sqkm of the BTR," said Murali. In Buxa, the process will be carried out from January to March. "Teams will move through the forest and make an estimate of herbivores to have an idea of the status of the prey base of carnivores and pugmarks and scat of the tigers. The census team will also estimate human habitats inside the core areas," said Murali. The BTR is spread over 706sqkm. Forest department sources said the data on the tigers would be collected in all the reserves from April to October next year through various processes including direct sighting, signage and camera traps. In the following two months, analysis of the data would be made. The last tiger count was conducted in 2014 by the NTCA. As per its report, only three tigers were found in the north Bengal landscape, which starts from Buxa and ends in the hills. However, a few months back, two tigers were sighted in the Neora Valley National Park in Kalimpong district. In the last tiger count, it was also mentioned that the tiger population of India stood around 2,226. While the foresters are gearing up for the exercise, representatives of NGOs working for conservation of nature and wildlife have raised questions. "In the past two decades, no tiger has been sighted in the BTR. It is because of this situation that a tiger augmentation has been planned in the BTR, which in simple words means tigers would be brought there from other reserve forests. In such a situation, it is ridiculous that the officials are focussing on the tiger count," said the representative of a wildlife NGO. Sunderbans is the other tiger reserve in Bengal.