Dec. 2 (Agencies): Tiger Woods admitted to “transgressions” without being specific, apologising to his family for letting them down a day after a waitress claimed she had an affair with the world’s top golfer. “I have let my family down and I regret those transgressions with all of my heart,” Woods wrote on his website. “I have not been true to my values and the behaviour my family deserves. I am not without faults and I am far short of perfect. I am dealing with my behaviour and personal failings behind closed doors with my family. Those feelings should be shared by us alone.” His statement followed a cover story in Us Weekly magazine which quoted a Los Angeles cocktail waitress as claiming that she had a 31-month affair with Woods. The waitress, Jaimee Grubbs, told the magazine she met Woods at a Las Vegas nightclub the week after the 2007 Masters — two months before Woods’s wife, Elin Nordegren, gave birth to their first child. Grubbs claimed to have proof in 300 text messages. About three hours before Woods’s statement, the magazine published what it said was a voicemail — provided by Grubbs — that Woods left on her phone on November 24, three days before his middle-of-the-night car crash outside his home in Florida. Woods did not offer details of any alleged relationship. “I will strive to be a better person and the husband and father that my family deserves,” Woods said. “For all of those who have supported me over the years, I offer my profound apology.” One of the world’s most recognisable figures and a powerhouse pitchman with the image of a squeaky clean, hard-working sportsman, Woods has lucrative endorsement deals with major companies such as Nike, AT&T and Gillette, a unit of Procter & Gamble. His marketing deals appeared to be holding fast. Nike, Gillette, NetJets, and PepsiCo Gatorade all said their relationship with the golfer remained unchanged. “Nike supports Tiger and his family. Our relationship remains unchanged,” Beth Gast of Nike Golf said in an email. Woods has been subjected to more media scrutiny over the past week than when he first won the Masters in 1997 and set off the first wave of Tigermania. He has spoken only three times through his website, although this was his longest posting. “Although I am a well-known person and have made my career as a professional athlete, I have been dismayed to realize the full extent of what tabloid scrutiny really means,” Woods said. “My family and I have been hounded to expose intimate details of our personal lives.” He continued to insist that accounts which claimed physical violence played a role in his car crash were “utterly false and malicious”. His statement came one day after the Florida Highway Patrol closed its investigation into the accident — without Woods ever speaking to state troopers.