New York: Golfing great Jack Nicklaus says Tiger Woods "needs all of our help" after he was arrested on a charge of driving under the influence early on Monday. A police report released on Tuesday said Woods was asleep at the wheel of a Mercedes-Benz stopped on a Florida road and did not know where he was. Woods, 41, has blamed the incident on medications. Nicklaus said during a news conference on Tuesday ahead of his memorial tournament that he felt bad for the former world No. 1. "Tiger's a friend, he's been great for the game of golf and I think he needs all of our help. We wish him well,"?said the 77-year-old. Woods, who has 79 PGA Tour wins and 14 Major titles, has competed in just 19 events on the Tour since the end of 2013 due to injuries. His goal of breaking the record of 18 Major championships held by Nicklaus looks increasingly unlikely. "Tiger, I always thought, was going to break my record. I don't know what's going to happen (now)," Nicklaus said. "Does anybody want to see their record broken? Of course not. But do I want to see somebody not have the ability because of physical problems? I don't like that at all. I feel bad for him that it's happened." Along with the overwhelming feeling of sadness surrounding the incident, some of Woods' peers expressed apprehension about what they have witnessed so far. "It was just tough to see that all over the news," Bubba Watson said on Tuesday. "We all have our dark places, and Tiger is human, which everyone seems to forget," said Watson. "I think we all are concerned for him as a friend, and we would want to help him in any way we could. Whatever the cause of what happened to him, we just want him to get better." Woods' Presidents Cup partner Matt Kuchar and Bill Haas noted that no one knows what's going on with Tiger's back, while a player who asked to remain anonymous wondered about the need for a cocktail of meds at this time. "I think we all are worried about Tiger," the player said, "but you have to ask, 'What was he doing at that hour, and why is he taking Vicodin?' "I thought he said a few days ago that he never felt better. But he's taking Vicodin? I just hope that isn't an indication of something a lot more serious." The player was referring to Woods' recent announcement that he had not "felt this good in years." He certainly raised questions that many folks are asking. There is one good news for Woods though. Nike is keeping its sponsorship. A spokesman told an American news channel, "There is no change in our relationship with Tiger." Meanwhile, Woods' current girlfriend Kristin Smith is having a much rougher time amid the chaos. The blonde bombshell pleaded for privacy on Tuesday, saying she's been "bombarded by the press" after Monday's incident. "She asks, on her own behalf and on behalf of her friends and family, that the media respects her wishes to be left alone, as this is a private matter," Kristin Smith's lawyer, Richard A. Roth, wrote in a statement. "She has nothing more to say about the incident regarding the DUI arrest at this time."