Alipurduar, June 24: A committee of local people and foresters will be formed in Buxa reserve to protect tigers with the funds to be released by the National Tiger Conservation Authority. The forest department hopes that the special tiger protection force, as the committee will be called, will help check timber smuggling and poaching and reduce the dependence of the villagers living on the fringes of the reserve. “We have decided to form the special tiger protection force on the recommendation of the National Tiger Conservation Authority under the Union ministry of environment and forests. The project will be funded by the NTCA. There are 78 villages in and around the Buxa Tiger Reserve spread over 761sqkm. We will pick 112 youths aged between 18 and  25 from among the villagers to launch the protection force, which will be headed by the additional divisional forest  officer. The youths will be divided into four groups.  Each group will have a  range officer and two beat  officers,” R.P. Saini, the field director of Buxa, told  The Telegraph. The youths will be trained in forest rules and provided with arms to take on poachers and timber smugglers. Saini said the protection force would gradually build an intelligence network that can zero in on the criminals. “The forest department cannot conduct raids and arrest the hunters and timber smugglers if there is no proper information. The main task of the protection force will be to prevent timber smuggling by road and water (rivers),”  said Saini. A 2010 report had showed that Buxa had 12 tigers. The figure was based on a DNA analysis of tiger scat by the  Hyderabad-based Centre for Cellular and Molecular  Biology. Once the villagers are assured of a sustainable income, their dependence on the forest will come down. “People enter the forest and collect firewood largely because the benefits of various government schemes don’t reach them. If a good number of youths join the protection force and get a regular income, the villagers wouldn’t depend on the forest resources. Besides, the youths will stop others from exploiting the forest resources,” said a forest officer.