Russian assaulted Mumbai, Oct. 29: A 21-year-old Russian woman was molested by two unknown men in the wee hours of Monday in suburban Worli. Police said the victim, a dancer, had come to the city for an event. She was walking with two friends when the men approached them and one of the duo bit her lips. The hospital where the woman got herself admitted informed the police. A case has been registered by the police who could not record the victim’s statement as she had to leave for Delhi. Tiger reserve Bhopal (PTI): Around 295 posts at different levels are lying vacant at the six tiger reserves of Madhya Pradesh.The highest vacancies, 222, are at the level of forest guards, followed by 46 of foresters, 25 of forest rangers and two of deputy forest rangers, according to information obtained through RTI. 1984 riots Melbourne (PTI): An Australian politician will table in Parliament this week a signed  petition which will ask the government to  recognise the 1984 anti-Sikh riots in India as “genocide”. MP Warren Entsch’s office said  the move followed  requests from the Sikh community. Ex-MLA shot Chandigarh (PTI): Former Punjab MLA Malkit Singh Keetu died on Monday after being shot allegedly by his nephews over a property dispute in Moga district, police said. Harpreet and Jaspreet arrived at the Akali leader’s house and entered into an altercation with him before shooting him. Uddhav wife Mumbai (PTI): Two men were injured after their motorcycle collided with the car of Uddhav Thackeray’s wife in suburban Bandra  on Sunday night. Police said they would go  through CCTV footages to find out who was  at fault. RAW staff crunch New Delhi, Oct. 29 (PTI): The Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) is facing a shortage of secretarial officers responsible for, among other things, providing logistic support to the external intelligence agency. The organisation has written to the department of personnel and training seeking assistance in filling the vacancies. The agency has asked for the appointments on deputation for an initial period of three years. Sachin plea New Delhi (PTI): The Supreme Court has dismissed a plea to transfer to the apex court two petitions filed in different high courts challenging the nomination of Sachin Tendulkar to the Rajya Sabha. Chief Justice Altamas Kabir said: “This is not a fit case to be entertained.” MLA slap case Chandigarh (PTI): Haryana police have registered a case against an MLA of Indian National Lok Dal and his wife for allegedly slapping a 30-year-old physically challenged rape victim and her husband and using casteist remarks. Dharampal Obra and wife Sheela have also been accused of putting pressure on the victim to withdraw her case. Bird flu Bangalore (PTI): More than 220 chickens and ducks have died at the Central Poultry Development Organisation here. Over 3,600 turkeys had died in the farm in the last fortnight because of avian influenza. Jawan suicide Jammu (PTI): An army jawan allegedly shot himself dead with his service rifle along the Line of Control in Rajouri district on Sunday evening. A court of inquiry has been ordered to determine the cause of the suicide.  Vijay Singh, a new recruit, hailed from Faridabad. Tirupati scare Tirupati (PTI): Three large bronze pots were found abandoned at the main entrance of the Lord Venkateswara temple here on Sunday triggering tension among temple staff who suspected it contained bombs, sources said. The pots were found to be packed with one-rupee and Rs 2 coins.