Bollywood star Salman Khan has shared the trailer of Ali Abbas Zafar’s Bade Miyan Chote Miyan on Instagram, expressing hope that the upcoming action thriller would break the records set by his Tiger movies and Sultan. Salman has also wished Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff, who headline the movie, saying that they are going to deliver a “superhit” with the Eid release. “‘Bade Miyan Chote Miyan’, akki n tiger best of luck for the movie yeh bohut badi hit hogi (Akki and Tiger all the best for the movie, which will certainly be a superhit),” the Tiger 3 actor wrote on Tuesday. “Loved the trailer and Ali u need to break tiger n sultan ka record with this one. Umeed hai ke Hindustan ko aap aur aap ko Hindustan Eidi dengein (I hope your patriotism will be a gift to the country on the occasion of Eid)”, he added. Salman and Zaffar have collaborated on three movies so far — Sultan (2016), Tiger Zinda Hai (2017) and Bharat (2018). Dropped by production house Pooja Entertainment on Tuesday, the Bade Miyan Chote Miyan trailer features Akshay Kumar and Tiger Shroff as fearless soldiers, who have been recruited to apprehend a masked villain (Prithviraj Sukumaran) and retrieve a stolen weapon. Sonakishi Sinha and Manushi Chhillar also appear in the video. Like Sultan (2016) and Tiger Zinda Hai (2017), the trailer overflows with high-octane action sequences. Loud explosions reverberate through tunnels, laboratories and streets, while tanks, bikes and cars are overturned, culminating in a final showdown between the two soldiers and the masked villain. A fresh take on the David Dhawan-helmed 1998 film starring Amitabh Bachchan and Govinda, Bade Miyan Chote Miyan is slated to hit the screens on April 10. On the work front, Salman will reportedly join forces with Karan Johar for his next movie The Bull. The actor will also team up with director Kabir Khan for another actioner titled Babbar Sher. Besides, a YRF spy thriller, featuring Salman as Tiger and Shah Rukh Khan as Pathaan, is reportedly in the works.