Agartala, April 26: The case of the serial bomb blast in Agartala which injured 20 people on October 2, 2008, concluded yesterday with the additional district and sessions judge S.B. Dutta convicting four collaborators of the banned All Tripura Tiger Force. The four were identified as Dinesh Debbarma, Sachindra Debbarma, Bikash Debbarma and Kumaria Debbarma. They will be sentenced next Tuesday under Sections 120 (b), 320, Sections 3 and 5 of the Explosive Substance Act and Section 13 of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act. "Those found guilty are likely to be sentenced to life imprisonment though the quantum of punishment will be known only on Tuesday," said public prosecutor Lutfur Rahaman Khadim. Three other accused in the case, mobile SIM sellers Santanu Chowdhury and Amal Acharjee and Budhi Debbarma, a sub-employee in the local Pragati Vidya Bhawan Higher Secondary School, were acquitted for lack of evidence. Around 8pm on October 2, 2008, a series of high-powered mobile SIM-controlled bomb blasts rocked GB Market, Radhanagar, Palace Compound and Maharajganj Bazar. Another powerful bomb, later defused by the bomb squad of the state police, did not go off despite being planted in the busy motor stand area. The state police was able to crack the case within a fortnight, arresting all the accused. The case dragged on for almost seven years and judgment was passed yesterday. However, advocate Bihbal Nandi, who represents the accused, said his clients would move the high court. The judgment comes at a time when the state government and Election Commission are preparing to hold polls to the autonomous district council on May 3. Despite a tangible decline in insurgency and willingness expressed by a section of the banned National Liberation Front of Tripura leadership to lay down arms, the police are leaving nothing to chance as all 13 battalions of Tripura State Rifles will be deployed for the polls to prevent ingress by militants through the unfenced stretch of the border with Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh. "Altogether 40 companies of central paramilitary forces will be deployed along with the CRPF and BSF battalions already posted in the state," said S.K. Rakesh, state election commissioner. Senior police officials ruled out any threat of retaliation by Tiger Force militants for convicting their four activists in the bomb blast case because of "non-existence of the group". Following arrest of their supreme leader Ranjit Debbarma three years ago, the outfit has virtually ceased to exist and its hidden cache of arms and ammunition has been seized by paramilitary forces of Bangladesh. "So the Tiger Force cannot do anything. Ranjit is in jail and most other leaders have either been eliminated or are on the run," said Uttam Bhowmik, superintendent of police (operations).