Nagaon, April 9: A Royal Bengal tiger attacked nine persons while a rhino killed a man in two separate incidents in Morigaon district early this morning. The tiger, which strayed from Orang National Park last night, was resting in an area along the Brahmaputra at Boralimari under Bhuragaon police station in the district. When the villagers found the tiger in the water, one of them poked it with a bamboo stick to see whether it was dead. “All of a sudden it lunged at us and injured four persons. It attacked three more persons in another part of the same village and later left Boralimari,” a villager, Uahidur Rahman, said. A forest department team, led by district forest official N. Anand, rushed to Boralimari immediately. “We learnt about the incident from the villagers. But the tiger had moved away from the site before we could reach there. It went to Mirikamari char where it injured two more persons. Teams from Pobitora and Orang, police personnel from Morigaon have left to locate and tranquillise the tiger before it causes any more harm,” said Morigaon range officer Rabin Baishya. “As we are yet to tranquillise the animal, we have issued a warning to the villagers,” said Morigaon additional superintendent of police Rup Kishore Handique. Forest officials later said the animal crossed the Brahmaputra this evening and entered Kurua forest in Darrang district. A senior forest official said the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has devised a standard operating procedure for dealing with emergencies arising out of straying of tigers in human habitats. When wild carnivores stray into human habitation, the district authorities need to ensure law and order by imposing Section 144 CrPC, it said. In an another incident, a 52-year-old man, Jogen Medhi, died after a rhino attacked him at Pobitora wildlife sanctuary in the district. A park official said Medhi, who lived at Bordia village on the fringes of the sanctuary, had entered the park to collect firewood when the rhino attacked him. He succumbed to his injuries later.