Indians in wire fraud New York, April 12 (PTI): Two Indian-origin persons have been sentenced to jail for conspiring to commit mail and wire fraud. Baljit Singh, 47, and Sharanjit Kaur, 36, owned and operated several companies with the sole purpose of defrauding customers in the US. The duo promised customers that they could provide debt consolidation services and used a call centre in India to defraud them. Part of the fund received was wired to a person in Calcutta. Tiger protest Bhopal (PTI): An NGO has opposed a move of National Tiger Conservation Authority to shift few tigers from Madhya Pradesh to Sariska Tiger Reserve to check their dwindling population. The NGO said the decision was taken under political pressure. J&K accident Kishtwar (PTI): Four persons died on Friday when their vehicle skidded off the road and rolled down into a drain, police said. Two critically injured persons have been airlifted for treatment. Junior minister Sajjad Ahmed Kitchloo has asked the police to arrest the owner and the driver of the vehicle. Coast Guard Mumbai (PTI): A Coast Guard interceptor vessel was commissioned at the naval dockyard in Mumbai on Friday. The vessel is fitted with state of the art navigation and communication equipment. The Indian Coast Guard now has 82 ships and boats. Kumbh aid Nashik (PTI): The Maharashtra government has made a provision of Rs 340 crore in its annual budget for Nashik and Trimbakeshwar Kumbh Mela to be held in 2015-16. Chief minister Prithviraj Chavan made the announcement while launching a campaign for drought assistance on Thursday. Raped at 90 Hoshiarpur (PTI): A 90-year-old woman has been allegedly raped at a village in Hoshiarpur district, Punjab police said. The victim’s son on Thursday night noticed Raghbir Singh sexually assaulting his mother in a forest. Raghbir fled on seeing the son. The woman has weak memory and cannot speak properly. Actor claim Thiruvananthapuram, April 12 (PTI): Malayali actor Jagathy Sreekumar, recuperating at home after year-long hospitalisation following a car accident, has approached a motor tribunal here seeking a compensation of Rs 10.5 crore from his insurer. The petition, filed by the actor’s wife, said he used to earn Rs 1 lakh for each day's schedule. He had to cancel all the film projects and lost his memory and speech capacities, the petition said. Assault cuffs Hyderabad (PTI): An engineering student from Afghanistan has been arrested here on charges of sexually assaulting a post-graduate student of Nagaland. N Yousufi, allegedly assaulted the 23-year-old after she spurned his advancements. Bribe cops Mumbai (PTI): An FIR has been registered against 37 Mumbai policemen, suspended after an activist caught them on camera allegedly accepting bribes to turn a blind eye to an illegal structure in suburban Kurla. Tycoon probe New Delhi: Four persons, including two alleged shooters accused in real estate tycoon Deepak Bharadwaj murder case, were on Friday remanded to three days’ police custody by a  Delhi court. The police have also declared a  Rs 1-lakh reward for anyone who helps in the arrest of Pratibhanand, a spiritual guru, who is suspected to have arranged the shooters to kill Bharadwaj. Kerry greetings Washington, April 12 (PTI): US secretary of state John Kerry has sent his “Poila Baisakh” (New Year greetings) to the Bengali-speaking people across the world. “As the New Year begins, let us all celebrate the rich cultures of West Bengal and Bangladesh in a spirit of optimism and mutual appreciation. Shubho Nobo Borsho!..,” Kerry said in his greetings message. Digitisation New Delhi: The I&B ministry on Friday claimed that over 85 per cent of digitisation had been achieved in 38 cities under phase-II where the deadline for switching from analogue to digital signals had ended on March 31. The review by the ministry reveals that as against a target of 160 lakh set top boxes (STB), 136 lakh STBs have been installed. Glenmark row New Delhi (PTI): Delhi High Court on Friday sought response by May 22 of Glenmark Pharmaceuticals on US drug major Merck Sharp and Dohme’s appeal against the single judge bench order refusing to restrain the Indian firm from manufacturing and selling anti-diabetes drugs Zita and Zita-Met. J&K stick Jammu (PTI): The CAG of India has pulled up the Jammu and Kashmir government for failing to surrender savings of Rs 5,038.65 crore in budgetary grants and appropriations in financial year 2011-12. The CAG said it violated the state budget manual. Adarsh probe Mumbai: The defence ministry on Friday filed an intervening application in Bombay High Court opposing a plea filed by former chief minister Ashok Chavan seeking to quash the FIR lodged against him by the CBI in the Adarsh housing society scam. The ministry refuted Chavan’s argument that the CBI has no jurisdiction to probe the case. Hasan Ali bail Patna (PTI): A court on Friday rejected the bail application of Pune-based businessman Hasan Ali Khan in a fake passport case. A passport official here lodged a case against Khan in 2010 after he had been issued passport on the basis of fake documents.