Ponte Vedra Beach: Tiger Woods goes into this week's Players Championship admitting that he has not slept for three days because of the emotional turmoil of his break-up with Lindsey Vonn, coming on the same weekend as the anniversary of his father's death. Woods was speaking on Tuesday after an early-morning nine holes of practice. It is his first appearance in four weeks since the Masters, and Woods revealed he is battling fatigue due to the emotional stress. Earl Woods passed away nine years ago on Sunday and that same day Vonn and Woods announced they had "mutually decided to end our relationship" citing the strain of their respective heavy schedules. Woods has thanked the skiing world champion for the three years together in which she forged an "amazing" relationship with his children, Sam, 7, and Charlie, 6, and it was clear that the "split has taken its toll." "Obviously it does affect me (the break-up). It is tough, I'm not going to lie about that," Woods said. "And on top of that this time of year is brutal on me - this three-day stretch is very tough. And what happened on Sunday just adds to it. I haven't slept." Of course, the 39-year-old has dealt with problems away from the fairways before and vowed to do so again here at the event, which he won the last time he played two years ago. "I was a little bit rusty out there, but more than anything I was just a little bit tired. I have two days to get ready for Thursday and a late tee-time helps... "Once you are inside the ropes, it's time to play. I get into my little world, my little zone for that five-hour time period and do the best I possible grind it out and win golf tournaments. "Because, in the end, for me that's what I want to do in that particular week," he said. Woods and Vonn said their busy schedules were the reason for splitting up. In an uncharacteristically candid press conference, Woods explained how he did not hit any full clubs in the week after Augusta because of jarring his wrist in a final-round 73 which saw him drop back from a tie for fifth into a tie for 17th. But he claims that despite making further swing changes under Chris Comu, he can build on the dramatic turnaround in form he showed in Georgia after the rank mediocrity which featured him shooting a career-high 83 at the Phoenix Open earlier in the year. Woods will have three weeks off after The Players and then plans a regular summer schedule. He will play every other week starting with the Memorial through the PGA Championship.