Miami: Jeev Milkha Singh found the Blue Monster Golf Course tough to handle on the final day as he ballooned to a five-over 77 to end up tied 28th at the World Golf Championships on Sunday. Jeev, who had two solid rounds in the middle of the week, totalled three-over 291. Tiger Woods was not at his best, but even then he willed himself to get the title. He won the title despite a one-over 73 on the final day and also finished with a bogey. He claimed his 56th career title, the 13th WGC title and the second one of 2007. He won by two shots over Brett Wetterich (71). Woods has now won 13 of 24 WGC events played since their start. It also puts him in ideal position for the Masters beginning on April 5. Jeev, who had tackled the tough course rather well the last couple of days, had a birdie on second raising hopes of a good finish. But then he bogeyed the third and fifth and again the 12th. He also dropped a double bogey on 14th and his next birdie did not come till the 17th. But even that small smile died with a double bogey on 18th. Jeev hit a drive of over 315 yards into primary rough and then from 176 yards he hit into the water and took a penalty. He hit his fourth shot 12 yards from the green and from seven feet he two-putted for a six on the par-4 hole. Asia’s best was Korea’s Choi Kyung-ju who enjoyed a steady close when he was even-par for the day and finished in tied 19th place. Choi, a former Asian Tour regular, fired four birdies against an equal number of bogeys for a one-under-par 287 total. Choi charged ahead with birdies on the first three holes but dropped a shot on the fourth. He picked up the pace, firing a fourth birdie on the eighth hole but had a slow finish on the back nine with three bogeys. Woods started the final round with a four-stroke advantage that he stretched to six with a birdie on the 10th hole. He struggled with the pace on the greens, though, and made three bogeys coming home, including at the brutal 72nd hole. Woods played protectively on the 18th, which features water down the left side of the fairway and guarding the left portion of the green. He hit 3-iron off the tee, an 8-iron for his second shot and a wedge to the green, then made a good two-putt from 52 feet. Geoff Ogilvy (70) tied for third at 6-under. Woods has now won a phenomenal 31 of the last 32 times when he was leading after 54 holes.