Brand Dhoni has ducked out of Jharkhand’s green pitch. Or so it may seem from the lackadaisical attitude of the forest department, which has perceivably failed to employ the Ranchi-bred Team India skipper to sensitise the masses about endangered big cats and shrinking woods. Two summers ago, on World Environment Day, Mahendra Singh Dhoni was roped in as the brand ambassador for a two-pronged campaign — first, to save the dwindling Royal Bengal Tigers and second, the state’s threatened forests. Thanks to then deputy chief minister Sudesh Mahto, also a close friend of the cricketer, the campaign was made visible through government advertisements in newspapers and posters and hoardings in Palamau, Dalma, Tamar and other forested pockets of Jharkhand. But now with the government gone, is the pitch prince still the state’s forest and wildlife brand ambassador? Some half a dozen senior forest officials, with whom The Telegraph spoke on Monday, drew a blank. “I was not in the wildlife division then, but I had heard that he (Dhoni) had been roped in. Truly speaking, no discussions have taken place on this matter at the department level lately,” said one. Another official seemed a tad more informed. He said the department’s move to name Dhoni wildlife ambassador had good reasons. “For instance, take the case of Sendra in the Dalma region. Every year, it is an uphill task for us to persuade tribals to observe their hunting ritual without bloodspill. The situation may have improved in the past two years, but having someone like Dhoni to steer such a campaign could have been very useful,” he said. However, in the same breath he added that he had no idea why the top-notch cricketer never played an innings on the forest pitch. Sources said that after Dhoni was roped in the department was asked to prepare a roadmap, but it was never drawn up. On how the busy willow warrior, who trots the globe for matches all year round, could have helped, the official added that if there was bureaucratic will, the department could have easily drawn up a few programmes keeping in view Dhoni’s schedule and convenience. Forest secretary Alka Tiwari sounded as clueless as her colleagues. “I know he was working with the department, but honestly I don’t know the current status. I will have to check,” she kept it brief. Former sports and forest minister Sudesh Mahto’s phone could not be reached. One of his close aides said he was busy in his constituency Silli. On Dhoni, the aide squarely blamed the forest department for not doing enough. “Dhoni is always game for his state, but forest officials have done little to harness his potential.” Will the Dhoni campaign ever be revived? Tell ttkhand@abpmail.com