Jorhat, June 26: The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has decided to conduct a study on movements of Royal Bengal tigers within Assam after the latest camera-trappings revealed presence of 24 big cats at Orang National Park, the smallest park in Assam. The figure was seven in 2008. The jump by 17 in the past five years is being seen as “unusual” and has triggered doubts over the tigers’ domicile. “We want to be sure whether the 24 tigers found at Orang are its permanent population or some among them at least have migrated from other habitats,” an NTCA official told this correspondent today. The study will be conducted with data collected over the past six years. Firoz Ahmed of Aaranyak, the NGO involved in the camera-trapping method to carry out tiger census in the state, said there had been instances of tigers migrating long distances. “We want to be sure whether some of the tigers at Orang have migrated all the way from other habitats.” The camera-trapping method was introduced in the state in 2008, first at Orang. Ahmed said Orang has always had a healthy Royal Bengal tiger population which could be ascertained from the data available. “We want to ascertain the breeding (read permanent) population of tigers at Orang,” he said. While seven tigers were found during the first camera-trapping census at Orang in 2008, 12 tigers were found during the next count in 2009. In 2012, 16 tigers were detected at Orang and 24 this year, which include four cubs. Ahmed, a wildlife biologist, said it was found during a study early this year that a tiger had migrated all the way from Kaziranga National Park to Laokhowa wildlife sanctuary, nearly 100km away. Kaziranga National Park director N.K. Vasu said it was natural for tigers to migrate from one habitat to another and Kaziranga is the only ideal tiger habitat in the Northeast. The park has 106 tigers in the census conducted last year. “There are more than 20 breeding females and several territorial male- tigers at Kaziranga,” Vasu said. He said there was every possibility of tigers from Kaziranga migrating to Orang National Park and vice-versa. Orang National Park authorities are, however, convinced that the national park has recorded a genuine rise in the tiger population over the years and there has been no infiltration from other habitats. Divisional forest officer Sushil Kumar Daila said there was no conclusive evidence to suggest movement of tigers between Orang and Kaziranga. “As far as we know, tigers have not crossed the main channel of the Brahmaputra which separates the two national parks. Tigers from Orang have been straying to nearby saporis (sand bars) of the Brahmaputra but had not gone on to cross the river.” Citing an example, he said a tiger which was shot dead in Morigaon district by security personnel a couple of years back was believed to have moved out of Orang, but it was later confirmed that it had strayed out of Kaziranga.