New Delhi: Mansur Ali Khan 'Tiger' Pataudi was never comfortable with anybody projecting him on centre stage. Clearly, he hated fuss of any kind. Yet, had Tiger been alive, he would surely have appreciated Wednesday evening being dedicated to him by Bishan Singh Bedi and the Trust which bears his name. Of course, the underlying theme for the evening, at the Jaypee Vasant Continental, would then have been different. Kapil Dev's speech (in Hindi deliberately) was excellent, but Naseeruddin Shah's was the one which stood out the most. Aamir Khan could have been as appealing, but his keynote address was reduced to a Q&A session with the MC. The one and only Amitabh Bachchan was, as usual, attention-grabbing in his video message for the evening, which also marked the Silver Jubilee Year celebrations of the Bishan Bedi Cricket Coaching Trust. Pataudi was the Trust's Founder chief patron. Barring son Saif, who is shooting in Udaipur, the rest of the Pataudi family was present: The always-so-elegant Sharmila Tagore and both daughters, Saba and Soha. Naseer, who'd greeted Sharmila with a kiss on the cheek and who'd hugged Aamir, mentioned that Abbas Ali Baig and Javed Burki (first cousin of Imran Khan) had been his heroes till he got to know of Tiger. "I had two ambitions as a 12-year-old... To study at Oxford and to play cricket for India... Somehow, I thought both were interlinked," Naseer quipped. Naseer had "no idea" where Pataudi was, assuming it could be in "Somerset," but he became a "devotee" of Tiger. "My first meeting with Tiger was in one of those ridiculous matches where cricketers bowled to filmstars and vice-versa... "I participated only because Tiger was one of the umpires... "After one over to Sandeep Patil, where I wasn't hit for 6x6, Tiger quietly told me that I'd been 'very impressive' with my tight bowling... "If I could trade that one compliment with the best I've received (as an actor), I would," Naseer observed. A touch emotional, Naseer quoted from an article he'd written after Tiger's death in September 2011: "I didn't know you, but I miss you..." Perfect for the evening. Kapil, who spoke between Naseer and Aamir's Q&A, said: "Tiger baat na bhi karte, to bhi khuda lagte the... I was jealous of Tiger, jealous of the way he went about everything." Not forgetting Bedi, the moving force behind the evening, Kapil commented: "Hats off to those who serve cricket, not those who run cricket." It was Kapil's way of conveying a sharp message. Aamir, who was mobbed for dualfies, revealed that he didn't even think "for a second" when Bedi invited him for the evening. "I'm a fan of captains, though it's not that I take on board some of the things they do... "Tiger's captaincy inspired confidence, Kapil paaji did likewise... Virat (Kohli) gives that feeling too," Aamir maintained. Bachchan began his video message by apologising for not being present in person. He would have come had the evening not been shifted from March 1 to 7. "Those who played under Tiger have written and talked about him with pride and admiration... "Despite Tiger's lineage, he was very humble. But that presence was there. It was in Tiger's genes... "Tiger, to my mind, gave that rockstar image to the India team and it's only appropriate that an evening of tributes is being held for a great Indian," Bachchan stated, straight from the heart. Many years down the line, Bachchan's video message would remain special. Among present-day cricketers, only Yuvraj Singh, Founder trainee of the Trust, was there. However, many headline-makers of the past could not be missed. Gundappa Viswanath, Mohammed Azharuddin, Virender Sehwag, Mohinder Amarnath and Syed Kirmani are among those who were present. MP Kirti Azad was accompanied by elder brother Yashovardhan, who now holds a Constitutional position. The evening also saw the unveiling of the logo for the proposed Tiger Pataudi Cricket Nursery, under the umbrella of the Trust. In keeping with the values Tiger stood for, the Nursery's motto features: "Integrity, Humility, Fairplay & Respect." At the end of the evening (which probably stretched for 30 minutes more than necessary), The Telegraph asked Naseer for his take. "Oh, it was fun... I enjoyed it... Cricket and films, it's always fun," is how Naseer summed it up.