Goa  cave-in Panaji, Jan. 5 (PTI): The death toll in a building collapse at Goa’s Canacona town rose to 15 today with the recovery of two more bodies. other 20 people are feared trapped in the rubble but firemen said chances of finding any survivors were bleak. A search is on for the missing builder and contractor of the under-construction five-storey residential building that caved in. Tiger kills Udhagamandalam (PTI): A woman was killed by a tiger in a Tamil Nadu village near Udhagamandalam on Saturday. The 33-year-old had gone to a shop to buy provisions but did not return home. Her mauled body was found on Sunday morning. Villagers claimed they had heard the screams of the woman and the roar of the tiger on Saturday night. Child assault Bangalore (PTI): A nine-year-old girl was sexually assaulted on her way back from school in Bangalore by an unidentified man who came from behind and covered her face with a cloth before taking her to an isolated spot, police said on Sunday. The child is recovering in hospital. Riot accused Muzaffarnagar (PTI): The property of two Muzaffarnagar riot accused absconding since the violence was ordered to be attached on Saturday. The chief judicial magistrate issued the order on police request, under Section 83 of the CrPC. Kapil and Mintu face murder charges. 377 plea New Delhi (PTI): A petition has been filed in the Supreme Court for dismissal of the Centre’s plea seeking review of its judgment on making gay sex an offence in India. The plea alleged the review petition is against constitutional norms as the government cannot ask the court to set aside Section 377 of the IPC which is a parliamentary statute. Cops injured Hyderabad (PTI): A probationary deputy superintendent of police and two other policemen were injured when some villagers allegedly attacked them with sticks on Sunday in Andhra Pradesh’s Mahabubnagar. They were attacked after they arrested two persons transporting illicit liquor. Court sermon New Delhi (PTI): A Delhi court has said premarital sex is “immoral” and against the “tenets of every religion” while clearing a 29-year-old MNC employee of rape charges brought against him by a woman who said he had gone back on a promise to marry her. A grown-up and educated woman who has sex on the assurance of marriage does so “at her own peril”, additional sessions judge said. The woman had alleged that the accused, whom she had met through a chat website had established physical relations with her on several occasions on the promise of marriage. Oman crash Dubai (PTI): Three Indian children were killed in a road accident in Oman, The Oman Times reported on Sunday. Six persons were injured when a four-wheel drive vehicle with nine persons on board met with the accident near Muscat on Thursday. Drug arrest Mumbai (PTI): The directorate of revenue intelligence has arrested a Chennai-based man in connection with the last month’s seizure of 1.2 tonnes of the banned drug Ketamine, also called a party drug, in Maharashtra’s Jalgaon district. It was the single-biggest Ketamine seizure in western India till date. Law course New Delhi (PTI): Delhi High Court has dismissed a petition challenging the rules of the recently established National Law University mandating its BA LLB programme to be residential and has refused to look into its fee  structure. Shetty cousin Mumbai, Jan. 5 (PTI): Actor Suniel Shetty’s cousin Ajay and his driver have been booked for allegedly assaulting a Best bus driver after the vehicle hit Ajay’s car at 12.45am today, police said. Rajkumar Shinde hit the car while taking his bus to Mumbai Central station. An altercation followed and Ajay’s  driver Ramnarayan Mishra attacked Shinde who fell unconscious. The duo then fled.  Shinde has been hospitalised. School bus Srikakulam (PTI): Fifteen children were  injured after a school bus hit a parked lorry  on the Chennai-Calcutta national highway at  noon on Sunday.  Forty children were travelling in the bus. The injured have been hospitalised. Bag found New Delhi (PTI): A commuter of Delhi Metro was given back his bag containing Rs 1 lakh by a CISF jawan after he forgot it at Chawri Bazar station on Saturday evening.