Lemont: American Jim Furyk avoided another late collapse and held off a charging Tiger Woods to end a two-year title drought with a victory at the Western Open in Lemont, Illinois on Sunday. Despite a late stumble with a bogey on 17, Furyk held on to finish two shots clear of Woods, who became the first golfer to break through the $50 million barrier in career earnings. Last week, Furyk held a three-shot lead with five holes to play at the Barclays Classic but watched it agonisingly disappear when he was overhauled by Padraig Harrington. This time, however, he held his nerve at the Cog Hill Country Club to return a final round two-under 69 and collect his 10th career win and first since the 2003 Buick Open with a 14-under 270 total. “Just keep plugging away,” Furyk said. “It was nice to come in after last week and play as well as I did.” The early bogeys may have given him a sense of deja vu but the 2003 US Open champion recovered to play flawless golf, including three consecutive birdies at the turn, until a final bogey at the 17th. Instead, it was world No. 1 Woods, chasing a fourth Western Open title, who suffered an uncharacteristic collapse going one-over on his final seven holes to finish with a five-under 66. Charging up the leaderboard from the opening tee, Woods mixed five birdies with a bogey over his first 10 holes, then upped the ante by draining a snaking 50-foot eagle putt on the 11th to join Furyk in front. However, Woods’ rally fizzled out with back-to-back bogeys on 13 and 14 to fall four shots off the pace. “I lost my momentum on those two holes,” said Woods, in his final event ahead of the British Open starting on July 14. “I was hoping to get to seven-under and force a playoff. I was close. It was the second consecutive runner-up finish for Woods, who was behind New Zealand’s Michael Campbell at the US Open. The result, however, was enough to allow the Masters champion to become the first player to reach the $50 million mark, achieved over a 10-year career. Ben Curtis, the 2003 British Open champion, fired a final round three-over 74 to take third place on nine-under 275. Fijian world No. 2 Vijai Singh shot a disappointing final round of 73 to finish 10 shots behind Furyk in a tie for 13th.