Calcutta, April 29: Mamata Banerjee today launched a vicious attack on Narendra Modi, calling the BJP’s prime ministerial candidate a “paper tiger” with “no control over his tongue”. “He cannot control his tongue, how will he control the country…. Pehle tongue ko control karo (learn to hold your tongue first). He will say anything, anywhere…. He doesn’t control himself… Kaan mein koi kucch bol deta hai, to wahi bol deta hai… Pehle puchho baat sach hai ke nahin (whatever somebody whispers into his ears, he repeats that. First find out whether it is the truth or not),” the chief minister said in Burrabazar, a commercial centre where the BJP is expecting considerable votes. Burrabazar falls under the Calcutta North Lok Sabha seat, where Trinamul MP Sudip Bandyopadhyay will contest the BJP’s state president Rahul Sinha. In her second meeting at Rajabazaar, Mamata referred to Modi as a “paper tiger”. “The child is yet to take birth and they have decided about his future. Elections are yet to get over but his name has been declared as the Prime Minister in newspapers. He is a paper Prime Minister and paper tiger. The Royal Bengal tigers of Sunderbans are enough to take care of him,” she said. Mamata’s attack on the BJP came on the eve of the third phase of polling in Bengal in the districts of Howrah, Hooghly, Birbhum and parts of Burdwan. The districts are all Trinamul strongholds, but the BJP has a sizeable presence in three of the nine seats going to polls tomorrow — Howrah, Serampore and Birbhum. In an election rally in Serampore on Sunday, Modi had said those coming from outside the state were considered as “guests” by Mamata. Mamata today accused Modi of instigating parochial feelings, adding that people from all parts of the country had been living in Bengal for decades. The Trinamul chief said Modi’s becoming the Prime Minister would be “disastrous” and added that he lacked proper knowledge of history and geography. Mamata spoke for nearly 50 minutes in each of the meetings and concentrated on criticising Modi. The chief minister also accused the BJP of seeking votes with money. “They only show their face during elections. They will come with money and try to buy votes. Where is this money coming from? Where is it going? Who is funding them?” asked Mamata.