Jamshedpur, Jan. 11: The big cat in West Singhbhum’s Saranda forests continues to be elusive, but forest officials have hit upon a two-fold strategy to confirm the presence of the majestic striped creature. One, teams of range officers and forest guards are engaged in making a tally of the number of herbivores — mainly chital (Axis axis), sambar and bison — in the forest. If their numbers show an unusual reduction, it will mean that there exists a tiger population to prey on them. Two, teams are scoring the forest for more pugmarks or tufts of fur. Pugmarks and fur were detected at Ghatkuri under Gua range of Saranda — the forest is earmarked into four divisions — in November, 2011. S.E.H. Kazmi, the director of the Palamau tiger reserve, also confirmed that the pugmarks were that of a tiger. By December-end, the Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India had confirmed that the samples were of a tiger. What remained now was to determine whether the big cat was a part of an ambush of tigers existing in Saranda or a visitor from neighbouring Odisha’s Simlipal National Park. However, the second theory does not curry favour with forest officials. “The Odisha reserve is not very near. It is unlikely that a tiger just came for a stroll,” said K.K. Tiwary, divisional forest officer of Saranda. Efforts are on to establish there exists a tiger territory in Saranda. Once that is done, the forest department will start necessary initiatives to protect the striped creature. The headcount of herbivores will be over in a month. “We have started monitoring herbivorous animals by counting them,” said Tiwary. “Let us get an idea of the numbers first. Then, we will draw the necessary conclusions.” He explained that it was logical to assume that a tiger population prospers with herbivorous animals available in good numbers. “The forest has them in plenty. We will continuously monitor the situation. Any unusual fall in numbers will indicate the presence of the predating carnivores. We are also on the lookout for any freshly killed carcass but we have not found any so far,” said Tiwary. Besides the spotted deer or chital, sambar and bison, Saranda is home to the barking deer, antelopes and wild boars.