Taxman courtesy New Delhi, July 29 (PTI): The income tax department has directed officials to be more “courteous” in letters to taxpayers. Officials of the department said a decision was taken in a meeting a few days ago to use words such as “please”, “warm regards” and “gentle reminder” in the letters with queries regarding taxpayers’ financial returns or transactions. Flat blow New Delhi (PTI): The apex consumer commission has dismissed an appeal by a real estate developer against a directive to pay nearly Rs 65 lakh to two persons who had jointly booked a flat that was not ready on time, saying “unscrupulous” builders who take to litigation “to cover up their faults” should not be spared. Assault cases New Delhi (PTI): Delhi High Court on Tuesday said written complaints of sexual assaults would be dealt with by the officer on special duty of the court administration. Chief Justice G. Rohini also made it clear that “anonymous” appeals would not be entertained. Conductor job Chennai (PTI): A Madras High Court bench has directed Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation to reinstate a bus conductor sacked 16 years ago for not issuing a ticket to a passenger. The bench, however, set aside an order granting the conductor 30 per cent back-wages. VC resigns Allahabad (PTI): Allahabad University vice-chancellor A.K. Singh has resigned amid an indefinite protest by the non-teaching staff demanding regularisation of wages and the withdrawal of a proposed move to abolish posts like sweepers and gardeners. On July 25, a group of students had demonstrated outside Singh’s office protesting alleged deterioration in academic environment. Deer carcass Erode (PTI): A carcass of the endangered spotted deer was on Tuesday found from a car near the Vilamundy forests near here. The car had four persons, all of whom were arrested. Kashmir protests Srinagar, July 29: Pro-azaadi protesters in Srinagar staged a brazen show of support for the Islamic State group today, raising slogans in its favour and waving its flags during clashes with security forces, reports our special correspondent. The protesters were shouting slogans against Israel and the violence in Gaza when masked men appeared, carrying Palestinian flags and black Islamic State flags. They later rode through the streets of the old city on motorcycles. The development came days after top militant leader Syed Salahuddin welcomed  al Qaida and Taliban  to Kashmir, marking  a departure from a  long-held position of Kashmiri militants  of opposing the international terror groups’  intervention in the  troubled state. Bus tragedy Shimla: Twenty-one people were killed when a Himachal Pradesh government bus skidded off the road and feel into a gorge on Tuesday, police said. The bus was proceeding towards Svera Khad from Shimla when the driver lost control, reports our correspondent. Chief minister Virbhadra Singh has expressed his condolence. JNU students New Delhi (PTI): A sexual harassment complaint has been filed with JNU’s gender sensitisation committee against two students. Akbar Chawdhary and Sarfaraz Hamid hold positions in the varsity’s students’ union. Sabarmati Ahmedabad (PTI): Gujarat chief minister Anandiben Patel performed a “maha-aarti” of the Sabarmati on Tuesday evening amid heavy rain. The chief priest of the Jagannath temple here, mayor Minakshi Patel and several BJP leaders participated in the aarti, which was on the lines of Varanasi’s Ganga aarti. Black tiger Bhubaneswar (PTI): Nandankanan Biological Park authorities have claimed that the zoo here is the first in the country to have a melanistic (black) tiger cub born in the captivity. A five-year-old white tigress has given birth to the black tiger along with three other cubs.