Bethesda (US): Remember the young Tiger Woods, that 21-year-old with the unlimited marketing potential and the ability to make longtime professionals cringe in frustration? The talent and appeal are still there. He still has the multimillion-dollar smile, and his game’s superiority still speaks for itself. But Woods and his wife, Elin, now have a 16-day-old daughter, Sam Alexis. And Woods is playing host this week to the inaugural AT&T National, a tournament with Woods’s personal imprint that will benefit the Tiger Woods Foundation and honour members of the United States military. Woods, 31, is all grown up, and the first tournament of the rest of his life begins Thursday at Congressional Country Club. He spoke Tuesday at a news conference about issues that seemed so far off for Woods 10 years ago — his foray into diaper changing and feeding, as well as the cross-country expansion of his foundation, which honours the memory of his father. He even spoke candidly about his daughter, her birth and the reason for her name. “My father had always called me Sam since the day I was born,” Woods said. “It was weird, he rarely ever called me Tiger. I would ask him, ‘Dad, why don’t you ever call me Tiger?’ He says, ‘Well, you look more like a Sam.’ ” Woods also said for the first time that Elin had non-life-threatening complications before Sam’s birth, and she had to be admitted to the hospital on June 14, four days before Sam was born. Woods began play in the United States Open in Oakmont on June 14, and finished June 17 — Father’s Day — tied for second place, one stroke behind Ángel Cabrera. Sam was born early the next morning. “How can you love something so much that didn’t exist a day before?” Woods said. “I’ve never experienced anything like that.” The AT&T National will be Woods’s first tournament since the Open, and Woods has attracted a midsummer field of golfers that is rarely seen outside the majors. The top four golfers in the world — Woods, Phil Mickelson, Jim Furyk and Adam Scott — and sixth-ranked Vijai Singh are scheduled to compete in the 120-player field on the par-70, 7,255-yard course. The tournament also represents the return of the PGA Tour to the Washington area. The Booz Allen Classic was left off the heart of the PGA Tour schedule this year after its lackluster field finished on a Tuesday last year at TPC at Avenel because the event was plagued by rain. The International in Castle Rock was initially scheduled for July 5-8. But the International was cancelled in February, and Woods announced in March that he would serve as the host of the AT&T National, a replacement. “Our expectations were pretty high, but right now I’d say we’re on the verge of them being beaten,” said Tim Finchem, commissioner of the PGA Tour, on Tuesday. “The first year’s always a struggle, but right now we look like we’re in position to have a great start.” Woods said Tuesday that this tournament was the first step in building a Tiger Woods Learning Center on the East Coast. The tournament also announced that it would distribute 30,000 free tickets to members of the military. Woods’s father, Earl, who died in May 2006, was in the military for more than 20 years. Woods said he “basically grew up on a military base.” “I told Dad, if I didn’t make it in the first two years, that’s probably where I would go,” Woods said. “I would probably end up going to the military.” The last time Woods played in a tournament at Congressional Country Club was at the 1997 United States Open, where he finished tied for 19th place, 10 strokes behind the winner, Ernie Els. But now, with a baby daughter, 12 major championship victories, and his name and image decorating the AT&T National logo, Woods wants to win just as badly as he did 10 years ago. “Expectation? Same — that hasn’t changed,” Woods said. But now, there is another young Woods whose father has passed along a golf club. Yes, already. “She couldn’t quite hold it,” Woods said, “but it was there.”