One of the upcoming, high-interest launches on the automotive front would be that of the Kia Sonet compact SUV. Kia has given it the family look with what the company calls the ‘tiger nose’ grille but more bulging muscles lookwise than its sibling Venue from Hyundai. The interiors bear a resemblance to those of the Seltos a segment higher up the pecking order. It includes a digital cluster, 10.25-inch high definition touchscreen and ‘Sound Mood’ lighting, where essentially the colour of the lights changes. The large instrument-cluster-plus-central-screen gives a sense of a busy cabin. Kia Sonet interior
                                                            Kia Set to roll out early next month, it is likely to be positioned in a bracket starting around Rs 7 lakh at the showroom and go into double figures at the higher end. The SUV is production-ready after being showcased at the Auto Expo 2020 in Greater Noida. The vehicle is being made in India. Kia claims that the trims use “high-quality materials, its dashboard provides owners with the car’s full range of user-friendly features, including a two-layer tray to store mobile devices and other items while driving. Taking centre stage is its high-tech digital display and instrument cluster, featuring a first-in-segment 10.25-inch HD touchscreen and navigation system with UVO Connected technologies. The Sonet will also offer drivers steering wheel-mounted controls, and the ability to select different drive and traction modes. Air vents in the dashboard feature a metallic, diamond-knurled pattern, a chic and stylish design highlight.” Headlamps and daytime running lights are LED. Karim Habib, senior vice president and head of Kia Global Design at Kia Motors Corporation says the Sonet should appeal to young, connected buyers. There is likely to be a 1-litre, 120ps and a 1.2-litre, 100ps petrol engine option as well as a 1.5-litre, 83ps diesel combined with a whole set of automatic as well as manual transmissions, possibly including the group’s recently-launched iMT shift.

Kia says: “The Sonet will feature an extensive list of active and passive safety equipment. It will come equipped with up to six airbags and offering a combination of front, side and curtain protection for occupants.” The Sonet that will be made in India will be available in many of the brand’s global markets as well.