Daltonganj: Over 400 daily wagers in Palamau Tiger Reserve (PTR) are suffering extreme hardships following the non-payment of wages since April. Aghaniya Devi, a tracker in Betla range, had to take a loan of Rs 5,000 from a money lender for which she has to pay Rs 500 a month as interest. "I have already paid Rs 2,000 as interest for April-July. If the pending dues are not cleared this month, I will have to continue paying the interest," the widow, who has to support her seven children, said. Rajesh Ram, a tiger protection force personnel, said he had been getting groceries from the local shop at a higher price because he was unable to pay the money immediately. "I have not been able to pay the fees of a doctor even," he said. Yasin Ansari, who collects scat samples and tracks pug marks, was facing a similar problem."The local shopkeeper charges me Rs 2 extra on items because I have been buying on credit because of the delay in wage payment," he said. However, none of them has any resentment towards PTR officials as they believe that they would be paid as soon as the state government releases the funds. The daily wagers, all of whom have bank accounts, get Rs 229.90 per day barring the four Sundays of a month. "The wages of over 400 plus workers are due since April. The half of July is gone and we have nothing to feel hopeful about the payment by the end of this month as well. Daily wagers are undergoing extreme hardship, but are working without making any parade of pain," deputy director of PTR's north division Anil Kumar Mishra said. On the reason behind the non-payment of wages, Mishra said, "The Centre has given the state government its share of funds for wage payment. Now it is for the state government to release it. The delay is happening at their end." On whether he or his counterpart in south division M.K. Mahaling have been authorised by the state accountant-general to sign cheques to draw funds, Mishra said, "We don't have the authority. The matter is caught between the state forest department and the finance department. The AG office will not issue the authorisation letter unless the finance department sends its approval to it and the finance department will act only when the forest department takes the initiative," he said. Sources said even if the state government released the funds, the dues could not be paid in the absence of authorisation.