World No 1 Tiger Woods has been confirmed in Corey Pavin’s US team that will defend the Ryder Cup against Europe at Celtic Manor next month. Woods, who retained his No. 1 ranking after finishing tied 11th in the Deutsche Bank Championship in Boston on Sunday, along with Stewart Cink, Zach Johnson and Rickie Fowler, was chosen as one of four wildcards that completed Pavin’s US team. The Americans defend the trophy at Celtic Manor on Oct 1-3 where Woods will win a sixth cap. He made his debut at Valderrama in 1997 and also played at The Belfry in 2002 and the K Club four years ago. In 25 Ryder Cup games — no captain has dared to leave him out of a single session yet — he was won 10, halved two and lost 13, a mediocre return by the standards he has set in championship golf, where he has won 71 tour victories and 14 majors. However, Pavin will hope that a pairing of Woods and Steve Stricker will reap the maximum points they enjoyed in partnership at last October’s Presidents Cup. “I asked him (Woods) last night if he wanted to be part of the team and he said ‘absolutely,’” Pavin said. “I am happy that he is very excited about playing and he wants to be on a winning team.” Woods said he was prepared to face a hostile reception on foreign soil. “On the road it’s very different,” he said. “You get booed a lot, you get jeered and people say things they probably shouldn’t say. “Unfortunately I’ve seen it on both sides. They did it with Monty (European captain Colin Montgomerie), so it goes both ways and I’ve had that experience and understand how to deal with it and make it a positive thing. “I missed the last one because I was hurt and it would be nice to be on the team. I enjoy playing in the Ryder Cup and going out there against those guys with my teammates and see if we can get it done.” Former Open champion Cink, 37, a member of the 2008 US team, will be playing in his fifth Ryder Cup, while Johnson, 34, made his sole appearance came at the K-Club in 2006. Debutant Fowler, 21, has yet to win a US PGA Tour event, although he has made five top-10 finishes this season, including as runner-up at the Phoenix Open and the Memorial Tournament. Europe’s team has six Ryder Cup rookies — Italian brothers Francesco and Edoardo Molinari, Peter Hanson, Rory McIlroy, Ross Fisher and PGA champion Martin Kayer — along with Lee Westwood, Ian Poulter, Padraig Harrington, Luke Donald, Miguel Angel Jimenez and US Open champion Graeme McDowell. teams Europe: Colin Montgomerie (Capt.), Luke Donald, Ross Fisher, Peter Hanson, Padraig Harrington, Miguel Angel Jimenez, Martin Kaymer, Graeme McDowell, Rory McIlroy, Edoardo Molinari, Francesco Molinari, Ian Poulter, Lee Westwood 
  USA: Corey Pavin (Capt.) Phil Mickelson, Hunter Mahan, Bubba Watson, Jim Furyk, Steve Stricker, Dustin Johnson, Jeff Overton, Matt Kuchar, Stewart Cink, Zach Johnson, Rickie Fowler, Tiger Woods