Tezpur, Nov. 29: Panic gripped Tezpur and its adjoining areas today after pugmarks of a Royal Bengal tiger, which killed a woman yesterday morning and injured a man last night, were found at Bishnu Rabha Memorial Park, 3km from the town. Attempts by forest department personnel to capture the tiger have proved futile and it is not clear if the animal has crossed the Brahmaputra or strayed towards a hillock near the memorial. The tiger killed Rejia Khatun, 56, at Dolabari Square on National Highway 37 (A), under Tezpur police station, around 5.30am yesterday. Safiqul Islam, 36, was injured at Dolabari, 8km from Tezpur town, near the site where forest department officials had set up a cage to capture the big cat. Safiqul has been admitted to Kanaklata civil hospital here. The assistant conservator of forests of West Sonitpur division, Jasim Ahmad, told The Telegraph that the tiger jumped on Islam when he was standing on the road. It also damaged a vehicle last night. Ahmad said pugmarks were found this morning near Bishnu Rabha Memorial Park in the Tol Kolibari area. "Now that it is confirmed that it is around, appropriate steps need to be taken," Manoj Saikia, a local resident, said. "The tiger could have strayed to the nearby hillock near the bank of the Brahmaputra or crossed the river towards Burahachapori, but nothing is certain," Ahmad said. He said a forest team was maintaining vigil in nearby areas and the cage, installed by an expert team on the boundary wall of a private plot last evening, had not yielded any results. The expert team also searched the area where the cage was installed. The tiger could have jumped over the wall and moved towards the river, Ahmad said. The people of Dolabari resorted to a road blockade after attempts to capture the tiger proved unsuccessful and demanded that areas where the animal was spotted be searched. Sonitpur superintendent of police P.P. Singh said a police team had been maintaining strict vigil in the area where the forest department found pugmarks and night patrolling had also been introduced in these areas. Last week, a female Royal Bengal tiger was killed in Jorhat district by a mob after she attacked three persons.