JNU elections New Delhi, Sept. 16 (PTI): Left-leaning All India Students Association (Aisa) today swept the Jawaharlal Nehru University Students Union elections, winning all the four top posts. The Aisa won the posts of president, vice-president, general secretary and joint secretary, retaining its hold over the students’ body. Last year, it had only lost the president’s post to SFI-JNU, now known as Democratic Students Federation. Bhatkal claim Mumbai: Maharashtra has ruled out retrial of the German Bakery blast case after claims that Yasin Bhatkal has confessed to have planted the bomb, raising questions on the conviction of another man sentenced to death. Himayat Beg, convicted this April, has filed a retrial plea. Tunda aide New Delhi (PTI): Mohd Zakariya, a close aide and father-in-law of Lashkar bomb expert Abdul Karim Tunda, has been remanded in 10-days’ police custody by a Delhi court. Investigators said Zakariya had helped in illegal infiltration of Pakistanis into India through Bangladesh. Doctor strike Jaipur (PTI): Nearly 9,000 government doctors across Rajasthan boycotted work on Monday between 8am to 10am demanding time-bound promotions and hikes in rural allowance. The doctors’ association said they would go on mass leave on Wednesday if the demands aren’t met. Tiger reserve Dehradun (PTI): Uttarakhand’s Rajaji National Park is likely to be designated a tiger reserve in a month, a forest official said on Monday. The proposal for tiger reserve status has been cleared by the environment ministry and a notification might be issued in a month, the official said. FIR scrap fine New Delhi (PTI): Delhi High Court has directed a  civil services’ aspirant to do community service to get an FIR against him quashed. Sandeep Pandey, 25, had allegedly molested and wrongfully confined a 14 year-old girl in February. The court directed Pandey to teach in a school for blind children for an hour every week for a year. Varsity refund Madurai, Sept. 16 (PTI): The Tamil Nadu state consumer forum has directed the Thanjavur-based Sastra University to refund the  advance fees of Rs 1.12 lakh and certificates collected from an engineering student who joined another college after completing the first year of his course. B.S. Manohar had alleged that when he wanted to shift he was told that his certificates would be returned only if he paid the fees for the next five semesters. But even after he paid the fees, the university refused to return his certificates. Killer storm Chandigarh (PTI): A storm, with an average speed of 70kmph, hit several areas of Punjab and Haryana on Sunday, killing three persons and injuring 60. The storm lasted around 40 minutes. Mallya order Bangalore (PTI): Karnataka High Court has directed UB Group chairman Vijay Mallya to appear before it on Tuesday in connection with a bunch of petitions filed by creditors who are trying to get back close to Rs 600 crore from his company. Dilip Kumar Mumbai (PTI): Actor Dilip Kumar, admitted to the Lilavati Hospital on Sunday after a heart attack, is stable and his condition is being monitored at the ICU, a press release from the hospital said. “In view of his advanced age and post bypass status, he needs close monitoring in the ICU,” the release said. Asaram case Jodhpur (PTI): A sessions court has extended the judicial custody  of Asaram Bapu, accused of raping a minor, by 14 days. The 72-year-old self-styled godman, who has denied the charge, was arrested on September 1. He had allegedly assaulted the minor in his Jodhpur ashram. Buffalo ‘thief’ Aligarh (PTI): The BJP’s district president in Aligarh has been booked along with 41 others for allegedly snatching buffaloes from two traders. An FIR has been registered against  Devraj Singh, the district president, and party leader Poonam  Bajaj along with 40 supporters. Crop drug patent Ahmedabad Sept. 16 (PTI): A drug developed by a Nagpur-based research and development institute to protect crops from pests has received a US patent. Kamdhenu Kitniyantrak is a synergistic composition comprising cow urine, neem and garlic, the chief co-ordinator of the Go Vigyan Anusandhan Kendra has said on the sidelines of a conference here. The drug will help  farmers move from chemical to non-chemical farming, the official added. Cheque term New Delhi (PTI): A Delhi court has sent  a physically challenged man to a year in jail  in a cheque-bounce case. The judge also directed Sanjay Gairola, from  Uttarakhand, to pay  Rs 16 lakh as compensation to the complainant. UAE Indians Dubai (PTI): Nearly 6,000 Indians in Saudi Arabia have secured full-time jobs since an amnesty was announced in April for illegal foreign workers to regularise their residency, the Indian consul general in Jeddah has said. Short circuit Jaipur (PTI): Eight lady constables injured themselves while jumping off the first floor of their hostel over fears of a short-circuit in the building on Monday. An electricity distribution  box caught fire and exploded because of heavy rains, scaring the constables.