Lemont: On a bright Sunday at the BMW Championship, it all fell into place for Dustin Johnson. This time, as he played in the final pairing for the fifth time this year, there would be no impatience, no doubts and no rules infractions. Dustin Johnson shot a two-under 69 Sunday and won the BMW Championship by one shot over Paul Casey. It was his second victory this season. There would be only composure, focus and some serious smash-mouth golf. With the tournament result still in doubt, Johnson birdied the 17th hole to take the lead by himself for the first time. Then, with a one-stroke lead and needing a par to win, he smacked a driver 315 yards down the left side of the tough finishing hole at Cog Hill, hit a 6-iron safely into the green and two-putted from 40 feet to close the deal. When the final putt fell, giving Johnson a one-stroke win over Paul Casey, some negative memories went down with it. Gone, at least temporarily, were the two major championships he could have won this summer, along with his letting the Barclays slip away two weeks ago after starting the day in a tie for second. The rules violation on the final hole and ensuing debacle at the PGA Championship one month ago at Whistling Straits? Gone. The final-round 82 after leading the US Open going into Sunday? Forgotten. “You know, to finally get it done — especially after all the things I’ve gone through this summer — to finally get it done on Sunday, it can’t feel any better,” said Johnson, who ended with a 69 and a nine-under-par total of 275. He also moved into second place on the FedEx Cup points list. Resilience led to Johnson’s cathartic win, his fourth career victory and his second this season. When the victory was there for the taking, Johnson snatched it. It appeared for part of the afternoon that Paul Casey was bent on running away with things, thereby getting a small measure of consolation for being left off the European Ryder Cup team by captain, Colin Montgomerie. After starting the day two strokes behind the overnight leader Ryan Moore, who stumbled to a 73 and a tie for third, Casey birdied 5 of the first 11 holes to reach 11 under and lead by three strokes over Moore and Johnson. But three straight bogeys on the 12th, 13th and 14th holes brought Casey back to eight under, where he finished with a final-round 69. Matt Kuchar, who also tied for third after shooting 72, remained atop the FedEx Cup points lead. Tiger Woods, who closed with a round of 70 Sunday to tie for 15th, is 42nd on the FedEx points list and is, for the first time since his rookie season in 1996, not eligible to play in a PGA Tour event. Woods and Phil Mickelson staged a rousing head-to-head battle, with Mickelson shooting 67 to finish tied for eighth. Woods, who said he would be home practising with the instructor Sean Foley for the Ryder Cup for the next two weeks, said he was looking forward to the break. “It’ll be good,” he said, “because now I can practice at home with Sean in peace and away from everybody and put some work in and also work on my short game and my putting.”