Shillong, July 28: The streets were not lined with mourners, nor was there the usual chest-beating. But there was Amanda L. Buhphang - in black and in mourning, having stayed awake since 3am preparing a bouquet of tiger lilies and ferns with her mother so that she could be in time to bid farewell to the "inspirational" former President-scientist A.P.J. Abdul Kalam before his body left Shillong. "He was an inspiration to us students. Down-to-earth despite being a former President and a great scientist. He was so much in touch with the Northeast, trying to bridge the gap with the mainstream," Amanda, a student of the English and Foreign Languages University in Shillong said. Amanda was one from among the silent majority which had assembled at the Eastern Air Command's advanced landing ground from where the body of Kalam was flown to Guwahati just before 6am en route to Delhi in an air force chopper. What the former President meant to them was best reflected in the efforts Amanda and her mother Aretha, who could not get pass the gates made to bid him goodbye. "They allowed me when I said I was a student. My mother was not as lucky. It was a very sad moment for us. It will be difficult to come across another President like him," Amanda said. Aretha, who waited for her daughter outside the gates, tried to put things in perspective. "He (Kalam) made us proud as Indians. He tried to bring the country together. The Northeast is least known in mainland India. Kalam tried to change it. He loved the Northeast. Maybe it was God's wish that he died here," she said, her voice choking. The "people's President" had passed away last evening following a cardiac arrest at the Indian Institute of Management, Shillong, where he had come to deliver a lecture on the topic Liveable Planet Earth. His body was kept at the Military Hospital during the night. Imams Habib Ahmed and Maulana Rafiquddin Choudhury had been with the body throughout the night, praying for the eternal peace of the soul. " Allah ke hawale ho gaye hain. Afsosh hain Kalam saab nahin rahe (He is with Allah now. We mourn his passing)," said Choudhury while coming out of the hospital gates before the body left. A small, silent crowd had gathered in front of the hospital from where Kalam's body was taken to the advanced landing ground in Upper Shillong, a distance of around 8km, around 5.10am. Some like Charmy Jajo, another girl student, a Naga from Manipur, missed the convoy carrying the body. "I went to Bethany Hospital around 4.30am and then came to the Military Hospital. He meant a lot to us. He was someone you could look up to," Charmy said. Looking up they were, those assembled at the airstrip to pay their last respects - defence personnel, politicians, officials and admirers - as the IAF chopper took off with the body of a man whose public connect will live on, safe with the Amandas and Charmys.