Tipu ring auction London, May 23 (PTI): A gold ring belonging to Tipu Sultan has been sold for £145,000 (around Rs 1.42 crore) at an auction here, 10 times the estimated price. Auction house Christie’s said the 41.2gm ring was sold to an undisclosed buyer amid criticism from heritage groups. The ring, inscribed with the name of Ram in raised Devanagri script, was allegedly taken from Tipu’s dead body. Insurance rap New Delhi (PTI): A consumer forum has directed an insurance firm to pay Rs 4 lakh to a man whose insured car was stolen, saying the firm had no authority to assess the vehicle’s value at a lower side after accepting a higher premium. The firm had contended that Sanjay Chawla’s car had been valued on a higher side based on false facts. Caste order Mumbai (PTI): Bombay High Court has set aside an order of Maharashtra government’s Caste Scrutiny Committee which had invalidated the claim of a student that he belonged to the Scheduled Tribe. The court said the committee had not considered Swapnil Gaikwad’s documents and evidence. Tiger book New Delhi (PTI): An IAS officer has penned a thriller on tiger conservation. Scent of a Game by Raghav Chandra, who has spent a decade in the forests of Madhya Pradesh, stresses on the importance of raising awareness about the endangered species. Lankan cuffs Colombo (PTI): Sri Lankan Navy has detained a family of five while trying to enter the country through sea after staying in India for some years as refugees, police said. The family had fled to Rameswaram in 2004. The motive for them fleeing the island nation will be investigated, officials said. Fraud glare Sagar (PTI): Madhya Pradesh medical education department has cancelled the admission of 41 students pursuing MBBS course from Bundelkhand Medical College for allegedly adopting unfair means to clear the pre-medical test. Eighteen students were of the 2009 batch and  23 of the 2010 group. Coal  case New Delhi, May 23: The CBI today filed another FIR in the coal block allocation case, accusing Nagpur private firm Jayaswal Neco Industries and some unidentified bureaucrats of alleged irregularities between 1993-2005. The allegations pertain to mining beyond approved limit in a Chhattisgarh mine and use for purposes other than those specified in the agreement. With the latest FIR, the number of cases registered by the agency in the coal block allocation case has gone up to 20. “Our probe into the scandal is now nearing completion. We have to submit a status report to the Supreme Court next month,” said a senior CBI officer. The agency today searched Jayaswal Neco’s offices in Nagpur, and in Chhattisgarh’s Raipur and Raigarh. Army brawl Srinagar: A group of army jawans went on a rampage and thrashed some policemen at Sonamarg in Ganderbal district after their vehicles were stuck in a traffic snarl and policemen told them to wait till the jam is cleared. The jawans also allegedly fired in the air. Rhino killed Golaghat (PTI): An adult rhino was killed and its horn chopped off by poachers in Assam’s Kaziranga park on Friday, the fourth such incident this month and twelfth this year. Forest officials said the female rhino was gunned down in Agratoli range of the park. AC blast New Delhi (PTI): A 25-year-old technician was killed and five injured after an air-conditioner exploded in the south campus of Delhi University on Friday. The blast took place while the technicians were servicing AC, a police officer said. Fare feud Kochi (PTI): A journalist of a Malayalam newspaper suffered fractures in both his arms after he was attacked by an autorickshaw driver with an iron rod on Thursday night. R. Lenin, news editor of the Kerala Kaumudhi, was on his way home after a night shift. The driver allegedly demanded an exorbitant fare and attacked Lenin when he protested.