Viacom18 Motion Pictures has rolled out its first Bengali film, The Royal Bengal Tiger, starring Jeet and Abir Chatterjee, which is co-produced by Neeraj Pandey’s Friday Filmworks. Ajit Andhare, chief operating officer, Viacom 18 Motion Pictures, tells t2 about their Tolly plans. Why did Viacom 18 decide to produce a Bengali film? As a full play studio (that caters to movies of all types/regions) we have Hindi, English as well as key regional markets for which we cater films. Bengal is an important regional market as there is a fast-growing opportunity for theatrical consumption as well as a presence of strong and well-penetrated satellite channels that contribute to the Bengali film revenue streams. Tell us about the genesis of this project.... We have worked with Neeraj Pandey before on Special 26, that we produced with great success. There was an opportunity in collaborating further to tap into the Bengali film market. The result of this collaboration is The Royal Bengal Tiger. What was it about The Royal Bengal Tiger that you felt offered great potential? At a content strategy level, we wanted to make a film that offers something that is different and not be seen as run of the mill. The common man’s tale should resonate with the Bengal audience. What sort of market dynamics led to this decision? An overall strategy to enter key regional markets. We have already produced films for the Punjabi, Marathi markets and we are producing two films in Tamil and in Telugu. Bengal was identified as the other key market to enter. This is our first step and more will follow. What kind of a strategy did you have when entering a new market like Bengal? As a studio we believe in offering different, content-led cinema across markets. Bengal as a market always had a discerning audience. The Royal Bengal Tiger reflects that approach. You must be aware that Shree Venkatesh Films has a virtual monopoly in Bengal. What are your thoughts on that and also what are your plans on making inroads into the Bengali market? Shree Venkatesh Films is a strong player and also our partner for our Hindi and English slate. We have all their support for the release of our film. Are you expecting competition from Reliance Entertainment? More competition will only bring in better investments and products into the regional markets. This is a positive sign for the industry. Studios like Planman have come to produce Bengali films but no one has stuck around. Why? The theatrical potential is not yet as large as other regional markets. As screening infrastructure improves and satellite channels offer better pricing, there is a scope to continue to address this market. Only players with a long-term commitment will be able to make a success out of the market. Would you be producing urban- centric films made by young filmmakers? Yes, that is where we excel, in working with younger talent and telling new stories. Would you invest in mass-oriented Bengali films? At an appropriate time, we could look at that. Our strength however lies in bringing differentiated cinema. How do you plan to get a firmer foothold in the market here? We will delight the audience with our products and that I believe is the only way to succeed in any business. We are looking for the right subjects and partners. We have a film with Sujoy Ghosh planned next and we will build a slate from there. We are taking calibrated steps and will build from our learning from this experience. It’s being said that there has been a resurgence of Bengali cinema. Do you agree? Yes, there is resurgence, but among regional markets, Bengali cinema still has a long way to go to acquire a sustainable scale. The proliferation of TV and the strength of players have however helped.