Anirban Lahiri's grandparents live in Salt Lake, we knew. Where in Salt Lake, we did not. Until we got through to Anirban's daddy cool, Col. Tussar Lahiri, on Monday evening over phone in Belgaum. After chatting with us about how it all began for his 'Junior Tiger Woods', he happily shared his sasural's address with us: Salt Lake, CK 105. We rushed to the address, to find Anirban's grandparents, his maternal uncle and aunt, his two younger cousins, and... his mother! Yes, Navanita Lahiri, Anirban's mom, was visiting her parents in Salt Lake. Just 10 minutes before we landed up she had managed to speak to her son - "he is exhausted, but it's a good exhaustion" - after trying several times and finding his phone busy. Metro asked Anirban's mother, grandfather, uncle, aunt and cousins about one of the greatest sporting achievers from Bengal. Navanita Lahiri, mother I haven't slept in three nights. We were there with him through it all. How am I feeling about it? It's strange, I am kind of exhilarated and it's hard to come to terms with where he is. It was not something we planned to do with him or with our lives. How am I feeling about where he is today? I think that's where he should be. I was telling his coach Vijay Divecha that even during the British Open, he kept going 'tied seventh' and 'tied ninth' and falling back. This has been happening. He just needed to put four rounds together. It's huge but there's miles to go. He is so much our son, the boy at home, that his image outside doesn't really impinge on our comfort and consciousness. What he has achieved, it's almost like an out-of-body experience for me. It's happening but is it my son? We are involved, but we are not obsessed. The be-all and end-all of the world is our son, his love, his comfort and happiness. For him too, there is more to life than just golf, especially for me as a mother. It's like somebody who does a job outside the house and how he is inside the house. I am concerned with the private side of him. I spoke to Anirban 10 minutes ago. I couldn't get through to him because his phone was so busy. He was like ' aami bari eshe katha bolchhi (I will come home and talk)'. He is exhausted, but it's a good exhaustion. There are no celebrations, but when he comes we'll see. My daughter-in-law (Ipsa) said they wanted to spend time with the family, because that's what we don't get to do. She said whatever Thamma (Anirban's maternal grandmother Smriti) will make in the house is fine. He loves fish fry, smoked pomfret and mishti doi. Maa has to make fish fry for him and Baba (maternal grandfather Nemai Sen) buys ilish maachh in advance. As a kid, he would take money separately for his share of mishti doi, sit in the park and eat it. He still loves mishti doi. He was a happy, undemanding and friendly kid. Anirban moved out when he was about 17-and-a-half to Bangalore. My husband and I would take turns to be with him when he was a junior. Then we stopped doing that because he could handle himself well. Now, sometimes we do, but it's not like we follow him. Anirban is the only one I have. He means the world and more to me. What do I like most about him? I like the fact that he is a compassionate soul. He is empathetic. He also doesn't judge people. I would tell parents not to put too much pressure (on a child). Let the kid decide for himself. I can facilitate and not dictate. Brig. Nemai Sen, maternal grandfather Although Anirban was born and brought up outside Bengal, at heart he is a Bengali. I can tell you that he loves Bengali food and culture, and he loves to talk to us in Bengali. He is very fond of fish. He loves ilish maachh bhaja . That's a must.... He has no airs about himself. That is one good thing about him. Regarding his achievement, we are proud of it, no doubt, but there is no special feeling because he is one of us. Every day is special. ("For 12 years he was the only grandchild. So he was pampered," quips mom Navanita). As a kid and the only grandchild, whenever he used to visit us, especially wherever I was posted in Bengal, I found it fascinating to take him to a sweet shop. He would point at a particular sweet, which I would then buy. He would accompany me to all army functions. He was neither a naughty fellow nor a mischievous one. He was just very playful. Sreya Sen, maternal aunt The victory hasn't quite struck us because for us, he is still the same Bochu. We don't think he is a celebrity! I've always felt he was a very adjusting kid. He never had tantrums...like clinging on to his mother. He even wanted to go on honeymoon with us! Nayonika Sen, 16, first cousin In school (La Martiniere for Girls), my friends who play or follow golf know about him. I like to annoy him, but he just puts on a happy face. He is one person who never loses his cool. Zen-like calmness. The way he handles his wins and losses is something I have learnt from him. It's like this didn't go well, I am going to do better next time. No devastation. Regardless of the sport you play, it's about how you handle the ups and downs. Navarun Sen, maternal uncle He was a sweet and happy kid. He used to love playing and eating. And he has continued with that! I still remember, he was picking up golf at that time... 1992... he was five, he used to putt. We are all very happy (about his achievement). What's waiting for him at his mamarbari (maternal uncle's house in Salt Lake)? His grandmom... she is most excited. Nirvik Sen, 14, first cousin I played once with him when I was a kid. One of my friends is fascinated by him. And what I love about him the most? He is happy and cheerful and never gives up. - As told to Saionee Chakraborty What is your message for Anirban Lahiri? Tell ttmetro@abpmail.com