Jaipur, May 30: You have heard of doting dads, this one has an affectionate growl. For the first time in Ranthambore, a male tiger is said to be keeping a “protective watch” over two six-month-old motherless cubs which, forest officials say, could be his own. According to experts, the big cat’s caring touch reflects a complete role reversal because male tigers are not known to protect their offspring. It is always the mother who takes care of the cubs till they are at least two years old. Ranthambore employees said the cubs have been following the male tiger, T25, for the past 15 days in Kachida Valley, a hilly zone in the Rajasthan national park. District forest officer Y.K. Sahoo said the park was for the first time seeing such fatherly concern on the part of a tiger. “We cannot say about taking care but, yes, the cubs are following the male tiger,” Sahoo told The Telegraph. “One of them follows their supposed father at a distance and the other close by. The  surprising trait of T25 keeping a protective watch over the cubs has led us to believe that the tiger might be their father but it is difficult to say for sure.” Wildlife expert Rajpal Singh said tigers with their complete families had been sighted in Ranthambore.  “But this is the first time that only a male tiger has been seen taking care of the young ones when the tigress is not there.” Forest officials said the cubs’ mother, T5, died of septicaemia in February this year and the two had been missing since before they resurfaced with the male tiger. But “daddy four legs” doesn’t just keep an eye on his wards. He lets them have the food — usually goat meat — that park employees leave for the cubs and doesn’t try to snatch a chunk or two. He even shares his kill with the cubs. Like a considerate father, T25 has also confined himself to a reduced territory, perhaps to protect the cubs and save them from fatigue. While T25 appears to be an exception, tigresses are known to be fiercely protective towards their cubs, sometimes even guarding them from the father. They have also been known to eat the faeces of their cubs so the smell doesn’t attract other predators. Born blind, tiger cubs are completely dependent on their mother for the first few days. Their eyes open when they  are between six and 12 days  old. However, they don’t  have full vision for another couple of weeks. When they are around eight to 10 months old, the cubs begin hunting with their mother who teaches them how to prey and protect themselves. According to official records, Ranthambore has about 40 tigers, including 14 cubs. Unofficial reports, however, say the 392sqkm park has about 35 tigers, including 14 to 16 cubs. It could easily have been two less had T25 not decided to take up the responsibility of bringing up the motherless cubs. Did anyone say tigers can’t be good fathers?