School stabbing Virudhnagar, Nov. 28 (PTI): A Class VIII student was stabbed to death, allegedly by an estranged friend, in a classroom of a government school in Tamil Nadu’s Virudhnagar district today. The incident took place around 9am before the classes started. The attacker, a former student of the school, stabbed G. Bhaskar thrice in the forehead in front of other students before fleeing. Police, who are looking for the attacker, suspect a feud between him and Bhaskar. Crash claim New Delhi (PTI): A Delhi motor accidents tribunal has awarded a compensation of over Rs 10 lakh to the family of a man who was mowed down by a speeding truck in 2008. The tribunal directed the truck’s insurer to pay the amount. Tiger found Kota (PTI): A tiger cub, missing from Rajasthan’s Ranthambore National Park for the past two months, has been traced at the Keladevi Wildlife Sanctuary in the same state. The cub’s pugmarks, captured by a camera at Keladevi, helped in the trail. Alimony order New Delhi (PTI): A sessions court has asked a lower court to award interim maintenance to a woman, saying “a husband cannot be permitted to desert wife and children on the ground of unemployment” in a city like Delhi where the cost of living is high. Chopper trial New Delhi (PTI):  A Delhi court has fixed December 15 for considering the chargesheet filed by the Enforcement Directorate against  businessman Gautam Khaitan and others, including two Italian nationals, in connection with its money laundering probe into the scrapped VVIP chopper deal. Riot stick Singapore (PTI):  An Indian national has been sentenced to receive three strokes of the cane in addition to an earlier 25-month jail term for his involvement in the Little India riots last December, the country’s worst street violence in 40 years. Samiyappan Sellathurai, 42, had instigated the crowd, media reports said. Techie killers Chennai, Nov. 28 (PTI): A court has sentenced three migrant labourers from Bengal to life terms for murdering a 24-year-old IT professional in February. Ram Mandal, Utam Mandal and Ujjal Mandal were convicted of murdering Uma Maheswari, an employee  of the Tata Consultancy Services. Her decomposed body was found  at an IT park in Siruseri on February 22, nine days after she went  missing. The victim was waylaid, dragged into a nearby bush and assaulted by the accused before the murder. Godman trial Chandigarh (PTI): A whopping Rs 26.61 crore was spent on the arrest of self-styled “godman” Rampal and security arrangements for producing him in court in a contempt case, the Punjab and Haryana High Court was informed on Friday. Rampal was produced before a division bench of Justice M. Jeyapaul and Justice Darshan Singh which adjourned the proceedings to December 23. Tigress dead Rishikesh (PTI): ): A tigress was mowed down by a speeding train in Nainital on Friday. A team of forest officers has rushed to the spot for a post mortem, which will be conducted according to the guidelines of the National Tiger Conservation Authority. Maid dead New Delhi, Nov. 28 (PTI): A young domestic help from Bengal died in hospital yesterday after she was allegedly beaten up by her employers in Delhi’s Janakpuri area. The victim, identified as Mumtaz Begum, was yesterday brought to a private hospital in the area by two persons. “The woman had injury marks on her body and was bleeding profusely. When doctors inquired about the cause of injuries to those who had bought her to the hospital, they could not come up with credible answers and later slipped away,” a senior police officer said. When police visited the house of the victim’s employer, Pooja Kapoor, it was found to be locked. Residents told the police that Kapoor often beat Mumtaz, who had been employed with her for the past five months. Rail helpline New Delhi (PTI): The Indian Railways has launched a helpline service number — 1800-111-322 — to provide security-related assistance to passengers, the Rajya Sabha has been informed. Deer check Cuttack (PTI): The Central Zoo Authority has asked Cuttack Municipal Corporation to relocate half of the deer from the Cuttack Park to check overcrowding.