It is believed that the success of a democracy depends on the maturity of its politicians. Indian democracy's record in this respect is debatable. This is because Indian politicians have, over the years, shown a marked preference for politicizing events. Even tragedies - such as deaths of humans or critically endangered animals - do not remain untouched by the pettiness of politics. The war of words between a Union minister and the chief minister of West Bengal over the killing of a tiger that had strayed into a not-so-dense forested patch in West Midnapore district exposes, once again, the multiple challenges that confront India's conservation discourse. Maneka Gandhi - her concern for the welfare of animals has not been dimmed by the pressure of leading the women and child development ministry - has blamed the tiger's killing on adivasis who, in the minister's opinion, kill thousands of animals during their hunting festivals. She has alleged that Mamata Banerjee has not put a stop on the practice because of political compulsions. Ms Banerjee responded to the allegation by saying that the minister had disrespected the adivasi community. The exact identity of the slayers of the tiger is yet to be established, even though it is known that adivasis had been entering the forest to observe a traditional hunt. But the matter is not only about identifying the killers. The trading of barbs between the two leaders is unfortunate because the exchange threatens to deflect attention from some fundamental assumptions. Ms Gandhi seems to have ignored established scholarly evidence of the role of forest communities in the conservation enterprise. The Bishnois of Rajasthan may be a celebrated lot but they are not the only saviours of the environment. In the Biligiri Rangaswamy Temple tiger reserve in Karnataka, the population of the big cat actually doubled after adivasis were allowed to co-exist with the animal. Yet, there is discernible pressure on the part of the government to retain the forests that remain as exclusive preserves of the forest department whose writ runs larger than that of the original inhabitants. Worryingly, the new draft national forest policy is allegedly inclined to reverse the modest gains made by an earlier law that seeks to restore to indigenous people their right over forests. Ms Gandhi's knowledge of tribal traditions appears to be rudimentary. Perhaps she could deign to read the numerous anthropological accounts of traditional knowledge systems that clearly advocate a syncretic relationship between communities and forests. Modern conservation can, in fact, learn a lot from these illuminating treatises. Ms Banerjee is also complicit, but in a different way. Her alacrity to defend the adivasi community should have been matched by a briskness that would have forced the state forest department to get its act together. Several questions have been raised about the skills and the training of the team that was dispatched to protect a solitary, vulnerable animal. Little wonder then that Ms Banerjee has chosen to answer other, less troublesome, queries.