P.K. Verma, the new chief wildlife warden of Jharkhand, on plans to safeguard wildlife, rejuvenate sanctuaries and curb 

man-animal conflicts • TT: What are your immediate priorities? PKV: To improve existing wildlife habitats, increase prey base to support carnivores and take care of the biodiversity of the area • How do you plan to achieve this? All interconnected. For creating a congenial environment for inmates of any sanctuary, we need to ensure availability of feed and water first. Once we manage to increase vegetation, herbivores (prey base) will automatically increase •  Have you begun the work? Not yet. I will start by meeting officials manning sanctuaries to start mapping animal abodes • Palamau Tiger Reserve is in utter disarray. Even the high court is unhappy. My first job will be to rejuvenate PTR. As per records, PTR has six tigers. But we need to introduce new measures to improve the habitat. I believe we need to ascertain how many tigers we actually have on the ground. Even if some have migrated, we can get them back by improving the condition of the habitat • Like? We can consider translocating tigers into PTR. This has been done at other sanctuaries. But to begin, we first need to know the ground reality • What else? I am also considering species recovery programmes. For example, in Latehar and Palamau regions, there used to be over 300 four-horned antelope or chousingha (Tetracerus quadricornis). Now, they are on the verge of extinction

 

• What about man-animal conflict? Yes. We need to look beyond compensating victims and forming joint forest management committees for local intelligence gathering • How? Two years back, we introduced GPS-based elephant tracking system that helps us map their movements today on Google maps. We need more such measures. Use of drones for surveillance and to divert animals away from human habitats is another possibility • You were director of Bhagwan Birsa Biological Park when actress Priyanka Chopra adopted a tigress in 2011-12 I had other plans that I could not execute for various reasons. Now, I will pursue them again • Anything specific? I will take steps to introduce zebra, giraffe and possibly cheetah in the reserve. As told to A.S.R.P. Mukesh