You had told us pre-release that the Rs 100 crore club doesn’t mean much to you, but has it changed now considering that you got into it in just five days? Obviously you feel good because reaching Rs 100 crore in such a short time means that a large number of people are watching your film. In this day of Facebook and Twitter, word-of-mouth spreads very fast and I am happy that the social media has contributed so much to the success of my film. What makes me really happy is that we are sitting on the sixth day and the numbers are growing each day. We had a historic Sunday, we had a historic Monday and the numbers are just going up, up, up! I can figure out that people are watching it a second and a third time already. As far as reaching it the fastest is concerned, those are just statistics that make one happy for a day. It sounds very good as a headline! We shouldn’t fool ourselves too much because we have to accept the fact that we had a great release date (August 15). But, it’s been a good ride and right now I am just enjoying the wave. How have Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif reacted? Katrina is a creature of commercial cinema who keenly follows figures and she is happy. She’s also ecstatic about the fact that she’s been appreciated so widely. In New York, she had a strong role and in Tiger, her role was even better. She’s pushed the boundaries with the action… you haven’t really seen a Hindi film actress doing those kind of moves before. I had gone to a single-screen theatre to gauge the reactions and that scene where she turns around and whacks someone, there was such a huge yell among the audience that it completely took me aback. I have always told Katrina that she is the fourth Khan… she’s unbelievably popular. Salman doesn’t really comment. He knows what the figures are like… he’s happy. So is the eye of Tiger now on Rs 200 crore? (Laughs) We have barely just passed one hurdle! If it does 200 (crore), I will pop a bottle of champagne; if it doesn’t, I am still happy. Whether we get there or not depends on what slots we get next, what are the films in opposition and so on. We have already made a profit, my film has been declared a superhit…. I am not getting into this 200 crore thing at all. What is the best and the worst thing that you have been told about the film? For me, it was before the film released and it was the hug that Salim Khan (writer and Salman’s father) gave me once he had watched the film. Salim saab’s screenplays are studied in film schools and for him to tell me: ‘I don’t think I can change anything in your screenplay, go right ahead with it’, was by far the biggest compliment. And then of course, there is Yash Chopra who has been very effusive in his praise. With Twitter and Facebook around, everyone has an opinion and there is no film in this world that can please everybody. There will always be positives and negatives and thankfully, it’s been predominantly positive. Out of 10 tweets, on an average seven have been positive and around three negative and that really shows how much the film has been appreciated. Looking back, what would you like to change? I don’t think there is any film of mine where I look back and don’t want to change… it’s a never-ending process. I would change so much in New York and Kabul Express. Similarly, in Ek Tha Tiger, when I look back, say a month or so later, there will be things that I would definitely want to change, but right now I am still soaking it all in, absorbing what everyone is telling me about the film, both positive and negative. Also, I don’t know why people compare Kabul Express to New York and New York to Ek Tha Tiger because they are all completely different films. You can compare apples to apples, but not apples to pumpkins. Every film demands a different treatment. Your first scene (Salman in a gun battle in Iraq) is one of the best action sequences in Bollywood. Why shift the focus to the love story post-interval? But don’t you think that the first half was also a love story? Ek Tha Tiger was never a mission film. After doing 12 years of dangerous work, Tiger gets an assignment that is kind of like a holiday for him… just to observe Dr Kidwai (Roshan Seth). The film has always been a love story. There have been people who have come up to me and said that they were surprised that it was a love story because they had expected it to be a hardcore action film. I never wanted to make James Bond, it was always a Tiger and Zoya romance for me. This was exactly the way it was in the script and the world of intelligence was merely the backdrop. This was a classic Romeo and Juliet tale where the backdrop was the conflict that was thrown in. The ISI and RAW in my film are actually metaphors for hate that pose a problem for my lovers. So, it’s essentially a classic love story. A man dedicated to his mission for 12 years suddenly gives it all up for love. Isn’t that a little too implausible? See, here is this man who’s never really known what love is. That little flash in the first half where she (Zoya) asks him: ‘Tumhari shaadi kyun nahin hui?’ and he gets this vision of women across the world battering him just shows that he’s never really known the real world. He’s always lived in a world where he has to kill someone who is out to kill him. Now, when he meets Zoya, it’s for the first time in his life that he realises what he’s missed out on. Suddenly this well-trained machine develops a heart and he starts questioning all that he had been made to believe all along. So this rebellion on his part is actually very natural. Also, you have to keep in mind that even while working within the parameters of sensible cinema, I had to keep the blockbuster format in mind. Till only a few years ago, our films in the mainstream were based in la la land… we had no idea of social or political context. To get out of that, you have to take a step at a time and not jump the gun.... Yes, I would love to make an out-and-out political thriller, but I will have to take my audience along with me and take it film by film. Some have felt that there were too many close-ups of Salman, a few even unflattering… This one I haven’t heard. But whoever says it has a very valid point because I tend to go in for a lot of close-ups in my films. I give one establishing shot and rightaway I bang onto a close-up. It’s an aesthetic choice that I make with my DoP (director of photography) because I feel that a particular scene or shot demands it. So though no one yet has really told me about the close-ups, I might just hear it as time goes by because right now, what I am getting are initial reactions. The ending screams out sequel… A lot of people have told me that they felt that the end is so cleverly designed that I must have thought of a sequel (laughs). And I am like: ‘Nooo, this is how I always wanted to end the film’. I always like open-ended films, but it wasn’t designed keeping a sequel in mind. I haven’t the faintest idea whether I will do a sequel or whether even Salman, Katrina or Yash Raj will be interested in a sequel. Whenever a film is successful, talk of a sequel surfaces and unfortunately, we have had sequels for films that really didn’t need one just to cash in on and continue a successful formula. Like after New York became a hit, people started expecting a sequel and I was like: ‘How do you expect me to make one after I have blown their (John Abraham and Katrina) brains out on that rooftop?!’ (Laughs)