Miami: Daniel Chopra crumbled when it mattered most and shot a five-over 77 to fall from overnight tied second to tied 20th with at the Ford Championships Golf on the USPGA Tour here on Sunday. Playing in the lead pair with Tiger Woods, Chopra registered his only over-par nine of the tournament, a poor six-over 42, and finished at 10-under 278. While Chopra struggled, Woods kept his head and despite a bogey-bogey finish, won the title by a shot over David Toms and young Camilo Villegas. Woods (69) won at 20-under 268, while Toms and Villegas were second at 19-under. Arjun Atwal played his best for the week with a three-under 69 that saw him rise from tied 54th to 35th at eight-under 280. Chopra was going fine in the front nine which he shot in one-under, but on the back he had a bogey on tenth, and a triple on 13th followed by two more bogeys on 16th and 18th for a disastrous finish.Woods closed with a three-under 69 for his second PGA Tour victory of the year. He has also won the world matchplay and Dubai Classic this year. He kept his cool in breezy conditions and at one stage Toms closed to within one shot with two straight birdies on the back nine. Then Woods moved a gear to hole a 12-foot birdie on the 11th and then became the only player to reach the 603-yard 12th hole in two shots to set up another birdie, which he duly made. As Toms dropped a shot on 18th, three-putting for the only time in four days, Woods needed just a bogey to close his win. Woods has never lost when going into the final round with a lead of two more shots in 20 attempts. It was also the 13th time he has successfully defended a title. After four victories in play-offs ? the World Golf Championships-American Express Championship, Dunlop Phoenix, Buick Invitational and the Dubai Desert Classic ? Woods finally won without going into extra holes.Woods now has won four of his six last tournaments worldwide. “If I put myself there enough times, those things are going to happen, as well as other guys are going to make birdies to beat me,” Woods said the 48th PGA Tour title of his career. “That’s the way it goes. As long as I’m there each and every time, it’s not a bad place to be. “Once David Toms had made his mistake (on 18), I just said anything in the back bleachers, right bleachers, just anything over there to the right and over the water is all I had to do, just trying to play for five. I wasn't even trying to make par.” “I had a lot of fun playing golf out there today, trying to catch Tiger Woods, getting close and ultimately not quite getting there,” said Toms. “I know I cost myself a lot of money on the last hole, but really it was all about having a chance to win.”