Ranchi, May 2: At least 30 forest fires were observed on satellite imagery in the past 24 hours across Palamau Tiger Reserve (PTR), the state's only habitat for big cats, in addition to 50 more recorded in the past one month in this blazing summer where mid-40 Celsius recording is an everyday occurrence. More than the fires, PTR is facing the burning embarrassment of having recruited 125 forest watchers but not giving them boots or safety equipment to fight the blaze. At the same time, senior authorities at the tiger reserve are also alleging that all forest fires recorded were not instances of spontaneous combustion. Some, allegedly, were deliberately ignited by villagers to drive out animals for poaching. Forest patches burning since Sunday are ranges of Mahuadanr, Henar, Jagir, Tati, Gokhar, Pandra, Korgi and Patan, among others. A PTR source maintained that Henar and Jagir regions near the Garu range were the worst affected, with at least 10-12 spots coming under the blaze. This comes after 50 cases of fire were reported from the PTR-Palamau area in the past one month. However, no animal has been harmed so far, claimed an official at the PTR headquarters, adding the exact loss of green cover was yet to be calculated because of manpower shortfall. M.C.H. Munda, Daltonganj divisional forest officer currently on dual charge of PTR's core area, said he wasn't exactly aware of the nature of the blaze in his division but he had sent his field staff to the sites. "I can say about Patan region near Medninagar division, that the area caught fire last evening but was controlled this afternoon. It seemed to have affected some 3km area. Our men cut fire lines and trenches to further control it," he said. The senior forester admitted that tackling forest fires was challenging as they were confronting twin problems of water and manpower crunch. "No forest fire can be doused with water tenders unlike in the city. If water is available, we pour it on the green patches near the blaze to stop flames from spreading," he said. But, the bigger challenge was tracking fires with too few people. Of over 100 forest guards post, only seven are currently working. Posts of PTR field director and DFO (core) are running on dual charges. Officials claimed to have appointed around 125 forest watchers on a casual basis across PTR to track fire incidents and alert the forest administration. But apparently, the workers have too much to do and too little protective equipment to even attempt to do the work. "They even lack boots. Do you expect them to walk on cinders wearing plastic slippers? How do you expect them to be vigilant round the clock? Plus, besides tracking fire, they are also given the additional job to track tigers and dig trenches. Above all, there is no one to monitor them," an official said. Mahaling, divisional forest officer of PTR buffer area, pressed the alarm on saboteurs. "More than natural fires, the recent blazes are deliberately being ignited by local villagers and poachers." "Villagers burn dried out weeds to pave the way for new grass to grow for cattle fodder or more harmfully, to push animals out from the interiors to become easy prey for the poaching network." Another official said they needed more forest workers to replenish dry watering holes to stop animals from migrating from their natural habitat. Roughly, PTR has around 300 big and small watering holes, but a majority have gone dry, spurring animals to try and head towards villages, making them vulnerable to poaching. PRT authorities were currently using four-five tankers each of 2,000 capacity several times a day to fill temporary structures created across the park to make water available to animals, Munda said. But, no one came on record to say if that was enough.