Augusta: The 2011 Masters appears ready for some drama during the final round of the tournament. Rory McIlroy entered the day atop the leaderboard at 12-under, but Charl Schwartzel is making a late charge, as is Tiger Woods. McIlroy stumbled out of the gate with a bogey on the first hole to drop to 11-under, but Schwartzel birdied that same hole and then sank an eagle on the par-4 hole No. 3. Tiger Woods started the day at five-under, but quickly found himself moving up the leaderboard. He had back-to-back birdies on the second and third holes, before a bogey on hole No. 4. But that didn’t deter Tiger, as he made par on No. 5 and then birdied holes No. 6 and No. 7. He is now tied with Luke Donald, Jason Day, Adam Scott and K.J. Choi for fourth. Angel Cabrera started the day at eight-under, but moved to nine-under and third place after a birdie on the second hole. On Saturday, McIlroy moved one step closer to ushering in a new era in golf, shrugging off the immense pressure of playing with the tournament lead, distancing himself by four strokes from his closest pursuers and closing in on his first major championship. Playing with patience and composure far in excess of his 21 years, McIlroy brought a sleepy third round to life when he rolled in a 30-foot birdie putt at the 17th hole. The putt touched off a roar that blasted through the pines into the 18th fairway, forcing Woods to step away from his ball and wait for the clamour to subside. The significance of the moment was inescapable. A four-time Masters champion whose shots have prompted so many similar roars at Augusta, had to make way for McIlroy. “It’s a great position to be in,” McIlroy said after his four-birdie, two-bogey round. “I stayed really, really patient out there today. I stuck to my game plan, and it worked out. I feel my swing is in a great spot at the minute. I feel comfortable — with the way I played and finally feel comfortable on this golf course.” Other golfers who once felt comfortable on this golf course seem somehow discombobulated by it now. The top American player is Bo Van Pelt, who shot a 68 and is at 210, six strokes back in eighth place. Woods (74), Fred Couples (72) and Bubba Watson (67) are tied for ninth at 211. This is the first time that no American player is among the top three after 54 holes, and only the third time since 1995 that neither Phil Mickelson nor Woods is in the top five entering the final round. What is more, Day and his countryman Adam Scott are in striking distance of becoming the first Australians in the 75-year history of the Masters to win. Scott, who has not threatened in nine previous Masters appearances, shot a 67, the lowest of his 35 rounds at Augusta National, and is five strokes back. Patience has not come easily for the freewheeling McIlroy, but it was his hallmark Saturday on a muggy afternoon. And his demeanor is so calm and his swing so steady that Day, a 23-year-old who has played all three rounds with McIlroy, said he would be difficult to catch on Sunday. “The way Rory is swinging and the shots he’s hitting, he can probably go out tomorrow and shoot 70 and win the tournament,” Day said. “And if he does win this thing, he’ll deserve it. He’s played really well.” McIlroy’s only bogeys came at the par-4 fifth and the 495-yard, par-4 10th. He has made only three bogeys in 54 holes. He again birdied the difficult par-3 No. 4, and added back-nine birdies at the two par-5s — No. 13 and No. 15 — before sinking the long putt at the 17th that put an exclamation point on his round. Day briefly took the lead with three birdies on the first five holes, but he was unable to hold it. He relinquished first place with a three-putt bogey at No. 6.