Dubai: Rory McIlroy kept his hopes of ending a two-year European Tour winless drought alive with a four-under-par 68 for a one-stroke lead in the Dubai Desert Classic second round, on Friday, with Tiger Woods lurking. The world No. 7 moved to an 11-under halfway total of 133 to be a shot clear of South African Thomas Aiken and Spain’s Sergio Garcia who both carded 67s, while Woods (137) roared into contention for a first title in 14 months with a 66. He recorded six birdies for his lowest round since December. Twice champion Woods upstaged partners and the world’s top two players Briton Lee Westwood (139) and German Martin Kaymer (140), the Englishman carding a 70 to Kaymer’s 71. “Being out this morning also meant we had some clean greens, which was nice, and all three of us hit them perfect, and made a few putts,” Woods said. McIlory’s last European Tour win came in the same event, where the 21-year-old Briton led from start to finish, and the Ryder Cup player was not ruling out a similar outcome this time. “I don’t see any reason why I can’t win wire-to-wire again,” he said. “I led all four rounds two years ago and that’s the plan this year. I’ll just keep shooting good scores and if I can do that then there’s no reason why I can’t beat that.” Two birdies on his closing four holes capped a fine round for the Northern Irishman who bogeyed the second hole. Briton Steve Webster posted another 68 for a 136 total, while Dane Anders Hansen (68), Briton Michael Hoey (67), Australia’s Brett Rumford (68) and Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Gonnet (69) were the other players level with Woods. Garcia’s return to form is a welcome boost for the 31-year-old who rose to world No. 2 after capturing the HSBC Champions event in Shanghai in November 2008. The Spaniard took a lengthy break from the game towards the later part of last year and Garcia admitted his confidence has been helped by the encouragement afforded him by fellow Spaniard and men’s tennis No. 1 Rafael Nadal. “Rafa has been very helpful here and there,” said Garcia. “He doesn’t give me any tips but it’s mainly just checking up on how much he’s doing and what I am doing, but it’s good encouragement for me. He will say to me things like ‘come on, I hope you have a good year and have a great week’ and things like that.” Briton Nick Dougherty will be sidelined for some time with confirmation he has broken his right wrist. He was forced to withdraw from the Dubai Desert Classic after slipping over in the shower in his Dubai hotel. Former champions Colin Montgomerie (149), Richard Green (146) and Mark ’Meara (150) are set to miss the even-par cut (144). India’s Jeev Milkha Singh ended the second round at tied 20th.