Acid attack Mumbai, Aug. 5 (PTI): The father of Delhi resident Preeti Rathi, who died after a man flung acid on her face here in May, today approached Bombay High Court seeking a CBI  inquiry. Amar Singh Rathi sought the probe be transferred to the CBI after alleged inaction by Mumbai police in arresting the culprit. An unidentified man had flung acid on Preeti at Bandra station on May 2. She was supposed to join the Colaba naval hospital INS Ashwini as a nurse. Rain havoc Kochi (PTI): Cochin airport was temporarily closed on Monday after the runway got flooded in heavy rains. Nine persons died and several were reported missing in neighbouring Idukki after the downpour caused landslips. ‘Food’ death Muzaffarnagar (PTI): A child died and three others fell ill on Sunday after eating gram flour at an aaganwadi centre in Uttar Pradesh’s Shamli, police said. They complained of vomiting and were rushed to a government health centre where one of them died. A probe is on. Solar scam Kochi (PTI): Kerala High Court has sought an explanation on a magistrate’s “unusual” 30-day remand order for chief minister Oommen Chandy’s former private secretary Tenny Joppen in the solar scam.  The usual duration is 15 days. The court was hearing Joppen’s bail plea. Leopard skin Pithoragarh (PTI): A man was on Sunday caught with five leopard skins in Uttarakhand’s Pithoragarh and sent to jail under the Wildlife Protection Act, a forest official said. The smuggler, Gopi, claimed he had purchased the skins for Rs 8,000 to 10,000 and that his trade network is spread across the Himalayas, including Nepal, the official said. Boy suicide Tuticorin (PTI): An 11-year-old boy committed suicide on Sunday by setting himself ablaze using kerosene, police said. The boy was allegedly afraid that his father might chide him for buying chocolates with the money he was to share with his brother. Passport problem Srinagar, Aug. 5 (PTI): A 15-year-old girl in a Jammu and Kashmir orphanage has claimed she was being denied a passport to study in the US as her uncle was a former militant. But chief minister Omar Abdullah said Sufaira Jan would get her passport soon. She claimed the CID had not cleared her passport application. The officials clarified that at no level the girl’s application had been held up or rejected. JNU student New Delhi (PTI): A student of the Jawaharlal Nehru University was attacked and molested inside the university campus allegedly by a former student of the institute on Sunday evening. The 20-year-old, a student of the School of Languages, was molested by Abhinendra Jain with whom she was in a relationship. Jain, 24, was arrested on Monday. Jain had told her not to talk to other men. When she did not listen to him, he attacked and molested her, police said. Defence land row New Delhi, Aug. 5 (PTI): An inquiry has prime facie found that army and defence estates officials allegedly colluded to transfer defence land to a charitable trust in Jodhpur after which a CBI probe has been ordered, defence minister A.K. Antony said today. The 4.84 acres was illegally handed over to the trust by the military authorities on August 23, 2007. The CBI has filed a preliminary inquiry on May 14, Antony said in reply to a query. Gang rape New Delhi (PTI): The judgment in December 16 gang-rape case has been deferred till August 19 by the Juvenile Justice Board according to a Supreme Court direction. The apex court has asked the board to wait till it decides on a plea concerning interpretation of the term “juvenile”. Tiger status New Delhi (PTI): Heavy traffic on highways is affecting reproduction among the endangered tigers, environment minister Jayanthi Natarajan said in the Lok Sabha on Monday. She said poaching, degradation of forest status outside tiger reserves owing to human pressure are also some of the factors which are causing decline in the tiger population. Dogs maul kid Ludhiana (PTI): A two-year-old child died after being attacked by six stray dogs near Ludhiana in Punjab on Sunday, police said. The boy followed his grandmother, while she was crossing a road, without her noticing it when the incident took place. Ramadoss Chennai (PTI): The Tamil Nadu government on Monday informed Madras High Court that security cover to PMK founder S. Ramadoss was withdrawn on the basis of a security committee report. The report said the leader faced no threat to his life. Father killer New Delhi (PTI): A Delhi court has sentenced a man to life imprisonment for murdering his father and attempting to kill his mother to grab their property. Chander Mohan Dhingra, 38, was also held guilty of attempting to commit suicide after assaulting his parents on February 7, 2012.