Gupta setback New York, June 12 (PTI): Former Goldman Sachs director Rajat Gupta will have to report to jail next week to begin his two-year sentence on insider trading charges after the US Supreme Court rejected his bid to remain free on bail till his appeal for rehearing his conviction is decided. Gupta, convicted in 2012 of passing confidential information to his friend and business associate Raj Rajaratnam, is scheduled to begin his prison term on June 17. Gujarat dam Ahmedabad (PTI): Gujarat chief minister Anandiben Patel on Thursday said the state had got approval to raise the height of the Narmada dam to 138.72 metres from 121.92 metres. The decision came as a boost at a time the state has been facing water woes because of deficient rains. UPSC topper New Delhi (PTI): A male candidate has topped the civil services examination 2013 for the first time in four years. The results were declared on Thursday. Gaurav Agrawal has got the first rank with Economics as his optional subject. Bharti Dixit is the topper among female candidates. She has secured fifth rank. Pension plan New Delhi (PTI): The Centre has decided to give pension payment order to an employee on the day of retirement. The government is working with the vision of ensuring the life of dignity for pensioners, the minister of state for personnel, Jitendra Singh, said. Tiger victim Erode (PTI): A man was mauled to death by a tiger in Tamil Nadu’s Sathyamangalam reserve on Thursday. The man, who had boarded a truck, asked the driver to halt because he wanted to relieve himself. When he did not return, the driver informed the forest officials who came and found his half-eaten body. Crash kills 8 Beed (PTI): Eight members of a family, including two minor girls, were killed and two others injured when their car rammed into a stationary truck near a village in Maharashtra’s Beed on Thursday, police said. The truck driver had parked the vehicle on a road after a tyre got punctured. Child chokes London, June 12 (PTI): A two-year-old Indian-origin boy died after choking on a grape while  watching television at his home in Leicester, a court has been told. il, the only child of Mayur and Kruti Sharma was pronounced dead at Leicester Royal Infirmary on February 24 after efforts to revive him failed. The couple were at Leicester Town Hall for their son’s inquest yesterday. Dance bars Mumbai (PTI): The Maharashtra government has approved a draft bill to amend the Dance Bar Prohibition Act and ban dance performances in star hotels. The government will table the amendment bill in the state legislature either on Friday or Saturday, the last  day of the Assmebly’s ongoing monsoon session. CBI recruits Ghaziabad (PTI): A batch of 32 cadets have joined the CBI as sub-inspectors. The new recruits come from diverse backgrounds like engineering, management and banking. “There is often a need for a multi-disciplinary approach in the investigation of cases,” director Ranjit Sinha said. Wonder kid Los Angeles (PTI): A 10-year-old Indian-origin boy has become one of the youngest ever in the US to pass high school. Tanishq Abraham received his high school diploma in California on Sunday. Abraham has been home-schooled since the age of 7. Fake cops Thane (PTI): Four persons, including a journalist, have been arrested for impersonating policemen and extorting money from a woman by accusing her of carrying out prostitution at her home in Thane. The woman, asked to pay Rs 1 lakh, approached a police station after paying Rs 10,000. House threat New Delhi (PTI): Over 140 buildings in north Delhi have been found dangerous by the NDMC in its pre-monsoon survey for the first four months of the year. A total of 144 buildings were identified as dangerous, with Sadar Paharganj zone alone accounting for 137, a report released by the NDMC said.