Bangalore/ Ranchi, June 15: Agasthya is basking in the glow of Mahi’s magic touch but Sugreev has been left out in the cold. Mahendra Singh Dhoni today adopted a nine-year-old Royal Bengal tiger of Mysore zoo and donated a lakh as his annual sponsorship fee, some two months after Ranchi’s Birsa Munda zoo requested him to sponsor one of its big cats but got no reply. “Tiger, our national animal needs protection. I am adopting Agasthya to… encourage our people to love animals and to stand for the cause of animal rights and conservation. Live and let live,” a statement released by Mysore zoo quoted the Indian captain as saying. Adoption formalities done, a signboard with the sponsorship details will be installed in Agasthya’s enclosure tomorrow, K.B. Markandiah, the conservator of forests and executive director of Mysore zoo, told The Telegraph. “We are really thrilled he has kept his word and come forward to adopt an animal. I am sure this will encourage many more celebrities to follow him and other cricketers,” he said. Back in Dhoni’s home town Ranchi, however, the thrill gave way to a sulk. A Birsa Munda zoo official said: “Two months ago, we had written a letter to MSD asking him to adopt a tiger or any animal in our zoo, as his feat would have motivated many others to do the same. “He didn’t say no to us but he has been dilly-dallying for long. Now we have given up hope about adoption.” J.B. Jauher, the principal chief conservator of forests, did not sound as dejected, though. “We would love it if MSD adopts Sugreev. Let’s see if it happens,” he said, possibly encouraged by Priyanka Chopra’s adopting Durga, the lone tigress at Birsa Munda zoo, in end-April. Forest officials, however, kept humming and hawing when asked if they had thought how “to utilise” Dhoni to promote awareness and conservation of wildlife. The cricketer was named brand ambassador for forests and wildlife in Jharkhand on June 4. “We are soon going to chalk out plans. His personality is such that people will automatically connect with him,” forest secretary A.K. Sarkar said. Dhoni, who first became brand ambassador of the tiger conservation mission in Uttarakhand last year, was apparently cajoled by former India cricketer Jawagal Srinath to adopt a tiger in Mysore zoo. The first to stand up for the cause of wild animals by adopting a jaguar, Srinath tipped off zoo officials about Dhoni’s intention when this year’s Indian Premier League was under way. He is believed to have handled the entire thing but could not be contacted for comment. “We were told by Srinath that Dhoni would visit the zoo the next time he is in Karnataka,” executive director Markandiah said. “Adoptions have a great way of creating awareness among celebrities and commoners on the proper upkeep of birds and animals.” Soon after Srinath began the trend, Anil Kumble adopted a giraffe and Zaheer Khan a tiger. Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yeddyurappa has adopted a tiger, too. The adoption fee covers the cost of food, healthcare and other welfare schemes for the animal. Environmentalist Bulu  Imam said getting celebrities to adopt animals was nothing but a gimmick. “We talk a  lot about environment and wildlife but do nothing. The main problem is there aren’t competent officials at the helm to help conserve forests and environment at the ground level.” Wildlife activist D.S. Srivastava, who is also a member of Jharkhand’s wildlife advisory board, said: “We don’t condemn MSD’s association with forests and environment but glorification will not save shrinking habitats and tigers.”