42 years of my life I have followed the tail of the tiger in order to understand and record its secret life. The root of all my learning has been the dry deciduous habitat of Ranthambhore National Park, which stretches across 350sqkm in Rajasthan. When I first went there at the age of 23, I was a tourist searching for tigers, which were very difficult to find, but today it is the best destination in the world to see wild tigers. In 1976, the tiger was completely nocturnal, and only a carefully coordinated village resettlement plan managed to reduce human disturbance. By 1983, the tigers were coming into their own and turning diurnal. Visibility is good and the area is dotted with the ruins of a historic past. Lake palaces, chhatris and a massive 1,000-year-old fort create a spectacular landscape to watch tigers. Probably the most difficult to find in the folds of a forest are tigresses with cubs below the age of six months. The mother is elusive and over-protective and tries to keep her cubs away from human observers. It was January 3, 2017, and I had been trying to find Nur and her three five-month-old cubs in the Sultanpur Valley. I had no luck but when searching for a family, patience must be the only virtue to follow. On January 2, we had found a sambar killed by a leopard in the heart of Nur’s home range. I was certain Nur would find it, so I spent much time revisiting the carcass and at dawn on the 3rd, as we turned the corner, there was Nur sprawled on the middle of the road. Nearby and just off the road lay the carcass of the sambar that she had usurped from the leopard… and then joy of joys… behind a thick bush appeared a curious face of a young tiger and then two more. It was for me the beginning of a day to remember. NUR AND BABIES AT LUNCH

We watched mother and cubs feeding on the carcass... the cubs were chewing at the ears to get a grip. Their teeth were still small and sawing into the hide and meat is no easy process. They learn by chewing on the ears. In between bouts of eating, the cubs would rush to mom for a cuddle and then all four would flop down around our jeep for a siesta. The devotion of a tigress to her cubs is astonishing. She will even ensure that all the cubs eat and push out the dominant ones if they get too greedy. Tree pies and crows that tried to land on the carcass were chased off and for nine hours we watched the four tigers and the amazing bonding that occurs between them. Till at least 20 months, the cubs would stick to their mother and learn the art of hunting and survival from watching her every step. When I left the family at dusk, my senses were full of tigers and I knew it was a day I would never forget. GABBAR’S NATURAL KILL

Ranthambhore, over the years, is one of those amazing locations where tigers not only reveal their secrets but also rewrite their natural history. Another favourite place of mine is the bamboo forests of Tadoba Andhari Tiger Reserve. If Ranthambhore is three hours by road from Jaipur, Tadoba is two hours by road from Nagpur. This rich tract of forest in Maharashtra had few tigers 25 years ago when I first visited. I worked very hard with the then director, Shree Bhagwan, in order to reduce and minimise human disturbance. Good management has resulted in a healthy population of tigers and it is now a great place to watch wild tigers. I remember a stunning morning in March 2016, when while driving through the hilly part of this reserve, we were suddenly blocked by an enormous male tiger, Gabbar. Battle-scarred and collared, Gabbar was slowly walking down a track marking the trees and asserting his territorial presence. His collar was a way to further our understanding of the movements of big male tigers, but sadly most of the time these collars malfunction. Gabbar, the year before, had been in a huge fight with another male and had recovered from his wounds slowly. Tigers will take over ranges in order to mate with the females and it is this process that can lead to vicious conflict. I followed Gabbar as he indulged in flehmen, which is a gesture a tiger makes on sniffing another tiger’s scent. He soon reached the edge of Tadoba Lake, where he curled up to rest. It was a beautiful morning as the sun glinted off his face. In the distance, sambar grazed on the far side and near Gabbar, a pied kingfisher dived into the water in pursuit of fish. After half an hour, he rose and paced down the edge of the lake. Suddenly all hell broke loose as a tiny chital fawn was flushed from behind a tree. In a flash, Gabbar leapt ahead and pinioned it in his enormous paws. In seconds he gripped it by its neck and walked off to a nearby patch of forest to feast. The rarest of encounters had happened and I could scarcely believe my luck. It is so rare to see natural kills and even rarer to observe this in daylight. It all happened so fast that I was barely able to even get my camera up to take a picture. I was lucky that my wife Sanjna was able to record the entire event on camera. Later that afternoon, after consuming the entire fawn, Gabbar came out again and dozed off in a patch of shade at the edge of the lake. Tadoba Tiger Reserve today is as good as Ranthambhore in terms of seeing tigers and both reserves have some of the highest tourism footfalls. In Tadoba, at least 25 different tigers are regularly seen. CHARGE OF THE RHINO

An all-time favourite tiger trail of mine is the Kaziranga National Park in Assam. World-famous for its nearly 3,000 rhinos, Kaziranga has the highest density of tigers per square kilometre anywhere on this planet. I have seen tigers here in this incredible habitat of forest and grassland. I remember sitting in a watchtower on the western part of this forest and a huge tiger suddenly came out of high grass, charging a group of hog deer grazing on the edge of the water. It strolled around nonchalantly, unaware that I was watching it. Suddenly a rhino appeared, and grunting, charged the tiger, who rapidly vanished into the high grass. Here tigers kill rhinos but only the young ones. This is a park that reminds me of Noah’s Ark. I remember once seeing 100 different rhinos in one day as I drove from one end of the park to the other. The rhinos are very aggressive and can charge a vehicle without reason. In the jeep you yell and scream in the hope of stopping a rhino’s charge. Vehicles have been charged by rhinos for more than a 1,000 metres! They are fierce animals and these charges are frightening. Tigers can get aggressive too but when they charge, those are mock charges. I must have been charged 50 times by tigers. But rhinos mean business. You have to be really cautious and careful. That is why a jeep in Kaziranga always carries a gunman. This is where forest staff are ever alert against poachers and several gun battles rage across the grasslands as poachers pursue the rhinos for their priceless horns. Many poachers and forest guards have died in these conflicts. The mighty Brahmaputra flows nearby and if you are exceptionally lucky you can watch tigers swimming across. The bird life is rich and astounding, and this area is a wildlife dream. I was once lucky enough to watch a sloth bear swimming across this river! TRUE FORTRESS OF THE TIGER

But the most evocative and inspiring tiger trail that I have ever been to is the Sunderbans in West Bengal. These are mangrove islands full of a network of waterways and on the border of India and Bangladesh. The Bay of Bengal laps at the shores of these islands. This is a magical world full of a unique kind of wilderness. There is a silence around, and dawn and dusk are spectacular times as the sky turns scarlet both before the sun rises and after it sets. When I saw my first tiger, it was for a flash of a second. I still remember the splash of water and the flick of a tail as it sped from water to land. I had to rub my eyes and wonder if I had actually seen the tiger or if my imagination was playing up. 

Yes, the Sunderbans is a place where dreams are made. There is a timelessness as the hours slip by on these waterways. You live on a boat and scan the creeks in the hope of a glimpse of stripes. The area and its tigers are like ghosts and it is like going through a near-spiritual experience. This is where many die each year from tiger attacks. Fishermen and honey collectors frequent the area and because the mangroves are thick and inaccessible, there is endless conflict with tigers. Saltwater crocodiles also take their toll on human life. At night there is palpable tension in the air. For me it is the true fortress of the tiger, and therefore intensely engaging for the senses. It’s like no other place I have been in. I have been privileged to spend long hours watching wild tigers and in some of the most incredible natural habitats that tigers frequent. I relish it. It has been a very special part of my life. This engagement with wild tigers has created my zeal to serve them. FOREST ESSENTIALS

1. Respect the forest you enter by being silent and following the rules

2. Fill in the feedback forms provided in places like Ranthambhore so park authorities can learn from your suggestions

3. Please register a complaint if your guide or driver is irresponsible as your safety depends on their behaviour

4. Do not litter or throw garbage 

5. Do not try to take selfies

6. Remember, a national park is not a zoo. Always be cautious when watching wild animals

7. Remember to read about the park you visit so you are well-briefed on the area and its inhabitants Valmik Thapar has spent 42 years of

his life working with and for wild tigers.

He is the author of 30 books, including Living with Tigers