Guwahati, July 28: Manas is on a roll. Weeks after winning back its World Heritage Site tag, the national park has earned the distinction of being classified as a “good” tiger reserve, following the Management Effectiveness Evaluation (MEE) of tiger reserves in India exercise carried out by National Tiger Conservation Authority and Wildlife Institute of India. The report was released in New Delhi today. It reveals that most of the tiger reserves in the Northeast have done well in comparison to earlier reports. Kaziranga has been classified in the “very good” category, while Dampa and Pakke are in the “good” category, and Nameri and Namdapha have been kept in the “satisfactory” category. MEE is an assessment of how well protected areas such as national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, conservation reserves, community reserves and tiger reserves are being managed and their effectiveness in conserving flora and fauna. Thirty indicators were used to evaluate the reserves. Manas was earlier classified as poor while Kaziranga and Pakke were “good”. Nameri was satisfactory, Dampa and Namdapha were classified as poor. “On Manas tiger reserve, it says there are no human settlements inside the core of the reserve except for an area of 16.3 square km in Panbari on the fringes and 20 hectares at Betbari in North Kamrup which was encroached upon in 1996. Relocation of these settlements is being addressed through negotiations with local people. “It is a good news for us and shows that the efforts put in during the last few years are finally paying off. There are some concerns, which are being adequately taken care of,” A. Swargiary, field director of the Manas tiger reserve, said. The report says there is excellent availability of water in the reserve, part of a larger landscape, dynamic ecosystem, change in attitude of local people towards conservation of Manas and good support from Manas. On the weaknesses, it says there is poor infrastructure in the buffer areas, multiplicity of management in the buffer area, porosity of the southern tip of the Manas river and lack of clarity in the role of volunteers. It has suggested that the authorities should discuss the issue with the Bodoland Territorial Council to place the buffer areas under the unified command of the field director. This apart, it should prepare a volunteer deployment programme and create administrative structure so that they can work under the supervision of regular staff. A source in Manas said though relocation of people from the core areas is on the cards, it looks to be a tough job, as there are several problems. A sum of Rs 10 lakh will be paid to each family for moving out. It says that Kaziranga has one of the best protection strategies, which are well implemented with 152 anti poaching camps, a number of roads and a well-connected communication system. It is prepared to meet emergencies arising out of flash floods, the core area is free from human habitation and the wildlife staff trained better at the senior level. The reserve is estimated to have 106 tigers. The weaknesses identified for Kaziranga are rapid habitat degradation in and around the tiger reserve, speeding traffic along National Highway 37 and delay in release of funds, among others. It has suggested a periodic review of tourism activities and the initiation of steps for habitat and population monitoring. The strengths of Dampa are no human settlements inside the core area, attitudinal change in the local communities and habitat for species of high conservation value, among others. The long international border which opens up scope for movement of people from neigbouring countries and shifting cultivation in the buffer area are some of its weaknesses. Pakke has excellent protection mechanism, man management and is free from human habitation. Namdapha has inadequate staff and most of them are not trained, 84 families are staying in the core area and there is no eco-development. Similarly, at Nameri tiger reserve, the buffer zone is not under the tiger reserve, there is a severe shortage of manpower and severe degradation and encroachment of buffer areas. The estimated total population of tigers in Assam is 143 with the lower limit being 113 and the upper limit being 173. In 2006, the population was 70. In the Northeast, the tiger population is 148 with the lower limit being 118 and the upper limit being 178. In 2006 it was 100.