Bhopal: Wildlife activists have expressed concern over rising tiger deaths in Madhya Pradesh, saying the state accounted for the highest number of fatalities among the big cats over the past two years. Government and forest officials, however, insisted that the feline's population was on the rise and there had been no negligence on their part in conserving the national animal. The assertions from both sides came amid claims that the state has lost 32 tigers to poaching and other reasons in the past 13 months, including six since January 1, 2018. According to data from the National Tiger Conservation Authority, 26 of the 98 tiger deaths in India in 2017 were reported from Madhya Pradesh, which houses half a dozen reserves for the striped cat. In 2016, 33 tigers died in the state, according to the state's forest department figures. Ajay Dubey, an activist, has decided to approach the high court. "We are going to move the high court for a probe into the tiger deaths since 2016. Madhya Pradesh recorded the highest number of tiger deaths in 2016 and 2017 and now six have died in January alone," Dubey said. He said a radio-collared tigress was allegedly poached in the Satpura Tiger Reserve in Hoshangabad recently. The feline was found dead near a rest house on January 18. Dubey claimed forest officials came to know about it three days after the tiger was killed. "Is this how they are keeping track of the big cats?" he said. L. Krishnamurthy, the Satpura Tiger Reserve's field director, said the death of the tigress, aged around 7, was being probed. "We are worried about the feline's death," he said, adding the radio collar had not been functioning for the past year and a half. The carcass did not have any internal or external injury mark, the official said. A feline in Seoni district, which houses the Pench Tiger Reserve, was found dead on January 13. The tigress is alleged to have been poisoned and its claws and other external body parts, which fetch a huge price in the international market, were found missing. "Five persons had been arrested in connection with the poaching," a forest official said. A retired official of the state's animal husbandry department said something was "seriously wrong with tiger conservation in the state". Madhya Pradesh principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Jitendra Agrawal said the state does not conceal the death of a tiger. "Every death is reported. We (Madhya Pradesh) had 257 big cats in 2010. The number went up to 308, according to the last tiger count of the country." Asked about the large number of tiger deaths in the state, Agrawal said farmers were putting electric fences around their fields to protect crops and this was hurting the conservation efforts. "Wait for the next tiger count in January 2019," Agrawal said, exuding confidence that there would be a "huge" rise in their number. PTI