Guwahati: Kaziranga tiger reserve (KTR) is being run without a tiger conservation plan, according to the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), the apex tiger authority in the country. The NTCA, in its report on rampant mining in Karbi Anglong Hills in adjoining Kaziranga tiger reserve, says the KTR, despite being declared a tiger reserve on August 3, 2007, does not have an approved tiger conservation plan. "It is a matter of great concern that a protected area like the KTR, a World Heritage Site, is being managed without a properly planned tiger conservation plan," the report says. The report was released on April 20 and sent to the Assam government. The NTCA team visited the park this year following a complaint filed by Rohit Choudhury of Assam about rampant mining taking place in Karbi Anglong Hills, adjoining Kaziranga tiger reserve. Section 38V (3) of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, says the state government shall prepare a tiger conservation plan for ensuring protection of tiger reserve and providing site specific inputs for available population of tigers, co-predators and prey animals and ecologically compatible land uses in the tiger reserves and areas linking one protected area or tiger reserve with another for addressing the livelihood concerns of local people, to provide dispersal habitats and corridor for spill over population. The tiger conservation plan of a given landscape has two major components, to address two different areas - core and buffer. It has an estimated 104 tigers now. "It is almost ready and is now in the final stages," divisional forest officer of Kaziranga National Park Rohini Ballav Saikia told The Telegraph. The report said non-declaration of the eco-sensitive zone for such a long period of time had a direct bearing on such activities detrimental to the well-being of the animals. "The dangerous trend, if not checked immediately and permanently could lead to irreversible impact on conservation and protection of wildlife with the potential threat that in case of a major flood, majority of the internationally acclaimed species of one-horned rhinos would be wiped out forever," it said.