Tiger Woods was never better. He had won the 2000 US Open at Pebble Beach by 15 strokes, and now, on a sunny Sunday in Scotland, he was sitting behind a microphone in the British Open interview tent after having won not only by eight strokes, but, remarkably, without his golf ball thudding into the sand of any of the 112 mostly hidden bunkers at St Andrews. “But,” a questioner said to him, “weren’t you in a bunker on the seventh hole on Friday?” “Bunker?” Woods said with a smile. “I was in a bunker every day ? on the practice range.” He deserved his little joke. He had dazzled the Scottish galleries by smashing his tee shots beyond the fairway bunkers and lasering his irons away from the greenside bunkers. In a sense, he had left the “home of golf,” the Old Course at St Andrews, in ruins. But when the 134th British Open begins Thursday, Woods and the world’s best golfers will be playing a somewhat different Old Course. Not that the Royal & Ancient blue blazers have added any bunkers. That would have sabotaged the integrity of the world’s most hallowed course. Instead, by creating five new tees, they brought several fairway bunkers into play for Woods and all those who have benefited from golf’s titanium technology. Feel free to use your driver, gentlemen, but it might be wiser to use a 3 wood, if not a 2-iron. Something else could be different this time ? wind. As the Scots like to say: “If it’s nae wind, it’s nae golf,” and five years ago, there was virtually nae wind all four days. But if there is wind this time and rain, it will be a different Open Championship. Three years ago at Muirfield, remember, Woods was sailing along until an 81 in Saturday’s cold, wind-driven rain ended his chances for a calendar-year Grand Slam. Woods is different, too. Five years ago, he would go on to win the PGA Championship at Valhalla and then the 2001 Masters ? the first pro golfer to win four consecutive major titles. But now, at 29, he is no longer dominant, and may never be again. In his last 12 majors, he has won only this year’s Masters. Of Woods’ nine major titles, he has only that one British Open ? not unlike Jack Nicklaus’ spread of his record 18 majors: three British Opens, six Masters, four US Opens and five PGAs. Nicklaus, at age 65, will be there in what he calls “my farewell to major championship golf.” “The Open demands patience ? to deal with the heavy wind, the sometimes quirky bounce of the ball, and the often extremely penal bunkers.” Yes, the 112 bunkers, none of which Tiger Woods was ever in five years ago. But that was then and this is now, when many of those bunkers will be in play off the tee.