The spectacular Himalayas straddle Nepal, China and India, and sport some of the highest peaks in the world - Everest, Kanchenjunga, Makalu, Dhaulagiri, Manaslu and Annapurna. From the dizzy heights of these permanently snow-clad mountains and their ominous glaciers to the tiger-haunted jungles of the Terai, this region presents an amazing variety of ecozones and habitats that is home to an equally fascinating diversity of flora and fauna. Little wonder that despite the frequent political upheavals in Nepal, this country, one of the poorest in the world, unfailingly lures tourists, trekkers and mountaineers. Sujoy Das's breathtaking black-and-white closeups of these rugged, forbidding yet enticing heights in his book, NEPAL HIMALAYA: A JOURNEY THROUGH TIME (Vajra, $28), effortlessly communicate the perils, thrills and the dare of scaling these vertiginous mountains and crossing treacherous glaciers to armchair adventurers. The text by Lisa Choegyal, an Englishwoman who has made Kathmandu her home for four decades, introduces us to Das as a "veteran trekker, photographer and blogger with over 50 trips into the Nepal Himalaya to his credit". Das, who has been photographing this region for more than 25 years, has written several books and done assignments for prestigious publications. Little wonder Das is at home at such staggering elevations. While Choegyal, who has been involved in conservation and tourism in Nepal for long, mostly expands on the activities of enterprising expatriates in the tourism business in her text, Das takes us straightaway to the stark, serene and ascetic world of the mountains that seem to have been in deep meditation for aeons. The photographs are spread over nine chapters and chart the journey of the photographer across icy wastes, villages in between, the exquisitely carved temples of Kathmandu, valleys with monasteries, and terraced fields. The treks are unthinkable without the sturdy loadbearers. The photographs are interspersed with some drawings of Paula Sengupta, who happens to be Das's wife. Das chose to photograph in black and white because there is no other monochromatic publication on this region. This limited palette could not have been more suited to the grandeur of his subject. It heightens the drama of light and shadows as the clouds scurry across the heavens, sometimes in formations like a phalanx of soldiers on the march, sometimes like a tattered veil or a cloak that conceals an entire range. The jagged edges of the inscrutable mountains stand out in sharp contrast. The most striking shot is the panoramic view of the black night sky with stars of the Milky Way scattered across it like a million fireflies. The purest is of silvery icicles shot through with sunlight, framing the dark vertical triangle of Machhapuchhare (picture).