Dalma and Palamau will soon be in hot pursuit of their elusive denizens. The state forest department has embarked on a smart project to install heat-sensitive cameras across the sprawling wildlife sanctuary and tiger reserve to make sighting of animals a swift, more accurate and non-intrusive exercise that also promises to focus on hitherto unknown species. Principal chief conservator of forests A.K. Malhotra said as many as 232 of these special digital cameras had been procured from the US through a New Delhi-based agency. Each of the 5MP compact gadgets — no bigger than an electric meter — runs on six batteries. They can sense animal body heat within a radius of up to 20 metres and click automatically. The cameras have 8GB memory cards and boast two-month battery life. “While 200 heat-sensitive cameras will be installed at the 1,014sqkm Palamau Tiger Reserve, 32 cameras have been earmarked for the 192sqkm Dalma Wildlife Sanctuary. It is a more innovative method of sighting animals, which will not just eliminate chances of duplication because of human error, but also reveal a great deal about rare and unknown species,” Malhotra said. Without using manpower per se, the forest department will be able to conduct an extensive survey to determine the population density of different animals in Dalma and Palamau, he added. An official of Ranchi wildlife division, which controls Dalma sanctuary, said the cameras could help make breakthroughs in the field of animal research in Jharkhand. “There are animals that venture out only during the night and, hence, go unnoticed. We can now identify them and study their behaviour from pictures taken,” he pointed out. According to Malhotra, installation of the imported gadgets will be complete by the end of this year. “The work is almost done in Dalma, while the exercise in ongoing in Palamau,” he said. A Dalma official said the cameras were being fixed to trees at a height of 4ft feet for optimum coverage. “We have installed the gadgets at Majla Bandh, Chotka Bandh, Nichla Bandh, Bijli Ghati, Kuiyakocha, Rangajal, Mahajal, Kasjobi, Kalajal, Rangasing Bandh and Aamdari,” he said. Some cameras have also been installed at Bota, the largest jungle inside the sanctuary with an area of 8,000 hectares. It is home to the reclusive and dwindling sloth bear.