Ranchi, Sept. 5: The police have conversation recordings between agriculture minister and Barkagaon Congress MLA Yogendra Sao and an extortion outfit kingpin, where it emerges that Sao was the chief patron of the year-old criminal organisation in what is a damning blow for the Hemant Soren ruling coalition. Alleged Jharkhand Tiger (JT) head Rajkumar Gupta, taken on remand today by Hazaribagh police for more grilling, revealed during preliminary interrogation that Sao formed the outfit in 2013 with “five guns and four motorbikes”. The outfit’s aim was to extort levy, have a hand in Hazaribagh’s lucrative illegal coal trade and prevent better-known outfits Tritiya Prastuti Committee and Jharkhand Prastuti Committee from becoming too big for their boots, Gupta has claimed. Though Sao has denied all charges, according to a senior policeman, the minister and Gupta have spoken over phone on the operations related to the fledgling JT numerous times. The police, the officer claimed, were in the possession of several recordings of these conversations. Though The Telegraph has no way of verifying the contents of the recordings, it appears from them and Gupta’s grilling that Sao asked the criminal to form the gang and, like a good patron, gave it five regular firearms and four bikes as part of initial capital. When one new recruit decamped with three firearms, Sao was understandably furious. When the pace of recruiting youths was slow, barely touching 20 of the targeted 80-100, Sao pulled up Gupta for not making it powerful enough. In another conversation, Sao and Gupta are heard talking of chhota aadmi and bada aadmi, which the police believe is code for sizes of arms and ammunition to be procured. According to the senior police officer, the reason for such damning candour was that Sao was probably unaware that intelligence agencies had been keeping tabs on his mobile calls. “Looks like the minister was behind JT. The minister was in regular touch with Gupta and others, made and received frequent calls on his personal and official numbers. Gupta seems to be a frequent visitor of the minister’s Ranchi and Hazaribagh homes. Tower locations on certain dates and times are being analysed,” the police officer said. Hazaribagh police has also recovered a photograph clicked on May 21 this year where minister Sao is seen sitting inside a chopper with one of the founder members of JT, Raju Sao. Raju was allegedly involved in the kidnap of one Bhavani Mahto, an employee of Central Coalfields Limited, in early June, where JT demanded Rs 8 lakh. Raju was arrested on June 13. Gupta has alleged that the minister also wanted Chatra-based coal transporter Bablu Munda to be “removed” for which he was prepared to give him Rs 5 lakh, weapons and a coal contract. Since the arrest of Gupta and his aides Sandeep Sao, Nakul Sao, Ramchandra Sao and Prakash Sao on Tuesday at Chumba village by Hazaribagh police, when more and more revelations emerged, the agriculture minister has been crying “a mega conspiracy” to malign his image. On Wednesday, Sao thundered he was ready for any probe, even by CBI, but today, he has gone incommunicado. His party and cabinet colleague, Rajendra Prasad Singh said: “Hum log iss baat ki jaanch CID ya Vigilance Bureau se karwaiyenge.” In a poll-bound state, the sensational Sao case has given the BJP enough fodder to demand the minister step down with immediate effect. As a face-saver, the Congress has formed a three-member fact-finding committee of Manoj Yadav, Abha Sinha and Shamsher Alam to probe into the allegations.