New York: Tiger Woods will make his long-awaited return to competitive golf at next week's Safeway Open in Napa, California, the PGA Tour said on Friday. The American former world No. 1 and 14-time Major champion has been sidelined for over a year while recovering from multiple back surgeries. Woods, 40, has not played competitive golf since the Wyndham Championship in August, 2015 and his ranking has plummeted to 767th after his spell on the sidelines. The Safeway Open, the first event on the 2016-17 PGA Tour, will be played from October 13-16 at Silverado Resort and Spa. Woods had said last month that depending on his "continued progress and recovery" he hoped to play in Napa, the Turkish Airlines Open in November and the Tiger Woods Foundation-run Hero World Challenge in December. Since the end of 2013, Woods has competed in only 18 events on the PGA Tour while being blighted by injuries and poor form, recording just one top-10 finish along with six missed cuts and three withdrawals. "It was difficult missing tournaments that are important to me, but this time I was smart about my recovery and didn't rush it," Woods said last month. "I still have work to do." Woods was at Hazeltine National last week as a vice-captain to US Ryder Cup captain Davis Love III. Although he was visible and spoke afterward about being honored to one day be considered to be captain, he did not address his health or whether or not he would play next week. Meanwhile, Australia's world No.1 Jason Day on Friday pulled out of next month's World Cup in Melbourne with a back injury. The 10-time PGA Tour winner was planning on returning home to play in the November 23-27 event at the Kingston Heath course for the first time since he and countryman Adam Scott won the event in 2013. "I regret that I will be unable to come home to Australia this year," Day said in a statement. "I was looking forward to playing in the Australian Open and teaming up with Adam Scott on one of my favourite courses Kingston Heath the following week at the World Cup in Melbourne. "My plan is to return home to Australia in 2017. My best wishes to Adam and Team Australia at the World Cup." Day tore a ligament in his back towards the end of the 2016 PGA Tour season, forcing his withdrawal from the BMW Championship and the Tour Championship. He has been advised to rest until next year and the prospect of a long trip to Australia in the midst of his rehabilitation and rest period was not recommended by medical staff. Day has also pulled out of a charity match against former world No.1 Rory McIlroy in the Philippines on November 29, a statement from the Australian PGA said. Scott will now select a new partner to form one of the 28 two-man teams who will represent their countries at the World Cup.