Daltonganj: CPI(Maoist) rebels in and around Palamau Tiger Reserve's south division have flexed their muscles for buffaloes owned by the prosperous Yadav community of milkmen near the sanctuary. Maoists want full immunity for Yadavs and their buffaloes inside the PTR at the expense of wildlife and violations of wildlife protection and forest Acts, PTR deputy director (south division) M.K. Mahaling told this paper on Sunday, indicating some kind of payback for this protectionism. On June 7, a band of around 10 armed Maoists threatened teams of Tiger Strike Force and camera traps, saying PTR officials would face dire consequences if the buffaloes of Yadavs were driven out of the wildlife sanctuary's grasslands and water bodies or any hurdle was created in the way of their setting up khatals (dairy farms) inside PTR turf. Quoting the teams who had the encounter with the Maoists near Phutwa Dam under Bareysarn range of south division, PTR's Mahaling said Maoists warned those defying this diktat would be buried alive and boasted their expertise in blowing up heavy vehicles. To stress the seriousness of their threats, Maoists beat up two forest guards, snatched GPS devices and two camera trappings and told PTR teams not to use vehicles inside jungles else they would be torched. Numerous khatals on PTR milk the sanctuary resources for free by sending their buffaloes to graze on forestland and muddy the watering holes, Mahaling said. There are about 1.5 lakh bovine animals inside the sanctuary where more than 168 villages exist. Roadside eateries from Garu to Mahuadarn buy milk from the Yadav community who own the buffaloes. "We maintain grasslands for our herbivores and watering holes for all animals. Buffaloes feast on sanctuary grass and drink water here. After they leave, no wild animal can use the watering hole. Buffaloes make the watering hole slushy and leave behind a stink," Mahaling said. "Usurping food and water and space meant for wildlife, these bovine animals pose a health risk to wildlife. Most buffaloes are not inoculated and there is a fear of an FMD (foot-and-mouth disease) outbreak," he added. He added that a khatal on PTR land comes up in stages. First, some 40 to 50 buffaloes are brought. Their owners clean around one hectare of all shrubs. In the span of one or two nights, a shanty of bamboos and timber, lying around in abundance, comes up. Bareysarn ranger Bhola Singh said buffalo owners openly defy PTR employees to set up khatals. "They behave adamantly because they have tacit support of Maoists in Burha Pahar region. Right now, Dona, Dhrup, Kujrum and Lato are places in PTR where buffaloes outnumber wildlife," he said.