Alipurduar, Jan. 6: The National Tiger Conservation Authority has approved a proposal to bring in tigers from other forests in the country and release them in Buxa at a time the number of big cats is declining in the reserve in north Bengal, state forest minister Binoy Barman has said. In 2005, the number of tigers in Sariska Tiger Reserve came down to zero. A similar relocation project was taken up and big cats were brought into the forest from other places. "Now, the number of tigers in Sariska is 11," a forest official said. In Bengal, the state forest department had sent a proposal to the NTCA a couple of months ago stating that tigers could be relocated to Buxa and a 200sqkm area had been identified to develop a prey base for the predators. "We believe that there are tigers in the BTR but the number has come down. According to experts' advice, we have decided to restock tigers. We have already received the approval of the NTCA. Tigers will be brought in from other forests. Everything will be done according to the NTCA's instructions," said Barman. In 2012 and 2013, scat samples from Buxa were sent to the Centre of Cellular and Molecular Biology in Hyderabad and the reports said there were at least 12 tigers in the forest. But last year, according to a report published by the NTCA, there are only three big cats in north Bengal (Buxa is the only forest that boasts tigers in the region). "This time, we are sending 45 scat samples to the Wild Life Institute of India for DNA analysis. We are yet to receive their report on the 54 scat samples that were sent last year. We have set up 100 pairs of automatic trap cameras in sensitive locations but we are yet to receive any direct evidence of tigers in Buxa," said Buxa field director Ujwal Ghosh. Last year, the NTCA has asked the state forest department for an explanation on why the status of a "tiger reserve" should not be withdrawn from Buxa and why it should not stop funding tiger projects in the forest prompting foresters to increase the number of camera traps to capture images of tigers. The state forest department also submitted a Tiger Conservation Plan to the NTCA mentioning that at least 15 villages had to be shifted out of the core area of the forest to increase the area where the animals could breed. According to a forest officer, an area of almost 200sqkm has been identified on the eastern side of Jayanti road in Buxa where a grassland would be developed for herbivorous animals - a pray base for tigers.