Patna, Oct. 30: Visiting Valmiki Tiger Reserve (VTR) would soon be a cakewalk, oops smooth ride. A weekly bus service between the wildlife habitat and the state capital would be introduced this fiscal. At present, there is no direct transportation facility for going to the reserve, about 280km from here. People either have to rent vehicles or drive their own cars to the tiger reserve. The forests and environment department of the state has decided to introduce the bus service to promote VTR as a tourist destination. Deputy chief minister Sushil Kumar Modi, who holds the additional charge of forests and environment, told The Telegraph: “We will hold parleys with the Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation for launching the bus service in the current fiscal.” Keen to put VTR on the state’s tourism map prominently, Modi would explore the possibilities of developing eco-tourism in the reserve during his two-day visit to VTR from November 3. “I will assess the facilities available right now and find out what amenities could be developed to offer tourists a comfortable stay in the reserve,” said the deputy chief minister, adding that he would visit the forest to have a first-hand feel of things before suggesting steps to be taken from tourists’ point of view. A formal decision to develop eco-tourism in the reserve was taken in a meeting of the state wildlife board on April 20 this year. The VTR administration has started preparations to put facilities in place that would allow a comfortable stay for tourists. It has decided to set up six eco huts in the reserve for tourists. While four such huts would come up in the Govardhana range of the reserve, two would be built in the Valmikinagar range of VTR. These huts would have all the facilities available in good hotels. Each hut would have the capacity to accommodate two persons. The huts are likely to be ready by the end of the current fiscal. At present, VTR does not offer dedicated residential facilities to visitors. The only option available is the rest houses of range offices. Eco tourism apart, Modi would also take stock of other aspects of the reserve, particularly the steps being taken for habitat development and safety of wild animals. “I will discuss all these issues with field officials so that necessary steps could be taken for developing the reserve as one of the best managed tiger reserves of the country,” said the deputy chief minister.