Salman Khan’s next, espionage drama Tiger Zinda Hai, takes the lead pair of intelligence agents Tiger and Zoya (Katrina Kaif) on a mission through five countries — Austria, Greece, Morocco, Abu Dhabi and India. The beauty of one locale rivals another. The climes of the Mediterranean, the cool of Austria and the mystery of Morocco. Director Ali Abbas Zafar said: “We went to Austria to get the snow-capped mountains, to Morocco for a fight sequence. In Greece, we shot the song Swag se karenge sabre swagat. Abu Dhabi is where we got to shoot in the desert. Each of these locations has significance and will be a turning point in the script.” If the setting is beautiful, the action is breathtaking. Salman’s Tiger will be seen in some jaw-dropping and death-defying never-seen-before action scenes when the masala entertainer of 2017 from the Yashraj stable hits screens in December. Trust Tiger to pull off insane stunts (remember the run around Havana in Ek Tha Tiger? Think bigger), wield some of the heaviest weapons to tear down his nemesis. We hear Salman’s character fires the MG 42, a massive machine gun, in a heavy-duty action sequence at a crucial juncture of the film. Just so you know, the MG 42 weighs as much as 25-30kg  and has a magazine of cartridges attached to it, making it a beast of destruction. Zafar said: “When you feature a superstar like Salman Khan, who is known to pull his weight for a film’s action, you need to have weaponry that suits his stature and also fits in with the scale of Tiger Zinda Hai. “This fight sequence is part of a very crucial chapter in the film, and the weapon was needed to match the scale and impact of this moment. For this scene, Salman fired around 5,000 cartridges over three consecutive days. It actually becomes one of the most iconic shots of the film. Because the gun was being used continuously, we needed to keep two such weapons ready for use. It generates extreme heat and we worked in very hot conditions. We had to flip the gun continuously, and keep both in perfect functioning condition.” So, get ready to sit on the edge of your seats this December 22. Shubha Shetty Saha and Bharati K. Dubey