Back to basics Sir — Google has revolutionised the world of information in the past two decades, providing answers to the most basic and random questions that come to our minds. So much so that ‘googling’ has become synonymous with the very act of seeking answers in everyday parlance. But technology is not irreplaceable. Recent surveys suggest that Google users have been migrating to other platforms, such as TikTok and Reddit, for information owing to the collective disenchantment with the search engine’s declining utility. Perhaps this is a cue for humans to start exercising their brain muscles. After all, Feluda’s Sidhu jyatha, the ‘human Google’, did not have to rely on any technology to help out the sleuth with critical information. Smita Dey, Jalpaiguri More blood Sir — In a shocking incident, at least 43 people were killed and more than 200 wounded when a suicide bomber detonated explosives at a political rally in northwest Pakistan (“35 killed in suicide blast at Pak political rally”, July 31). The explosion targeted the workers’ convention of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam-Fazl party, which is an ally of the ruling coalition led by the prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif. While no outfit has claimed responsibility for the attack yet, the needle of suspicion points to the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan. It has declared war on the Pakistani government and security forces. The TTP is also the mastermind behind past terrorist attacks in the region. It must be noted that with the return of the Taliban regime in neighbouring Afghanistan, Pakistan has been witnessing an uptick in terrorist-related activities. Afghanistan should stop providing a safe haven to terrorists and ensure peace with its neighbour. Khokan Das, Calcutta Political work Sir — All higher education institutions in the country were urged by the University Grants Commission to ensure that students, teachers and staff virtually attended the inauguration of the Akhil Bharatiya Siksha Samagam by the prime minister, Narendra Modi, on a day the nation was observing Muharram (“A tireless PM who toils even on a holiday”, July 30). The fact that the prime minister works without taking a day off is exemplary. However, one wishes that this dedication was similarly reflected in other areas that require his urgent intervention. For instance, Modi is yet to hold a discussion in Parliament on the Manipur violence in spite of repeated demands from the Opposition. The ruling dispensation’s apathy towards the burning issues is deplorable. It remains to be seen whether this will dent its electoral prospects in the general elections next year. Aayman Anwar Ali, Calcutta Sir — At a time when his presence is critically required in Manipur, the Union home minister, Amit Shah, flew to Tamil Nadu to flag off the padayatra of the Bharatiya Janata Party state chief, K. Annamalai. This shows that political campaigning is more important to Shah than ensuring peace in the northeastern state, which has been battered by ethnic violence for more than three months now. It was also hypocritical of Shah to call the government in Tamil Nadu the “most corrupt” when the saffron party was shunted out of neighbouring Karnataka not too long ago because of the large-scale corruption of its ministers. Tharcius S. Fernando, Chennai Sir — The author, Amitav Ghosh, has correctly traced the root of social fissures in strife-torn Manipur to the thriving opium trade in the state (“Opium widens fissures in society: Ghosh”, July 30). The Northeast is also a vast storehouse of minerals. Illegal activities and pillage get a fresh stimulus during times of conflict. It would not be surprising to see profiteers and crony capitalists making a beeline to Manipur to exploit its resources. Abhijit Kumar Sen, Hooghly Rising count Sir — It was heartening to learn that the average tiger count in India has increased from 3,167 to 3,682, according to the latest census (“Tiger count on the rise”, July 30). This comes as a breather at a time when there have been increasing cases of cheetah deaths. India has been able to save tigers from the brink of extinction through large-scale conservation efforts. For example, Project Tiger, which was launched in 1973, has played a major role in increasing the population of the big cats. The government should ensure the continuity of the project’s success. Bidyut Kumar Chatterjee, Faridabad Sweet delight Sir — Mysore Pak, a scrumptious sweet popular in South India, has been ranked 14th among the 50 best street-food sweets in the world by TasteAtlas. This is heartening. Mysore Pak’s journey from the royal kitchens of the Mysore Palace to the world’s plate has been phenomenal. Its recognition highlights not only India’s diverse gastronomic culture but also the global love for India’s street food. On a lighter note, it will not be surprising to see the Centre renaming the iconic sweet as Mysore ‘Ind’ after this acclaim. Ranganathan Sivakumar, Chennai Flawed strategy Sir — The West Indies must be congratulated for winning the second one-day international by six wickets in the ongoing three-match series against India (“WI strike back after Ishan fifty”, July 30). India’s decision to rest Rohit Sharma and Virat Kohli turned out to be imprudent. Further, the inclusion of Axar Patel was unnecessary as the team already had an able all-rounder, Ravindra Jadeja. One hopes that Sharma leads the team to victory in the final match. N. Mahadevan, Chennai