Promotion judgment New Delhi, Oct. 24 (PTI): A government employee, whose promotion has been cancelled following his refusal to accept it, cannot ask for it at a later stage, the Supreme Court has said. The apex court  set aside a Madhya Pradesh High Court order directing the state government to restore the promotion of one of its employees who had turned down the offer as he did not want to get transferred. Doctor bar London (PTI): A 51-year-old Indian-origin  gynaecologist will be struck off from the  medical register here after three patients filed  complaints accusing him of inappropriate  sexual behaviour. Mahesh Patwardhan got  his medical degree  from the University of Mumbai. Phone alert New Delhi (PTI): The Indian Air Force has asked its personnel  and their family members not to use Chinese Xiaomi Redmi 1s phones following intelligence  inputs that data was  allegedly being transferred to the firm’s servers in China. The company has denied the charge. Libya nurses Thiruvananthapuram (PTI): Kerala chief minister Oommen  Chandy has written to foreign minister Sushma Swaraj, urging her to to secure the release of 18 Malayalee nurses stranded in Libya and five fishermen held captive in Iran. Gangotri Dehradun (PTI): The Gangotri shrine in Uttarakhand was closed for the winter season from Friday. The gates were closed amid chanting of Vedic hymns in the presence of Uttarkashi district magistrate S Ravishankar, Gangotri MLA Vijayapal Singh Sajwan, temple committee officials and scores of devotees. Tiger cubs Chennai (PTI): A six-year-old white tigress has given birth to four cubs at the Anna Arignar Zoological Park in Chennai. She mated with a 12-year-old Bengal tiger named Vijay. The newborn cubs take the number of white tigers at the zoo to 14. The park also has 12 Bengal tigers. ‘Assault’ school Bangalore, Oct. 24 (PTI): Police today arrested a functionary of a trust that ran a city school where a nursery student was sexually assaulted three days ago. eral secretary K.R.K. Reddy was arrested and questioned in connection with a cheating case filed against the school. Cases against various sections of the IPC were filed against the institution last night after it was found to be functioning illegally. No arrests have been made in the assault case so far. Husband duty New Delhi (PTI): It is a husband’s responsibility to keep his wife happy and ensure her safety both inside and outside the house, a Delhi court has said. The court made the observation while sentencing a man to three years’ imprisonment for harassing his wife. Cash in drain New Delhi (PTI): The CBI has recovered Rs 10 lakh from a drain near the house of a Railway Board official, arrested on Wednesday while taking a bribe. Sources said when the sleuths reached the house of Ravi Mohan Sharma, his relatives flushed the cash. Pak ‘error’ Islamabad (PTI): A leading economic institute in Islamabad has mentioned Manmohan Singh as Pakistan’s President in an invite sent to the head of the state for attending its convocation on October 28. Officials of the Pakistan Institute of Development Economics could not be reached for comment. Slum fire New Delhi (PTI): A fire broke out at a slum cluster in Delhi’s Shastri Park on Friday morning gutting 50 huts. The blaze was reported around 10.19am and 14 fire tenders were rushed to the spot, an official said. No casualty has been reported. The cause of fire is yet to be ascertained. Rebels held Nagpur (PTI): Five alleged Maoists, including a teenaged girl, have been arrested, police said. The rebels carried a reward of Rs 26 lakh on their heads. The arrested includes Maoist platoon no. five commander Dunga Yesu Bapu Teka who was wanted in connection with nine encounters and landmine blasts.