PM oath expenses New Delhi, July 20 (PTI): An expenditure of at least Rs 17.6 lakh was incurred on the oath-taking ceremony of Prime Minister Narendra Modi at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, an RTI reply has said. The reply given by the President’s secretariat said the event was attended by 4,017 guests and the approximate cost incurred on the arrangements for the ceremony related to stage, furniture and other allied items. Activist Ramesh Verma had sought to know the details of the expenditure and the number of persons who attended the event. Jawan killed Srinagar (PTI): A jawan was killed when a grenade exploded accidentally during a counter-infiltration ambush along the LoC in Kashmir’s Bandipora district, the army said on Sunday. Bank graft Chennai (PTI): A branch manager of Indian Overseas Bank has been arrested for allegedly swindling about Rs 1.40 crore from fixed deposits of some customers. M. Parasuramamurthy had allegedly given fake renewal letters after the deposits matured and pocketed the money. Cheap food Thiruvananthapuram (PTI): The Malappuram Municipality in Kerala is planning to provide breakfast and lunch at Rs 10 for the poor. Initially, breakfast for 500 people and lunch for 1,000 would be prepared daily. Five idlis and two curries will be served for breakfast and rice and four curries for lunch. Jumbo fear Udhagamandalam (PTI): Residents of three villages near Udhagamandalam are panic-stricken following the movement of a herd of elephants and a lone pachyderm, which has attacked two persons recently. The herd is roaming around fields, police said. Delhi zoo New Delhi (PTI): Delhi zoo has taken steps to keep animals active, introducing swings for chimpanzees and wooden logs for elephants. Monsoon picks up New Delhi, July 20 (PTI): Monsoon deficit has come down to 31-32 per cent with rain picking up in July across the country, the government said today, asserting that there is “no reason to be unnecessarily alarmist”. “This will bring in much needed relief to the farmers,” the Met department said. A government statement quoted minister of state for earth sciences Jitendra Singh as saying there has been an 11 per cent increase in the monsoon during the last one week. Ghisingh Darjeeling: GNLF chief Subash Ghisingh left Darjeeling unannounced on Sunday afternoon with his son, days after he directed his supporters to start rallies across the hills demanding revival of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council till a new administrative set-up under the Sixth Schedule is formed. Party sources said Ghisingh had gone to Delhi. Dilip Kumar Islamabad (PTI): A directive by Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to turn actor Dilip Kumar’s ancestral house   in Peshawar into a museum is facing opposition from the provincial archaeological department which called the proposal “unfeasible”, The Dawn has reported. Tiger attack Chandrapur (PTI): A 48-year-old woman was killed in a tiger attack in the Jharan Range of forests under the Forest Development Corporation of Maharashtra when she went out to answer nature’s call on Sunday morning, sources said.