Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif grooved to hit songs from Tiger 3 at Yash Raj Film’s special meet-and-greet event, also attended by Emraan Hashmi, after the spy action thriller crossed the Rs 200-crore barrier at the domestic box office on Friday. Here are five moments that caught our eyes from the star-studded event. Salman and Katrina groove to Leke Prabhu Ka Naam As the latest movie in the YRF Spy Universe found its place among the year’s highest grossers in Bollywood, everyone at the event was in a merry mood. Looking happy, Salman and Katrina didn’t think twice about hitting the dance floor in a spontaneous manner. The former Bollywood couple grooved together to Leke Prabhu Ka Naam, eliciting loud cheers from the crowd. Salman plants a peck on Emraan Adding a touch of humour to the festive mood, Salman was caught on camera saying, “Katrina hai iss film mein, toh thoda toh romance banta hi hai,” But the moment of the event was created when the Bollywood star looked mischievously at Emraan Hashmi before cheekily referring to the latter’s reputation as a serial kisser in movies. “Agar Emraan ka role Aatish ka nahi hota, toh yeh toh ho he jata,” Salman said while jokingly planting a kiss on the Murder star’s cheek. Katrina reminisces her 11-year journey in Tiger franchise Reflecting on the journey from Ek Tha Tiger to Tiger 3, Katrina shared her thoughts on the longstanding collaboration with Salman Khan in the popular spy action thriller franchise. “It’s been almost 11 years from Ek Tha Tiger to Tiger 3. So, I think it’s become a part of our lives, both on-screen and off-screen. I hope we get to keep making many more of them,” she said. Salman gifts Tiger’s scarf to Katrina When Salman gave Tiger’s signature scarf to Katrina, it prompted an unforeseen response from the actress. Expressing her surprise, she remarked, “This is the first time Salman has ever given me a gift.” Her declaration left the audience in a state of astonishment. Salman, however, was quick to come up with a witty reply, “What! Wasn’t Bharat a gift? Partner wasn't a gift? Maine Pyaar Kyun Kiya wasn't a gift? Yes, one wasn’t a gift, and that was Yuvvraaj,” he asserted, leading to a thunderous applause from the audience. Emraan is all praises for Salman Emraan Hashmi couldn’t contain his glee as he spoke highly of Salman as a co-actor.  “He is the kind of co-actor who what you see is what you get. There is no pretence. My first scene was with him and he made me feel at ease. We also vibed well,” he said.