Considerable changes will be noticed in the year of the tiger from this month. Feng shui guidance will be of much help in determining the ways and means of tackling situations in the coming months. The flying stars will change position and so we need to enhance the areas where auspicious flying stars arrive and suppress the sectors where the negative stars are present. It becomes all the more important if the sectors affected happen to be our main entrance, bedroom or personal office chamber. The Prosperity Star 8 has moved to the centre sector in 2010, bringing with it abundant wealth and luck to its residents who activate it properly. This lucky star will help attract good fortune and luck for all family members when the central area of the house is kept clean and clear of any kind of obstruction. If you are building a new house or a flat you should bury some treasure in the centre of the house. Auspicious Star of Future Prosperity 9 flies to the northwest of the house bringing with it not only wealth and finances but also instant recognition. Display nine small candles in this sector to ensure luck. The Heaven Star 6 flies to the east of the house and is regarded as very auspicious, attracting good fortune that comes when one least expects. Houses with main doors located in or facing the east will greatly benefit. The Romance Star 4, also known as the Peach Blossom Star, flies to the north of the house. Those intending to marry should occupy the bedroom in the north of the house. Strengthen the marriage luck by placing a pair of lovebirds or mandarin ducks here. The auspicious White Star 1 flies to the west bringing with it good career and mentor luck. This star helps one to win and attain success over numerous competitions Those appearing for competitive examinations or jobs should activate the western sector of the house with a victory  banner or a note of affirmation. The Burglary Star 7 flies to the southeast of the house this year. This star normally brings losses and thefts. Be extra careful with your wealth if it is stored in this part of the house. Protect your house if the entrance is facing this direction by placing any religious protective symbol on the main door. Its detrimental effect can also be negated by placing three healthy bamboo shoots in the southeast. The Illness Star 2 flies to the northeast of the house. Avoid staying in the Northeast sector. If the illness star is in your bedroom or study, try to move to another room. If you cannot, then the bed or the study table should not be in the northeast corner of the room. Place a religious symbol or a spiritual book on your study table or at the side of your bed. The negative Quarrelsome Star 3 flies to the south of the house bringing with it litigation, quarrels, conflict, disharmony and misunderstandings. Face this direction and pray for harmony among  the family members on a  daily basis. The negative Five Yellow Star flies to the southwest of the house and afflicts it with bad luck, disaster and misfortune. The best way to keep this star quiet is by placing a heavy earthen object on the floor in the extreme southwest of the house. Alternatively hang a metal wind chime here with five solid rods to suppress the bad energy. Do not disturb this star by digging in the southwest of the garden or by cutting down any tree or doing any major renovations in this part of the house. This year people who are born under the sign of the monkey are threatened with the arrival of the tiger. Pig comes as a lucky mascot that helps to make monkey and tiger compatible. Tip of the week: A very powerful time of the year for making wishes and see them being realised is on the February 14, 2010 at 8.21am. This can be done by writing your wishes on a green piece of paper within 10 minutes of this time.