• THANE: The principal of a private school in Thane allegedly attacked a teacher with weapons, following which he was booked. Police said the teacher, Mahajan Prajapati, had accused principal Rameshchandra Mishra of irregularities a few days ago. On December 3, Mishra, his son and some of his friends attacked Prajapati. A case under provisions of the Arms Act and the Bombay Police Act has been registered against Mishra. Prajapati is being treated at a private hospital. PTI • MANDSAUR: A man allegedly flung his one-and-a-half-year-old son to death after a quarrel with his wife in Mandsaur district on Monday. Raju Banjara, who has been arrested, was cooking food in his house at Bhagwanpura village when he objected to his wife standing outside, leading to the tiff. In a fit of rage, Banjara flung his son on the floor, causing the toddler's death. PTI • MUMBAI: The Enforcement Directorate has issued a fresh order to attach assets worth Rs 20.41 crore in connection with a money laundering probe against former Maharashtra deputy chief minister Chhagan Bhujbal and others. With the fresh order, the total attachment of properties in the case stands at Rs 178 crore. The former deputy chief minister and NCP leader had been arrested by the agency last year. PTI • KOTA: A dentist called off her marriage to a doctor after the groom's family demanded Rs 1 crore on the wedding day. The bride's father, an assistant professor at a medical college in Moradabad, claimed that they had spent Rs 30-35 lakh on wedding arrangements besides giving a car to the boy. PTI • MUMBAI: A minor fire occurred at the state secretariat in south Mumbai on Tuesday but there was no injury or casualty. The fire broke out on the first floor of the building around 11pm on Monday. The flames were doused in 15 minutes. PTI • NEW DELHI: Anna Hazare has announced a protest against the government on March 23, upset over the non-appointment of the Lokpal in the past four years. PTI • NEW DELHI: A panel formed by the Delhi government to look into the case of a premature baby wrongly declared dead has found Max Hospital guilty of not following medical norms. The panel on Tuesday submitted its preliminary report to Delhi heath minister Satyender Jain, a government source said. The report said no ECG was done to check if the child was alive. PTI • PUNE: A partly clad body of a 17-year-old girl with her head smashed was found in Pune on Monday. Police suspect it to be a case of murder and have not ruled out the possibility of sexual assault, an officer said. The officer said the teenager was reported missing from her village on Friday. PTI • UMARIA: The carcass of a tiger, aged around four years, has been found in Madhya Pradesh's Umaria district, which houses the Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve. Forest officials suspect poachers' role in the tiger's death. It is suspected that the tiger fell victim to a live electric trap laid by poachers. PTI • COIMBATORE: Nearly 800kg of banned tobacco products valued at Rs 7 lakh were seized from a private bus in Coimbatore on Tuesday. One person has been arrested, police said. PTI • WASHINGTON: A 57-year-old Indian-origin man from Canada was sentenced by an Arizona court to 46 months of imprisonment on charges of travelling to the US this year to have sex with a minor girl. Dilbagh Singh had pleaded guilty to the charges. According to the court documents, in January 2017, Singh began an online relationship with the 15-year-old girl. Over the course of four months, Singh told the girl that he wanted to engage in various sexual acts with her. In May, he travelled to Arizona to meet the girl and have sex with her. PTI • BALASORE: India on Tuesday successfully test-fired Akash, its supersonic surface-to-air missile with an indigenous radio frequency seeker, from a test range in Odisha. The missile is being inducted into the army. PTI • NEW DELHI: A 22-year-old hockey player allegedly shot himself dead in his car parked outside his friend's house in Sarojini Nagar, police said. However, Rizwan Khan's family has alleged that he was killed. Khan had represented Delhi in hockey tournaments at the under-16 level. PTI • HYDERABAD: A software employee was arrested here on Tuesday on the charge of harassing a former colleague online after she got married to another person. Sandeep Kumar Gupta P. allegedly created a fake account on a social networking site and uploaded abusive messages as well as her phone number on a classifieds network to project her as a call girl. PTI