Jorhat, May 31: The Assam forest department has announced a cash reward of Rs 50,000 for actionable information on those who killed three Royal Bengal tigers at Orang National Park in February this year. The park’s divisional forest officer, Sushil Kr Daila, told The Telegraph today that forensic tests had found traces of organophosphorus, an insecticide, in all three carcasses, indicating that all three big cats were poisoned. Organophosphorus is a neurotoxin and attacks the central nervous system. The tiger carcasses were discovered separately inside the park over a period of three weeks. “We are now sure that the three tigers were poisoned. We have started investigations and announced a cash reward of Rs 50,000 for information leading to the arrest of the  culprits involved in the incident,” Daila said, adding that posters announcing the reward had been put up in towns and villages near the national park. The tiger deaths had raised concerns over the security of the big cats at Orang, considered to be a miniature Kaziranga. Senior officials of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) had visited the national park after the incident and had suggested various measures to check the killings. The three carcasses were found in different areas — one in Darrang district and the other two in Sonitpur district. The 78.80sqkm park is spread across the two districts. Two more tigers were poisoned at the national park in 2009 and 2010. While organochlorine, another insecticide, was used to kill a tiger in 2010, organophosphorus was detected in the carcass recovered in 2009. According to the national park’s 2012 census, there are 22 tigers in the park. Although another tiger census was carried out in December 2012 through January this year, the figures are yet to be released, though park authorities expect an increase in the population. Poisoning of Royal Bengal tigers by villagers living on the periphery of the national park has been a major concern, as they poison tigers in retaliation to the big cats preying on their cattle. “We are taking steps to check the revenge killing  of tigers, like paying ex gratia of Rs 2,500 to the owners for each cattle head killed whether inside or on the periphery of the park,” Daila said. Apart from the poster drive, forest personnel have been deployed in villages  near the park. “Our main target is Phatasimalu village, as the carcasses of two tigers were found near it,” Daila said. The forest official said  a door-to-door search would  also be carried out in the  next few days in a few  villages to apprehend the culprits. The park authorities have sought NTCA’s assistance for installation of a few more surveillance towers along with fencing of the park’s perimeter. “We have also requested the NTCA to bear salaries of casual workers so that we can rope in more people to beef up security,” Daila said.