While India is still rejoicing, rather gratuitously, over the much-touted increase in the country's tiger population, another animal - as important as the tiger in the list of endangered species, if not as photogenic - is facing extinction. Hardly a day goes by when newspapers are not carrying reports of yet another rhino being killed in Assam, chiefly in its Kaziranga National Park. And now a study conducted by the International Union for Conservation of Nature has warned that the rhino population in Assam's Manas National Park is on the verge of extinction too. Chillingly, the report fixes a time in the near future - the next 20 to 30 years - within which rhinos would disappear from Manas if effective steps are not taken in the meantime to stabilize the numbers and prevent poaching. Eight rhinos have been poached in Manas since 2011 - if the rate of killing stays constant in the coming years, soon there will be no rhinos left in the park. The IUCN report, focusing on Manas, must be a fresh cause of headache for the chief minister of Assam, Tarun Gogoi, who had recently announced the setting up of a rhino protection force to tackle poachers in Kaziranga. However, poaching as a hazard is not limited to Kaziranga and if the task force succeeds in saving rhinos there, a similar team may work for Manas as well. The related measures should also stay the same. Kaziranga had published a list of 323 wanted poachers at the beginning of this year. But how many of them have been convicted, prosecuted, even tracked down 
before they have killed? Because of Assam's location, the poachers obviously find it easy to escape to neighbouring states or countries with their loot. So, to stop poachers, there should be more intense patrolling not only inside the forest areas but also along the borders. There is another aspect of this issue that goes beyond the specifics of poaching to include the larger problem of militancy that has beset Assam for long. On February 3, a rhino was killed in Kaziranga not by poachers but by militants. One of the districts which Manas straddles is Kokrajhar, where Bodo militants had massacred the 
adivasi settlers last year. There might be hidden militants among the ranks of forest guards, who would make the task of poaching that much easier. Mr Gogoi has much to deal with - the poverty and anger of the people of Assam, to start with - if the rhinos of Manas are to survive.