Colombo, Feb. 24 (Reuters): Sri Lankan soldiers battled today inside the last town the Tamil Tiger separatists control, and the government said it had no plans for a truce amid UN and EU calls for a halt to fighting. Soldiers from the 58th Division entered Puthukudiyiruppu township after heavy fighting. That is the last actual town the LTTE still control; after that there are only a handful of small coastal villages left. “They are inside Puthukudiyiruppu and fighting to take control,” defence spokesman Keheliya Rambukwella, also a minister, said. Yesterday, UN secretary-general Ban Ki-Moon urged a “suspension of fighting” to allow tens of thousands of civilians to escape while the EU urged an outright ceasefire and condemned the LTTE for forcibly keeping people in the war zone. Both followed an LTTE offer of a ceasefire yesterday, in which it refused to surrender and urged the international community to push for the former. The government has g said the Tigers have a choice: surrender or be destroyed. Rambukwella dubbed the LTTE ceasefire call “hilarious” in an interview with the state-run Daily News, and said the Tigers had repeatedly manufactured civilian crises to get a truce when they were close to defeat and needed time to rearm. The LTTE has never been closer to a military defeat than it is now. Yesterday, Reuters was at the frontline just to the west of the Puthukudiyiruppu town centre, where 58 Division commander, Brigadier Shavendra Silva, said: “It’s the last objective.” Silva at the time said he was measuring the war in days, and not weeks. His soldiers now have less than 6km  to go before they reach a 12-km long no-fire zone the army established on the Indian Ocean island’s northeast coast. It is there that he and other commanders expect a showdown with the LTTE, the final act in a war that began in earnest in 1983 and is now Asia’s longest-running. Slowing the offensive is the civilian presence, the military says. Witnesses who have escaped say the Tigers are shooting people who try to flee and making others stay and fight. The UN, EU and others have all expressed concern about reports of civilian casualties. The military says civilians may have been killed but that the numbers given have been inflated for propaganda reasons.