Athens: Germany's Football Association (DFB) president Reinhard Grindel has strongly criticised Franz Beckenbauer on Wednesday over payment from a sponsor of the 2006 World Cup that the soccer great had headed. Beckenbauer, who led the organising committee for the World Cup in Germany and had said he had done the work on a voluntary basis, received 5.5 million euros ($6.17 million) from a deal involving event sponsor. London: Liverpool coach Juergen Klopp enjoyed the first win of his Premier League career at a stumbling Chelsea last October but expects a much tougher challenge when his side return to Stamford Bridge on Friday. Tehran: The Indian basketball team defeated Kazakhstan 100-90 in their last Group E game to secure a place in the quarter finals of the FIBA Asia Challenge 2016 here on Wednesday. Los Angeles: Venus Williams voiced dismay after Russian hackers who broke into the World Anti-Doping Agency database released details of her confidential medical records. New Delhi: David Ferrer has a staggering 685 singles wins, 13th in all time victory list, in a successful 16-year career but Grand Slam success has eluded him. But he is cool about it. "I don't have it because I don't deserve it," Ferrer said during a training session ahead of the Davis Cup tie against India, here. London: Former world No.1 Martin Kaymer believes back injury victim Tiger Woods can add to his haul of 14 Major championship wins as long as he returns to golf with a clean bill of health. Singapore: McLaren's Jenson Button could race in Rallycross or in Japan's Super GT series when he takes a break from Formula One next year. The 2009 world champion, who has spent almost two decades in grand prix racing, is handing over his race seat to Belgian Stoffel Vandoorne next season. Calcutta: The Cricket Association of Bengal (CAB) will have its working committee meeting on September 19 to decide how to go about the second Test versus New Zealand and also finalise the dates of the local tournaments. The CAB is also mulling to start zone-wise academies but it's at a nascent stage, a CAB official informed.