Big cats or not, a visit to Palamau Tiger Reserve is set become an experience of a lifetime with authorities roping in those who know the forest best as guides. As many as 30 local youths have been handpicked by the authorities for hospitality training in what is being seen as an attempt to impress visitors and increase footfall. Divisional forest officer of the reserve (buffer zone) A.K. Mishra claimed that though the plan was a first-of-its-kind venture, it would certainly act as a catalyst to draw more crowds to the park. Daylong training was conducted in two phases — August 2 and August 14 — for the first batch, comprising 15 youths. The second batch will get training in the first week of September. The authorities will issue one-year licences to the guides after training. The foresters will also fix the hiring rates of the trained guides. “While training the youths, we are paying special attention to three things — etiquette, knowledge of the tiger reserve and know-how of flora and fauna. For instance, they will be taught the difference between the Asian elephant, that is normally found in the country, and their African cousins, their behaviour, food habits etc,” Mishra said. He added that the idea was to ensure that the guides were able to interpret nature and its diversities and pass on the knowledge to the visitors, so that they learnt something new from their trip. “We are drawing up a roster for further training. Since this is not the peak season, we plan to make the best use of it to ensure that the youths pick up all necessary skills during the lean period,” Mishra said. Though a handful of unofficial guides earlier existed in the region, visitors were often either cheated by them or put off by their unruly behaviour and lack of etiquette. “The guides often took the tourists for a ride with false promises. This led to ugly fights,” Mishra said. As the guides functioned unofficially, they often resorted to wrong tactics to win new customers, he added. “Tourists now will have to shell out only a certain sum of money irrespective of whether they get to spot animals or not. This apart, we also plan to introduce cab services for tours to ban entry of private vehicles in the reserve,” divisional forest officer (core) Premjit Anand said. He added that each touring cab would have a guide on it. “This way, the guests will get expert escorts while they tour the reserve and we can keep a tab on them. This will also help us monitor and stop poaching and damages to flora and fauna,” Anand added.