Alipurduar: The forest department has decided to bring sambar and bison to the Buxa Tiger Reserve from other wildlife sanctuaries to boost the food chain ahead of the introduction of big cats in the BTR. Buxa is one of the three forests in India where the National Tiger Conservation Authority has approved the tiger augmentation programme. Although there had been claims of tigers being spotted in Buxa, no concrete evidence of the big cat's presence there has emerged. N.S. Murli, the field director of the BTR, said the additional herbivores would be brought to Buxa in December to create the prey base for tigers. "For the survival of the tiger, a number of herbivore need to be present in Buxa. So, we have decided to bring in at least 50 sambar and a good number of bison from Jaldapara National Park to the BTR. A team of forest officers from the BTR under the leadership of Pradip Bauri will visit Madhya Pradesh to see how the herbivore augmentation was implemented successfully in Panna and Satpura forests. The team will visit MP in November and the sambar and the bison will be released in the BTR in December," he said. The forester has said tigers predate on deer, sambar and bison which are rarely found in the BTR. "Few years ago, more than 50 spotted deer were brought to the BTR from Rasikbil Eco Park to improve the herbivore population. Jaldapara has sufficient number of sambar and bison. All the animals will be tranquillised and then transported safely to the BTR in small groups," said Murli. "We have already received the permission of the chief wildlife warden for the herbivore augmentation. We have a veterinary officer and efficient tranquillisers. So, hopefully, there will be no problem in shifting the animals to the BTR. More importantly, we have already developed quality grassland in about 100 hectares, which is essential for the survival of the herbivores," he added. The forester said sufficient measures would be taken to thwart the threats posed by poachers to the tigers to be brought to the BTR. "We are not at all worried about poaching because prior to the herbivore introduction in the BTR, we will erect energised fences in vulnerable areas like Chuniajhora, Nurpur and Dhamshibad. The fences will be in border areas of the forest. If any object comes in contact with the fences, an alarm will sound and on duty forest staff will be alerted. They will immediately rush to the spot to verify what actually happened. Apart from it, radio collars will be fitted to the neck of each tiger in the BTR. So, we will be able to trace the movement of the big cat," said Murli.