November carried on box office’s sluggish run from October by plunging even lower. With an overall collection of Rs 628 crore, November became the worst performing month since April as well as the third worst of the entire year, as per the India Box Office Report by Ormax Media. More than half of November’s collection came from a single film, Tiger 3, with the Salman Khan-Katrina Kaif-starrer contributing 53 per cent to November’s tally. This also meant that Tiger 3 roared into the list of the top 10 highest-grossing movies of the year. While different language industries use different parameters for assessing box office numbers (Gross, Nett or Share), Ormax’s report adopts Gross Box Office as the unified measurement. Under this, a film’s collection is always attributed to the month of its release, even if the film goes on to produce more or better numbers in the subsequent months. For films released in multiple languages, box office numbers reflect the contribution of such films to all the corresponding languages. With a total collection of Rs 334 crore, Tiger 3, directed by Maneesh Sharma, emerged as the seventh film to cross Rs 300 crore in 2023, taking it to number six on this year’s list of highest-grossing films (above Adipurush at Rs 331 crore but below Jailer at Rs 397 crore). Atlee’s Jawan starring Shah Rukh Khan remains in pole position on the highest-grossing list at Rs 741 crore, which, incidentally, is more than November’s entire collection. After Tiger 3, November’s list of highest-grossers makes for disappointing reading. Jigarthanda DoubleX, a Tamil action comedy, grabbed second place, finishing the month at Rs 50 crore. This was followed by Japan, another Tamil action comedy, which accumulated Rs 20 crore. No other Bollywood film earned a place in the top 10, with English language films like The Marvels (eighth place) and Napoleon (tenth place) fetching Rs 14 crore and Rs 11 crore, respectively. Despite November’s dull showing at the box office, the overall collection for 2023 stands at five per cent higher as compared to the same period last year. Moreover, with Sandeep Vanga Reddy-directed Animal’s impressive numbers in December (for which the complete report will be out in January next year), 2023 has already crossed an annual collection of Rs 11,000 crore, making it the most successful year in Indian box office history. As for the language share in November, Hindi continued to lead the way, with 41 per cent, with Tamil and Telugu tied for second place, with 18 per cent apiece.