St Andrews: Jordan Spieth has rejected comparisons with Tiger Woods as he seeks to become the first man since his fellow American to win three Major championships in succession. The interview room at St Andrews was full to overflowing for Spieth, halfway to the Grand Slam at the age of 21 after his triumphs at the Masters and the US Open. But the young Texan, displaying the extraordinary self-assurance that has become his trademark, tried to remove some of the pressure by baulking at any mention of Woods. "The parallels that are drawn between Tiger and I are unfair," Spieth said. "It's something that people are looking for, but when they ask me I shake it off. "These things can't be compared until at least halfway through your career. I'm extremely happy with how I've been able to win a couple of Majors at my age, but at the same time, I have an appreciation for how Tiger could continue winning majors at an unbelievable percentage. It's not easy." Not since the zenith of Tiger Woods or the absent Rory McIlroy has such feverish anticipation been centred upon one player. Spieth is on the type of tear that only Woods in his prime could have rivalled - indeed, he is the first since his compatriot to have won four titles in one season before the Open. No sooner had the won the John Deere Classic in Illinois than he was boarding the red-eye for Scotland, ready for his latest tilt at history. Spieth is the only figure besides Gene Sarazen to have won multiple majors before the age of 22, and clutches the chance to join Ben Hogan as only the second ever to win the first three in the same year. While he seeks to downplay the odds, he is acutely conscious of the stakes being played for this week. "Sure, I'm aware," he said. "I like to study the history of golf, and it's extremely special what this year has brought. To have the chance to do what only one person in the history of golf has done doesn't come around very often. But by the time I start, that won't be in my head. It'll be about how I can bring this Open Championship down to just another event." There seems slender hope of that. Not when Spieth's exploits are framed by the fabled setting of St Andrews, a course he has only previously played in practice for the Walker Cup, and not when all the talk is of whether he can emulate Bobby Jones' calendar Grand Slam. THE DAILY TELEGRAPH