It will be a special silver birthday party at the animal rescue centre in South Khairbari of Alipurduar district on August 23. The birthday boy is Raja, a royal Bengal tiger. Jaldapara wildlife division of the state forest department and the West Bengal Zoo Authority will celebrate the birthday on the date the then badly wounded tiger aged 12, arrived at the centre in 2008. Raja, who lived in the Sunderbans, had been crossing the Matla river when a crocodile injured his right hind leg. Rescued by forester, he was brought to Calcutta where vets saved his life but a part of the leg had to be amputated. The same year, he was sent to the animal rescue centre, said a forester. Royal Bengal tigers live for 17 years or so in the wild and up to 20 years in captivity. Raja’s longevity is rare. “Raja has lived for 25 years and hence a celebration has been planned,” said Deepak M, the DFO of Jaldapara wildlife division. As many as 19 other tigers, rescued from circuses after a ban was imposed on engaging tigers in circuses for entertainment, had also been brought to the South Khairbari animal centre over the years. “All of them gradually died of old age. Raja continues to live in good health,” said a source. As a part of the birthday celebration, the department is hosting an online drawing competition for children as well as an online quiz on tigers. Participants can upload their paintings and winners will be awarded. “We will share a link on our website where people can click and join the quiz. Every participant will get a certificate and the top 10 rank-holders will receive mementos. We will also upload pictures of Raja on the website with a brief description of him ,” said the DFO. At the animal rescue centre, the enclosure were Raja stays will be decorated with balloons and flowers. “We will also organise a cake-cutting ceremony,” added the forester. Elephant attacks Babulal Oraon, 57, a resident of Aibheel tea estate in Matialli block of Jalpaiguri district, died on Tuesday night after being attacked by a wild elephant. Sources said Oraon had come out of his hutment when an elephant that had strayed into the garden, wrapped him with its trunk and tossed him on the ground. Foresters recovered the body. In another incident, an elephant entered Madhya Khuttimari village in Dhupguri block of Jalpaiguri on Tuesday night and damaged an anganwadi centre, devoured food grains stocked there and then left the village. Additional reporting by our Jalpaiguri correspondent