Ranchi, May 22: Hindi teachers may not begin with Ka for kamal anymore. Instead, they would recite, “Kahua, karam, kajo, kari — isey bachaney ki ayi bari (It is time to save trees such as kahua, karam, kajo and kari)”. The green focus in the mode of teaching may soon be visible in schools across Jharkhand, thanks to an effort of Palamau Tiger Reserve (PTR). Officials of the reserve today started a biodiversity school in Betla, about 175km from here. PTR project director R.N. Prasad inaugurated the school, which is intended to make children living in forest villages understand degradation of environment and take steps to stop the process. Palamau Tiger Reserve forest range officer Lalan Prasad Gupta, the brain behind the school, said there was a need for such education. “We can fight some enemies of forests, such as man, cattle and fire, but we are unable to fight two enemies — lantana camara (pudus shrubs) and parthenium (locally known as gazar grass).” These shrubs came to India with the British. The imperialists left but the shrubs are slowly conquering the forests and stopping germination. “We may not have next generation of trees if these shrubs are not weeded out soon,” he said, adding that the focus is to have enough hands to fight the war against the shrubs. “We have realised that child is the father of the man. So it is better to begin with children. We are focusing on children from the poor strata of the society but we are not luring them with midday meals. We are going to their parents and asking them to send their children to the school and help prepare a force to save the fast-degrading forest.” To make things easier, the reserve has decided not to go to the government with the school project. “In fact, the school will not burden the state exchequer. We have the required infrastructure ready. Besides, forest trackers will take classes,” said the PTR range officer. The school will run for three hours in the morning. Lessons on the forest will be for an hour while the usual syllabus would be taught for two hours, the range officer said. The children would also be taken on study tours inside the jungle for first-hand lessons on wildlife and medicinal plants. The project director said a proposal would be sent to the state government to replicate the project in other parts of the state.