He’s polished off a plate of Chicken Sizzler in between signing autographs for a dozen fans at South City Mall’s chock-a-block food court. He even happily poses for a quick click with a schoolboy thrilled to have caught his favourite star! He is a picture of politeness whenever a boy, a girl or an aunt comes to him and showers praise. He even admires — in his own charming way — a pretty girl in green salwar kameez sitting opposite us! That’s Abir Chatterjee, the bhadralok star we crush out on. You shot for The Royal Bengal Tiger without a roar... Yes, they managed to shoot very hush-hush. It was completely the producers (Neeraj Pandey and Viacom 18) and director’s (Rajesh Ganguly) decision. I liked the idea because now we have this tendency to over-promote a film. Posting shooting stills on Facebook and Twitter, personally I don’t like that. Too much of promotion during the shoot takes away the interest. Tell us about your character Abhiroop... Abhiroop is a government employee. He has a wife and son and lives in a two-storeyed house in south Calcutta. His is a very happy family. Abhiroop is a middle-class common man who dreams of getting a promotion someday so that he can lead a slightly better life. His only problem is that he is a little scared, a bhitu. He has his fears, like everybody else and he has his own crisis to deal with. He fears something bad happening to his wife or his son or him. He is also financially very insecure. He is educated yet he feels what if he loses his job.... These are the common fears which haunt him. He never has the courage to protest. That’s a very familiar tendency we all have. But in the film this cannot go on for long and there comes a point when he hits the wall and whether he returns and how is what the story is. Since you say Abhiroop’s fears are very common, you must have identified with him... Always. These are the common fears we all have in every phase of life. I used to work in an office a couple of years back and to quit that and become a full-time actor took a lot of time. That fear of financial insecurity was there with me, that’s why despite getting film offers I somehow managed to continue the job until I could take that decision to finally call it quits. It was so bloody difficult to take that one decision. So Abhiroop is someone I know very closely. Even the audience will identify with him. Apart from the common fears, is there anything else that really scares you? Yes, the constant fear of losing my near and dear ones. I think after a certain age we realise the family bond better. In a man’s life there’s a stage when friends and his career are the only two things that matter. But there also comes a stage where family becomes very important. Unlike women, it takes a little more time for men to realise that no matter how much money you make or how much attention you pay to your work, it’s ultimately your family that really matters. The other fear is that our profession is totally based on perceived value. You can quantify a salesperson with how much money he will bring, you will know the average score of a cricketer, but how can you quantify an actor? Will you ever know an actor’s box-office value? An actor’s life depends on people’s perception. Why do people go and watch Abir’s films? It totally depends on their choices. How can you quantify that? Our views, opinions, outlook are changing every minute and we actors are playing with the hearts of the audience. We are either making them laugh or cry or selling a larger-than-life dream. Toh, the basic foundation of an actor stands on whether people like him or not. Nobody can predict that. That’s a very big fear, whether I can maintain that connect with my audience. I know I have been able to create a level of expectation among my audience from my films, touchwood. Earlier I would commit careless mistakes, but now I keep telling myself ‘concentrate Abir, concentrate’. People associate me with a kind of cinema, not necessarily urban films, but at least they know if Abir is there we will get to see a few things. Actors are always standing on a thin line. How do you fight this fear? I try to do my work. There’s no alternative to good work. The industry buzz is that Abir is very good in small roles. Why do you do cameos and agree to play the hero’s friend? Yes, now is the time to stop doing those. But say, for instance, in Meghe Dhaka Tara, Apuda (Saswata Chatterjee) played the lead but my character (Abir played a doctor) was there throughout and he becomes the audience at one point. Now it would be foolish to say no to these roles. But definitely, like you said, I will stop doing guest appearances. Sometimes I also do these bit roles on the request of my friends from the industry. For instance, in Jaatishwar (Abir plays Jisshu Sengupta’s friend). Do you get offers mostly to star in small roles in big films? No no. I have done multi-hero films like Bedroom and Bojhena Shey Bojhena or (yet-to-release) Jodi Love Dile Na Praane or The Royal Bengal Tiger. You also juggle a Raj Chakraborty and a Srijit Mukherji film... I have only done Raj’s film, no other mainstream director has offered me a role. The two films (Kanamachi and Bojhena Shey Bojhena) that I did with Raj are different from the masala films he makes. I can’t do all kinds of roles, right? Which are the roles you can’t do? For instance if I play a ruffian, a chhokra who is doing the kewra dance on streets, I don’t think it will work. Coming to matters more personal, you have a bhadro chhele image who is very attached to his family. Despite being in the industry for long you’ve had no link-ups… My critics may say that I have planned this image. Not true. I am not that calculative and I don’t want to be one. I am like this only! I have few friends inside the industry. But I don’t have a bad relationship with anyone. I feel that everyone is stressed about something or the other in life. What’s the point of getting into more trouble? Besides, end of the day, I like to face myself in the mirror with my head held high and I want to look into my eyes straight. Specially now that I’m a father I want to sleep at peace beside my daughter (Mayurakshi, turned one on Friday). I wouldn’t want her to ask me ‘Baba why did you do that’? I can’t wear a mask. So better I take decisions after a lot of thinking. I want to be clear to my conscience. It’s difficult but not impossible to lead a clean life and not fall in the same trap of falling for co-stars. It affects work also. I know after reading this answer, a lot of people will say dhur Abir is a bhitu middle-class guy, he is boring. I think there are too many people who are very happening and lead a happening life. I’m boring and that makes me exclusive! Kushali Nag Do you find Abir boring or happening? Tell t2@abp.in