It cannot have escaped Tiger Woods’s attention, as his Gulfstream jet touched down in Sheboygan Falls for this week’s US PGA Championship, that the wind-lashed layout of Whistling Straits had somewhere in the region of 1,000 bunkers. So in addition to his sand-iron he might like to have picked a spade — just so he could dig a hole in one of them. While ‘the Straits’ represent one of perhaps 10 courses that the standard American hacker would board any plane to play, it is as harsh a test as could be conceived for a man who has just played four rounds on the manicured fairways of Akron in 18 over par. Woods arrived in Wisconsin under the radar, with a haggard look born not just of his scruffy goatee beard but of his uncomfortable sense of embarrassment. We must assume, even allowing for the weary way he slapped it around at Firestone last week, that a wretched total of 298 was accompanied by a degree of shame, because to believe otherwise would be to conclude that he does not care. Even at this nadir in his career, Woods would never be so fatalistic. In a season when he has lost his wife, his dignity, his coach and his putting stroke, he betrays little intention of giving up on a game that has proved a dependable friend. Woods’s attempts at rehabilitation for sex addiction have not saved his marriage. He appears none the wiser on when he will next see his children. His life is in turmoil, and in a sport requiring such unremitting mental application as his, some impairment is inescapable. Although Woods could take solace from the tournament’s reputation as glory’s last shot, Whistling Straits this week is no place for one so vulnerable. Jack Nicklaus, earlier in the year, indicated that Woods, marooned on 14 majors, would need to win at least one this year to threaten his record of 18. But the thrill of the chase has, briefly, evaporated. Forget the majors; Woods approaches the season’s final showpiece unable even to get it going in the minors. He is due to meet Corey Pavin, the US Ryder Cup captain, this week to discuss his potential role at Celtic Manor, but was suitably blunt when asked if he wanted to play. “Not playing like this,” he replied. “ No one could help the team if they’re shooting 18 over par.” On the latest evidence, 18 over could resemble a respectable total for Woods once the sandy graves of the Straits Course have swallowed him whole. He hardly boasts an enviable record at the place, having only narrowly survived the cut at the PGA in 2004. That hollow look in his eyes will not vanish easily over the coming week. So we should excuse him if he fails again to contend. Then, at last, he might begin to find the answers he craves. Statistics show Tiger is losing his bite. Driving: Woods claimed to have controlled the ball beautifully in June’s AT& T National, and that he had it on a piece of string throughout his ragged Open performance at St Andrews. But closer analysis hints at a delusion: he is ranked 163rd in the PGA Tour standings for driving accuracy. The fear instilled in rivals by his distance is diminishing, too; an average of 298 yards is impressive, but pales against the 330 routinely reached by Dustin Johnson and Rory McIlroy. Iron play: If a category was developed to judge a player by his irons from 175-225 yards, Woods would be the undisputed No. 1. Closer in, he is more fallible, landing his shots farther from the pin and dropping 40 places in the rankings for approach play from last season before his troubles. Scrambling: Statistically, ‘scrambling’ — or his ability to save par after missing the green — is the area where his play has deteriorated the most this year, with his proportion of successful up-and-downs dropping from 68 per cent in 2009 to a less-than-remarkable 53 in 2010. Short game: Nowhere is Woods’s “head full of spaghetti”, to borrow a description from former Europe Ryder Cup captain Mark James, more evident than in his putting. At times the holes on Akron’s greens last week seemed to be shouting “over here, Tiger”, such were the margins by which he missed.