Yeddy quits BJP Bangalore, Nov. 30: Former Karnataka chief minister B.S. Yedddyurappa resigned from the BJP today and quit the Assembly seat he had won while leading the party to victory in 2007. The 70-year-old leader put in his papers after a tearful adieu to the party he had helped to form it’s first government in the south. After addressing his supporters, Yeddyurappa walked to the Assembly to meet Speaker K.G. Bopiah and submit his resignation. He said he had instructed all his supporters in the BJP to stay in the party to ensure the government lasted its full term ending April 2013. “I am forced to take this tough decision (of leaving the BJP) by those who did not want me in the BJP,” he said. Yeddyurappa said  he would never return  to the BJP and that his political future lay in  the the soon-to-be launched Karanataka Janata Party. Home violence New Delhi (PTI): Tamil Nadu has the highest number of domestic violence cases with the state recording 3,983 cases in 2011, the Centre has said. Bengal was ranked third, behind Gujarat, with 1,661 cases. Last year, 9,431 domestic violence cases were reported. Fine on ITC New Delhi (PTI): A consumer forum has asked the ITC-Welcomgroup to pay Rs 15,000 to Gurgaon resident Bharat Singh for serving him “stale food” at its Delhi international airport lounge because of which he fell sick. The forum held the group guilty of serving food “hazardous to human life”. Tiger attack Bahraich (PTI): A teenager was injured after being attacked by a tiger at Katarniaghat forest reserve, sources said on Friday. Pradeep, 14, had gone out for work when he was attacked. Deputy ranger Irfan Khan said wild animals strayed into human habitats because of change in weather and asked people to be on alert. The boy has been admitted to a community health centre. Firing death Chandauli (PTI): A youth was killed in celebratory firing during a wedding, Uttar Pradesh police said on Friday. Abhishek Upadhya, 26, was injured on Thursday at the wedding of a relative and died while being taken to hospital. Editors’ custody New Delhi, Nov. 30 (PTI): Two senior editors of Zee News, arrested on charges of trying to extort Rs 100 crore from Congress MP Naveen Jindal’s firm, were today sent to 14-day judicial custody by a Delhi court. Sudhir Chaudhary and Samir Ahluwalia were remanded till December 14 after Delhi police said they no longer required their custody. The duo have filed a fresh bail plea which will be heard tomorrow. Pesky calls New Delhi (PTI): The Centre has said the average number of complaints against telemarketing calls had dropped to 17,425 per month from 47,454 a year ago. Regulations on curbing unsolicited commercial calls came into effect in September 2011. Tourist visits New Delhi (PTI): Around 1.94 crore foreigners visited India in 2011. Around 9.8 lakh tourists were from the US followed by 7.98 lakh from the UK.