In 12 days’ time Tiger Woods will celebrate his 30th birthday and already he is over halfway towards surpassing Jack Nicklaus’ record of 18 major championships. In 2005 Woods won the Masters and the Open, his ninth and 10th major victories, finished second at the US Open, fourth at the USPGA and bestrode the world like one of Woody Allen’s neurotics. Yes, that’s right you at the back, in the past nine months Woods has looked gone in the head. Beginning of the end: has Tiger Woods had his day ? This may sound like a crazy thing to say about arguably the mentally toughest sportsman of all time. You might as well say that Shakespeare was suffering from writer’s block when he penned Hamlet in 1600 or that the megalomania behind the invasion of Russia in 1812 was brought about by Napoleon’s failure to make it as a pastry chef. But there is overwhelming evidence that in 2005 Tiger began to fray mentally for the first time in his career. The first signs came at the Masters. There was an awful lassitude around Augusta when Chris Di Marco blew up at the end of the third round, coming back in 41 strokes after being knocked senseless by a little Tiger fist-pump. Here we go again, everyone thought. The final 18 holes continued to mimic history. Tiger makes a couple of slight errors, opponent rallies bravely, Tiger finishes him off with a shot of outrageous genius. But then something happened that we had not seen before. Leading by two strokes Woods lashed his drive on the 17th into the trees, pushed his iron on the final hole into the bunker and failed to recover on both occasions. We then remembered that Woods had hit a putt off the green and into Rae’s Creek during a previous round. Such things do not happen in Tiger world. In the end we put it down to static. After a brilliant birdie on the first hole of sudden death, we decided that even Woods’ brainwaves could be jammed once in a lifetime. Now that he had the green jacket on and the electric smile, Woods looked back to normal. We were wrong. At the US Open Woods led the field in greens hit in regulation. Aiming at targets not much bigger than dustbin lids and just as convex and hard, Woods hit them three times out of every four attempts ? astonishing. On the two previous occasions that he had led the US Open in GIR he had won. Yet in 2005 Woods putted more like Bagpuss than Tiger, and he finished second for only the second time in a major. He took 36 putts on Saturday and just when he was charging at Michael Campbell on the final afternoon he missed a par putt from five feet on the 16th and then three-putted from 20 feet at 17. Another happening that did not compute. At least the Open was to be played at St Andrews and that course for Tiger is almost a gimme. It’s telling that he has won six of his major titles on just two courses, both of them fairly wide open and with diabolical greens. Tiger won the Open, but again there was a blip. On the Saturday Woods played with Colin Montgomerie and the Scottish crowd was most definitely pulling for Monty. At times they almost ignored Woods and he looked spooked by it. He three-putted the second green and hit it into the gorse on the sixth and the ninth.. He has since admitted that the atmosphere might have got to him. At the PGA Woods had his worst score relative to par in the first round of a major. Over the previous two majors he had averaged more than 330 yards off the tee, but Baltusrol was not quite so forgiving. It chewed Tiger up over the first 18 holes. There were other moments in the year that revealed Tiger’s head to be suffering from a bit of worm. Woods’ run of making 142 consecutive cuts came to an end at the Byron Nelson Classic and he missed his second cut of the year at the Disney Funai Classic. Only once before in his 10-year pro career had Woods failed to make a cut for reasons other than injury. Woods also made his first triple bogey for two years and it was the first time since 2000 that he had had a triple and a double in the same round. The problems added up. In 2005 Woods was finding his way in a marriage and coping with his father’s serious illness from cancer. Earl Woods has always been Tiger’s mental drill sergeant, so it is hard to believe that the father’s disease did not also affect the son. Under such circumstances it is hard to predict how Tiger’s mental state will be in the 2006, but it is easy to predict that the rest of the golfing world will be stronger. Michael Campbell stared down Tiger at the US Open when the New Zealander was supposed to fold. David Howell did the same recently in China. The year 2005 was another defined by Tiger. He ended a run of 10 majors without a victory. He also ended the world’s fear of his mind. Like Fu Manchu the world will hear from Tiger again, but the terror might never be the same.