Tezpur, Nov. 30: A Royal Bengal tiger which has created panic here for the past two days, has moved to Kolibari Tapu on the Brahmaputra, forest officials said today. A team from the wildlife division, Tezpur, found a pugmark in a farm. The animal also killed a cow in the early hours today, a source said. Guwahati: A consignment of 20 metric tonnes of fully refined paraffin wax from Numaligarh Refinery Ltd was flagged off for Bangladesh on Tuesday from the NRL marketing terminal. Guwahati: Dasanglu Pul, widow of former Arunchal Pradesh chief minister Kalikho Pul, who won the Hayuliang bypoll on November 19, was administered the oath of office on Wednesday at a function at the Arunachal Assembly by Speaker T.N. Thongdok. Kokrajhar: Altogether 71 people, said to be illegal encroachers, were arrested from Kahitema under Panbari range of Manas National Park on Wednesday. Police said the people, mostly from Panbari in Chirang and Dhekiajuli in Sonitpur district, were caught clearing up forestland. Guwahati: KMSS members on Wednesday staged a protest in front of the PowerGrid zonal office at Dispur against discrepancies in compensation to over 12,000 people affected by construction of powerlines in Biswanath Chariali. Guwahati: The Joint State Haj Committee has decided to dissolve all district Haj committees and the sub-divisional committees of Rangia/ Bilasipara sub-divisions with immediate effect. The committees will be reconstituted within December 31. Guwahati: The Assam government has asked all traders to enrol themselves on the GST portal, www.sst.gov.in, by providing valid PAN, from Wednesday. Guwahati: The Assam Congress on Wednesday condemned the state government's decision to increase the price of kerosene oil and power tariff by 59 paise per unit from Thursday. Dhubri: Customers of Kharuabandha branch of SBI in South Salmara-Mancachar district have expressed resentment over lack of cash for the past four days. Most of the ATMs in Dhubri are without cash for the past week, customers said. Guwahati: Dimapur deputy commissioner Kesonyu Yhome said on Wednesday that responsible persons must lead by example for the success of the anti-tobacco campaign.