Bokaro, Aug. 25: Jawaharlal Nehru Biological Garden has again gone into mourning. Two months after Anthony, one of the three white tiger triplets, died (accidentally crushed by his mother Ganga), father Satpuda breathed his last this afternoon. The four-year-old white tiger had been suffering from paralysis of hind limbs and had developed sores. According to zoo officials, Satpuda had been suffering from fever for the past couple of days and had turned weak as he had stopped taking food. Although veterinary doctors, led by zoo chief Gautam Chakravarty, kept him under watch round the clock and administered antibiotics, vitamins and minerals, Satpuda could not finally pull through. “Despite the best of our efforts, we could not save the white tiget. We even took advice of some of the best vets of the country, but failed to cure him,” said a dejected Chakravarty, who was instrumental in getting the big cat, a prized possession of Bokaro zoo, from Bhilai. Satpuda — brought from Matri Bagh in Bhilai in January along with mate Ganga — had suffered a paralytic attack in his hind limbs. Zoo officials spotted him dragging his hind limbs on July 3. He also had sores. The condition aggravated in a few days and Bokaro zoo authorities contacted experts in Jamshedpur, Ranchi, Gwalior, Chennai, Gujarat, Bhuvaneswar and Delhi zoos. All the vets offered valuable advice, which included physiotherapy and cleaning of Satpuda’s sores. Satpuda even started showing signs of improvement in the next few days and started moving after consuming about 6kg of buffalo meat every day. But the relief was only shortlived as the tiger again fell ill early August and mostly lay at one place, which resulted in more sores. Finally, he died around 12.30pm today. Bokaro district forest officer Arvind Manish sent in a team of experts to the zoo to ascertain the reason behind Satpuda’s death. The post-mortem was also conducted in front of them. White tigers are known to be genetically weak because of a number of reasons, one of which is breeding in captivity. As a result, they are prone to developing diseases and health-related conditions, said experts.