While studying in a public school in Bengal over two-and-a-half decades ago, I suddenly became a laughing stock among my friends one fine morning. Not only the boarders of my hostel, the entire school, including the  wardens and house masters, had burst into splits after going through a news report. The report said that two persons from Bihar had gone to the UNO headquarters in Geneva and  demanded affiliation of Kolhanistan as an Independent nation. The persons had also approached the Queen of England and  requested her to free Kolhan from the Indian Union. They were caught in Delhi while returning home. As the persons belonged to Bihar, I became a soft target for my friends. Everyone wanted to know more about Kolhan from me. But, even I had heard the name for the first time. I tried my best to argue that all were not alike and that there was no match to Bihar’s contributions in nation-building, but to no avail. I was forced to give up the “fight”. But my interest in the area was kindled and later as my curiosity got better of me, I gradually learnt that Kolhan had rich mineral reserves, particularly iron ore. It had dense forests and lots of wild life. And that the area was  tribal dominated. I couldn’t gather much idea about its role in power politics or national  economy. The newspapers seldom carried reports about this area. People like former Bihar chief minister Jagannath Mishra ridiculed the Jharkhand Movement adding that it was a “gimmick” by adventurists. Even after becoming a journalist I had a little idea about the Kolhan region. While covering the Bihar Assembly sessions in Patna, I used to wonder looking at the bare-bodied Bagun Sumbrai. He was quite a bit of an enigma for me especially when my kind colleagues informed me that he still lived on a tree-top house and had several wives, the youngest being of his granddaughter’s age. After the formation of Jharkhand, too, Kolhan  remained “insignificant” in power politics during the state’s initial days. But after Arjun Munda became the chief minister in 2003, it gradually came into its own, with its  coverage increasing on the political pages. As Munda was new to the BJP, he started concentrating more on expanding his support base in Kolhan. However, his “exploits” were centred around Jamshedpur. He was more interested about silencing late Mrigendra Pratap Singh and cornering Raghubar Das. And in due course, he made mistakes. After the last Assembly elections in the state, Kolhan became the nucleus of a power block after a long time. Now there’s a group of ministers from the area. Both the chief minister and the leader of the  Opposition belong to the Seraikela-Kharsawan district. Finance, mines and geology ministers, too, are from Kolhan. The investment proposals received during the Munda regime compelled one to realise the might of Kolhan. Munda’s adamant “stand” over the issue of construction of Hatgamharia-Baraiburu Road in West Singhbhum district proved to be a  costly affair for him and the department. Now the Koda government has four ministers from Kolhan, including the chief minister himself. The protem Speaker, too, is from Kolhan and if Arjun Munda is elected as the leader of Opposition he will be another feather in the cap of Kolhan. “Now the power has gone in the hands of a real Jharkhandi. He will work for the welfare of the poor tribals,” the senior leader of Jharkhand movement, Shibu Soren, recently  commented. But, the moot question is how has Kolhan  benefited from the many leaders who emerged from it? For one, power still rests in the hands of the outsiders or the dikus. Though a poor Ho did manage to win the Assembly elections independently and became the chief minister with the support of 42 MLAs belonging to different parties, observers believe that he can do little on his own. It seems that for every small business he has to look up for Delhi’s “permission”. The media is more interested in pictures of him touching Shibu Soren’s feet or waiting several hours to meet Sonia Gandhi. It takes more  interest in describing how he giggles before the RJD chief and how he “struggles” with his personal life. Koda’s challenge now is to prove that he is not really spine-less as he is made out to be and that he truly is the Tiger of Kolhan.