Rory McIlroy watched his mate Graeme McDowell win the US Open last month and became convinced that he could win the Open. He cancelled his warm-up tournament and went away to practice his links golf. Thursday’s nine under par 63, one stroke off Curtis Strange’s Old Course record, was proof he has what it takes to win the British Open. It also equalled the lowest ever round in a Major championship. This is McIlroy’s ninth consecutive sub-70 round as a pro on the Old Course. He feels he just about owns the place and when a kid as talented as McIlroy starts thinking like that, then the world is a possibility. The Northern Ireland golfer’s 63 gave him an early three-stroke lead over John Daly and Andrew Coltart on a ridiculously benign morning. There are few days as calm as this, but when they come the Old Course is just about defenceless. The heavy rain on Wednesday night softened the greens and made the place a birdie fest. “I didn’t get off to a flying start,” McIlroy said. “The eagle on 9 really sort of turned things around for me, and I just got going from there. It was great to get into the rhythm of the round and get into a flow.” Daly shot 66 and had every right to be disappointed. He saw five birdie putts lip out in his final seven holes. The 66 could just as easily have been a course record. But far from raging when he came into the interview room Daly claimed he should now be dubbed ‘Mild Thing.’ “It’s a golf course, I don’t know, I just love it. I don’t know why,” Daly said. “It suits my game. Just a special, special place.” McIlroy may expect the champion of ’95 to come and go, but he will be far more nervous of Tiger Woods, bidding to be the first man in history to win three Open Championships. Woods did not hit the ball particularly well. He made a mess of a couple of putts early on. And yet he was five under par after 18 holes. Dressed in pink Tiger had several grumpy moments for a man defying his own mortality. He says he is interacting with the crowd, but there was not all that much evidence of it on day one. “It’s getting better every week,” Woods said. “I’m hitting shots that I haven’t hit in a long time. It’s building.” Woods was partnered with Justin Rose who birdied his opening holes. The 29-year-old’s round stalled a little after that but it was a good morning for the English. The Old Course, generally, relies on the elements to provide its best defence. Without the usual rain and wind, it was like target practice for the world’s best. Of the first 51 players to finish, only 13 posted scores above par. Among those in the red: defending Open champion Stewart Cink, who got off to what normally would have been a very solid start. This day, though, a 70 felt like an opportunity squandered. “It was out there for the taking,” said Cink, who beat Watson in a playoff at Turnberry last year after the five-time champion missed an 8-foot putt on the 72nd hole. “I definitely left a few out there.” The afternoon starters, including Phil Mickelson, could only hope the favourable conditions held up for them. “For the real golfers, this is for the taking,” said Nick Faldo, who has played only a couple of competitive rounds this year and still shot 72. “For me, it makes it playable.”