DCP ‘mishap’ Thane, March 28: The widow of Sanjay Banerjee, the deputy commissioner who shot himself before his wife and sons at a restaurant on Saturday, claimed he did not commit suicide but “accidentally” shot himself with his service pistol. Thane commissioner K.P. Raghuvanshi said: “We have to go by the statement she (Sushmita) has given.... We will consult the forensic and ballistic experts and take the case to its logical conclusion.” Turban relief Melbourne (PTI): A Queensland court has exempted a Sikh man from paying a fine of $100 imposed by Australian police for not wearing a helmet. Magistrate Stuart Shearer, while pulling up traffic authorities, asked: “How on earth is a bike (rider) going to get a helmet over his turban?” Rape accused New Delhi (PTI): A Delhi court will pass an order on April 10  on the start of the robbery trial of the four surviving adult accused in the December 16 gang-rape case. The accused had alleged robbed and beaten up a carpenter before the bus rape. Slimming scan New Delhi (PTI): The Delhi consumer commission has asked the state health department to look into “malpractices” by slimming clinics that are taking advantage of the weight-loss trend and “fleecing” people. The commission held Rediscover clinic guilty of unfair trade practices. Girl mauled Kotdwara (PTI): The half-eaten body of a six-year-old girl has been found after a leopard dragged her into a forest in Uttarakhand on Wednesday, officials said. The girl was playing outside her home when the leopard attacked her. A compensation of Rs 3 lakh has been paid to her relatives. Tiger count Rishikesh, March 28 (PTI): India’s tiger population has risen to 1,468 from 268 in 1973, when the country’s first tiger conservation project was launched. Corbett Tiger Reserve director Ranjan Mishra gave the information today. Uttarakhand chief minister Vijay Bahuguna will inaugurate a panel discussion to mark four decades of tiger conservation efforts in the country on April 1, Mishra said. Sotheby’s London (PTI): A large company school album of watercolours of costumes, craftsmen, trades and processions in India providing an insight into the culture of the early 1800s will be auctioned here and is expected to fetch anything between £200,000 and £300,000. It will be put on the block at Sotheby’s Arts of the Islamic World sale on April 24. Mika home Chandigarh (PTI): Gurgaon district authorities on Thursday sealed all farm houses in Roz Ka Gujjar village, including that of playback singer Mika Singh, which were allegedly running illegal small tourism units and other commercial activities. The electricity connections were also disconnected, a Haryana government statement  said. Navy leak case order New Delhi, March 28: A UK court has ruled in favour of Ravi Shankaran’s extradition to India. Shankaran is the prime accused in the navy war room leak case. The court dismissed Shankaran’s appeal against extradition and referred the matter to the UK’s secretary of state. Shankaran, a former navy officer, had left India even before the CBI registered the case in 2006. A request for his extradition was sent to the UK in 2007. Back in job New Delhi (PTI): The central administrative tribunal has asked the Centre to reinstate a sepoy, who had been dismissed for allegedly molesting a Japanese girl while posted at the Indian embassy in Japan, saying the inquiry had been in violation of rules. Law misuse New Delhi (PTI): Four members of a family have been acquitted of gang rape charge by a court which termed it as a misuse of rape laws in which the husband of the alleged victim used her as a “pawn” to settle personal scores. The court stressed the need to remain “vigilant” in “differentiating” between false and genuine rape cases. Parking lot Bangalore (PTI): The Lokayukta Court  has received a complaint against deputy leader of the Congress Legislature Party, T.B. Jayachandra, alleging illegal allotment of parking lot in the truck terminal. Robbery trial New Delhi (PTI): A court has directed initiation of criminal proceedings against a banker for prima facie deposing falsely before it to save her husband from punishment in a 2009 robbery case. The court held that Supriya had passed on to accused Jitesh Gogia the account details of a jeweller, whose father was robbed of Rs 1.55 crore. Riot plea New Delhi (PTI): The victims of anti-Sikh riots withdrew on Thursday their plea seeking permission to bring on record two news articles published in 1984 about the alleged role of Congress leader Sajjan Kumar in the massacre after a court assured them it would look into it. J&K prepaid New Delhi, March 28 (PTI): The government today extended prepaid mobile services in Jammu and Kashmir and the Northeast by  another two years as  the current permission was to expire on  March 31. The decision to  extend the service was taken after the security situation in these states was reviewed and no major fault or misuse of mobile telephony came to notice. Mirwaiz curbs Srinagar (PTI): Restrictions on the movement of Hurriyat chairperson Mirwaiz Umer Farooq have been lifted after he filed a writ petition in Jammu and Kashmir High Court against his house arrest. He had been under house arrest since February 9, the day Afzal Guru was hanged. Adarsh post Mumbai (PTI): The chairman of the Adarsh society and an accused in the multi-crore housing scam, Brig. (retd) M.M. Wanchoo. He  cited old age and poor health.