An author's mind is never at rest. If not figuring out the plot for the next book, it is busy recalling that old joke a friend once told him or that old friend whose jokes never grow old, faces and places hidden deep within the crevices of memory or rooted firmly in the present. A Time for All Things is an excellent example of this trait. Through the essays in the book, Ruskin Bond deftly demonstrates that not all thoughts translate into novel(la)s. Some, fleeting as they are, can be just as beautiful and need telling. Like his autobiography, Lone Fox Dancing, the accounts in this volume, too, trace the author through his childhood in Jamnagar, his time on the Channel Islands up till now, when he is trying his best to fend off unwanted guests at his house in Mussoorie. The topics, however disparate, are held together by Bond's inimitable style. A particularly evocative memory is about the last time his father came to visit him in his boarding school in Shimla and they spent the afternoon together. The narrative effortlessly switches from jovial to philosophical and occasionally, even becomes a serious commentary on the present times. Some children, the author's friends, wave at him on their way to and from school. But Bond observes that they all have to hurry back home owing to the lack of proper roads and the constant fear of wild animals, thus stressing the need for better infrastructure in the hills. The writer talks about the many practices that he lives by. For example, walking - not for health but simply for pleasure, not with people but alone. He repeatedly says that his best moments, creative or otherwise, are those when he is alone, thereby making an important distinction between being alone and being lonely. In a world where wanting to be alone is often mistakenly read as manifestation of signs of loneliness, the author's lifestyle will hopefully help those who enjoy nothing more than a few quiet moments to enlighten their 'well-wishers'. Nature, however, makes its presence felt throughout. It is there when Bond goes searching for the stream he had only heard of, when the little monkey sits at his typewriter - typing what the author thinks is a love letter to him - it is also there when he lists the various evil spirits that are to be found on a peepul tree. In many ways, this book is a token of love, of appreciation for the flora and fauna that have embraced him all these years.