Guwahati, Oct. 7: India's proposal to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (Cites) asking countries to share images of tiger skins or carcasses to aid law enforcement has been passed. India, the world's largest tiger range country with more than 60 per cent of the global tiger population, had submitted a proposal at the 17th Conference of the Parties (CoP17) of Cites to this effect. The meeting concluded on October 5 in Johannesburg. The proposal stated that this method of identification of tigers could be used to support law enforcement efforts, as it enables authorities to identify the locations the tiger was known to have frequented and in turn can facilitate prosecutions as well as provide valuable information on poaching and possible trade routes. "The proposal has been adopted. The idea is to build up a database and if tiger skins are seized, it can determine their origin. Hence, where poaching gangs are operating, it can perhaps glean forensic information too - anything that will lead to who's behind the trafficking" Richard Thomas, global communications coordinator of Trade Record Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce (Traffic), told 
The Telegraph. "Storage of forensic markers and photographic information will aid investigations and law enforcement efforts. Photographs of skins will help authorities determine the source and provide insights into understanding criminal networks and the trade patterns they employ, including routes used for trafficking" Kanitha Krishnasamy, senior programme manager, Traffic (Southeast Asia, Malaysia) told 
The Telegraph. The use of camera trapping for monitoring tiger populations has helped India to have a database of over 2,000 wild tigers from India, Nepal and Bangladesh as well, which can be uniquely identified from their striped coat pattern as well as the coordinates of their photo-captures. "The software used to identify individual tigers by their stripe patterns can also be used to support law enforcement. If a photograph of the stripe pattern of a seized tiger skin or carcass is compared with the database of photo-captured tigers and a match is found, it establishes the identity of the tiger that was poached, and the locations the tiger was known to have frequented," the proposal said. Such information is extremely valuable from an enforcement point of view. It has the potential to throw light on the illegal trade in tigers all the way from where poaching is occurring, to the routes used for smuggling skins, to the destinations. Apart from its usefulness in an individual case, such information, when collated and analysed, can be used to tailor national, regional and international enforcement responses. A Traffic report, 
Reduced to Skin and Bones Re-examined, released at the conference, stated that collaboration at a regional level is needed, particularly at hotspots and border areas. Collaboration with partners at the international level, including the Interpol through the National Central Bureaus (NCBs), in coordinating and supporting investigations could strengthen efforts on this front, particularly in pursuing information on perpetrators.