Q I belong to the Tiger animal sign, which will rule the year 2010. I would like to know what its impact would be on all those born in the year of the Tiger. Arjun Baruah A: To say that all the Tiger people will have the same fate will not be correct. The fate of all such people cannot be generalised and one has to take into consideration the exact time, date and place of birth. Accordingly, we can find out which pillars of destiny they are going through at present before arriving at any conclusion. Tigers have a friendly compatibility with those who are born in the year of the Horse and Dog and should bring them good luck and prosperity this year. Any new business ventures undertaken by the Tiger people would be profitable if they are done in partnership with Horse and Dog people. In contrast, it clashes with the Monkey sign and hence people born in the year of the Monkey should be extremely careful with their health and any new kind of business project that may be undertaken. This clash becomes severe when it is present in the birth chart. It also indirectly clashes with the people born under the sign of Snake. You can definitely keep a picture or an image or a symbol of the Tiger in the east of the living room or bedroom to enhance your intuitive powers and boost your self confidence. Q: We live in a small flat where drying clothes is a big problem. There are two small balconies, one in the northeast and the other to the south. The northeastern balcony is mostly used for drying clothes and many of these are at times left there the whole night. Do you think that is a good idea? Antara Dev Barman A: The northeastern section of the house is connected with pious spiritual energy. I do not think it is a good idea to hang washed clothes here. Instead, activate this area with all the five elements of nature along with a water body, potted flowers or plants and an image of God. Use the southern balcony for drying clothes as the yang energy of the sun will help to dry them faster. Avoid hanging clothes out the whole night as they tend to absorb the yin energy of the night, which is not considered conducive for good health. You can also invest in a dryer, which should again be carefully placed in the southeast of the southern balcony or any bathroom if possible. Q: I am a regular reader of your articles in The Telegraph and am anxious to know about the ruling elements in the year of the Tiger. Please throw some light on it. Arindam Dutta A: The ruling elements of this year are yang metal over wood. This means that the heavenly stem is of yang metal and the earthy branch is of yang wood. In other words, yang metal sits on wood and gives pressure to the wood element. Wood is connected with spine, liver, gall bladder and extremes of the body. Hence people should be careful of their health, especially regarding these particular organs. East and southeast sectors of the house are ruled by wood element and are directly associated with health and wealth of its residents. Energise these areas with lot of fresh plants, flowers, wooden furniture and green colour. Ensure that nothing metallic is kept in these areas this year as this will further destroy the wood energy, which is already sitting under the pressure of yang metal.