Hazaribagh, Jan. 2: The howl over the roar, at least to ears that matter. Villagers at Canary Hills may claim to have spotted a big cat in the region, but the forest department is keen on shelving a 10-year-old tiger safari and deer park project here in favour of a hyena conservation centre. The changed stand comes in the wake of fresh evidence of presence of the scavenger. According to forest officials, the big cat project will be a threat to the hyenas believed to have set up home in the caves carved out by tigers, earlier found in abundance in the nearby forests. Divisional forest officer (DFO) Mahendra Prasad confirmed working on the new plan of setting up a hyena reserve. “We will soon forward the proposal to the higher-ups.” Prasad further said regional chief conservator of forest, Bhubaneswar (Orissa), J.K. Tiwary, who had recently visited Hazaribagh for an inspection ahead of setting up the tiger safari and deer park, had even suggested the same idea. “We saw a female hyena moving with four cubs when we visited the hills. This prompted Tiwary to suggest a hyena conservation reserve. All the caves at Canary were made by tigers, but are now used by hyenas,” the DFO told The Telegraph. Canary Hills, sitting pretty atop 572 stairs and surrounded by a thick forest cover, used to play host to a large number of hyenas till 1985. During those time, residents avoided venturing out, especially in the night, out of fear of being attacked by the wild animal. In fact, several children had fallen victim to hyenas. With passing time, the hyena count reduced as trees were axed and the natural habitat was destroyed. But the recovery of two carcasses from the foot of the hills in the past 15 days has fuelled fresh speculation hyenas are still present in the area. Forest officials put the figure to at least three dozen. “Earlier, we though of sending a fresh proposal for setting up another sanctuary here in addition to the tiger park. But it is a lengthy process and hence, we settled for a hyena conservation centre. We do not want any disturbance to the hyena population. If we indeed set up a safari, it will be on hyenas. Canary Hills is the best habitat for the animal,” Prasad said. Incidentally, the state wildlife advisory board finally gave the nod for establishing the tiger and deer sanctuary at Canary Hills on October 10 after sitting on the proposal for 10 years. Sources said around 30 hectares of forestland at the foot of the hills had been identified for the sanctuary. A few days ago, a 30-year-old woman, who was attacked by an animal while she was working in a field near the forest, claimed it was a tiger. Her mother-in-law seconded her, raising hopes that big cats may be in the area.