Tiger Woods is still the main attraction. Groups of early morning spectators chased, unseeing, past an assortment of other players before finally catching up with Woods in the middle of his second practice round for this week’s USPGA Championship at Baltusrol. In most eyes, the American is back on the same lofty pedestal as when he won the Masters in 1997 and bagged four majors in a row across 2000 and 2001. True, he lost to Vijai Singh in the Buick event a week or so ago, but he has captured two majors out of three so far this summer and was only a few putts away from winning the US Open. Lee Janzen, winner of the US Open at Baltusrol in 1993, suspects that Woods’ closing 70 in the Open at St Andrews has done more than anything to set the alarm bells ringing again. “That last round was flawless,” said Janzen. “It’s the kind of thing we fear. If he plays like that, he’ll be impossible to beat.” Padraig Harrington believes we have seen three very different Tigers in the last nine years. “In 1997 he was just a kid to whom anything was possible,” he said. “In 2002 he was a phenomenon whom no one could touch. Now, after a few years of lows as well as highs, his confidence may have taken a bit of a dent but he has picked up more than enough experience to make up for it.” In Harrington’s view, Woods will walk the eight further majors he needs to match Jack Nicklaus’ 18-strong haul. Woods agreed with Harrington’s view of his confidence. It had taken a bit of a knock when he was not winning majors in 2003 and 2004 but it had started to flow again when he won the Dunlop Phoenix tournament in Japan at the end of last year. His drive, though, remains constant. “Every day,” he said, “you get out there and can’t wait to get to work and do better than you did the day before. If, say, you win by one, you can win by two. And if you win by 10, you can win by 11.” Woods then turned to the question of fitness. “You know,” he began, “I hear guys saying ‘I’m tired,’ after only playing 18 holes. You should never be tired after playing just the one round. Possibly because I have a background in track and cross-country, I’ve always felt that golf has to be treated as a sport.” He cited this year’s Masters in which he had to play 54 holes in two days due to bad weather. “Most guys were worn down, but I was OK.” Woods spoke about Colin Montgomerie’s creditable performance in the recent Open but suggested that Baltusrol, with its wet, sticky rough, is no place for a man with a hand injury. Montgomerie actually had an encouraging day with the right-hand fingers he bruised at Gleneagles last Thursday, managing the full 18 holes which will enable him to rest Wednesday. “It wasn’t too bad,” he said afterwards.