Jorhat, April 19: Preparations are on to transfer a Royal Bengal tiger from Assam to Bhopal by next week. The tiger, Vivek, which is over three years old, has been staying at the Centre for Wildlife Rehabilitation and Conservation (CWRC) at Borguri near Kaziranga National Park, about 250km east of Guwahati, since December 27, 2007. The tiger was only six months old when it was rescued by the forest department from Hathikhuli tea estate on the fringes of Kaziranga and admitted to the centre. The centre’s in-charge, Abhijit Bhawal, told this correspondent today that the cub, along with a female cub of the same age, had fed on the carcass of a poisoned cattle, following which the female died but Vivek responded to treatment and survived. He has been in good health since. The cubs had most likely ventured out from Kaziranga, Bhawal added. He said they had been thinking of shifting Vivek to a bigger area since he had grown up. The request to transfer him to Van Vihar Zoo came towards the end of last year through the Delhi-based Central Zoo Authority. However, the transfer was delayed because of some problems. The Central Zoo Authority extended permission for the transfer by six months and the CWRC is now planning to transfer Vivek by the end of next week. Bhawal said this was the first time that a tiger was being transferred from a rescue centre in Assam. He said the tiger would be moved in a truck with two doctors and two animal-keepers to ensure that it reached its destination safe and sound. The journey to Bhopal is expected to take about three days. The tiger was tranquillised for a general health check-up this afternoon. Bhawal said all health indicators were normal and blood samples had been collected for a few tests to be done at the centre’s laboratory and at the College of Veterinary Science in Guwahati. The principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), Suresh Chand, said the forest department had granted the necessary permission and formalities required for the transfer. The tiger will have to be shifted before monsoon.