Briton Lee Westwood is to take over as world No. 1 when the new rankings are published on Monday after Ryder Cup teammate Martin Kaymer finished down the field at the Andalucia Masters. Westwood ended Woods’s unprecedented 281-week reign at the top of the rankings after German Kaymer finished with a closing 75 for a seven-over-par tally of 291 at Valderrama on Sunday. Kaymer, who needed to finish in the top two here to become world No. 1, was always up against it after opening his campaign with rounds of 72, 74 and 70. Westwood did not play in Andalucia because he was at home resting his injured calf. His progress up the rankings makes him the first European player to take the No 1 spot since Nick Faldo in January 1994. ■ Reuters adds: “Of course I’m disappointed,” Kaymer told reporters. “I thought if I had a fast weekend I could still play a role but I missed too many putts. You have to accept it isn’t your week. I don’t think trying to get to No. 1 played any part. It was in the back of my mind but I didn’t play differently, any more aggressively or defensively. I liked the challenge (of trying to get to number one) and I think I’ll have another chance in the next few weeks,” added Kaymer. “Lee deserves it, he’s one of the greatest guys on the European Tour. I played with him in the Ryder Cup (this month). I’m very happy for him.”] The end of Woods’ tenure suggests that golf is entering a new competitive era with young guns such as Kaymer, Rory McIlroy and Hunter Mahan riding high in the rankings. At the very least, fans can expect a riveting battle for the label of world No 1 over the coming months with at least seven players vying for the honour. Adding further spice to the mix is the fact that the world's top four — in no particular order - of Westwood, Kaymer, Woods and Phil Mickelson will be competing in next week’s big-money WGC-HSBC Champions event in Shanghai. “The battle for world No 1 has become very fluid,” Ian Barker, the European Tour’s director of information services who manages the official rankings said. “The top four are all playing for the next two weeks with all of them at the HSBC before Lee, Martin and Phil compete at the Singapore Open and Tiger defends the Australian Masters.” Asked if he expected the volatility at the top of the rankings to continue until at least next year’s US Masters in April, Barker replied: “I believe so. And you can certainly factor in Steve Stricker and Jim Furyk as well. They would each have had a shot at No. 1 on Monday had they played this week. You can also add anyone else in the current top 12, if any of them can pick up a couple of quick big wins in 2011. It promises to be very volatile.” Faldo, meanwhile has a message for the new world No. 1. “We’ll see if it inspires Lee to better things like pulling off that first Major,” the triple British Open and US Masters champion told reporters on Sunday. “Lee has played consistently these last two years and we all know what’s been going on with Tiger. So, it’s time for a change. It’s interesting how times have changed, how you can get to be No. 1 without winning a Major,” Faldo added. “I never understood the points scoring system, even in my day. But I wanted to be No. 1. It is a nice one to win. But majors are the one, because you have to go and win them and finish them off.” Woods’s huge lead at the top of the rankings diminished after a very public divorce this year following his admission that he had a number of extra-marital affairs. As the American struggled to recapture his form after a self-imposed exile of nearly five months, Westwood has collected several top 10 finishes to replace the 14-time Major winner. “It’s weird because I had won four Majors before I got to world No.1 and probably the fifth one helped it,” said Faldo who spent a total of 97 weeks at the top of the rankings. Westwood is yet to collect his first Major but has recorded a top-three finish in each of golf's four elite tournaments, including runner-up at this year’s British Open and US Masters.