Hazaribagh, Feb. 9: A 2009 report by Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is back in the news again, adding fuel to a recently rekindled debate between residents and forest officials over the presence of tigers in the jungles of Hazaribagh. While residents claim to have sighted the big cat many a time in forest areas, officials disagree, saying tigers have disappeared from the district. However, on December 26, 2010, a woman claimed she was attacked by a tiger in Canary Hills, despite forest officials insisting that the animal in question was a hyena. The origin of the debate lies in incidents that took place in 2006. A spate of livestock deaths in Hazaribagh sanctuary area prompted forest officials to send impressions of pug marks and excreta collected from sites where cattle were killed to Dehradun for tests. In its report, sent in September 2009, WII confirmed that the cattle had indeed fallen prey to tigers. The report notwithstanding, divisional forest officer (wildlife) Mahendra Prasad said he had not seen a single tiger in the forests of Hazaribagh. He added that people often confused hyenas, which were found in abundance in the area, for tigers. Speaking about the WII report, Prasad said, “The department did receive the report, but as far we know, there are no tigers in these forests. Hazaribagh sanctuary spills into the forests of Chatra, which lead to Palamau. The tigers that preyed on cattle here in 2006 could have come from either of the neighbouring districts.” The 30-year-old woman who was attacked and seriously injured by an animal in an open field near the forests of Canary Hills adjoining Sindoor on December 26 last year, however, insisted that she had seen a tiger. Civil court employee Akhouri Rajesh also claimed to have seen a tiger in Canary Hills, but his claims too were refuted by forest officials. A forest official pointed out that 14 tigers were spotted during a census at Hazaribagh sanctuary in 1991. A survey in 2006 by a WII team, however, failed to sight a single cat in the area. The lush green sanctuary, spread over 186.25sqkm, was declared a national park on July 7, 1954. A few years later, it was stripped off its status because of the presence of people in its core area. According to officials, the only indication that big cats roamed in abundance in the area is a tiger trap built by the British that lies within the sanctuary.