Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL) is committed for Sustainable development and believes in raising the awareness towards Sustainability to all its employees. In continuation to the last session conducted in February 2020 on biodiversity management conducted for environment professionals of the organization, this session was conducted for all employees of HZL and focussed on the relationship between humans and biodiversity and how individual actions can contribute towards conservation.

Dr. Vivek Saxena, Country Representative, IUCN India encouraged the participants for individual and collective conservation action. Dr N M. Ishwar, Programme Coordinator, IUCN India talked about biodiversity, its importance, and the linkages to a pandemic. Mr P.R. Sinha, Ex- IFS, Former Country Representative, IUCN India and Ex- Director, Wildlife Institute of India, focussed his discussions on the impacts of extractive industries on biodiversity to provide a holistic view of HZL operations impact on nature followed by a session by Mr Kedar Gore, Director, The Corbett Foundation, who invoked individual’s thoughtful action towards biodiversity by focusing his talk on impacts of individual activities on biodiversity and how one can contribute to conservation in their individual capacity. The session was arranged and curated by Ms Aanchal Saxena, Project Assistant, IUCN India in consultation with Ms. Shama Jain, Lead Sustainability, Hindustan Zinc Limited.

The virtual session was conducted as part of HZL’s celebration of World Environment Day-2020 with the theme Biodiversity. Various activities like Bird Photography contest, Green Zinc Virtual Plantation Drive, Poster making Competition, Online awareness quiz and an awareness session on Biodiversity were organized. 

The session was highly interactive and attended by more than 60 employees of HZL. The organization understands the need for awareness for its employees in terms of their operations impacts as well as individuals to integrate sustainability and biodiversity conservation concerns in business practices of extractive sector.