In response, the global mangrove expert community presents a detailed guidance to illustrate how mangrove ecosystems contribute towards the achievement of multiple goals, targets and associated indicators so that „by 2050, biodiversity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely used, maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy planet and delivering benefits essential for all people“.


Mangroves are superheroes, a triple dividend of resilience, biodiversity gain and people”, says Minna Epps, Director of IUCN’s Global Marine and Polar Programme. “Protecting and conserving them is essential for achieving multiple goals and targets towards the 2050 vision for biodiversity. They are our roots of hope - it is time that their importance is widely recognized.”


The conservation of mangroves constitutes coastal nature-based solution for the biggest challenges humanity face today. They play a crucial role in combating climate change by storing 3 to 5 times more carbon than terrestrial forests. They provide habitat for over 3000 fish species and other wildlife, thus providing livelihoods to more than 120 million people, generating income and food security. They protect coastal areas by reducing wave height by up to 66%. If mangroves were lost, 15 million more people would be flooded annually across the world.

Achieving the ambitious vision 2050 vision will take a joint effort by all Parties. The “Guidance on Mangrove Indicators in the Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework” provides a detailed collection of scientifically robust data and resources for consideration by governments in support of their national reporting and progress tracking against the goals, targets and indicators set in the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework.  

The guidance is intended to contribute to the ongoing discussions convened by the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) towards the adoption of the Biodiversity Framework. 


This is urgently  needed”, states Julika Tribukait, Policy Advisor on Coastal Ecosystems at WWF Germany, “to allow for mangroves and other coastal ecosystems to be taken fully into account in the development of and future reporting against the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework.”


The guidance was prepared by experts from Save our Mangroves Now! - a joint initiative by WWF, International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Wetlands International and the German Federal Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), as well as the Global Mangrove Alliance, the Global Mangrove Watch and the IUCN Mangrove Specialist Group.

You can find the full Guidance here.

Calendar

Between 23 August and 3 September 2021, the governments and stakeholders are gathering virtually for the 3rd Open-ended Working Group meeting on the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework https://www.cbd.int/conferences/post2020, in preparation to the UN Biodiversity Summit planned in two parts in October 2021 and April-May 2022 in Kunming, China.
Immediately after, between 3-11 September 2021 several events on mangrove conservation and the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework will be held during the IUCN World Conservation Congress in Marseille and virtually  https://www.iucncongress2020.org/  


For more information, please contact

Anete Berzina-Rodrigo, Project Manager at IUCN's Marine Global Marine and Polar Programme, anete.berzina@iucn.org
Emily Goodwin, Programme Officer on Ecosystem-based Adaptation at IUCN's Global Ecosystem Management Programme, emily.goodwin@iucn.org
Julika Tribukait, Policy Advisor Coastal Ecosystems, WWF Germany, julika.tribukait@wwf.de