Outline


	Key responsibilities and tasks
	Key attributes and capacities
	Application process 


1. Key responsibilities and tasks 


	To provide overall strategic leadership of SULi;
	To develop internal structures of the joint SULi as needed in relation to the outputs that need to be delivered, and to oversee their work;
	To ensure close integration with relevant work of CEESP and its Themes;
	To ensure close integration with the work of SSC, including any relevant Specialist Groups and other Task Forces, as well as the Sub-Committees;
	To manage the SULi budget in collaboration with the Chairs of CEESP and SSC as relevant;
	To further revise and refine the SULi strategic plan;
	To seek additional funding for the work of SULi in collaboration with the Chairs of CEESP and SSC, and with relevant IUCN Secretariat Programmes (both regional and thematic);
	To supervise the work of any staff or consultants recruited to work for SULi;
	To represent CEESP, SSC and, when agreed, the wider IUCN at key meetings, and to articulate, further develop and promote the key concepts of sustainable use both within and beyond IUCN;
	To mobilise and input SULi expertise into relevant initiatives and projects of IUCN and broader constituencies, including international policy fora such as CITES;
	To respond to requests for technical advice and input from IUCN Members, structures, and other sources;
	To provide regular reports on the work of SULi to donors, and to the Chairs of CEESP and SSC.


Key attributes and capacities

Different Specialist Groups differ enormously in their activity, governance, and the style and approach of their Chairs, so it is very much up to the new Chair to establish their own approach. However, there are a number of qualities that a Chair is likely to need to possess or develop in order to lead the work of SULi successfully. SULi encompasses both biological and socio-economic expertise, addresses contexts of use across a very broad range of context and geographic regions, and engages with a very broad range of constituencies. The successful Chair is likely to hold the following attributes:


	To have the time and availability to invest in SULi work (i.e. to ensure regular communication by replying to emails daily or at least weekly, hold Skype conversations, organize meetings, attend relevant meetings, undertake commission work, coordinate document writing with group members, etc.). This position would necessitate international travel, although how much could vary depending on the new Chair’s capacities and flexibility. Note that the current Chair has had the majority of her time covered (3- 4 days/week) from a mixture of core SULi funding provided by the SSC under its programmatic support from the Abu Dhabi Environment Agency and project funding raised by SULi for SG activities. It may be possible to continue a similar arrangement.
	To have strong research and/or practitioner experience on sustainable use of wild species and its relevance and importance for local livelihoods, ideally across a number of different contexts or regions.
	To have experience on linking scientific research with policy development and formulation at national and/or international level.
	To have strong organisational, policy engagement and fundraising skills and experience.
	To have the political and diplomatic skills needed in order to represent the SG when required, including on difficult and controversial topics.
	To have experience in conceptualising and organising meetings and conferences.
	To be an excellent communicator, collegiate, personable and able to build rapport with and encourage active engagement from the group’s members.
	To be capable of recognising the validity of a diversity of perspectives and viewpoints around sustainable use, while ensuring technical rigour and credibility of SULi outputs.
	To have experience and abilities (formal or informal) in dealing with complex and conflictual issues in a sensitive and measured way.


 

Application process 

Applicants should provide brief answers to the following questions, and return them to Rosie Cooney at rosie.cooney@gmail.com by end August 2018, with a CV.

It is expected that a decision will be made by the SSC and CEESP Chairs, in consultation with a selection panel, by 8 September 2018, and the successful applicant will "shadow" the current Chair until end 2018 when she steps down.

1. Why do you think sustainable use of wild species is an important topic? Why and how is it important for species conservation? Why and how is it important for local livelihoods?

2. What do you see as key current priorities for IUCN work on sustainable use and livelihoods?

3. What do you see as key strengths and constraints of being part of IUCN?

4. What relevant networks, associations, and communities are you part of, that might assist you in leading SULi?

5. In broad terms, how would you choose to spend a SULi core budget for 2019 of 40K USD (noting this is not guaranteed)?

6. SULi often provides technical commentary or input on highly contentious issues, such as trophy hunting or wildlife trade. How would you define the role of SULi, as an IUCN Specialist Group, in relation to such issues?