Building on the Breakthrough Agenda launched at COP26, and the work of the Global Mangrove Alliance, the Mangrove Breakthrough provides a framework for countries, the private sector, and others to join forces and strengthen their actions every year, in every sector, through a coalition of leading public, private and public-private global initiatives scaling up investment in mangrove protection and restoration.

The Mangrove Breakthrough is part of a set of Marrakech Partnership Adaptation and Resilience Breakthroughs which collectively define global milestones and high-impact solutions to reduce climate risks, particularly in vulnerable communities, through adaptation action. It aims to aims to catalyze the financial support needed to scale proven solutions by working to channel finance to the ground through the Global Mangrove Alliance: a world-wide collaboration between NGOs, governments, academics and communities working together towards a global vision for accelerating change and building a host of opportunities for coastal peoples and biodiversity around the planet.

Read more at https://www.iucn.org/story/202209/mangroves-climate-action-global-mangrove-alliance-launches-new-state-world-mangrove

About The Global Mangrove Alliance:

In 2018 Conservation International (CI), the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), The Nature Conservancy (TNC), Wetlands International, and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) formed the Global Mangrove Alliance (GMA). This partnership now includes over 30 member organizations that share the aim of scaling up the recovery of mangroves through equitable and effective expansion of both mangrove protection and the restoration of former mangrove areas. From a practical perspective, the GMA works worldwide in supporting research, advocacy, education and practical projects on the ground with local and community partners.

For more information, see the Global Mangrove Alliance website and the Global Mangrove Watch platform.

Speakers:

Deputy Director General of the International Union for Conservation of Nature, Mr. Stewart Maginnis
High-Level Climate Champion, Mr. Nigel Topping
Minister of Environment and Climate of the United Arab Emirates, Ms. Mariam Almheiri
Executive Director of The Nature Conservancy, Ms. Jennifer Morris