The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), a global conservation organization and one of New York City’s premier cultural institutions, is seeking to fill the position of Vice President of Global Health Programs. Since its founding in 1895 as the New York Zoological Society, WCS has been dedicated to saving wildlife and wildlands through science, conservation, education and the management of the largest system of urban wildlife parks in the United States. The Vice President will be based at WCS headquarters in New York and will work with the Executive Vice President of Living Institutions to ensure that wildlife health meets its’ potential to fulfill the mission of the organization.
The Vice President of Global Health Programs oversees some 100 conservation health professionals in achieving critical goals for the Wildlife Conservation Society both in New York and around the world. The qualified candidate will have 5 years or more of administrative and supervisory experience in a complex and diverse organization. Preference will be given to those with extensive background in conservation and animal health practice, a thorough knowledge of wildlife health issues as they relate to conservation, experience with policy development and a proven track record of fundraising from philanthropic and government sources. Salary and benefits are commensurate with experience. The Wildlife Conservation Society is an equal opportunity employer.
Qualifications:

1. Minimum of 5 years working in a position of leadership with administrative and supervisory experience in a dynamic and complex wildlife health and conservation organization. 

2. Preference given to a graduate of a college or school of veterinary medicine accredited or approved by the AVMA, or possessing an Educational Commission for Foreign Veterinary Graduates (ECFVG) certificate, or be legally qualified to practice veterinary medicine in some state, province, territory, or possession of the United States or Canada, or some other country.

3. Preference given to those with proven success in fundraising from philanthropic and/or government sources.

4. Previous management training a plus. 

5. High quality interpersonal skills. 

6. Comprehension and fluency in oral and written English language.


Interested candidates should send a CV and a cover letter to Pamela Watim, Global HR Manager (pwatim@wcs.org). Applications will be reviewed as they are received.