Dr Watling is recognised by the Pacific conservation community for his pioneering work, natural history knowledge, leadership and publications in diverse areas including Pacific Island birdlife and Fijian palms, wildlife management and protection of endangered species, and tropical forest and mangrove ecology.

Other areas of Dr. Watling’s work include national park and protected area management, a columnist for the Fiji Times, and environmental impact assessment and governance in virtually all Pacific Island countries and territories, as well as in much of tropical Southeast Asia. He founded Environment Consultants Fiji Ltd, the Island Pacific’s first effective EIA entity; and also, with colleagues, NatureFiji-MareqetiViti, Fiji’s successful local environmental NGO.

“I remember well and with great pleasure, my first major consulting role as team leader which was for IUCN preparing Fiji’s first State of the Environment Report, and the Strategy that followed it (in the early 1990s). Equally rewarding and perhaps the most important contribution with them was the preparation of the Environmental and Social Action Plan for the Nakai-Nam Theun Conservation Area (1996 - 97) in the Lao PDR. I think we are fortunate that the IUCN Oceania Regional Office is here in Suva, and occupying its unique position, the middle ground between the Governments of the region and the conservation communities,’’ said Dr Dick Watling.

IUCN Oceania congratulates Dr Watling for his achievement and looks forward to working with him closely.

“It is indeed fitting that IUCN has recognised the dedication, sacrifice and conservation-related work by Dr. Watling over the past years not only in Fiji but in the region as well. I congratulate him on this award and share with him and the conservation community this milestone achievement. He joins the rank of eminent individuals from across the globe who have been duly recognised by IUCN for their stewardship of nature. Vinaka saka vakalevu Dr. Watling,” shared Mason Smith, Regional Director of IUCN Oceania.

The Honorary Membership is awarded once every four years during the IUCN World Conservation Congress to recognize individuals for their outstanding services to the conservation of nature and natural resources and exceptional contributions towards the goals of the Union. The prestigious global award, which consists of a certificate and a citation, was first bestowed at the founding of IUCN in 1948.

Other conservation leaders awarded with the IUCN Honorary Membership were Mr Ropni Metyktire of Brazil, Mr Assad Serhal of Lebanon and Dr Jane Goodall of the United Kingdom.

Dr Dick Watling is the second recipient from Fiji to be bestowed this prestigious award after Professor Randy Thaman who received Honorary Membership at the 2012 IUCN World Conservation Congress held in Jeju, South Korea.