The organisations in charge of some of the largest tracts of protected landscapes and marine environments across the world have come together for the first time to call on world leaders to support their work at the vanguard of the fight against Climate Change and Biodiversity loss. Orchestrated by National Parks UK, as host nation for COP26, the statement has been signed by, amongst others, the IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) and EUROPARC.

The statement notes:

‘As a family of Protected and Conserved Areas we recognise that no single site or organisation can address the global crisis of climate change nor the exacerbating impact of climate change on biodiversity loss. 

[Together we are] well placed to … support the ambition of countries around the world, including the G7 … by taking rapid and far-reaching actions to tackle climate change and biodiversity loss.  We can be the first 30% that inspires and informs land and sea use choices across the remainder of the planet, and we can be the places where billions of people connect with nature and become inspired to play an active part in combatting the dual crises.’

The full text of the statement can be read here.

James Stuart, Convener of Loch Lomond & the Trossachs National Park and architect of the statement commented: “In the fight against biodiversity loss and climate emergency, if we fail here, we will fail everywhere. We’re star players, don’t leave us on the bench.

“Climate change is not confined within national borders, and I believe this unique agreement can help spread innovation and good practice to our collective benefit. In turn we can show the way for countries, landowners and individuals across the world – inspiring them to put nature and nature-based solutions at the heart of their thinking and their economic and life choices.”

Stuart signed the statement on behalf of UK National Parks in the UK Pavilion at COP26 as part of the Youth Day events.  The most prominent signature was reserved for the front of the document and provided by Catriona Manders, Youth Committee & Junior Ranger, at Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park which is just 20 miles from the COP26 venues in Glasgow. She signed on behalf of future generations, charging Governments and conservation organisations with a duty to work together more closely.

Madhu Rao, Chair of the IUCN WCPA said: “Protected and Conserved areas are critically important solutions in combating the twin crises of climate change and biodiversity loss simultaneously. Increasing investment in these areas can not only help safeguard biodiversity in both the terrestrial and ­­­­marine realms, but also help secure their role as important carbon sinks helping human societies cope with climate change impacts by reducing risks associated with climate-related hazards.”

 

Founding signatories to the statement include:

 


	Bureau of Land Management (USA)
	Centre for National Parks and Protected Areas
	EUROPARC
	European Ranger Federation
	Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
	Israel Nature and Parks Authority
	IUCN/WCPA
	Korea National Park Service
	The National Association for Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
	National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (USA)
	National Park Service (USA)         
	National Parks UK
	Nature Conservation Agency of the Czech Republic
	NatureScot
	New South Wales National Parks & Wildlife Service
	Nigeria National Park Service
	Parks and Wildlife Finland
	Parks Australia
	Parks Canada
	Sabah Parks
	Quebec-Labrador Foundation/Atlantic Center for the Environment
	South African National Parks
	US Bureau of Reclamation
	US Fish and Wildlife Service
	US Forest Service
	World Urban Parks