Released today at UNFCCC COP 15 in Copenhagen, ‘Ocean acidification – the facts’ takes stock of the latest science on ocean acidification and spells out the steps that are urgently needed to stop its acceleration.
Increased release of CO₂ in the atmosphere is making seawater more acidic and is threatening ecosystems and species precious for our food and economy. It is also reducing the ocean’s ability to absorb CO₂ and regulate climate. Previous episodes of ocean acidification were linked to mass extinctions of some species, and it is reasonable to assume that this episode could have the same consequences. There can be little doubt that the ocean is undergoing dramatic changes that will impact many human lives now and in coming generations, unless we act quickly and decisively.
“Ocean acidification can be best described as the evil twin of climate change,” says Dan Laffoley, lead editor of the guide, Marine Vice Chair of IUCN’s World Commission on Protected Areas and member of Natural England’s Chief Scientist’s team. “We have used story-telling to paint a picture of the many ways in which ocean acidification may alter how the ocean works – given the possible far-reaching consequences we hope this guide acts as a wake-up call to decision makers to place the ocean centre stage in climate discussions and conclusions."
The ocean provides about half of the Earth’s natural resources and humankind takes direct advantage of this through our fisheries and shellfisheries. The ocean also absorbs 25 percent of all the carbon dioxide we emit each year, and produces half the oxygen we breathe.


Ocean acidity has increased by 30 percent since industrialization began 250 years ago. If CO₂ levels in the atmosphere continue to rise, sea water acidity could increase by 120 percent by 2060 – greater than anything experienced in the past 21 million years. By 2100, 70 percent of cold water corals may be exposed to corrosive water.
Given the lag between CO₂ emissions and a stabilisation of acidification, it could take tens of thousands of years before the ocean’s properties are restored and even longer for full biological recovery. This demands immediate and substantial emissions cuts and technology that actively removes CO₂.
“There is an increasingly real and very urgent need to dramatically cut emissions. The ocean is what makes Earth habitable and different from anywhere else we know in our solar system and beyond – now’s the time to act to minimise the impacts on our life support system while we still have time,” says Carl Gustaf Lundin, Head of IUCN’s Global Marine Programme.

 
Notes to editors
Ocean Acidification: The Facts, a special introductory guide for policy advisers and decision makers, is a product of the Ocean Acidification Reference User Group, an Initiative of the European Project on Ocean Acidification (EPOCA).
Production of the guide was sponsored by Natural England, Scottish Natural Heritage, EPOCA, IUCN and leading scientists and organisations worldwide who freely gave their time and expertise. Download the guide and learn more about EPOCA at http://www.epoca-project.eu/index.php/Outreach/RUG/
B-Roll will be available at the press conference in Copenhagen from Antinea Foundation..
For more information or to set up interviews, please contact:
Pia Drzewinski, Media Relations Officer, IUCN, Tel. +41 76 505 8865, e pia.drzewinski@iunc.org
About EPOCA

The EU FP7 large-scale integrating project EPOCA (European Project on Ocean Acidification) was launched in May 2008 with the overall goal to fill the numerous gaps in our understanding of ocean acidification and its consequences. The EPOCA consortium brings together more than 100 researchers from 27 institutes and 9 European countries. The research of this four-year long project is partly funded by the European Commission.
www.epoca-project.eu
About Natural England
Natural England is the UK government’s independent advisor on the natural environment. Established in 2006, its work is focused on enhancing England’s wildlife and landscapes and maximising the benefits they bring to the public.
www.naturalengland.org.uk