World Fisheries Day is celebrated every 21st November and represents a chance to recognise the vast and sometimes underappreciated food source for millions of humans that is the sea.

Mr. Cheema in his key note address, apprised that The Global Mangrove Alliance in collaboration with the UN Climate Change High-level Champions have identified the need for a unified global approach towards mangrove conservation and are calling for signatories to the Mangrove Breakthrough which is launched at the UNFCCC COP27. The Global Mangrove Alliance is led by IUCN together with partners Conservation International, World Wildlife Fund, The Nature Conservancy, and Wetlands International. He further elaborated that the Mangrove Breakthrough aims to secure the future of 15 million hectares of mangroves globally by 2030, seeing investments of 4 billion USD by 2030 to conserve and revitalize these coastal ecosystems, to implement collective action on halting mangrove losses,     restoring half of recent mangrove losses, doubling the protection of mangroves globally and     ensuring sustainable long-term finance for all existing mangroves.

A large number of students, dignitaries, faculty members, researchers and IUCN staff participated in the event. Among others who attended the session as speakers included Dr. Muhammad Ayub (President Pakistan Fisheries Society), Dr. Amina Zuberi (Professor, Chairperson Department of Zoology, QAU Islamabad), Dr. Naeem Khan (Professor, Vice Chancellor Baltistan University), Dr. Afzar Mian ( Professor Emeritus, Ex – Dean & Chairman Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture University), Mr. Junaid Wattoo (CEO, FDB, Ministry of Food Security), Mr. Naeem Iftikhar Dar (Director, Wildlife & Fisheries, AJK) & Dr. Zafar Bhatti (Ex DG, Punjab Fisheries Department).


At the conclusion of the event, shields and certificates were distributed among the dignitaries, organizers and students (winners of the poster competition). Towards the end, an awareness walk was also conducted which was followed by lunch.