As part of its three-year collaboration with IUCN’s SOS - Save Our Species initiative, which began in 2018, the global apparel company Lacoste will sell limited-edition polo shirts where its crocodile logo temporarily makes way for 10 different threatened species. The number of shirts for each species corresponds to the number of known individuals remaining in the wild. While each species faces specific threats, all are in need of increased funding for conservation action to help ensure their long-term survival.

“This campaign highlighting the plight of 10 threatened species will help widen awareness of the global extinction crisis,” said IUCN Director General Inger Andersen. “The collaboration with Lacoste is an excellent example of one of many roles that businesses can play to help stop the deterioration of our natural world. Further support from businesses and individuals is urgently needed to conserve the species and ecosystems on which we depend for food security, water security, and countless other benefits.”  

On 22 May – the International Day for Biological Diversity – ten Lacoste stores across the Americas, Europe, Asia and online will put the spotlight on one specific species, selling limited-edition polo shirts related to just that animal. 

“This is an exciting collaboration which is already making a difference; we are delighted that funding from last year’s campaign is helping to conserve Critically Endangered Burmese roofed turtles in Myanmar, for example,” said Thierry Guibert, CEO of Lacoste. 

All profits from the sale of 3,520 limited-edition polo shirts and all other items sold on the day in the ten stores will support IUCN’s efforts to conserve threatened wildlife. A call for proposals will be issued later in 2019 to identify and fund suitable conservation projects. 

Anyone can get involved to help increase funds for species conservation – visit www.saveourspecies.org/donate to learn more and donate.

Notes to editors

For more information or to set up interviews, please contact:

Goska Bonnaveira, IUCN Media Relations, Tel: +41229990245, Mobile: +41792760185, goska.bonnaveira@iucn.org

Species featured on the limited-edition polo shirts:


	
		
			
			Species
			
			
			IUCN Red List status
			
			
			Estimated known wild population
			
			
			Lacoste store location
			
		
		
			
			Hawaiian monk seal
			
			
			Neomonachus schauinslandi
			
			
			Endangered
			
			
			1,400
			
			
			Online only
			
		
		
			
			Iberian lynx
			
			
			Lynx pardinus
			
			
			Endangered
			
			
			589
			
			
			Paris
			
		
		
			
			North Atlantic right whale
			
			
			Eubalaena glacialis
			
			
			Endangered
			
			
			444
			
			
			New York
			
		
		
			
			Moheli scops-owl
			
			
			Otus moheliensis
			
			
			Endangered
			
			
			400
			
			
			Seoul
			
		
		
			
			Yemeni mouse-tailed bat
			
			
			Rhinopoma hadramauticum
			
			
			Endangered
			
			
			150
			
			
			London
			
		
		
			
			Opal goodeid
			
			
			Allotoca maculata
			
			
			Critically Endangered
			
			
			150
			
			
			Los Angeles
			
		
		
			
			Mountain chicken
			
			
			Leptodactylus fallax
			
			
			Critically Endangered
			
			
			132
			
			
			Miami
			
		
		
			
			Northern hairy-nosed wombat
			
			
			Lasiorhinus krefftii
			
			
			Critically Endangered
			
			
			115
			
			
			Tokyo
			
		
		
			
			Addax
			
			
			Addax nasomaculatus
			
			
			Critically Endangered
			
			
			90
			
			
			Berlin
			
		
		
			
			Cebu damselfly
			
			
			Risiocnemis seidenschwarzi 
			
			
			Critically Endangered
			
			
			50
			
			
			Shanghai
			
		
		
			
			       TOTAL
			
			
			3,520