This shall be achieved through the following forums:

1) Public Health and Environment Awareness and Practices: This discussion seeks to analyze health awareness and its impact on addressing the pandemic, precautionary acts, and its implications on the different aspects of life. This will be backed by a discussion of media management of the pandemic.                            

2) Environmental Management: This forum will address the work of The Local Environmental Management throughout the pandemic in all relevant aspects. This will include reflections upon opportunities to promote sustainable production and consumption patterns, in addition to the challenges of managing solid and medical waste in a global pandemic. Furthermore, discussion will tackle the management of municipalities and local authorities while weighing incurred consequences of the pandemic. Lastly, this dialogue will include discussion concerning this pandemic’s impacts on wildlife, both as opportunities for potential recovery or as a threat of an increased danger.                                                                                                           

3) Environmental Justice and Climate Change: This discussion sets about to showcase the connections between the pandemic and environmental justice, and the necessity to capitalize a roll-out to reach the visualized environmental justice. Achieving this will require work on a national level to take advantage of certain aspects of the ongoing pandemic as an opportunity to continue striving to mitigate climate change.    

4) Environmental Planning and Finance: This discussion works to analyze the impact of the ongoing pandemic on programs, plans, and finances of international and local institutions working in the field of disaster management, and the possibilities of transforming COVID-19 from a threat to an opportunity to finance public health and environmental projects.                                                                   

5) International and Regional Experiences in Dealing with the Pandemic:  A showcase of governmental, civil and international experiences, programs, and initiatives in the proper dealing with, sane management, and confrontation planning of the pandemic; in addition to the obstacles and successes faced during the process.        

Place and time of the conference: The conference will be held in Bethlehem during the first week of December 2020.

Content: Research papers, experiences, testimonials, initiatives, visual models, procedures, and dialogues consistent with the conference forums, providing a solution or a description that will aid overcome the pandemic, reduce its repercussions, all while building sound environmental management during similar or recurring crises.                                                               

Participants: Researchers, health and environmental workers, academics, entrepreneurs, interested persons, and postgraduate students are kindly asked to submit a one-page summary in English of their papers, experiments, and research. This should include methodology, importance, procedures, references, and the most prominent expected results, key findings, in addition to a brief one-page resume.      

Important dates: Abstracts will be received until November 10th, 2020, and the Environmental Education Center will contact the concerned persons whose abstracts are considered applicable with the content and objectives of the conference, in order for them to present all their further a due papers no later than November 30, 2020.                                              

Further Information: Submissions can be sent as MS-Word file to media@eecp.org or through the fax on 022765574