Mr Ryad Bendaoud, president of the association Ecologique de Boumerdes has just left us, an outstanding advocate for the environment, a fervent beating of ecology and activist of nature conservation in Algeria and the Mediterranean. He has led several actions and projects of conservation, environmental education and sustainable development at the local and national levels. Very active, He organized many seminars, outings, celebrations of international days (tree, biodiversity, sea, combating erosion and support dunes stabilization, and desertification). Mr Bendaoud has represented Algeria in as president of NGOs in several international meetings and conferences and has directed the first life project on the development of the Boumerdes coastline as part of a regional study at the regional level and Mediterranean area which was presented in Malaga. He has been a strong advocate for the establishment of the IUCN Mediterranean Cooperation Center in Malaga and has contributed immensely to the consolidation of the IUCN Program in Algeria and North Africa. He was married and father of 5 children all adults by now.



May he rest in peace, and I pray to Almighty God that he welcomes him into his vast paradise and his immense mercy. We present to his children, his wife our sincere condolences.


About the Author

Brahim is a graduate of the Veterinary School of Rabat (IAV Hassan II), wildlife option and holds a Master in biological science option Nature Conservation from ‘ the Royal College of London 'and a certificate on zoonotic diseases from Institute of Tropical Medicine in Antwerp / Belgium. He worked for 30 years at Forestry Department / Ministry of Agriculture in Rabat on the ex situ conservation and management program for the reintroduction of national endangered wildlife species. He is a founding member of The ASMAPEC (Moroccan association for environment and climate protection), NGO member of IUCN. Hi sis also Member of the Moroccan Association for ecotourism and nature conservation. Brahim is also a Bureau member of the Royal Moroccan Federation for Hunting and promotion of sustainable hunting in responsible eco tourism for rural development in remote areas.