Background

IUCN, International Union for Conservation of Nature, with the approval of the Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation, is implementing the project, “Accelerating Tiger Recovery along the Thailand-Myanmar Border: Thailand Component”. The  main objective of the project is to build understanding of the distribution and status of the statistically significant increase in the populations of tigers and tiger prey in the southern Western Forest Complex, through the deployment of camera traps and the development of a GIS database.

Objectives

1.To obtain data on the distribution of tigers and their prey population in (1) Thong Pha Phum National Park and/or (2) Lam Klong Ngu National Park.

2.To develop recommendations and guidelines for management of the protected areas, tiger and their prey populations.

Scope of work

1. The project must use camera trap techniques based on DNP’s research standard (3x3 km grid) to survey and identify the distribution and status of tiger populations and their prey in the southern WEFCOM, focusing on: (1) Thong Pha Phum National Park and/or (2) Lum Klong Ngu National Park. The applicant may submit a proposal for 1 or 2 sites.

2. The project must develop a geographic information system (GIS) for tigers, prey, and threats in project target sites.

3. The project must analyze the camera trap data of distribution and status of tiger populations and prey in project target sites.

4. The project must closely coordinate and share information with the Smart Patrol Center (PARO3), Khao Nang Ram Wildlife Research Station and IUCN.

Deadline

Proposals should be submitted by email to Pratheep Mekatitam at Pratheep.Mekatitam@iucn.org by 18:00 Bangkok time on 15 March 2022.  Late applications will not be considered.

Contact

Mr. Pratheep Mekatitam

IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature)

Thailand Programme 63 Sukhumvit Soi 39, Wattana, Bangkok 10110, Thailand

Email : Pratheep.Mekatitam@iucn.org

Mobile : 086 093 9976, 061 416 0054

Download document