The workshop started with a field visit to the well-known Mikoko Pamoja mangrove conservation project in the Gazi bay, followed by two days of intense discussion and brainstorming. Ambassador Peter Thompson, serving as the UN Special Envoy for Oceans, shared opening remarks with participants through a recorded message (see video below) followed by welcoming speeches by representatives of the Kenyan Wildlife and Forestry Services; Dr. Mohamed Omar and Mr George Wara respectively.



The goal of the workshop was to identify gaps and needs in mangrove conservation and discuss best practice and lessons learned. The outcome includes an overview of current status and on-going work needs in terms of mangrove best practices for the WIO region. The various sessions addressed the current status of mangrove conservation in Asia and WIO including restoration gains and failures, legal frameworks in place, on the ground field experiences and protection and restoration needs. Participants also discussed the potential to enhance and develop new finance opportunities, strengthen community engagement and coordinate with regional and international structures and initiatives. Based on these deliberations, participants identified priority actions and means to implement them.

The identified priorities include the development and dissemination of:


	Overarching mangrove principles
	Target-group specific guidance documents on:
	
		Community engagement
		Alternative livelihoods
		Restoration
		Data collection
		Law enforcement
		Policy coordination
		Mangrove management
		Sustainable financing and blue carbon
	
	


The most important findings on how to support exchange on and dissemination of best practices in the WIO region and beyond were:


	Globally: donor education and advocacy
	Regionally:



	Training of field officers/forestry staff
	Training of trainers at community or district level
	Facilitate access to information via regional platform and regional exchange via the existing WIO Mangrove Network
	Continue interregional exchange with Asia/Latin America


A matrix is being produced synthesising the results around priorities and next steps and will be made available shortly.

Many of the identified needs are highly relevant to reaching the SDGs (for example SDGs 1-6 and 8, 10-11, 13-16) for the millions of communities dependent on the ecosystem services provided by mangroves and can contribute to the Communities of Ocean Action on Mangroves.

To find out more about Save Our Mangroves Now! click here 

For more information contact Raphaelle Flint (Raphaelle.flint@iucn.org)