More than 2,000 participants from 52 African countries and beyond come together at APAC to address challenges and drive action for Africa’s Protected and Conserved Areas. They will discuss the key role of these areas in safeguarding the continent’s iconic wildlife, delivering vital ecosystem services, driving sustainable development and conserving Africa’s cultural heritage and traditions. The event is expected to culminate in the adoption of the Kigali Call to Action by all participants.

“Africa is rich in biodiversity - perhaps the richest in the world. We have the most beautiful rivers, forests, mountains and a variety of wildlife that can only be found on this continent. We must therefore spare no effort in protecting and conserving this diversity”, said His Excellency Édouard Ngirente, Prime Minister of Rwanda. ”Given the huge social and economic benefits of protected and conserved areas, it is my conviction that this Africa Protected Areas Congress will chart pathways towards resilient and sustainable conservation of our biodiversity for economies’ transformation.” 

“Protected and conserved areas in Africa have a complicated legacy, with conservation success too often coming at the expense of local communities. One key focus of the first-ever IUCN Africa Protected Areas Congress is to give a voice to these marginalised communities, stressing their stewardship of nature and the need for inclusive and just conservation models under African leadership, and with global support”, said Dr Bruno Oberle, IUCN Director General.  

"The Africa Protected Area Congress offers Africa the golden chance to reset and recalibrate our mindsets towards sustainable avenues that will ensure that. the wellbeing of wildlife and their habitats is safeguarded. Africa faces the challenge of economic transformation in a world that is aware that the current model of prosperity is reaching its ecological limits. To be successful in beating extinction and postponing its inevitability, we will need strong alliances that bring different sectors together if we are to overcome the challenges of wildlife protection and conservation and save the future of our planet; hence why APAC is so important at this moment in time", said Kaddu Sebunya, CEO of African Wildlife Foundation.

APAC participants include Ministers and other decision-makers, community leaders, youth representatives and scientists. Among the confirmed speakers at the Congress are the Prime Minister of Rwanda, Édouard Ngirente, IUCN Director General Dr Bruno Oberle and African Wildlife Foundation CEO Kaddu Sebunya, and indigenous representatives such Hindou Oumaru Ibrahim, member of the Indigenous Peoples of Africa Coordinating Committee.

Please consult the APAC website for details about the Congress programme.

Media registration remains open to cover the event in-person. Key sessions including press conferences can also be followed via live-stream. To see which sessions will have a virtual component, please visit the APAC website.

Contact:

Valentine Njoroge, Communications Coordinator Africa Protected Areas Congress, vnjoroge@apacongress.africa , Tel: +254715448909
Matthias Fiechter, Media & Communications Officer IUCN, press@iucn.org, Tel: +41795360117
Wambui Odhiambo, Media Specialist, African Wildlife Foundation, wodhiambo@awf.org,   Tel: +254728886987