Prof. Keping Ma, Vice Chair and Secretary General of BC-CAS chaired the event. Qing Yan, Director General of Bureau of Science & Technology for Development CAS, Fenmin Yan, Deputy Director General of Department of Nature and Ecology Conservation of Ministry of Environment Protection, Academician Qi Zhou and Vice-President of University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS) delivered the opening addresses. More than 400 participants from 28 provinces, various cities and autonomous regions attended the conference.

Academicians Deyuan Hong, Bojie Fu and Fu Gao, and professors Hiroyoshi Higuchi, Ding Wang, Rui Yang, Keping Ma and Yongfei Bai all gave plenary presentations that were highly appreciated. The 14 sessions, 123 oral presentations and 172 abstracts presented during the conference covered various aspects of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. The eight presentations covered variety topics including biodiversity and species, wildlife and public health, World Conservation Congress and biodiversity trend, national park system, etc. .

"We need to strengthen marine biodiversity research, and encourage research on distribution, hotspots and conservation of biodiversity in Asia. This can be done through the application of IUCN's new conservation tools," said Prof. Keping Ma.

Five students were also chosen by the expert group for the ‘Nature Conservation Youth Award’, which encourages young researchers to engage in biodiversity research. The winners were: Pingping Huang from Institute of Oceanology, CAS, Yue Wang from South China Botanical Garden, CAS, Xiangyan Su from Peking University, Yunyun Wang from Institute of Applied Ecology, CAS and Meng Wang from Central China Normal University. They received certificates of honor and bonuses.

The National Conference on Biodiversity Science and Conservation, which started in 1994,  is held every two years and is the highest-level academic event in the subject of biodiversity in China. The conference aims at promoting academic research and communication among different fields of biodiversity conservation. At this year's conference, hot topics included marine biodiversity, national parks and the downgrading of the giant panda's conservation status.