Tech4Wildlife News: SMART Mobile SMART is excited to showcase the features of their new data collection solution, SMART Mobile! Built around the specific needs of the SMART user community, this streamlined mobile tool allows staff in protected areas to efficiently collect and upload data for analysis and action, and allows for improved integration with the SMART desktop software and SMART Connect.
Read on to see SMART Mobile's full range of features, and visit SMART online for more information on their conservation tech solutions.
This news article was originally shared on the SMART website. SMART Mobile, the SMART data collection solution for mobile devices is here! SMART Mobile minimizes the time between data collection and management response in terrestrial and marine environments. Learn more and download: https://t.co/nbXRlKuxgV pic.twitter.com/pFLROZ8ndo SMART mobile is the leading solution for capturing data in protected areas. SMART Mobile allows staff to easily, accurately, and quickly collect and upload data for analysis and action. SMART Mobile offers functionality and user experience enhancements specifically requested by the SMART user community, as well as much tighter integration with the SMART desktop software and SMART Connect. SMART Mobile enhances the tried and trusted power of  CyberTracker with a new and streamlined data entry process, support for high-resolution icons, touch/swipe controls, advanced mapping and navigation, support for multiple languages, flexible changes to patrol metadata on the fly, real-time alerts, and many other new functions. A Modern User Interface SMART Mobile has a modern easy to use user interface.  Some of the features include smooth scrolling, easy to use lists, and high-resolution icons. Additional new features that improve the usability features include dark mode, multi-language support (including support for a broader range of languages), and font scaling to allow text to be easily read. Modern state of the art mapping The state of the art mapping in SMART Mobile includes the ability to complement online base maps with offline maps generated directly from SMART desktop.  The user experience includes features such as pinch-zoom, map rotation  and navigation follow mode. Multi-leg patrols and on the fly patrol type changes Patrol type can now be changed on the fly.  Also, patrols can now be easily paused and resumed.  When paused the track timer is disconnected, ensuring that SMART delivers an even more accurate measure of effort. Detailed sighting history SMART Mobile supports viewing your full sighting history in the field.  Individual sightings can be edited without disrupting patrols/surveys. Navigate to previous observations Building off the sighting history, the “Goto” feature supports users to navigate to previously visited locations. Add independent incidents during patrols/surveys During or outside of a patrol or survey, observations can be recorded independently from a patrol or survey.  These observations are recorded as independent incidents in SMART.  For example, if you are collecting ecological records data on a mission but have a protocol of recording human-wildlife conflict or poaching signs independently,  you can now easily record these are independent incidents without interrupting your overall data collection. Desktop demo version for training SMART Mobile also has a Desktop demo version for Windows which works exactly the same as the mobile version that can be used for training. The GPS simulation can be customized for your location as part of the training. Robust kiosk mode We’ve built a robust kiosk mode that locks the device for use only by SMART Mobile.   Kiosk mode can be exited with a pin. Simple, Customizable Themes Ability to customize the look and appearance of SMART Mobile from within SMART selecting theme colors and your own project icon. Learn More Release notes Download SMART Mobile