Senior Software Engineer, Skylight Join the mission to help tackle IUU fishing with cutting-edge tech! The Allan Institute for AI is seeking a Senior Software Engineer to accelerate efforts to make sure those working to restore our ocean have the tools and information they require. Seattle, Washington
      
                        - 


                
        United States Who you are: We are looking for an experienced Senior Software Engineer with a strong growth mindset and deep experience building scalable and maintainable backend services and full-stack products.  The ideal candidate is excited about collaborating with AI researchers to develop, train, test, and deploy cutting edge models.  They should be enthusiastic about learning new languages, frameworks, and technology and are excited about applying their skills and experience to important problems facing our planet. The ideal Senior Software Engineer candidate will tackle challenges with an entrepreneurial spirit and have the capacity to deliver across a broad range of domains and technologies. On the Skylight Team, we are passionate about building great user-centric software products that deliver wins to our customers while also focusing on building modern, maintainable, scalable systems.   As a developer, you will have had a diverse set of experiences demonstrating the ability to perform full stack development across multiple domains.  You believe that building a collaborative and inclusive culture is fundamental to creating a high performance team. Your next challenge: On the Skylight team, you will work with talented engineers, designers, product managers, and AI researchers to uncover illegal fishing by developing the tools that help countries around the globe combat this problem. We partner with some of the most impactful organizations in illegal fishing and over 60 nations to help identify, track, and defend against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.  Our technology provides timely and actionable information about suspicious activity to enforcement authorities. What you’ll need: Senior Software Engineers will work collaboratively across our team of product managers, designers, AI researchers, and engineers to solve difficult and complex problems.  The essential functions include: Experience owning feature development across the stack, from idea to delivery. Including taking an active role in product definition, architecture, design and writing a significant portion of critical code A passion for applying your skills and experience to improve our planet Have production experience with multiple successful launches/deliveries, that are extensible, with significant wins to users, and limited oversight from managers Proficiency in planning, designing, coding, and delivering systems that have a significant impact, such as greatly improved performance, availability, adoption, or customer satisfaction Knowledge of professional software engineering practices & best practices for the full software development life cycle, including coding standards, code reviews, source control management, CI/CD, testing, and operations Be sought after as a technical expert and provide technical advice to senior leadership and customers Preferred: Strong coding experience in web applications using frameworks such as Python/Flask, Java/Spring, Ruby/Rails or NodeJs Experience designing, developing, and maintaining GraphQL or RESTful APIs Experienced with NoSQL platforms such as MongoDB, Elastic Search or Redis, and relational databases like PostgreSQL Experience with building Data platforms with open source software such as Kafka or Dataflow Experience delivering solutions on Google Cloud, AWS or Azure Experience with modern deployment technologies such as Docker, Kubernetes A passion for mission-driven work and a desire to make the world a better place through your work Education/experience: Bachelor's degree in Computer Science or relevant engineering experience A minimum of 5 years' of software development experience Physical Demands and Work Environment: The physical demands described here are representative of those that must be met by a team member to successfully perform the essential functions of this position. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the functions. Must be able to remain in a stationary position for long periods of time The ability to communicate information and ideas so others will understand. Must be able to exchange accurate information in these situations The ability to observe details at close range Can work under deadlines Who We Are: The Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence is a non-profit research institute in Seattle founded by Paul Allen. The core mission of AI2 is to contribute to humanity through high-impact research in artificial intelligence. In addition to AI2’s core mission, we also aim to contribute to humanity through our treatment of each member of the AI2 Team. Some highlights are: We are a learning organization – because everything AI2 does is ground-breaking, we are learning every day. Similarly, through weekly AI2 Academy lectures, a wide variety of world-class AI experts as guest speakers, and our commitment to your personal on-going education, AI2 is a place where you will have opportunities to continue learning alongside your coworkers. We value diversity - We seek to hire, support, and promote people from all genders, ethnicities, and all levels of experience regardless of age. We particularly encourage applications from women, non-binary individuals, people of color, members of the LGBTQA+ community, and people with disabilities of any kind. We value inclusion - We understand the value that people's individual experiences and perspectives can bring to an organization, and we are building a culture in which all voices are heard, respected and considered. We emphasize a healthy work/life balance – we believe our team members are happiest and most productive when their work/life balance is optimized. While we value powerful research results which drive our mission forward, we also value dinner with family, weekend time, and vacation time. We offer generous paid vacation and sick leave as well as family leave. We are collaborative and transparent – we consider ourselves a team, all moving with a common purpose. We are quick to cheer our successes, and even quicker to share and jointly problem solve our failures. We are in Seattle – and our office is on the water! We have mountains, we have lakes, we have four seasons, we bike to work, we have a vibrant theater scene, and we have so much else. We even have kayaks for you to paddle right outside our front door. We welcome interest from applicants from outside of the United States. We are friendly– chances are you will like every one of the 200+ (and growing) people who work here. We do. AI2 is proud to be an Equal Opportunity employer. We do not discriminate based upon race, religion, color, national origin, sex (including pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions), sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender status, sexual stereotypes, age, status as a protected veteran, status as an individual with a disability, or other applicable legally protected characteristics. You may view the related Know Your Rights compliance poster and the Pay Transparency Nondiscrimination Provision by clicking on their corresponding links. This employer participates in E-Verify and will provide the federal government with your Form I-9 information to confirm that you are authorized to work in the U.S. If E-Verify cannot confirm that you are authorized to work, this employer is required to give you written instructions and an opportunity to contact the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) or Social Security Administration (SSA) so you can begin to resolve the issue before the employer can take any action against you, including terminating your employment. Employers can only use E-Verify once you have accepted a job offer and completed the Form I-9. We are committed to providing reasonable accommodations to employees and applicants with disabilities to the full extent required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). If you feel you need a reasonable accommodation pursuant to the ADA, you are encouraged to contact us at recruiting@allenai.org. Benefits: Team members and their families are covered by medical, dental, vision, basic life insurance, basic accidental death and dismemberment insurance, short-term disability, long-term disability, and an employee assistance program. Team members are able to enroll in our voluntary life insurance program, our voluntary accidental death and dismemberment program, our health savings account plan, our healthcare reimbursement arrangement plan, and our health care and dependent care flexible spending account plans. Team members are able to enroll in our company’s 401k plan. Team members will receive $125 per month to assist with commuting or internet expenses and will also receive $200 per month for fitness and wellbeing expenses. Team members will also receive up to ten sick days per year, up to seven personal days per year, up to 20 vacation days per year and twelve paid holidays throughout the calendar year. Team members will be able to receive annual bonuses and can participate in the long-term incentive plan.