Call for Nominations: Tusk Conservation Awards The 2020 Tusk Awards are now accepting nominations of outstanding individuals who have made a significant impact on conservation in Africa. These nominations offer the rare and exciting opportunity to honor your peers or mentors with prestige, recognition, and generous grants for their excellence over a lifetime, as an emerging conservation leader, or in the field directly protecting endangered species. Do you know someone who deserves a Tusk Award? Ask yourself…… Have the lives of the people and wildlife of Africa been improved through their leadership? Have they had a significant impact on wildlife population numbers? Do they provide mentorship? Have their ideas been replicated across the continent, or should they be? If the answer is yes to any of these, they need to be recognised! The judges assess the nominee’s outstanding contribution towards any, or all, of the following areas: wildlife and habitat conservation, development and delivery of environmental education, and sustainable community development programmes designed to enhance conservation. The Tusk Conservation Awards, in partnership with Investec Asset Management, give us a chance to celebrate extraordinary people, whose work and lives might otherwise go unnoticed outside their fields. Their work with wildlife and communities in Africa safeguards the future for us all The Duke of Cambridge, Tusks Royal Patron says “These awards which mean a great deal to me personally, play a huge part in our mission to preserve Africa’s precious wildlife for its people.  It is vital that we recognise the dedication of these unsung heroes and the bravery of rangers risking their lives, day and night, on conservation’s frontline. We all owe them a huge debt of gratitude.” There are three awards – please choose the one which fits your nominee. If you are unsure, please email Sarah, sarah@tusk.org and she will answer any queries you have. A lifetime achievement award, which recognises outstanding dedication and exceptional contribution to conservation in Africa. This award is sponsored by Investec Asset Management. The winner receives a grant of £40,000 towards their work. Nominate someone for the Prince William Award for Conservation in Africa here. This award is for an individual who has been judged to be emerging as a leading conservationist and in recognition of their outstanding contribution to conservation and considerable success shown in their chosen field. This award is sponsored by Land Rover. The winner receives a grant of £20,000 towards their work. The two finalists each receive a grant of £7,500. Nominate someone for the Tusk Award for Conservation in Africa here. This award is to give international recognition to the men and women who work in the field protecting wildlife in Africa on a daily basis. The award is being generously sponsored by a private US foundation. The winner receives a grant of £10,000. Nominate someone for the Tusk Wildlife Ranger Award here. If you know someone exceptional then please take the time to nominate them. A few hours of your time you could change someone's life. All nomination pages can be found here. Please note the deadline to submit your nomination is Friday, 20th March, 2020. All forms must be completed online using the respective links above. This form will be submitted to the Nominating Committee. If the Committee decide to propose your nominee to the judges you will be contacted to obtain further information on the nominee, including references from three individuals, one of whom must be an in-country referee. Confidential: Can you keep a secret? Please keep your nomination confidential from the nominee and ask the supporting referees to do the same. Visit the Tusk Awards website for more information about past winners, the Tusk Award judges, and more.