Senior officials from the CITES Secretariat, INTERPOL, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the World Bank and the World Customs Organization (WCO) convened in Bangkok to discuss the future strategy of the International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime (ICCWC). The five organizations joined forces as ICCWC in 2010, in response to the increasingly organized and transnational nature of wildlife and forest crime, and in recognition of the need for enhanced international coordination and cooperation to underpin responses to this crime. Secretary-General of the CITES Secretariat, John E. Scanlon, stressed: “The serious nature of wildlife and forest crime demands a response that is commensurate with the scale of the risk it poses to species, livelihoods and security. ICCWC is the first initiative where the five organizations have joined forces to achieve a common goal. The combined experience, capacity and networks of the partners makes ICCWC uniquely-placed to develop programs to combat wildlife crime to help ensure the perpetrators face a more formidable and coordinated response”. The meeting allowed for partners to review the activities that have been conducted by ICCWC to date, including the coordination of international and regional events on critical issues related to wildlife crime such as a workshop on controlled deliveries in Shanghai, China, and the development of a toolkit to help governments review the effectiveness of their responses to wildlife and forest crime. Highlighting the capacity-building focus of the consortium, Director of Operations at the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Aldo Lale-Demoz, explained: “The ICCWC Wildlife and Forest Crime Analytic Toolkit is a technical resource that assists government officials in wildlife and forestry administration, customs and other relevant agencies to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of their preventive and criminal justice responses related to the protection of wildlife and forest products. Based on the results of the analysis, tailored evidence-based capacity-building and technical assistance programs will be designed and implemented through ICCWC partner agencies.” Reflecting on the strengths of the consortium, William B. Magrath, Lead Natural Resource Economist, World Bank said: "Through our engagement in ICCWC and related partnerships we are seeing a growing need for additional resources for crime prevention and socially and developmentally-sound law enforcement. The World Bank is already the largest source of development finance for environmental and natural resource law enforcement and we are looking to ICCWC as a way of expanding and improving our support of good environmental law enforcement as a global public good." Consortium partners also used the opportunity to discuss the future priorities for ICCWC, including the need to continue to build the profile of wildlife crime along with its recognition as transnational organized crime. The important contributions and expertise of each partner organization in helping achieve these were acknowledged. INTERPOL’s Director of Specialized Crime and Analysis, Bernd Rossbach, said: “Transnational organized criminal networks are increasingly moving into wildlife crime which offers them the possibility of significant profits at comparatively low risk. National law enforcement agencies are the first line of defence against the illegal trade in wildlife, however they increasingly face sophisticated and highly-organized criminal gangs. INTERPOL, and its network of 190 member countries and as part of ICCWC, will continue to provide the necessary support to national agencies to conduct transnational enforcement operations and target those behind all forms of wildlife crime.” The Deputy Director of Compliance and Facilitation at the World Customs Organization, Allen Bruford, stressed: “Much further work lies ahead to combat organized wildlife and forest crime and for this reason the WCO will continue to raise awareness of its serious impact on the natural environment, while continuing to build the capacity of customs officers across the globe to more effectively tackle the criminal syndicates behind cross-border wildlife crime in partnership with our key partners.” CITES implementation and enforcement issues are a focus of the CITES Conference taking place in Bangkok until 14 March, reflecting both the escalating levels of poaching and illegal trade – particularly in elephant ivory and rhinoceros horn – and strong evidence of the increased involvement of organized crime groups in wildlife crime. In response to this, ICCWC is hosting a number of high-level events in Bangkok alongside the CITES Conference, including a Ministerial roundtable on transnational organized wildlife and forest crime and the first global meeting of wildlife enforcement networks. The Consortium will also deliver specialized technical training on combating wildlife crime for enforcement officials at an event being hosted by the Asian Development Bank, in collaboration with ICCWC, next week. Note to Editors: For more information, contact Juan Carlos Vasquez at +66 (0)853322469 juan.vasquez@cites.org or Stefania Kirschmann stefania.kirschmann@cites.org General Information to correspondents and accredited media. General Information to correspondents and accredited media. CITES CoP 16 will take place from 3 to 14 March 2013 at the following address: Queen Sirikit National Convention Center (QSNCC) 60  New Rachadapisek Road, Klongtoey

	Bangkok 10110, Thailand

	Tel. : (662) 229-3000

	Fax : (662) 229-3001 E-mail : info@qsncc.com http://www.qsncc.co.th/ Media&Exhibition zone: Zone C-2nd floor Press conference room : Auditorium, Zone A You can pick up your badge at the media registration desk on the following days: For more information about the procedures for media accreditation to cover the Bangkok Conference – CITES CoP16, see: https://cites.org/eng/cop/16/media_accreditation.php Learn more about CITES by visiting www.cites.org and CoP16 decisions by visiting https://cites.org/eng/cop/index.php  or connecting to: www.facebook.com/cites
www.twitter.com/citesconvention
www.youtube.com/citesvd
www.flickr.com/cites ---------------------------------- See also the press release issued by the organizers of the operation.