CLICK HERE TO DOWNLOAD YOUR FREE COPY
 
Or visit the Apple App Store to download your tablet ready copy by downloading the Milan Voyages Nature et Territoires newstand. You will see the Terre Sauvage icon for immediate free download inside.
 
This edition is dedicated entirely to highlighting a selection of conservation impacts and successes thanks to the IUCN’s Red List of Threatened Species™ and SOS - Save Our Species initiative. The frontline conservation action supported by SOS is informed directly by the Red List’s accumulated knowledge, hence the reason they are presented together.
Inside the covers are a history of the Red List and infographics explaining how it works as our Barometer of Life on earth with the goal of doubling assessments to 160,000 species by 2020.
Meanwhile, wildlife reporters and photographers for Terre Sauvage document many examples of how these initiatives are saving our precious species from a variety of threats. Content includes special features about the Saiga Antelope in Kazakhstan, Siamese Rosewood in Thailand, and the plight of the world’s vultures species.
But this is just a selection of the thousands of animals and plants around the world that face extinction. With species disappearing at a rate up to 1,000 times higher than normal: 1 in 4 mammals, 1 in 3 amphibians, 1 in 3 corals, and 1 in 8 birds are at risk of disappearing forever.
We know these facts thanks to the work of 9,000 experts from the IUCN’s Species Survival Commission (SSC) who do the research, compile data worldwide and continuously update the Red List.
Similarly during three years of action SOS – Save Our Species has funded a portfolio of 85 conservation projects which so far protect 200 threatened species of plants and animals across 50 countries. Each of these projects addresses one or more of the most pressing threats wildlife faces in the 21st century such as over harvesting, “by-catch”, poaching or habitat destruction.
Nature is in trouble- we all know. But there is hope, there are successes and together we can achieve so much more than we do already – by turning knowledge into action and success on the frontline we can generate positive effects that impact us all.
By supporting SOS and the IUCN Red List, your donation can count toward significant conservation success.