The eight draft “solutions” will be finalized and, if eligible, published on the PANORAMA web platform and promoted through various communication channels.

The Wildlife Institute of India has, in fact, already submitted a solution case study to PANORAMA in the past, which described the saving of the critically endangered Eld’s deer. IUCN looks forward to expanding plans for further cooperation and for the WII to systematically submit solutions from its projects to PANORAMA.

Noteworthy was the fact that although the event registration stated that only twenty seats were available on a "first come, first served" basis, eventual space was made for the oversubscription, with thirty-five attendees.

Conducted by Marie Fischborn of the Global Protected Areas Programme, the workshop was hosted by the “Biodiversity and Ganga Conservation” project of National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) and the WII. Participants were students and faculty members.

After an introduction to PANORAMA, its approach and online platform, participants formed groups to discuss and co-design “solution” case studies based on the projects they work in.

PANORAMA – Solutions for a Healthy Planet is an initiative to document and promote examples of inspiring, replicable solutions across a range of conservation and sustainable development topics. One of the goals is to enable cross-sector inspiration and learning, which was in evidence in the WII workshop.

The PANORAMA approach is to use a modular case study format that identifies replicable key success factors ('building blocks') when documenting solution case studies and describing the context in which the solution was developed.

The PANORAMA initiative is based on:


	Peer-to-peer exchange.
	Solutions which are applicable across topics, sectors, and audiences.
	Adherence to defined quality standards.
	Solutions peer-reviewed by subject matter experts before publication.
	Solutions shared on the online platform and through publications.
	Integrating these same solutions into capacity development activities and workshops.


 

Related links

PANORAMA web platform

WII website