The decision was made today by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee, meeting in the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh.
El Pinacate and Gran Desierto de Altar Biosphere Reserve is situated in the Sonoran Desert, an ecosystem shared by Mexico and the United States.
“Inscription of this spectacular site on the World Heritage List is extremely welcome recognition of its significant values and impressive local conservation efforts,” says Tilman Jaeger of IUCN’s Delegation to the World Heritage Committee meeting. “We hope the attention generated by such recognition will help consolidate its conservation for future generations and further increase existing ties between authorities, NGOs, scientists and indigenous peoples in the bordering American part of the Sonoran Desert.”
Covering more than 715,000 hectares and a large buffer zone, the reserve is a relatively undisturbed protected area comprising two very distinct landscape types. To the East is a massive, dormant volcanic shield — the Pinacate Shield, with extensive black and red lava flows. The shield features 10 enormous and almost perfectly circular Maar craters and more than 400 cinder cones.
In the West, towards the Colorado River Delta and South towards the Gulf of California, is the Gran Altar Desert, North America's largest field of active sand dunes, some of which reach 200m in height.
El Pinacate and Gran Desierto de Altar’s variety of landscapes has led to extraordinary habitat and species diversity. Many species are found only in the Sonoran Desert or even within the protected area. The subtropical desert ecosystem is reported to host more than 540 species of vascular plants, 44 mammals, more than 200 birds, over 40 reptiles, as well as several amphibians.
The area also has a rich archaeological history and is considered sacred by the indigenous Tohono O'odham, today living on both sides of the international border.
Mexico is the one of five exceptional places added to the World Heritage List this year, at the recommendation of IUCN. Positive decisions about Namib Sand Sea in Namibia, Xinjiang Tianshan mountains in China, the Tajik National Park of Tajikistan, Mount Etna in Sicily, Italy and the extension of Mount Kenya National Park to include the Lewa Wildlife Conservancy and Ngare Ngare Forest Reserve were adopted by the World Heritage Committee earlier today.