Hybrid Event (online and in Washington, D.C.)

May 15th, 2024 

4:00pm - 5:30pm Eastern 

REGESITER HERE

The IUCN North America Regional Office is kicking off its new Horizons Event series with its first hybrid event, the Status and Policy of Species Conservation and Recovery in the United States, taking place on May 15th 2024 from 4-5:30 pm, in hybrid format, with a reception to follow at the IUCN North America Regional Office in Washington D.C. This hybrid panel event will help advance our knowledge and share information about the status in the United States of species conservation and recovery, the policies in place and under review to help better protect species and promote species recovery, and, success stories related to recovery achieved relayed to us by one or more of IUCN’s members. 

This event will take place just after the end of the first World Species Congress, a 24-hour, online event hosted by Reverse the Red in response to IUCN World Conservation Congress Resolution 4.019. The World Species Congress (WCS) will showcase evidence-based conservation strategies, invite organizations and governments to accelerate their commitments to saving species, and inspire conservationists to amplify success. Governments, civil society, indigenous people’s organizations, academics, and the private sector will engage and network with the aim of accelerating and amplifying strategic, impact-driven efforts that contribute to species recovery. Special emphasis will be given to Reverse the Red’s support to government efforts to deliver commitments under the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. 

Each region was invited by Reverse the Red and The Species Survival Commission to host a country-specific event to help reinforce one or more of the desired outcomes of the WSC, including, advancing discussions around species recovery priorities or strategies and development of national biodiversity strategies. IUCN North America Regional Office is hosting this event as a local complement to this global WSC. The Status and Policy of Species Conservation and Recovery in the United States event will begin with a summary of the key messages and outcomes from the WSC, offering an early opportunity to help carry forward its results.  A series of speakers will share their expertise and knowledge about US species data and status of conservation and recovery, US government policy in place and proposed, including the potential for a National Biodiversity Strategy, and, on the ground implementation strategies and success stories achieving species conservation and recovery results. 

REGESITER HERE

AGENDA: 

4:00 – 4:10pm: Welcome remarks, setting the stage for the importance of species conservation and recovery, and highlights from the World Species Congress: Tracy Farrell, IUCN North America Regional Director 

4:10 – 4:20:  Welcome and introduction of the panel – Moderator 

4:20 – 5:00:  Panel discussion 

5:00 – 5:15:  Moderated dialogues with panelists 

Status of species, biodiversity and what we know about threats and conservation action in the US: Anne Bowser, Interim President & Executive Vice President, Programs, NatureServe 
US government efforts in species conservation action: Deb Hahn, International Relations Director, Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies
Species conservation action plans and examples in the US from IUCN members – IUCN Members share their successes,  Re:wild 
Overview of the National biodiversity strategy and Species Recovery Act in the US 
5:15 - 5:30: Audience Q & A

5:30: Reception at the IUCN North America Office in Washington, D.C. for those who are present in person (1630 Connecticut Ave NW Suite 300, Washington, DC, 20009)