The Species Survival Commission (SSC) of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and Fundación Temaikèn announced a groundbreaking partnership to create a Center for Species Survival (CSS) in Argentina, located at Fundación Temaikèn in Buenos Aires. The official agreement was signed by IUCN SSC Chair, Jon Paul Rodríguez, and the CEO of Fundación Temaikèn, Darío Lareu. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the signing was held virtually on Friday, December 4th. 

This agreement between the largest of IUCN’s six volunteer commissions and the Argentinean conservation NGO aims to provide strategic support and capacity in catalyzing assessments, planning and action for species conservation in Argentina and to provide capacity and training support for species conservation assessments, planning and action across the Region.

Aimed at conservation planning and mobilizing species recovery action, the CSS Argentina will enhance the scope and capacity for species conservation and solidify the Biopark’s role as a hub for conservation efforts. Also, supporting the work of more than 10,000 SSC experts, dedicated to securing a future for biodiversity.

“This Center for Species Survival is part of a growing global movement to expand species conservation efforts,” said Dr. Jon Paul Rodríguez. “IUCN SSC strongly believes that this partnership will change the way in which our global network of leading conservationists works to save species. Temaikèn will provide expertise and capacity building to Latin American specialists by bridging the gap between experts across the conservation spectrum, from zoo professionals, field practitioners, academics, to government officials.”

The CSS Argentina will coordinate initiatives to understand the status of species and implement conservation action plans for biodiversity across Argentina and South America, as well as reduce gaps in Argentina’s National Red List and ensure these assessments contribute, where possible, to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. CSS Argentina will also act as a catalyst among diverse stakeholders, including IUCN SSC Conservation Planning Specialist Group, to mobilize planning and action for priority species.

“This is without doubt one of the most important steps of our foundation’s 20 years history, in which we’ve built a strong capacity that now allows not only the alliance with SSC, but also the generation of further collaboration with both local and global actors. The Center for Species Survival Argentina will be a keystone for ensuring Reverse the Red on local species by honouring what both organizations share: the commitment and aspirations for global conservation” remarked Darío Lareu. 

The Center, hosted by Fundación Temaikèn, will employ a full-time team of 5 experts who will work with IUCN SSC, the IUCN South America Regional Committee, IUCN Argentina National Committee, IUCN members and other institutions and entities engaged in species conservation in the Region.

The IUCN Species Survival Commission is working with a growing number of partners in creating Species Survival hubs around the world. These are model partnerships in strategic species conservation across the IUCN SSC networks and the global zoo, aquarium and botanic garden communities.

“We know that conservation works and that we can reverse the current threatening trends to truly secure a future for wildlife, wild places and people. We simply need to do more and work together. The Center for Species Survival Argentina is an important step towards this”, said Dr. Kira Mileham, IUCN SSC Partnership Director. “Ultimately we hope for others to join, with the IUCN SSC, Fundación Temaikèn and other partners around the world to create united partnership networks in each country working together towards a better future.”

###

Download photos here

For more information or interviews please contact:

Aritzaith Rodríguez, IUCN SSC Communications Officer, ssc@iucn.org 

Florencia Roqueta, Fundación Temaikèn Integrated Communications, prensa@temaiken.org.ar 

###

About IUCN Species Survival Commission

With over 10,000 members in 174 countries, the Species Survival Commission (SSC) of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) is the largest of the six expert commissions of the Union and enables IUCN to influence, encourage and assist societies to conserve biodiversity by building knowledge on the status and threats to species, providing advice, developing policies and guidelines, facilitating conservation planning, and catalysing conservation action. Learn more.

About Fundación Temaikèn 

Fundación Temaikèn is an Argentinean globally recognized NGO with 20 years dedicated to the conservation of biodiversity. Pursuing the Vision that “all living beings coexist in our planet with harmony” it works through three strategic levers: Protected Natural Areas-Osununú Natural Reserve, Temaikèn Biopark, and a Wildlife Rescue Center. Strong alliances with the local Public Environment Agencies, partnerships with diverse and relevant environment organizations and memberships of international networks  allow  Fundación Temaikèn to fulfill its mission "Protecting Nature together" working with every sector in a society -locally and internationally- for the conservation and health of species and ecosystems.