Following the success of the 2016 World Conservation Congress, IUCN’s search for the host country of the 2020 Congress has been launched. 

In a communication from the Director General, Governments interested in hosting the next IUCN Congress have been invited to submit a non-binding expression of interest by 18 April 2017.  The deadline for final proposals is 15 August 2017 and the decision on the venue will be taken by the IUCN Council in April/May 2018. A detailed timeline of the selection process can be viewed here.

The IUCN World Conservation Congress, which takes place every four years, brings together leaders and decision-makers from all sectors of society to discuss and find solutions to global environmental challenges. 

For the host country, the Congress provides a unique opportunity to showcase its leadership on global environmental issues and to highlight conservation activities, as well as benefiting from the international exposure of the country’s biodiversity, history and culture.

Over a period of nine days, participants have the opportunity to meet, discuss, and determine the future of conservation. The Congress is split into two segments – the Forum and the Members’ Assembly. The Forum is the largest knowledge marketplace for conservation and sustainable development science, practice and innovation. Over 600 sessions (workshops, training sessions, exhibits, round-table discussions and other networking events) provide governments, NGOs and the private sector with an opportunity to discuss and debate key conservation and sustainable development issues ranging from the wildlife trade to ocean conservation, protected areas to sustainable business, and climate change to human rights.

The Members' Assembly is the highest decision-making body of IUCN. Here, the Union’s 1’400+ Members from over 160 countries come together to debate, vote and establish environmental policy, to approve the IUCN Programme and to elect the IUCN Council and President.  In 2016, Members voted on 121 Resolutions, Recommendations and other Decisions to help shape the conservation agenda over the coming years.

For information on the 2016 World Conservation Congress and its outcomes, watch the Congress Outcomes video or visit the Congress website:  http://iucnworldconservationcongress.org/

For more information on the selection process or the Statement of Requirements, please contact the Congress Team on congress@iucn.org.