The event began with planting of tree saplings by the Minister of Forest, Balochistan, the Deputy Commissioner, Ziarat, and the members of Green Club of Al-Hijrah School & College, Ziarat.
A “Poster Competition” on various environmental themes including forests, water, pollution and disasters was also organized among various local schools and colleges. The winning posters under each theme were awarded shields. Among schools, the first position was obtained by the students from Government Girls School, Ziarat. The second position was secured by students form Government Boys High School, Manna and Al-Hamd Public School Ziarat whereas; the third position was secured by students Government Girls High Schools, Ziarat and Al-Hijrah School Ziarat. Among colleges, the first position was obtained by the students from Al-Hijrah College, Ziarat and Government Boys College, Ziarat. The second position was secured by the students form Government Girls College, Ziarat whereas; the third position was secured by students from Government Girls College, Ziarat and Al-Hijrah College, Ziarat.
Speaking on the occasion, the Minister of Forests, Balochistan highlighted various actions taken by his Ministry to improve forestry governance in the province. He disclosed that Balochistan Forest Department was being strengthened through creation of an additional post of Chief Conservator of Forests and opening of a Forest School in Balochistan. He emphasized that he has issued clear instructions to Forest official to apprehend forest damagers without any discrimination. He praised the efforts of IUCN Pakistan for conservation of Juniper forests and assured of his utmost support in this regard. He emphasized that conservation of environment is religious and moral responsibility of every individual and we must collaborate to conserve our precious natural resources.
Mr. Mohammad Siddique Mandokhail, Deputy Commissioner, Ziarat appreciated efforts of IUCN Ziarat team in creating awareness among young generations. He viewed that environmental conservation is a global agenda and every one of us has to contribute to nature conservation. He viewed that the beauty of Ziarat valleys was because of Juniper forests, as thousands of tourists visit the area each year to enjoy serene environment of Ziarat. He stressed that we must ensure that this natural beauty is sustained and enjoyed by our current and future generations. He assured IUCN full support of district administration for conservation of juniper forests and promoting a healthy environment in the area.
Speaking on the occasion, Mr. Ghulam Qadir Shah, the Manager, IUCN Pakistan Juniper Conservation Project highlighted importance of the day. He gave an overview of various environmental challenges facing the globe and Pakistan, such as deforestation, water scarcity, pollution and loss of wildlife and their impacts upon our lives. He added that according to a study conducted by World Bank, the cost of environmental degradation in Pakistan has been estimated to be rupees one billion per day. This was too much a cost for a poor country like Pakistan. Highlighting theme of WED 2010, he stressed that for a healthy planet we need to conserve our biodiversity to sustain our future. He further stressed that concept of environmental conservation is well embedded in Islamic teachings which we need to practice in our daily life.
The Principal Al- Hijrah School & College Ziarat, Mr. Mohammad Tariq viewed that all the living things in this world were interconnected. He viewed that the real challenges of environment such as climate change and natural disasters are due to misuse of environment. He shared that Al-Hijrah, Ziarat campus has representation of students from across the breadth and length of Balochistan and hoped that through these types of awareness events the message of nature conservation would get spread across every nooks and corners of the province. We have to save our natural resources for our current and future generation, he emphasized.
Among others who spoke on the occasion included, Mr. Mohammad Ashraf Head Boy of Al-Hijrah, Ms. Rehmat Bibi Literacy Coordinator Education Department, and Ms. Shela, Ms. Hira and Ms. Gulali of Government Girls School, Ziarat. They expressed their views on different environmental issues pledged their support to conservation of our precious natural resources.
The World Environment Day is celebrated worldwide on 5th June each year.  The Day was adopted by UN General Assembly in 1972 to mark the beginning of Stockholm Conference on Human and Environment and is intended to create public awareness and invite political attention to environmental issues. The UN has adopted “Many Species, One Planet, One Future” as the theme of WED 2010.
For Further Details Contact:

Ghulam Qadir Shah

Project Manager

IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature)

Ziarat, Pakistan

Tel. +92 0833-560200, 560254, 0345-2006612; 

E-mail: ghulam.qadir@iucn.org