The workshop was attended by key stakeholders including policy and decision makers, Federal and Provincial government departmental representatives, academia, national and International development partners.

Dr. Rizwan Irshad, Deputy Director, Biodiversity Directorate, Ministry of Climate Change provided an overview about the process followed to develop the Sixth National Report.  

Mr. Abdul Munaf Qaimkhani provided an overview of reporting for the 6th National Report and highlighted the importance of this report. The 6NR will establish the global biodiversity outlook which plays a key role in enhancing global biodiversity. The report comprises of seven major sections, out of which there are 2 optional sections.

A joint team of IUCN consultants and officers of Biodiversity Directorate, Ministry of Climate Change initiated a country wide consultative process from 5th November to 28th December, 2018, to collect information from various stakeholders regarding implementation of NBSAP and progress made towards achieving 20 Aichi Biodiversity Targets (ABTs) during reporting period (i.e. July 2014 - December, 2018), so that the actions taken in support of biodiversity conservation and its sustainable use could be assessed and reported to CBD Secretariat under Sixth National Report (6thNR). The same is an obligation under Article 26 of the convention.

The national report has a combination of information and data available at the country level which includes, information on the targets being pursued at the national level; implementation measures taken and assessment of their effectiveness; assessment of progress made towards each national target; description of the national contribution to each of the global ABTs; description of the national contribution to Global Strategy for Plant Conservation (GSPC); contribution of indigenous peoples and local communities to ABT,s and updated biodiversity country profiles.

Mr. Abdul Raheem Soomro, Secretary Forest Department, Government of Sindh appreciated the participation of all departments and ensured that the Sindh Government provides a comprehensive feedback for finalization of this report. He suggested developing the academia-industry partnerships for inclusion of latest research done by university students. He acknowledged the presence of relevant government departments coming together for a common national cause.

Syed Mahmood Nasir, Inspector General of Forests, Ministry of Climate Change highlighted the importance of this obligatory requirement of Pakistan which sets the global outlook for next four years. While elaborating the two major issues that need to be addressed on priority basis, he shared the efforts made by the Government for plant conservation and prevention of the illegal wildlife trade in Pakistan.

Provincial environment departments from Punjab, KPK, Sindh, Balochistan, AJ&K and the GB shared their feedback to finalize the draft document.

In her concluding remarks, Ms. Fauzia Malik, Manager IUCN Islamabad Programme Office thanked all the stake holders present for sharing their valuable feedback to make the 6th National Report a successful, authentic and futuristic document.