The Government of Rwanda together with all the partners remain fully committed to making the IUCN Africa Protected Areas Congress a landmark event for nature conservation and sustainable development in Africa.

Speaking on the announcement, Rwanda Minister of Environment, Dr. Jeanne d’Arc Mujawamariya said: “The Government of Rwanda remains excited to host all delegates in July for a safe, ambitious Congress that will change the course of the African conservation agenda. Rwanda remains steadfast in seeing the vision of having the first IUCN Africa Protected Areas Congress held in Kigali. We encourage delegates to continue registering as we prepare to deliver this all-important Congress. We would like to assure everyone that Rwanda has put in place stringent measures to ensure that Africa deliberates on the future of its biodiversity in a safe environment.” 

As a reminder, this event is the first ever continent-wide gathering of African leaders, citizens, and interest groups to discuss the role of protected and conserved areas in safeguarding Africa’s iconic wildlife, delivering vital life-supporting ecosystem services, promoting sustainable development while conserving Africa’s cultural heritage and traditions.

The secretariat has now extended the early bird registration to 31st March 2022 and therefore encourage those planning to participate to register. 

About IUCN World Commission on Protected Areas

IUCN's World Commission on Protected Areas (WCPA) is the world's premier network of protected area expertise, administered by IUCN's Global Programme on Protected Areas. WCPA works by helping governments and others plan protected areas and integrate them into all sectors; by providing strategic advice to policy makers; by strengthening capacity and investment in protected areas; and by convening the diverse constituency of protected area stakeholders to address challenging issues.

About African Wildlife Foundation

African Wildlife Foundation launched a series of events in October 2021 celebrating its 60th Anniversary. Founded in 1961 to focus on Africa’s conservation needs, AWF articulates a uniquely African vision, bridge science and public policy, and demonstrate the benefits of conservation to ensure the survival of the continent’s wildlife and wild lands. AWF is the primary advocate for the protection of wildlife and wild lands as an essential part of a modern and prosperous Africa.