The IUCN GL is a global initiative that aims to recognise and increase the number of protected and conserved areas that deliver long-lasting conservation results for people and nature.

The IUCN GL Standard is organised into four components: good governance, sound design and planning, effective management, and successful conservation outcomes. Progress is measured using 17 criteria with 50 indicators.

Since the IUCN GL Standard was launched at the 2014 IUCN World Conservation Congress, 77 certified protected areas from 18 countries around the world have been Green Listed.

Van Long Nature Reserve was the first protected area in Viet Nam (and Southeast Asia) to receive GL certification in 2020.

Under USAID BCA, IUCN is supporting eight protected areas to get Green Listed: Cuc Phuong, Phong Nha-Ke Bang, Vu Quang, Bach Ma, Dong Chau-Khe Nuoc Trong, Song Thanh, Bidoup-Nui Ba, and Cat Tien. Separately, IUCN is supporting Pu Mat and Con Dao to achieve GL status.

Of these, two are in the Application Phase (Con Dao, Pu Mat), and the others in the more advanced Candidate Phase. Cat Tien is the closest to GL certification.

To attain GL certification, Cat Tien has undertaken extensive biodiversity surveys of birds, primates, deer, crocodiles, and other species with healthy local populations. Survey results show an increase in species numbers and preservation of natural values. The park has also made significant investments in forest management and wildlife rescue and release.


  
  
                                  
        Photo: Wildlife in Cat Tien National Park © IUCN Viet Nam/Nguyen Manh Hiep 
        
  
 

According to Pham Xuan Thinh, Director of Cat Tien National Park, the park is using the IUCN GL User Manual as a benchmark for effective management. GL is not an end in itself, but once achieved will need to be maintained over the long-term.

The independent Expert Assessment Group for the Green List (EAGL) met in April and September 2023 to review and endorse the Cat Tien application dossier and the independent reviewer approved the dossier in December 2023. A decision to Green List Cat Tien will be taken by the Global GL Committee in April 2024.