The meeting was initiated by a welcome address by Dr. Dhananjai Mohan, Director, Wildlife Institute of India followed by approval of minutes of meetings of the 20th meeting of the IUCN INC meeting held on 25th November 2019. 

The gathering also discussed India’s participation in the upcoming IUCN World Conservation Congress in January 2021. The platform was well utilized to inform the members about the candidature of Mr. Vivek Menon for regional councillors and members were encouraged to support his candidature. The members were more importantly encouraged to exercise their voting rights in Congress.  

Dr. Vivek Saxena, Country Representative, IUCN India briefly discussed IUCN activities and projects (past and present) in India. He also shared knowledge related to various IUCN resources and tools including the recently published IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based Solutions. 

Since its inception, the structure of India National Committee (INC) includes a chair as the Secretary of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Secretariat as Director, Wildlife Institute of India, and Vice-chair, elected within the members of the executive body. INC was re-informed about the provision of electing Vice-chair in the constitution which has been exercised in the past. Mr. Karthikeya V. Sarabhai was elected as Vice-Chair in July 1999 for a three-year term and re-elected for another three-year term. Since then, the position has been vacant. 

Insight of this and to maintain transparency of the process, it has been decided that members will submit nominations and election will take place before 15th August 2020. 

Deliberation on the need for modification in the by-laws of the constitution took place. The Chair of INC has constituted a committee to work on the revision of the bylaws to make it more relevant to the present context. The Committee consists of Dr. Vivek Saxena, Mr. Karthikeya V. Sarabhai, Dr. Dhananjai Mohan, Mr. Jigmet Takpa, Mr. R.D. Kamboj, and Ms. Lima Rosalind. The committee will submit a draft within two months. 

Lastly, the financial statement of the IUCN INC Secretariat was presented and approved. 

The meeting was attended by 27 participants including special invitees. 

 

For more information, please contact:

Ms. Aanchal Saxena

aanchal.saxena@iucn.org