Supporting the vision of Mediterranean youth in IUCN’s global programme



Young environmentalists are already leaders in many of their communities and are at the forefront of the movements to conserve nature and combat climate change. However, fostering dialogue and collaboration between generations is essential to tackle the current and future challenges of our societies.



In the same spirit, the IUCN Global Youth Summit aimed to strengthen connections between young leaders and their existing global networks, infusing their voices in decision-making and amplifying their stories to contribute to the growing youth-led movements for nature and climate.



Opportunities and challenges after a year of pandemic

"A decline in law enforcement in protected areas is putting certain species at increased risk of poaching and prosecution”, explained Hayfe Chamkhi, project manager in Association des Randonneurs d’Akouda, who manages a project for wildlife monitoring at the Bouhedma National Park in South Tunisia, supported by the PPI-OSCAN programme.

 



Similar impacts have been detected by the MEET Network, an association of Mediterranean protected areas working to foster ecotourism. Besides the collapse in tourism revenue during the pandemic, the increase in poor visitor behaviour and overcrowding have exacerbated overall the pressure on protected areas. Natalie Beckett from the MEET secretariat stressed the importance of promoting “a park-led ecotourism model that doesn't depend on large visitor numbers.”



This two-day event was presented by Blanca Moreno-Dodson, Manager of CMI Marseille, who expressed her wish to "showcase scientific evidence on the drivers and risks of climate change in the region, as well as its socio-economic impacts on territories.”. “We are also very pleased that CMI Marseille has already hosted for some time the Mediterranean Youth for Climate Action Network, where 150 participants from the Mediterranean bring innovative ideas on how to tackle climate change-related threats", added Ms. Moreno-Dodson.

[Recording] Empowering Mediterranean Youth to Strengthen the Governance of Ecosystems - Day 1 from CMI Marseille

Making use of a variety of interactive platforms, the World Food Forum, as well the Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development and MedYCA offered engaging talks on Nature-based Solutions, food security, city mobility and air quality.

Agenda: https://www.cmimarseille.org/highlights/webinar-empowering-mediterranean-youth-strengthen-governance-ecosystems

Networking session with IUCN Mediterranean members

The Global Youth Summit also offered a chance to gather several Mediterranean members of IUCN and collaborators in a closer networking session. Representatives from the Department of Environment and Sustainability in the regional government from Catalonia, together with the World Association of Zoos and Aquariums and a variety of other organizations participated in the virtual meeting “The role of youth in the Mediterranean programme of IUCN”.



For further details, please contact Andrés Alcántara.