In his opening remarks, Mr. Mahmood Akhtar Cheema, Country Representative, IUCN Pakistan welcomed the NCB Members to the meeting and informed that IUCN Pakistan was continuing to maintain the NCB platform as it was useful for coordination amongst agencies and organizations working on coastal issues. Mr. Mahmood Akhtar Cheema also thanked Engro Foundation for their generous funding for the Mangroves for the Future Programme’s activities. He highlighted the significant achievements of MFF in the last 9 years and gave a presentation on MFF’s journey over the last few years – its achievements, milestones, and collaborations – all focused on building coastal sustainability. He said he welcomed further inputs from members present on the occasion on how to better the working of NCB.

Special guest on the occasion was the CEO of National Disaster Risk Management Fund (NDRMF), Lieutenant General Nadeem Ahmed (Retired). Also present on the occasion was Secretary Sindh Forest and Wildlife Department, Mr. Abdur Rahim Soomro.

Speaking on the occasion, Ms. Naeed Durrani, Federal Secretary, Ministry of Climate Change appreciated the efforts by the National Coordinating Body (NCB) towards protection of the coastal resources. She especially appreciated IUCN for bringing together all the relevant stakeholders for collective efforts and to find a way forward in the face of threats posed by climate change and sea intrusion.

Mr. Riaz Wagan, Conservator Forest, Sindh Forest Department shared achievements of the Sindh Forest Department towards enhancing the mangroves forest area. He informed that the mangroves forestation activities provide a source of livelihood to the local communities. He mentioned that Sindh Government has been awarded GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS in the years 2009, 2013 & 2018 for planting the largest number of mangroves sapling in a day. He spoke of the threats to the mangroves that include: shortages of required fresh water; silt depositions; industrial, municipal pollution, urbanization; cutting of mangroves for fuel and fodder and grazing of camels.

The participants emphasized on holding a workshop of all the relevant stakeholders for developing a plan for designating Churna Island as the Marine Protected Area and more efforts towards Marine Protected Areas as per the international obligation.

For more information, please contact:

George Sadiq

Programme Officer

Education Communication and Outreach

Cell: 0303-3332127

E-mail: george.sadiq@iucn.org