Editorial: Wildlife crime poses unique challenges to protected areas 

Nigel Dudley, Sue Stolton and Wendy Elliott
Progress towards the CBD protected area management effectiveness targets

Lauren Coad, Fiona Leverington, Neil D. Burgess, Ivon C. Cuadros, Jonas Geldmann, Toby R. Marthews, Jessie Mee, Christoph Nolte, Susanne Stoll-Kleemann, Nanna Vansteelant, Camilo Zamora, Mark Zimsky and Marc Hockings
Are governance and management effective within protected areas of the Kanchenjunga landscape (Bhutan, India and Nepal)? 

Krishna Prasad Oli, Sunita Chaudhary and Uday Raj Sharma
Protected area management and livelihood conflicts in Ghana: a case study of Digya National Park 

Jesse S. Ayivor, Chris Gordon and Yaa Ntiamoa-Baidu
Tigers in the Transboundary Manas Conservation Complex: Conservation implications across borders

Jimmy Borah, Dorji Wangchuk, Anindya Swargowari, Tenzing Wangchuk, Tridip Sharma, Dhritiman Das, Nilmani Rabha, Ajit Basumatari, Niraj Kakati, M. Firoz Ahmed, Amit Sharma, Anupam Sarmah, Deba Kumar Dutta, Bibhuti Lahkar, Tshering Dorji, Probhod Kumar Brahma, Labanya Ramchiary, Tshering Tempa, Yeshey Wangdi, Tshering Nedup, Tandin Wangdi, Lhendup Tharchen, Pema Dhendup, Chitaranjan Bhobora, Bivash Pandav and Joseph Vattakaven
Placemaking and transnationalism: recent migrants and a national park in Sydney, Australia 

Denis Byrne and Heather Goodall
Can the IUCN 2008 Protected Areas Management Categories support Pacific island approaches to conservation? 

Hugh Govan and Stacy Jupiter
Putting Nature on the Map: Applying the IUCN Protected Areas Management Categories in the UK 

Roger Crofts and Adrian Phillips
An Elephant Corridor in a fragmented conservation landscape: Preventing the isolation of Mount Kenya National Park and National Reserve 

Maurice O. Nyaligu and Susie Weeks
Collaborative governance and benefit sharing in Liuwa Plain National Park, western Zambia

Vincent R. Nyirenda and Bimo A. Nkhata 


Lessons from large-scale conservation networks in Australia 

James Fitzsimons, Ian Pulsford and Geoff Wescott