The Global Youth Summit will address topics including the relationship between people and nature, climate change, marine and freshwater conservation, technology and innovation, and rights, governance and social justice. The event will feature three high-level intergenerational dialogues, 60+ youth-led workshops, dozens of informal networking sessions, body awareness classes and a weekend film festival.

Programme highlights include:


	Global Youth Summit Opening & Intergenerational Dialogue: “Super-year” for Nature and beyond: mobilising young leaders and building momentum. 6 April, 13:00-15:00 UTC. Featuring Jayathma Wickramanayake, United Nations Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth; and AY Young, artist and member of the UN’s 2020 Class of “Young Leaders for the Sustainable Development Goals”.
	Intergenerational Dialogue: Moving from token voices to heeded partners: Youth in Governance and Decision-Making. 9 April, 13:00-15:00 UTC.
	Intergenerational Dialogue: Supporting and Valuing the Voice of Indigenous Peoples: the Role of Youth. 14 April, 13:00-15:00 UTC.
	Global Youth Summit Closing: 16 April, 13:00-15:00 UTC.


Key speakers include:


	Jayathma Wickramanayake, United Nations Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth
	Neeshad Shafi, founder of the Arab Youth Climate Movement in Qatar
	Lefteris Arapakis, Co-Founder & Director Enaleia, 2020 UNEP Young Champion of the Earth
	Paloma Costa, UN Secretary-General’s Youth Advisory Group, lawyer and human rights defender
	Carlos Manuel Rodriguez, CEO and Chairperson, Global Environment Facility
	Elizabeth Maruma Mrema, Executive Secretay, UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
	David Cooper, Deputy Executive Secretary, UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
	Ron Hallman, President and CEO, Parks Canada
	Joyce Msuya, Deputy Executive Director, UN Environment Programme (UNEP)
	SungAh Lee, Deputy Director General, IUCN


The Global Youth Summit is organised in partnership between the IUCN Secretariat, its six Commissions, and several partner organisations. See editor’s notes for a full list of partners.

For more details please visit the IUCN Global Youth Summit website: https://www.iucnyouthsummit.org.

For more information, please contact:


	IUCN media relations, press@iucn.org
	Sean Southey, Chair, IUCN Commission on Education and Communication (CEC), sean.southey@iucn.org


Editor’s notes

The IUCN Global Youth Summit is organised by the IUCN Secretariat and its six Commissions (IUCN CEC, IUCN CEESP, IUCN WCPA, IUCN SSC and IUCN WCEL), in partnership with the following organisations:


	Parks Canada
	Ocean Wise
	Rainforest Trust
	Canadian Wildlife Federation
	Sustainable Forestry Initiative
	Fondo de Conservación El Triunfo, A.C.
	Conservation Leadership Programme
	Global Youth Biodiversity Network
	Post2020 Biodiversity Framework - EU Support
	Expertise France
	UNESCO
	UN Convention on Biological Diversity
	IUCN Intergenerational Partnership for Sustainability


Inspired by #NatureForAll

With the kind support of the Government of France