Winner of many prestigious awards, including the “The Best Alumni of Monterrey Tech 2004”, “UNESCO Prize for Environmental Preservation 2005”, Pronatura-Mexico “Recognition for Achievement 2006”, National Conflict Resolution Center “Peacemaker Award 2007”, World Conservation Union “Fred Packard Award 2008” and Society for Conservation Biology “Distinguished Service Award 2009”. Kenton Miller Award for Innovation in protected areas management, 2009, Ernesto is the Dean for Sustainable Development at Monterrey Tech, the largest private university system in Latin America. Previously, as the President of the National Commission on Natural Protected Areas of Mexico, he dealt with all aspects related to directing this Mexican institution in charge of the conservation of all protected areas within the country with a budget of approx. 100 million USD (2009) and 2000 employees and over 100 conservation partner organizations, including 32 Mexican states and a large number of NGOs.
Member of IUCN WCPA since 1996, Ernesto holds a degree from Monterrey Tech in agronomy, wildlife and animal science, and has received several academic honors. He also has a PhD in wildlife ecology with his research on parrots leading to science-based advances in parrot and habitat conservation around the world. .
Ernesto founded and directed Pronatura Noreste and positioned it as one of Mexico’s leading conservation organizations. He also participates as a citizen and professional consultant on conservation and sustainable development policy issues, in steering committees, editorial committees, scientific societies and boards of NGO’s. Together with his family and partners he established two privately run nature reserves encompassing over 2,000 hectares.
Ernesto has published over 100 refereed and popular articles and is co-editor and author of several chapters in “Ciencia Ambiental y Desarrollo Sostenible”, and “Vida, Ambiente y Desarrollo en el Siglo XXI: Lecciones y Acciones”. He also participated in the drafting team of the Durban Accord for the 5th IUCN World Parks Congress in 2003.
"I am immensely pleased with Ernesto's appointment" said Trevor Sandwith, Head of IUCN’s Global Protected Areas Programme. "His skills and experience within IUCN WCPA will strengthen the revitalization of IUCN's Global Protected Areas Programme and I am looking forward to working with him in my new role".
“Protected areas are a success story overall and IUCN WCPA has had a pivotal role.” said Ernesto Enkerlin-Hoeflich, Deputy Chair of IUCN WCPA, “I look forward to assisting the IUCN WCPA Commission in addressing the political, social and financial threat posed by climate change to make protected areas opportunities for conservation in a new era of truly global shared responsibilities.”
"I am thrilled that Ernesto has agreed to serve as the Deputy Chair for the Commission.” said Nik Lopoukhine, Chair of IUCN WCPA. “His wide experience and commitment to protected areas will be critical in helping the Commission in addressing some of the challenges that face protected areas around the world."