The project of ‘Inventory of Wetlands’ of Italy, following the Pan Mediterranean Wetland Inventory (PMWI) method of Med Wet (Mediterranean Wetlands- www.medwet.org), whose aim is to apply the Ramsar Convention in the Mediterranean area, is an example of  a good nature conservation project. A technical team of scientist and stakeholders was set up in 2009 to analyze, develop and propose– the values of Wetlands, monitoring and management processes and develop guidelines for their protection. On the whole 1520 wetland sites were recorded and a database created and a Report was published (D’Antoni et al., 2011). This article is a summary and a review of that project and Report. Most of the Wetlands catalogued resulted of Inland water type, then of Marine coast and then of Artificial type. The values of Wetlands and of ecosystem services and socio-economic values, from a biodiversity point of view, were studied and also the evaluation methods to preserve Wetlands. The data of the values of Wetlands were recorded for Wetland sites of four Regions while only for Tuscany and one site in the Marche there were data of social-cultural values. Ecosystem services that refer to Wetlands are for example Regulating services – storage and recycling of nutrients, storage and recycling of organic pollution, stabilizing the climate, regulation of water cycle, regulation of floods, Support services - in agriculture irrigation, production of energy, transport, Providing services - use of water, food, Cultural services – research and education, cultural and spiritual role.

The main indirect drivers of degradation and loss of Wetlands are the increase of population and of economic development. The direct drivers are infrastructure development, land use, drainage, pollution etc... In general, to acquire Wetland values a survey was accomplished to evaluate the performance of the ecological functions of each site on the basis of their environmental characteristic on a scale of one to five. The survey regarded a description of the site and of species and habitats, human activities and the impacts affecting the Wetland site. Likewise to evaluate ecosystem services of the Wetlands for which humans receive benefits for survival the following services/functions were considered Ground water recharge, Active recreation, Ground water discharge, Wildlife resources, Flood control, Fisheries, Sediment/toxicant retention, Forage resources,  Agricultural resources, Shoreline stabilization, Water supply, Storm protection/windbreak, Forest resources,  Uniqueness to culture/heritage.  For Friuli Venezia Giulia Wildlife habitat, Biological diversity and  Ground water discharge services were considered to be those that retain the highest capacity. A high functional ecology corresponds to a high standard of ecosystem service. It is therefore important to preserve these ecosystem services.

The Nature Directives (Birds and Habitat) and Freshwater planning tools could be used to assess the status of species and habitats. Moreover the Report points out that an integration of conservation measures in river basin planning could have a positive effect on biodiversity conservation. After an analysis of the water dependent species and habitats in the Nature Directives it is shown that about a third of species and habitats of SIC/ZPS sites are made up of fresh and marine water ecosystems. Furthermore, the Report shows that the conservation status of Wetland habitats is not as good as other habitats. An analysis following the criteria of the Wetland Horizontal Guidance (2003) elaborated for the Common Implementation of the Strategy for the Water Framework Directive of the WFD (Water framework Directive) shows that 17,2 % of aquatic species in Italy are threatened.

Indicators are used to evaluate the integrity and vulnerability of Wetlands on the basis of parameters associated with eco system functions. A DPSIR (Drivers, Pressures, Impacts, State, Response) model adopted by the European Environment Agency was proposed to evaluate Wetlands i.e. the State of the environment, the Pressures, Impacts and management Responses of Wetlands. These indicators are useful to monitor the trends and status of Wetlands. In the Report there is a description of the main threats which Wetlands are exposed to and approach to evaluate to define priority action plans of protection. There are guidelines for the integration of conservation measures into wide basin scale planning. There are guidelines to protect Wetlands to implement strategies and integrated actions of prevention, mitigation and adaption to restore the ecological integrity of rivers and freshwater ecosystems.

A Case study of a Ramsar site, the Tiber- Farfa, Nazzano Nature Reserve was completed to analyze  threats and identify Indicators to assess the efficacy of management using IUCN, Nature 2000 and WISE (Water Information System for Europe) threat categories. There are examples of case studies and best practices proposed to manage wetlands such as the requalification of a network of multifunctional wood areas with the planting of poplar species, conservation interventions to restore the habitats of the Nature Reserve ‘Le Bine’. An example of managing the fluctuation of the water table level of the lagoon of Ostiglia on the basis of the chemical physical quality of water and the limitation of nutrient enrichment and the management of common reed beds on the basis of Nature 2000 water bird species. In the Regional Nature Reserve of Macchiatonda the interventions to monitor the predation of water bird eggs with the use of artificial nests to register traces and comprehend predation dynamics. In the Nature Reserves of Lake Tarsia - Foce dei Crati environmental educational activities in favour of the younger generations and  local communities, to develop a new culture  on the role of Wetlands and biodiversity conservation. Interventions to restore the salt basin pond of the Reserve Saline di Tarquinia to remove sediments from the pools and restore and correct a hydrological equilibrium and improve the heterogeneity of the area. There are also examples of International Conservation projects. In the Report conservation measures guidelines are proposed to protect Wetlands and restore rivers, small lakes, and ponds. There are also guidelines for the management of peninsular mires.

For further information: http://sgi2.isprambiente.it/zoneumide/

Bibliography

D’Antoni S., Battisti C., Cenni M. e Rossi G.L. (a cura di), 2011 – Contributi per la tutela della biodiversità delle zone umide. Rapporti ISPRA 153/11