The Council, President, Director General and entire family of IUCN extend a very warm welcome to the new Members and look forward to their active involvement. Furthermore, IUCN welcomes the following National Committees:
Dominican Republic National Committee of IUCN Members
    Republic of Congo National Committee of IUCN Members
    Thailand National Committee of IUCN Members
New IUCN Members:
Asociación Preserve Planet [Preserve Planet Association] in Costa Rica works for the conservation and protection of nature through direct action, supported by environmental education programmes. It identifies monitors and raises awareness on marine, wetlands, deforestation and pollution issues. By cooperating at national and international level, it seeks to raise public awareness and promote understanding through the organisation of environmental conferences and workshops.
Association Naforé pour la Protection de l`Environnement (NAFORE) [Association Nafore for the Environment] works to combat poverty in Mauritania through the promotion of natural resource management and education on sanitation and hygiene, and the use of water in rural areas, especially in protected areas. Their many projects include methods to protect flora and fauna in all marine, coastal and inland water ecosystems, including Mauritania's wetlands, in line with sustainable development principles in Mauritania.
Chaire de Services Cameroun (CSC)* [Cameroon Board of Services] works to promote the sustainable use of forests and protection of ecosystems in Cameroon through integrated forest management. Working with local communities, CSC is active in environmental and natural resources management in rural development and seeks to secure financing and partnerships to set up rural micro-projects to promote local forest establishment processes. In addition, CSC provides capacity building for rural stakeholders, training them to develop technical skills.
Centar za zastitu i proucavanje ptica Crne Gore (CZIP) [The Center for Protection and Research of Birds of Montenegro] works to protect and monitor birds and their habitats in Montenegro and to educate the public on ornithology. It cooperates with other governmental organizations, universities and institutes, both in Montenegro and abroad for the wider protection of the nature and environment. In particular, CZIP has significantly contributed to the promotion of Tivat Salinas and its further declaration as a bird reserve, and has also influenced national legislation such as the bird directive in the Law on the Protection of Nature.
Centre for Resource Management and Environmental Studies (CERMES), based in Barbados, seeks to promote and facilitate environmental sustainable development in the Caribbean and beyond through education and research. It provides advisory services to governments, NGOs and the private sector, building awareness and capacity through outreach. In addition, CERMES provides graduate students with advanced training in policies, mechanisms and techniques for the sustainable use and management of natural resources.
Conféderation Européenne des Propriétaires Forestiers (CEPF) [Confederation of European Forest Owners ], based in Luxembourg, is the umbrella association of national forest owner organisations in the European Union, which works to promote the common interests of approximately 16 million individuals and families who take care of more than half of the forest area of the EU. CEPF is an advocate for sustainable forest management as a whole and is involved in the integration of sustainable forest management in EU legislation and processes. It is committed to promoting a balanced and holistic approach on forestry.
Consultative Group on Biological Diversity (CGBD) works to create strategic partnerships among funders and other partners in the US and internationally, to support efforts to conserve and restore biological diversity in order to safeguard the well being of people and the health of the global environment. It identifies needs, emerging issues, strategic opportunities and alliances for biodiversity conservation through a variety of approaches, including the incubation of new projects.
Environment Action Association (EAA), in the Republic of Korea, organises environmental activities and campaigns related to policy making, advocacy and the development of environmental technology. EAA supports green growth and ecologically sustainable technology and research, and works to increase public awareness on energy-saving methods, wastewater management, recycling and the conservation of local wildlife and their habitats. EAA is also active abroad, for example in Africa, where it supports a range of well drilling projects and research on drinking water supplies.
Forum Burundais de la Société Civile du Bassin du Nil (FCBN)* [Burundi Nile Discourse Forum] contributes to the management of the Nile Basin's natural resources in Burundi and the promotion of sustainable development. FCBN works to develop policy to raise public awareness on environmental issues, to strengthen links between civil society member organizations and the Nile Basin Initiative (an intergovernmental organization), to mobilise resources (technical, material and financial), and to establish this Forum as a key stakeholder in negotiations with public authorities, the Nile Basin Initiative and funding organizations.
Friends of the Country Parks (FOCP) is a Hong Kong environmental organization, which works to conserve country parks and promote the sustainable use of Hong Kong’s natural resources. FOCP is government partner in the promotion of nature conservation and outdoor education, and has produced an extensive catalogue of publications on these subjects. Since its establishment in 1992, FOCP has sponsored the Community Afforestation Scheme, promoting public and institutional participation in tree planting and woodland management. It is also actively involved in the management of Geo Parks.
Fundación ProYungas (FPY) [ProYungas Foundation] in Argentina focuses on management activities for sustainable development and conservation in the Las Yungas eco-region. It is especially active in the Upper Basin of the Bermejo river in north-western Argentina, but also involved in other subtropical areas. FPY is working to establish strong ties and build bridges with the private sector in the energy, forestry and agribusiness. With these partnerships FPY seeks to influence public policy on environmental issues and regional development. Key activities include technical training on ecological issues; initiatives to conserve natural resources; the promotion of sustainable development and wide dissemination of conservation information through different media.
Fundación Parque Nacional Chagres (FPNCh) [The Foundation Chagres National Park] in Panama focuses on cultural and natural resource biodiversity conservation and sustainable development programmes, in particular on water resources. Its programmes include environmental education, community development, ecotourism and scientific research, and it develops these programmes with public and private-sector strategic partner organizations, individuals and institutions.
Himalayan Nature in Nepal carries out scientific research on Himalayan floral and faunal diversity and the broader environment, actively working on emerging issues related to the conservation of natural resources and the strengthening of livelihoods for people in the Himalayan region. It runs initiatives to raise awareness, promote ecotourism and support capacity building, empowering the public to manage the natural resources in the most participatory way possible.
Live & Learn Environmental Education in the Maldives works to promote the greater understanding of environmental and human sustainability through innovative environmental education and environmental management. The organization was founded on the principles and recognition that building the capacity of communities and local, provincial and national government, to jointly manage natural resources is a key component in achieving sustainable development and reduction of poverty. Activities include developing educational programmes for teachers, schools and communities and running a range of projects on environment and hygiene education, clean communities, waste awareness and management.
NATIVA (Naturaleza, Tierra y Vida) [NATIVA - Nature, earth and life] in Bolivia promotes the transboundary sustainable management of natural resources and alternative solutions for development, prioritising disavantadged areas and communities. NATIVA works with both the public and private sector, at national and international level, to facilitate sustainable management projects and processes regarding protected areas and their surrounding zones. Projects aim to empower local communities to undertake environmental conservation, including sustainable production with fair benefit-sharing, climate change adaptation, valuation of ecosystem services, and institutional and social capacity building.
Nature Mauritanie (Association Mauritanienne de Conservation de la Nature - NATMAU)*, [Nature Mauritania] focuses on the protection of birds and their habitats, and in particular on vulnerable habitat and species management, sustainable ecosystem management, forest restoration, community development and environmental education. Its work is mainly concentrated in Diawling National Park, the Senegal River Delta transboundary biosphere reserve, Banc d'Arguin National Park, Lake Mâl and Mauritania's wetlands including the Senegal River Lower Delta .
Pokrajinski zavod za zastitu prirode (PZZP) [The Institute for Nature Conservation of Vojvodina Province] in Serbia works to protect and improve the conservation status of all species and ecosystems in the province. It collects and manages data, monitors status, assesses threats and defines proposals for measures to conserve nature and geological heritage. PZZP also studies and prepares proposals for new protected areas, cooperating extensively with local and international partners to share knowledge and implement projects.
Royal Botanic Garden* in Jordan is a conservation-oriented botanic garden. It undertakes research, biodiversity conservation -including the recreation of five major Jordanian plant habitats - and it promotes educational awareness of the biodiversity of Jordan. The ex situ habitat conservation is important to conserve native Jordanian species, for research to understand the role of habitat rehabilitation in water resource management and as a way of conveying environmental issues to the public. RBG also supports in situ habitat conservation and works to train livestock owners in the sustainable use of nature resources, especially water, forest and rangelands. It is intended that every strategy used at RBG be replicable by the average Jordanian.
Sustainable Fisheries Partnership (SFP), in USA, works at a global level to advise grocery retailers and suppliers on sustainable seafood procurement and to assist marine capture fisheries and aquaculture industries, as well as management authorities, to gradually improve seafood production methods and governance. Its FishSource programme tracks the status and trends in sustainability of source fisheries. Conservation gains are realized by engaging the seafood industry in fishery improvement projects.
Te Ipukarea Society (TIS) [The Environment Society], in the Cook Islands, coordinates and implements environmental projects, encouraging innovative, proactive and positive outcomes to environmental problems, by working with the community and providing leadership on key environmental issues. TIS’ work makes the link between environmental sustainability and social and economic justice. It provides individuals and groups with a voice to lobby more effectively at local, national and regional level. Key initiatives include the successful re-introduction of the native Rimatara Lorikeet to the island of Atiu and awareness-raising on ocean dumping.
The New Zealand Antarctic Institute (Antarctica New Zealand) is the Crown Entity responsible for developing, managing and executing New Zealand Government activities in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, in particular the Ross Sea region of Antarctica. Antarctica New Zealand manages Scott Base, New Zealand’s Antarctic research station. Key activities include supporting scientific research, conserving the intrinsic values of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, and raising public awareness (including through the arts, media and youth programmes) of the international significance of the continent.
La Voix de la Nature (VONA)* [The Voice of Nature] in The Democratic Republic of Congo supports and develops the efforts of local communities and authorities to protect, sustain and coordinate management of areas of ecological and biological significance, ensuring the fair-sharing of all conservation benefits in the Northern Kivu region. They work to increase awareness of animal and plant wildlife, develop fish-farming projects, and to introduce sustainable farming and afforestation methods.
Terra Cypria, The Cyprus Conservation Foundation (Terra Cypria) promotes environmental awareness within Cypriot society through educational and sensitization programmes, protecting the island’s natural resources and heritage and facilitating the island’s harmonisation with European environmental legislation and standards. It works to sensitise decision makers through seminars and other community based activities, as well as younger generations, and, to this end, has established the Environmental Studies Centre in Paphos to provide environmental education to local elementary schools, Greek and Anglophone secondary schools and institutes of higher education in Cyprus and abroad.
The European Association for the Conservation of the Geological Heritage (ProGEO), in Norway, works to improve the status of Geological Heritage Conservation (Geo-conservation) and the protection of Sites and Landscapes of geological interest. It promotes the conservation of Europe's rich heritage of landscape, rock, fossil and mineral sites, creates public awareness of the importance and relevance of this patrimony, provides advice and facilitates the exchange of ideas and information. ProGEO aims to achieve an integrated approach to nature conservation, promoting a holistic approach to the conservation of biological and physical phenomena. It is currently working towards and integrated European listing of outstanding geo-science sites.
 
* Website currently unavailable