Belize, May 26, 2021 (IUCN). Over the past four years, Belize worked extensively on objectives to safeguard the protected areas of Selva Maya tropical forest, within the framework of the Selva Maya Natural Resources Protection Project.

The Central American nation finished designing the frame of reference for management plans that will be applied in areas such as Mountain Pine Ridge Forest Reserve, Elijio Panti National Park, Sarstoon Temash National Park, Río Bravo Conservation and Management Area, Vaca Forest Reserve, Chiquibul National Park and Chiquibul Forest Reserve.

The tool is aimed at making the IUCN Green List Standard a country-wide benchmark as quality and measurement model in developing and implementing management plans for protected areas. Representatives of different sectors participated in updating these plans under the gender mainstreaming and societal involvement.

Notably, despite the COVID-19 pandemic this updating was concluded successfully using digital platforms to hold public consultations.

In addition, local communities also participated in placing new signage in Elijio Panti National Park indicating park boundaries and regulated or prohibited activities.

Canoes, a motorboat and vehicles were acquired to improve access to protected areas, heightening ranger presence to discourage illegal activities. This was part of the investment needed for effective conservation of Belize’s Selva Maya zones.

Strengthening the Forest Department in technology, fire prevention and control and deterrence of deforestation 

Offices and conservation outposts were renovated, security systems received maintenance, drones were purchased and staff were trained in technology supporting the use of new equipment, as well as data analysis and interpretation for better decision making. These actions contribute to the continuous presence of qualified personnel within the protected area.

Extensive fire prevention and control work was highlighted during 2020 with the consolidation of the National Wildland Fire Working Group directed by the Forest Department. The National Meteorological Service of Belize collaborated in climate forecasting and analysis during the dry season, using soil moisture sensors purchased through the Project.

Early fire forecasting at country level directly impacted better-targeted prevention and coordination actions among national and local stakeholders.

The Forest Department was also provided equipment for managing and safely handling wildlife rescued from fires or confiscated in control operations during patrols. Also staff needed to train in the use of the new equipment and strengthen technical skills for the botanical identification of commercial arboreal species, fruit trees and species with ecological functions for wildlife.

To comply with protected area management plans, the Project supported Forest Department overflights of priority risk zones to monitor fires and illegal activities. These were essential to establish a baseline in relation to fire and the hurricane season, occurrences that can lead to deforestation and degradation from change in soil use.

In addition, fire detection equipment was placed in two outpost used as temporary shelters in Douglas Silva and in Bent Pine, for staff working at the observation towers.

It should be emphasised that Forest Department field personnel and community groups received advanced anti-fire training centred on the Green List Standard.

Forest Department staff training to sharpen skills in preparing and supervising annual logging plans. The aim is to ensure due diligence in receiving and reviewing applications, procedures and technical criteria.

Last but not least, sustainable production activities were promoted through investments and equipment facilitating agroecological practices, for farmer groups belonging to Friends of Vaca Forest Reserve and the San Antonio Maya Green Growers. The goal is to implement actions that prevent deforestation in the zone.