IUCN World Conservation Congress is the world’s largest conservation event and will take place in Honolulu, Hawai’i, between the 1st and the 10th of September 2016. While the Congress will feature more than thousand events, here are the events tiger enthusiasts who have the chance to be there should not miss:

The elements needed to develop and implement flagship species recovery, the tigers tale (Conservation Campus):

This conservation campus will give a step by step approach on the elements needed to build and implement a landscape scale tiger project. It will draw on the experiences of the Integrated Tiger Habitat Conservation Programme (ITHCP) and other similar schemes, and will be divided into a number of sub-sessions led by experts in their field. Participants will get a chance to feed into discussions and questions, and the aim is to finish by creating a user friendly guide to tiger projects.

 

Quartet at the Crossroads: Overcoming Challenges in Conserving Tigers, Elephants, Rhinos, and Orangutans (Species Conservation Pavilion event):

This session will highlight the uniqueness, conservation challenges, and achievements related to the conservation of tigers, elephants, rhinos and orangutans. Through short movie and other supporting materials, engaging presentation and dialogue, we will discuss further challenges requiring various parties from across the globe to contribute and collaborate even closer if we are to make sure that this quartet of magnificent wildlife will not only survive, but thrive for generations to come.

 

Asia at the Crossroads - How tigers and people can prosper in the Asian Century (Species Conservation Pavilion event):

This IUCN-WWF-UNDP session will be adressing the nexus between development and flagship species conservation. Efforts that co-benefit both humans and wild tigers will be used to illustrate the potential of these approaches.

 

Youth Engagement for Forest and Tiger Conservation (Knowledge Café):

The goals of this workshop are two:

Host an intergenerational network discussing best practice in relation to forest conservation and poverty alleviation;

Connect individuals and organizations interested in establishing an education institution in sundorbon that caters to research as well as business development.

 

Meaningful Engagement of Businesses in Conservation: Call of the Tiger (Knowledge Café):

Globally, the biodiversity conservation is facing tremendous challenges. Bold action is required to solve this challenge. No government or conservation organization can accomplish this task alone. Because it is only when we combine and leverage our individual strengths that we can forge extraordinary change. The Knowledge Café will aim to discuss and find better options how best to partner with businesses to bring better results for biodiversity conservation.

 

While you are wandering around Hawai’I Convention Center, take the time to check out the tiger conservation posters put on display, in particular: “Bengal Tiger Conservation Activity in Bangladesh Sundarbans”; “Repaint the Stripes: A Guideline for Oil palm and Pulp-and-Paper Industries to Support Tiger Conservation” and “Geo-spatial technique for mapping the tiger corridor of Ranthambhore, India”