Karnataka continues to be among the top five states in the country witnessing large number of cyber crims, with Bengaluru contributing in a big way to such crimes.

ADVERTISEMENTThe police say increasing use of technology across the state, migration of youngsters to Bengaluru from other states and countries and online initiatives offered by public and private sectors have led to an increase in cyber crimes. Barring the cases that are registered, a large number of cyber crimes go unreported as victims don’t approach the police, said a senior police officer.

The top three cyber crimes reported from the state are financial offences, defamation and personal abuse - circulating defamatory content about a person- and use of stolen electronic devices.

 Crimes committed using credit card, debit cards, mobile phones and internet account for nearly 90% of the total crimes, followed by defamation and personal abuse with 8% and stolen electronic devices about 2%, points out cyber law expert Vijayashankar. 

Though cyber crimes are increasing, action taken by the police is disappointing. The police admit that the number of arrests made is less, while conviction rate is not even two per cent. Most criminals operate from Nigeria and east European countries. The police detect IP addresses of the computers used to commit the crimes, but are unable to arrest the suspects as India has no extradition agreement with these countries, Additional Director General of Police (Crime and Technical Services) Bhaskar Rao said.

“Amount involved in most financial crimes is less. Investigating officers are often transferred. It takes about eight months to get in touch with countries having extradition agreement with India. Most police inspectors fail to investigate cases properly as they lack cyber law knowledge. Lack of awareness of cyber law among judicial officers and judges of lower courts has affected conviction,” Rao said.

There is no provision for the police to employ private expert advocates to handle the case. Cyber criminals employ expert advocates and win their cases.  The police said it is high time the government formed a dedicated police force to handle cyber crime. 

According to the police, Bengaluru accounts for more than 80% the crime registered in the state followed by Mysuru and Mangaluru.

Cyber crimes in numbers

Karnataka

Year    2014    2015    2016  (till June 22)
Cases  1,091   1,450   746 

Bengaluru

Year    2014    2015    2016  (till June 22)
Cases   687    1,039    435 

Measures suggested to check cyber crimes

Create separate force for cyber crime investigations
Create awareness among people on  cyber crimes and IT Act
Ensure proper protection of digital  data and personal data
Fix accountability on banks for financial crimes

Bhaskar Rao, ADGP (Crime and Technical Services): Most police inspectors fail to investigate cases properly as they lack cyber law knowledge. Lack of awareness of cyber law among judicial officers and judges of lower courts has affected conviction.