Mysuru city reported the highest number of cyber crimes in the five districts of Mysuru, Mandya, Hassan, Chamarajanagar and Kodagu in the last 10 months. There were 84 cyber crimes in Mysuru alone, out of the 106 reported in the five districts of the southern police range. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe districts saw a threefold rise in cyber crimes over the previous year. Just 41 cyber crimes were reported in 2015, according to the cyber crime police. Mysuru got a cyber crime police station in January 2015. Previously, the cases were handled by the cyber crime cell in Bengaluru. 

Renukaradya, cyber crime inspector, Mysuru, said that people had become aware of cyber frauds and were coming forward to file complaints. Victims of ATM frauds to the tune of Rs 5 lakh and above can approach the Mysuru city cyber crime police station. Those who lose a lower sum in such frauds can file complaints at the jurisdictional police station, he said. 

Common cyber crimes include hacking of Facebook accounts, ATM frauds, and creating fake websites and e-mail IDs. As much as 70% of the cyber crimes are ATM frauds, followed by fake Facebook accounts at 20% and fake e-mails at 10%. Online fraud is another cyber crime that is catching up fast, as customers fall prey to messages like ‘shop for less’, online gifts, etc. 

Out of the 106 cases, five were reported from rural Mysuru, seven from Mandya, three from Chamarajanagar, five from Kodagu and two from Hassan. 

Renukaradya said that most victims of ATM frauds were well-educated. “Culprits contact account holders by phone in the guise of bank officials and seek their personal details like PIN to siphon off the money. The fact is that bank officials never seek personal details of the account holders,” the inspector said. 

The cyber crime police suspect a Nigerian gang behind the spurt in unethical hacking and illegal online transactions in the Mysuru region. 

Members of the gang have opened bank accounts in Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and the Northeast by submitting fake documents. They deactivate the accounts after siphoning off money.