Conviction rate in wildlife cases is very low. Now, this is what the data procured by the conservationists under Right to Information Act claims. 

ADVERTISEMENTWildlife First, a Bengaluru-based conservation NGO, had filed RTI  application on July 22, 2014 seeking information on offences under wildlife Act and crime review. The information obtained was disturbing.

   Since 1992, as many as 704 cases reported in Nagarhole Tiger Reserve (NTR) are pending. Only 120 have been charge sheeted. About 83 per cent cases are pending in NTR, a major tiger reserve in India. Deputy conservator post has been upgraded to chief conservator of forests in three years, but cases have not been examined, said Praveen Bhargav, former National Board for Wildlife member.  

KM Chinnappa, Wildlife First Trustee added,  “Ironically NTR Director R Gokul, in RTI reply, has stated that in case of remaining 584 cases; investigation report will be filed within 15 days. This shows the poor understanding of cases by the department. Thus, we demand formation of SIT comprising authorised officers and a thorough crime review of all national parks and reserves. 

The 704 pending cases include poaching, encroachment, road kills, hunting, forest fire, sandalwood, timber and teak smuggling and other wildlife offences. RTI reveals 369 cases are pending in Mettikuppe Range. Of which 33 cases are sandalwood smuggling, 36 wildlife cases and 300 others. Charge sheets  have been filed in just three sandalwood, 10 wildlife and 29 other cases. 

Under Kallalla range - 38 cases, including seven sandalwood, 11 wildlife cases are pending. Charge sheet for seven sandalwood, four wildlife and 11 others has been filed. 
Under DB Kuppe Range - 112 cases are pending- one sandalwood, four encroachment, 13 wildlife and 94 others. 

In Annechowkur Range, charge sheet for all 66 cases has to be filed.  In Antharsanthe Range, 73 cases are pending. Of which, 14 cases of sandalwood smuggling, three wildlife, seven cases booked under section 71 of Wildlife Act and nine others. Charge sheet for two sandalwood and 21 other cases has been filed. 

Similarly, in Nagarhole Range 31 cases are pending- 14 wildlife, six others and seven encroachment; Charge sheet has been filed in 13 wildlife cases, three encroachment and four others. 

In Veeranahosahalli range 15 cases are pending- two sandalwood, seven wildlife and six others; Charge sheet for two wildlife cases and two others. 

The conservationists have pressed the Forest department to set up a Special Investigation Team (SIT) and have a crime review in all forests.

Gokul accepted that cases were pending and conviction was low. He said that the department has written to the State government for formation of SIT as the present staff cannot handle all this. 

The conviction is happening, since 1992 over 1,500 cases have been booked of which over 700 have been closed; 704 are pending. Number of cases are dynamic. There are instances where accused is missing, tribal name is changed  and so on. Present staff strength in NTR is 250 and there are 100 vacancies below RFO category, Gokul rued.