New Delhi, Jan 3 (PTI) National Commission for Women (NCW) chairperson Rekha Sharma on Wednesday claimed the West Bengal Police does not register cases easily under pressure from the Trinamool Congress (TMC) and the women suffer more because of this.ADVERTISEMENT She was responding to a post on X by the TMC, which quoted a story on how 28,811 complaints of crime against women were registered last year, with Uttar Pradesh recording the highest number of complaints at 16,109 about 55 per cent of the total cases.The data shows that in UP police  do work and register  the cases without any political pressure and it also shows how women in UP are aware of their rights but in W. Bengal police under pressure  from ruling party doest not register cases easily and women suffer more because of… https://t.co/p2MrQEdvpg— Rekha Sharma (@sharmarekha) January 3, 2024


"In another revealing data of the @NCWIndia, 28,811 complaints of crime against women were registered last year, with Uttar Pradesh recording the highest number of complaints at 16,109 – about 55% of the total cases. Why is @sharmarekha, Chairperson of the @NCWIndia silent on such despicable data which screams the utter failure of @BJP4UP in ensuring women safety? Are the concerns and issues raised according to BJP's convenience or is this the fear of losing position for questioning the SUPREMO?" the TMC posted.Also Read:TMC’s days are ‘numbered’ in Bengal, says Congress' Adhir Ranjan ChowdhuryAlso Read:TMC’s days are ‘numbered’ in Bengal, says Congress' Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury The NCW chairperson defended Uttar Pradesh."The data shows that in UP police do work and register  the cases without any political pressure and it also shows how women in UP are aware of their rights but in W. Bengal police under pressure  from ruling party doest not register cases easily and women suffer more because of this. It also show women are kept under dark as In rural regions because of poverty women are unable to get proper education and are not aware of their rights," she said in a post on X. The NCW registered 28,811 complaints of crime against women last year and about 55 per cent were from Uttar Pradesh. Uttar Pradesh recorded the highest number of complaints at 16,109 followed by Delhi at 2,411 and Maharashtra at 1,343, according to data.