Assistant Commissioner of Police (South sub-division) Shruthi N S cautioned people, especially youngsters from getting addicted to cellphones, a first step to prevent them from falling prey to cyber crimes.

ADVERTISEMENTShe was addressing students at an awareness programme on cyber crime organised as part of Librarians’ Day and the birth anniversary of Dr S R Ranganathan (considered as Father of Library Science in India) by St Agnes College Library and Information Centre, in association with the Department of Political Science and Human Rights Education Cell here on Friday.
 Shruthi cited her own example to inspire students. 

“I don’t have a Facebook account. But I prefer WhatsApp for communication purpose,” Shruthi said advising the students to be careful online, as there are chances of walking into a trap, without any inkling.

Elaborating on the safety measures to be taken while using internet, cashless transactions using credit cards and debit cards, Shruthi said, one should not share password of internet account or personal details, mainly of the date of birth. While at ATM kiosks, four digit PIN number should not be typed in open or even during cashless transactions. There are chances of perpetrators installing cameras only to know the PIN number. Instead, it is better to cover hands, while typing the number. Frequent changing of PIN number will also come in handy, she suggested.  

Another way of stealing ATM data is skimming, where the fraudsters use a sensor to copy the data, the moment a debit card is swiped, Shruthi said.

She said Information Technology (IT) Act was introduced in the year 2000 and was amended in 2008 which empowers police to act in relation to cyber crimes. Though Sections 66 and 67 of the IT Act were in vogue earlier, Supreme Court repealed Section 66 later. In case of any crimes online, it is better to file a complaint with the police, that will be later referred to dedicated cyber wing depending on the severity of the cases, she noted.

Principal Sr M Jeswina gave a clarion call to the students to get rid of obsession towards cellphones and develop reading habit. Reading not just helps acquire knowledge, but also is a stress buster, that gives solace even during the hours of distress. Library should be the only choice afer classes, instead of loitering in the campus, during free hours, she added. 

Raghuveer S from Nehru Yuva Kendra, HoD, Political Science, Chandramohana Marate and senior grade librarian Vishala B K were present.