"We knew Brij Bhushan Singh is influential, but we had no idea he would be this powerful," says  Sakshi Malik. "We are making efforts so that the ceremony happens smoothly," says Ayodhya Commissioner Gaurav Dayal on preparations for Ram Temple consecration ceremony. Junior wrestlers protesting at Delhi's Jantar Mantar threaten to return their Arjuna awards if the govt fails to restore suspended WFI within 10 days. Security operationsIndian Navy warships and aerial assets are carrying out maritime security operations in the Gulf of Aden and North Arabian Sea in view of the recent attacks on merchant ships in the region.Indian Navy warships and aerial assets are carrying out maritime security operations in the Gulf of Aden and North Arabian Sea in view of the recent attacks on merchant ships in the region. pic.twitter.com/cEx3d8ACLz— ANI (@ANI) January 3, 2024 Above 100 killed in blasts at ceremony honouring slain Iranian general SoleimaniTwo explosions caused by terrorist attacks killed at least 50 people and wounded dozens near a cemetery in Iran where a ceremony was being held to mark the 2020 death of the country's top commander Qassem Soleimani in a US drone attack. Breakthrough in Sukhdev Singh murder caseNational Investigation Agency has arrested a key suspect during extensive raids across Haryana and Rajasthan in the case relating to the murder of Shri Rashtriya Rajput Karni Sena chief Sukhdev Singh Gogamedi. The arrest today takes the tally of arrests so far to 9, in the murder case.National Investigation Agency (NIA) has arrested a key suspect during extensive raids across Haryana and Rajasthan in the case relating to the murder of Shri Rashtriya Rajput Karni Sena chief Sukhdev Singh Gogamedi. The arrest today takes the tally of arrests so far to 9,  in the… https://t.co/328CKcjXXE— ANI (@ANI) January 3, 2024 PM praises 'Stree Shakti'"I'm grateful that 'Stree Shakti" have gathered here in large numbers to bless me," says Prime Minister Narendra Modi while addressing a mass gathering of women at BJP's Mahila Conference in Kerala's Thrissur district.#WATCH | Thrissur, Kerala: Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses a mass gathering of women at the Bharatiya Janata Party's Mahila Conference

He says, " I'm grateful that 'Stree Shakti" have gathered here in large numbers to bless me..." pic.twitter.com/P49VktFgHH— ANI (@ANI) January 3, 2024 Namibian Cheetah gives birth to three cubs in MPPurrs in the wild!

Thrilled to share that Kuno National Park has welcomed three new members. The cubs have been born to Namibian Cheetah Aasha.

This is a roaring success for Project Cheetah, envisioned by PM Shri @narendramodi ji to restore ecological balance. 

My big congrats… pic.twitter.com/c1fXvVJN4C— Bhupender Yadav (@byadavbjp) January 3, 2024