Indian forests host more than 60% of the global populations of the Asian elephant, royal Bengal tiger and single-horn rhinoceros besides 100% of the Asiatic lion population in the wild. Given the unrelenting pressure from an increasing human population (35 crore to 121 crore from 1947 to 2011) for forest biomass, animal meat and forest land, and the socioeconomic and political context that has prevailed during the 20th century, the success of wildlife conservation in India is for sure extraordinary.

Co-occurring with successful conservation however, is human-wildlife conflict. During the three-year period from April 2012 to March 2015, 72 and 769 human deaths were recorded in conflict with tigers and elephants respectively, in the country. 

Once considered inexhaustible, forests in India were under threat by the latter half of the 19th century due to the unprecedented and indiscriminate exploitation. This prompted regulating the use of forests. Starting 1860s, gradually about a third of the forests in India, which were farther from habitations and covered steeper slopes and river banks, were reserved leaving the remaining two-third for communities to meet their household and agricultural biomass needs and cattle grazing. 

Countries like France, Germany and Japan adopted the practice of government reservation of forests about a century earlier to India. The USA promulgated the Forest Reserve Act in 1891 and the Philippines reserved forests after its independence. This suggests that governments find it necessary to reserve ecologically important forests in larger public interest.

The National Forest Policy 1988, the Wild-life (Protection) Act 1973 and the Forest Conservation Act 1980 have effectively promoted conservation of forests and wildlife in India. Forest conservation was assisted by the fresh impetus on afforestation activity during the last quarter of the 20th century and more than 90% of all the plantations in the country were carried out after 1980. 

The enhanced afforestation activity, enabling legislations and the newly found support from the highest court of the country, motivated the foresters. The major achievements of their dedicated working are following: 1) Increase in national forest cover from 62.9 mha (million hectares) in 1970 to 70.17 mha in 2015. And, 2) among the wildlife range countries, a majority of the large-bodied charismatic animals (like tiger) are found in India. 

Changing landscape: While the forest sector was working hard for conservation, the landscape outside forests underwent tremendous change. For example, the 100-metre wide buffer strip to reserved forests was lost to agriculture and habitations. 

The landscape-bisecting infrastructure (such as roads, canals and railway lines) and the fences around individual habitations, estates and agriculture fields, have occupied and severely compartmentalised the proximate landscape to forest and snapped the animal migratory routes. Wild animals, particularly the long-distance-traversing large animals (elephant, gaur, leopards etc), are lost in such drastically modified landscape. Unable to return, they behave aggressively out of panic resulting in the conflict. 

Large-scale land development and expansion of irrigation facilities have led to substitution of monsoon-dependent one-crop regime by long-rotation (sugar cane, banana etc) and multiple-crops regime around forests. Agriculture crops grown adjacent to forest areas are readily available nutritious source of forage for wild animals.

Comparatively, forage is scattered over large tracts inside forests and animals make a lot of effort to meet their daily need of food. Also, such forage is coarser and often less nutritious than agriculture crops. Like humans, animals also tend to save energy and optimise effort to sustain. As a result, agriculture-based forage sources available adjacent to forests lure animals to stray out leading to conflict. 

Ecological basis 

Natural biota (plants, animals, insects and microbes as a whole) has capability to organise and self-restore after a disturbance (for example, a forest restores itself after a fire episode). Self-restoration capacity of biota emanates from the presence of ‘repairer-species’. Forest ‘pioneers’ (species that establish first at a disturbed site and initiate the process of restoration) are an example of ‘repairer-species’. 

In the absence of disturbance for extended periods, ‘repairer-species’ are likely to reduce in abundance below functional thresholds or be lost altogether. Nature has devised a mechanism to maintain necessary abundance of ‘repairer-species’ through large animals (elephants, gaur and deer), which cause disturbance in forests simply by movement and foraging. 

Disturbance to forests by humans is on the rise. This has aggravated the above mentioned natural disturbance regime in forests. Now, humans as well as large animals disturb the same forest. Consequently, disturbance to forests is excessive and disturbance agencies (man and large animals) are in confrontation. 

Dealing with the conflict: Resolving human-wildlife conflict is complex as it necessitates adopting challenging options such as wildlife-compatible land use adjacent to forests and animal population management. Further, resolution of conflict pertaining to urban area dwelling monkeys is not a forest-based issue and needs to be coordinated and resolved by urban bodies. Involvement of the government agencies beyond the Forest Department and all other stakeholders is therefore necessary. 

As a long-term measure to mitigate the conflict, state government have taken steps. For example, the Karnataka Forest Department is erecting fence-barriers and trenches on forest boundaries and contemplating population-management based options. 

Under the country’s present human-wild-life conflict scenario, working outside notified forest areas is necessary and the challenge lies in devising an ecologically robust and socio-economically acceptable solution. 

(The writer is Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Water Resources Department, Karnataka. Views are personal.)