Amid vociferous demand to declare the Hesaraghatta grassland a conservation reserve, Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai on Thursday directed the Forest Department to conduct a public consultation and submit a report to understand various matters surrounding the issue.ADVERTISEMENTThe direction came during the 16th meeting of the Karnataka State Wildlife Board held on Thursday evening. A source said more than five members of the board submitted individual recommendations in support of the proposal. The matter was discussed in detail, taking into consideration the recent protests against the reserve status.The chief minister, who is the chairman of the board, said officials have to hold public consultation and submit a report as part of the proposal."The chairman stressed on the need to take into confidence the local population and hence, advised the forest officers to consult the public before placing proposals to create reserves and sanctuaries. The department will have to submit a report in the next meeting following which a decision can be taken," a member of the board said.Also Read | Chronicle of a fight for Hesaraghatta grasslandsThe Forest Department had sent a proposal to the Karnataka State Wildlife Board over two years ago for declaring 5,010-acre as a reserve to ensure protection of the grassland ecosystem. In 2021, the board rejected the proposal without giving reasons.Activists battling to protect the unique grassland ecosystem had taken the matter to the High Court of Karnataka which noted that the board's "cavalier" decision in rejecting the proposal stems from "non-application of mind". The court had ruled that the proposal has to be considered afresh.Vijay Nishanth, one of the petitioners in the case, said they expected a better decision from the board. "We were hoping for a positive outcome. More than 72,000 people have signed a public petition. We urgently need to protect the shrinking wildlife habitats. The board's decision once again leads to a long waiting period. We will wait. If the decision is not in the interest of the flora and fauna of Hesaraghatta, we will go to the court," he said.Activist Joseph Hoover said the protection that comes along with 'conservation reserve' status was a necessity in Hesaraghatta due to growing pressure from urbanisation. "There is no need for the government to think twice about the proposal if those in power have observed the effects of climate change everyday," he added.An official, however, said Section 36A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, which empowers the State to declare conservation reserves, suggests public consultation. "If people want the protection, they can demand it during the consultation," he added.