Jamaat, which opposed the independence war, engaged the three British legal experts as a process was underway to expose their detained leaders including party chief Motiur Rahman Nizami and secretary general Ali Ahsan Muhammad Mojahid and bring them to justice, the Daily Star reported.

It said of the three British legal experts Steven Kay QC was appointed as the court-assigned defence counsel for Milosevic who was charged for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes in the International Criminal Court in The Hague.

Trial against Milosevic, however, ended without any verdict as he died in prison in 2006.
Jamaat leaders were immediately not available for comments but the paper quoted a "top Jamaat leader" as saying that Kay QC, Toby Cadman and John Cammegh were currently "giving us advice but we have plans to appoint them as defence counsels for our leaders against whom formal charges will be placed by the prosecution".

According to John's online profile he led the counsel team for Sierra Leone's notorious rebel leader Augustine Gbao at the special court of Sierra Leone while Toby was a prosecution lawyer in the Bosnia Tribunal for war crimes.

Nizami and Mojajeed allegedly led the infamous elite Al-Badr auxiliary militia force, which is particularly castigated for their role in killing a number of leading intellectuals during the war as Jamaat was opposed to independence siding with the then Pakistani junta in 1971.

Bangladesh last year constituted a high-powered three-member International Crimes Tribunal headed by a High Court judge along with a special investigation agency and a prosecution cell in line with the election pledges of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina's ruling Awami League to bring the war criminals to justice.

The Star report said one of the detained Jamaat leaders lawyer Tajul Islam said the three lawyers agreed to defend the detained leaders of the country's biggest Islamic party after formal placement of charges against them as investigations were underway.

So far six high-profile suspects are in jail to face the charges of crimes against humanity while the lone detainee beyond the Jamaat  leaders is Salahuddin Qader Chowdhury MP, a stalwart of ex-premier Khaleda Zia's main opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party's.
The Tribunal earlier ordered submission of the investigation report against detained Jamaat leader Delwar Hossain Sayeedi by later this month and Chowdhury by April while no dates were fixed yet for hearing of the charges against the rest four.
ADVERTISEMENT