Lack of proper policing threatens to turn the localities in the Hebbal Assembly segment into hubs of crime, residents chorused in unison on Saturday. 

“We find young boys smoking ganja in almost every street. The police haven’t taken any stringent action despite several complaints,” Keshava Murthy, of Ganganagar, said at ‘Janaspandana – Citizens for Change’, a civic grievance redress programme organised by DH and Prajavani in RT Nagar. Many participants echoed him. 

J Venkataraman, another resident, said drag racing and wheelies were common on many congested roads. “Hoysala patrol cars arrive here for namesake,” he said.

“Every night, about 20-30 motorcyclists take part in a high-speed race. Most of these vehicles neither have number plates nor silencers.” 

Firoz Khan, Inspector, RT Nagar police station, said about 1,500 cases had been registered in the previous year for rash driving. “We will form a special squad to catch these people and solve the problem at the earliest,” he promised.

Hebbal MLA, Y A Narayanaswamy, however, said: “The police lack responsibility. Drug peddling is thriving in RT Nagar and Sultanpalya. Peddlers openly come in auto-rickshaws and sell the contraband. The police should identify such men and crack down on them.”

The enormity of the problem does not end there. Syed Mustafa, of Ward 33 (Manorayanapalya), said online gambling was taking place right opposite the Government Urdu School in the locality. He said students were frequenting cyber cafes during school hours and demanded why the authorities had allowed these shops within 100 metres of the school.

Dinesh Nayak, Inspector, JC Nagar police station, asked the residents to file complaints as soon as they see such incidents. But the MLA censured the officer: “As police officers, you need to check such crimes and take action. We need to stand up against the drug mafia and the opening of clubs, and launch a movement to educate youngsters and stop them from falling prey to anti-social elements.”

Dumping of garbage was another major complaint. Kalasegowda, of Ward 21 (Hebbal), said: “Residents dump garbage on vacant sites and even on roads.”

Sri Ranga Raju, assistant executive engineer, BBMP, said he had addressed all the complaints that had been registered and promised to make a list of black spots where people dump garbage and see to it that they reduce day by day.

Ashok, additional commissioner (east), BBMP, assured that the issue would be sorted out within 15 days. “We will ask landowners to clear the garbage dumped on vacant sites and if we are unable to trace them, we will clear the dump ourselves,” he said.

Overflowing sewage water on roads was another complaint raised by residents. S Chandru, of Ward 22 (Vishwanath Nagenahalli), said it had been 15 years since the BBMP desilted the stormwater drains, leading to overflowing of sewage water on roads. M Suresh, of Ward 21 (Hebbal), said sewage water had entered a primary health centre in Cholanayakanahalli.

Rajashekara N, corporator, Vishwanath Nagenahalli, said: “That’s a low-lying area. We have received Rs 1.5 crore to build a cement concrete (CC) drain but since it is raining, we are unable to continue the work. I have also requested the MLA to build another drain near the railway track which will help the flow of rainwater.”

Narayanswamy said he had received Rs 16.8 crore for the construction of the SWD in the ward and that tendering had been initiated.

Parks neglected

When some people raised the poor maintenance of parks, Manjula, horticulture inspector, BBMP, said: “There are 59 parks in Hebbal and about 15 of them come under my jurisdiction. There is a water crisis and we have made an arrangement to water these parks through a tanker.

Mahalakshmi, of Ward 33 (Manorayanapalya), raised the issue of rising cases of dengue. “Health inspectors have not fumigated the ward and the disease is spreading. What are they doing,” she asked.