Karnataka DG&IGP Rupak Kumar Dutta on Wednesday said that beat policing would be implemented in police stations across the state to put an end to criminal activities. Dutta said he has already held talks with the government in this regard.

ADVERTISEMENTHe was participating in the passing out parade of the first batch of civil police probationers at Gadenahalli near Shanthigrama hobli in the taluk. Dutta said the staff on beat system at every police station would increase the patrolling so that they can get accurate information on criminal activities and help solve cases related to murder, extortion, matka, gambling and assault. He said the beat system would bring down the crime rate in due course.

He said an increase in population had facilitated a need to increase the number of personnel, vehicles, technical equipment and latest gadgets to strengthen the police force. He said the government had been urged to consider the proposal on beat policing.

Dutta called upon police personnel to discharge their duties honestly and bring honour to the department without expecting any returns from society. “It is the duty of police personnel to maintain law and order and remain true to their profession,” he said.

“Public have great regard for police department and personnel who pass out after strenuous training should be honest to their profession and bring laurels to their family and the government. They should not get lured by materialistic pleasures and yield to political pressure. They should strive hard for meting out justice to the affected within the legal framework,” he said.

He also advised probationers to maintain physical and mental health and be disciplined as the society looks up to them and they are perceived as upholders of law. They should also update their knowledge in cyber crime, legal awareness, Indian Penal Code, psychology and behaviour towards women, children and be people-friendly, he said.

Superintendent of Police Rahul Kumar administered the oath to the probationers. In all, 374 probationers from Bengaluru rural, Bengaluru city, Shivamogga, Mysuru, Hubballi, Dharwad took part in the parade.