A Delhi Police head constable and a constable were thrashed when they went to nab a wildlife trafficker at Paharganj on Monday evening. Hamender and Pankaj, posted with the crime branch, were overpowered by accused Akash and a mob, including his sister Seema. 

ADVERTISEMENT“They even bit the cops and pelted stones. Akash’s father Sansar Chand was also involved in wildlife smuggling, and died due to cancer while lodged at a Jaipur jail in 2004,” said Joint Commissioner of Police (Crime) Ravindra Yadav.

The raid on Monday was carried out on input received by head constable Hamender regarding 33-year-old Akash’s presence at Motia Khan. The crime branch had also received a request from Rajasthan Police seeking help in Akash’s arrest in a case filed under Wildlife Protection Act in 2015.

“Despite the attack and injuries, the team apprehended Akash,” Yadav added. Two leopard hides were recovered in the 2015 case, in which Rajasthan Police have arrested eight people, including Akash’s mother Rani. Akash was absconding.The police team conducted the raid at Sadar Thana Road in Motia Khan at about 5 pm. 

Suddenly, a mob including, family members and relatives of Akash gathered at the spot and tried to forcibly release Akash from police custody.

“Akash and his family members opposed his apprehension and attacked our team. We resisted their move and refused to leave Akash,” Yadav said.

Apart from Akash, those identified include his sister Seema, cousin Jatin, brother-in-law Sandeep and father-in-law Azad Ram. 

They allegedly bit Hamender and constable Pankaj over their hands and pelted stones at the police team. Akash was not allowed to flee and soon local police also arrived there.

 On the basis of Hamender’s complaint, a case has been filed with Paharganj police station. A team of Rajasthan Police has also reached Delhi for further course of legal action. Akash’s family also run Sara Electronics at Karol Bagh, Delhi, which is in the business of selling laptops through Snapdeal.