The United Nations on Wednesday detailed horrific abuses committed in Sri Lanka’s civil war, including the disappearance of tens of thousands of people, and said the country needed international help to probe war crimes and enable reconciliation. 

ADVERTISEMENT“A purely domestic court procedure will simply not succeed in overcoming the widespread and justifiable suspicions fuelled by decades of violations, malpractice and broken promises,” UN rights chief Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein told reporters in Geneva. 

The country, he said, needed international assistance to address the “horrific level of violations and abuses” during and following Sri Lanka’s 26-year civil war. 

Patterns of violations

The report identified patterns of grave violations “strongly indicating that war crimes and crimes against humanity” had been committed by both sides.  Among other abuses, it found that tens of thousands of Sri Lankans remained missing after decades of conflict, suggesting enforced disappearances had been part of a systematic policy. 

Sri Lanka’s new unity government has promised dramatic reforms to achieve accountability for alleged atrocities during the war with the LTTE guerrillas, which ended in 2009 and killed at least 1,00,000 people. 

The government, which is planning various measures to ensure reconciliation including the creation of a truth commission, had been hoping to win UN backing for a domestic probe. 

But while acknowledging the positive steps taken by the new government, Wednesday’s report concluded that “Sri Lanka’s criminal justice system is not yet ready or equipped” to conduct an independent and credible investigation. 

Instead, it urged the country to establish a “hybrid special court”, including international judges, prosecutors, lawyers and investigators, to probe war-related abuses. 

Sri Lanka’s foreign ministry said it had taken note of the findings, and said it was encouraged by the “recognition of the efforts of the new government”, and said it would “take all possible measures to ensure non-recurrence” of conflict. 

Zeid said the change in tone from the new government provided hope that “truly fundamental change” was possible.