Bengaluru: The Central Crime Branch (CCB) on Saturday detained one person for questioning over the alleged rave party held at a farmhouse near Electronics City. ADVERTISEMENTThe CCB earlier issued notices to at least five people to appear for questioning in the case. Telugu actress Hema Kolla and 85 others who attended the party on the intervening night of May 19 and 20 have tested positive for drug use. At least 101 people attended the event that was advertised as a birthday party. The CCB raided GR Farmhouse in Hebbagodi and arrested five people. It recovered 15.56 grams of MDMA, 6.2 grams of cocaine, six grams of hydroganja and five mobile phones, besides impounding two cars. A car with a sticker of an MLA and minister from Andhra Pradesh was found at the scene. The CCB is investigating who owns the luxury car and how they got the MLA's sticker. The CCB has been issuing notices to those who tested positive for drug use. The CCB earlier issued notices to at least five people to appear for questioning in the case. Telugu actress Hema Kolla and 85 others who attended the party on the intervening night of May 19 and 20 have tested positive for drug use. At least 101 people attended the event that was advertised as a birthday party. The CCB raided GR Farmhouse in Hebbagodi and arrested five people. It recovered 15.56 grams of MDMA, 6.2 grams of cocaine, six grams of hydroganja and five mobile phones, besides impounding two cars. A car with a sticker of an MLA and minister from Andhra Pradesh was found at the scene. The CCB is investigating who owns the luxury car and how they got the MLA's sticker. The CCB has been issuing notices to those who tested positive for drug use.The sixth accused hailing from Hyderabad was among the organisers of the event, police sources said on Saturday.Also Read:CCB raids warehouse of fake cleaning products, three arrested in BengaluruAlso Read:CCB raids warehouse of fake cleaning products, three arrested in BengaluruThe CCB raided the dusk-to-dawn party on May 19, which 103 people had attended. The blood samples collected from those who attended the rave party at a farmhouse have tested positive for narcotics.MDMA (Ecstacy) pills, MDMA crystals, hydro cannabis, cocaine, high-end cars, DJ equipment, including sound and lighting worth Rs 1.5 crore were seized by the police.(With PTI inputs)