A 27-year-old man allegedly killed his parents at their Kodigehalli house in north Bengaluru on Monday night, locked the house from outside and fled. Neighbours, who had heard the screams, assumed it was just another fight the man had with his parents, and kept away. They had previously been asked not to intervene as it would only anger their son.ADVERTISEMENTThe suspect is Sharath (27), who struck his mother Shantha (60) and father Bhaskar (61) on their heads with a rod on Monday night at their home in Sahakarnagar. Kodigehalli police said Sharath was caught on CCTV cameras in the vicinity walking on the road between 8.23 and 8.25 pm on Monday.Also Read | Bengaluru woman sets 40-year-old alcoholic son on fireThe family hailed from Talapady near Ullal in Dakshina Kannada district, and lived in a densely populated area just off the 1st Main Road in Park View Layout. The murder came to light on Tuesday morning when the couple's elder son Sajith, who lived at Thindlu close by, asked the neighbours to check on his parents as they were not responding to his calls. When he was informed about the locked door, he rushed to the house and found his parents dead in a pool of blood.Sajith told the police that his brother lived with his parents and stayed in a room on the first floor. He said Sharath fought with his parents regularly.The police have launched a manhunt for the suspect. Laxmi Prasad, DCP (north-east), told DH that the incident took place around 8 pm on Monday. Sajith registered a complaint on Tuesday morning. Sources said Sharath had not used his phone nor logged into his social media accounts in over four months. “He had no friends. He lived a recluse’s life and rarely stepped out,” they told DH. The police said Sharath was unemployed and used to drink a lot. Shantha was a retired government employee and Bhaskar was a cashier in a canteen. An FIR has been filed under Section 302 of IPC.'Sharath good at technology'Sharath was good at hacking, said Manjunath, brother-in-law of Sharath's brother. “He is brilliant with technology. He could dismantle a computer and reassemble it in no time.”