The Sri Lankan government’s positive response to the recent report issued by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Investigation on Sri Lanka is heartening. In the past, the Mahinda Rajapaksa government would dismiss rather aggressively the findings of such reports. This time, however, the new national unity government has not only said it would pay “due attention” to the report’s content and recommendations but also promised to hold wide consultations with all stakeholders, including importantly, the victims of the conflict, to ensure justice and non-recurrence of violence. 

The report documents “horrific crimes” committed by the state and the rebel Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and confirms that war crimes were “most likely” committed. It points out that Sri Lanka lacks the capacity to put in place a credible domestic mechanism to fix accountability and punish those guilty of these terrible crimes and recommends the setting up of a “special hybrid court” that would draw on international judges and lawyers mandated to try war crimes and crimes against humanity and domestic resources as well. Sri Lanka has not yet officially clarified its position on setting up a hybrid court. This is a sensitive issue. Allowing an international probe, even if it is a ‘hybrid’ one, undermines the sovereignty of the state and could set off a tidal wave of Sinhala nationalism in the island, setting the stage for another round of conflict. 

The ball is now in Colombo’s court. It must clarify its next steps to bring to justice those accused of war crimes. This is important to restore the confidence of alienated Tamils in the Sri Lankan state. Since the end of the war, the guns are silent but real peace remains elusive. Credible justice is essential to transform the current negative peace to a positive and meaningful one. While drawing on international expertise is one way of ensuring a credible mechanism, a more useful approach would be to involve Tamils at every step of the process. During his recent visit to Delhi, Wickremesinghe signalled willingness to initiate dialogue and reconciliation with the island’s Tamils and Delhi must support him in this endeavour. While nudging Colombo to act on the UN’s recommendations to bring to justice alleged war criminals, Delhi must ensure that Sri Lanka’s sovereignty is not undermined unduly.