The state government will soon set up Forensic Science Laboratories (FSLs) in all the district headquarters for speedy investigation of cases.

ADVERTISEMENTHome Minister G Parameshwara, who visited the FSL at Madiwala here on Monday told reporters that lack of FSLs in all the districts was delaying investigations. 
“It takes much time for FSL experts to collect evidences and compile reports. Hence, the government has decided to set up FSLs in all the district headquarters,” he said. 

Presently, there are six FSLs in the state at Bengaluru, Mysuru, Belagavi, Davangere, Mangaluru and Kalaburagi. 

Parameshwara said crime scene units comprising experts would be constituted in all districts. The team members would be given necessary training and given crime scene kits so that they could quickly reach the spot to collect evidences.

He said the FSL in Madiwala would be upgraded with additional facilities and machines. “There is only one machine for DNA testing at Madiwala FSL. The pendency of DNA tests is increasing every day. Hence, one more DNA testing machine will be purchased at a cost Rs 1 crore. Tender has been invited for construction of another building on the FSL campus in Madiwala. The upgradation of facilities will help the police to gather evidences in a better manner to solve cases,” he said.

A separate wing for cyber forensics, mobile forensics and audio visual forensics would be set up. A poison repository and a research and analysis wing would be set up to facilitate staff to develop new techniques of evidence analysis in various departments, he added.

The minister said the staff strength of FSLs would be increased. “At present, 184 employees work in the FSLs. The government will recruit 286 candidates and post them to various districts,” he said. 

Replying to a question, he stated the Congresss leader Marigowda, accused of threatening Mysuru deputy commissioner, would be arrested soon. “The police have already arrested one person in connection with the case and Marigowda would also be arrested soon,” he said. 

Mysuru DC Shikha had filed a complaint against Marigowda for intimidating her for refusing to transfer an official as demanded by him.