By any standard, the sharp increase in reported crimes in Karnataka, particularly in Bengaluru, is disturbing, even alarming. Data for 2016 from the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) - which collates figures for the entire country annually - shows that among metropolitan cities, Bengaluru jumped to second place after Delhi in terms of the total number of crimes registered, recording a 28.7% increase over the previous year. Data doesn't lie. The gravity of the situation can be gauged from the fact that Bengaluru has overtaken Mumbai with 45,797 cases under the Indian Penal Code compared to around 39,000 cases in Mumbai, which has a population double that of Bengaluru. In terms of total number of crimes, though, national capital Delhi is way ahead of others at two lakh cases, if that is any consolation.ADVERTISEMENTWhat should worry the authorities in Bengaluru is that there is a spurt in all heinous crime categories - rape cases are up by a staggering 186%, (attributed to a change in definition), murder (17%), assault on women (16%), kidnapping (25%) and sexual offences against children have increased by 16%. Dismally, the state ranks second in the number of cases booked under the Dowry Prohibition Act, next only to Uttar Pradesh, which has a much larger population. Karnataka's litany of woes continues with the state accounting for nearly 30% of all crimes against SC/STs across the country. Bengaluru, being the technology capital, tops the country in cybercrimes, too. An embarrassed police top-brass has tried to explain away the overall increase in crimes registered to an activist citizenry, NGOs and proactive filing of FIRs by the police - which may all be true to some extent - but the zooming crime graph points to a virtual collapse of policing in the state. The failure is also evident from the fact that in crimes against women, for instance, the conviction rate in Bengaluru is just 3.5%, against 30% in Delhi.The Siddaramaiah government has to squarely take the blame for the deteriorating law and order situation. Efficiency and merit have taken a back seat in most appointments, including the post of city police   commissioners and their deputies, with a retired police officer close to the chief minister playing the 'ring master', despite several complaints against him. Siddaramaiah has tried to brazen out demands for the resignation of a former home minister who is accused of abetting the death of a police officer. In another recent case, he has tried to shield a cabinet minister accused of involvement in a murder. When the police morale is thus knocked down repeatedly, how can they be expected to perform?