Chief Minister Basavaraj Bommai on Tuesday said Congress leaders first count how many rowdy sheeters are there in their party before pointing fingers at the BJP.ADVERTISEMENTThe CM, who was here to meet the legal experts to discuss the border dispute with Maharashtra, told reporters that, " Everybody knows how many rowdies in Congress. The Congress leaders first introspect and count their rowdy sheeters before teaching morality to the BJP, he said.He was reacting to Silent Sunil sharing a stage with the BJP leaders at a function in Bengaluru on Sunday. Congress accused the BJP of admitting anti-social elements in the guise of social workers.Also Read | Bengaluru: Cops, BJP red-faced as party leaders attend rowdy's eventBorder dispute in Supreme CourtThe CM also met senior advocate and former Attorney General Mukul Rohatgi here and discussed the issue since the border dispute between Maharashtra and Karnataka. The State Advocate General Prabhuling K  Navadgi accompanied the CM.Maharashtra had filed a petition in the Supreme seeking the transfer of some of Karnataka villages to its side. The matter listed before the Bench headed by Justice K M Joseph on Wednesday is unlikely to come up for hearing as the judges would be busy with the Constitution bench matters related to Jallikattu. Karnataka formed a team of senior advocates comprising Rohatgi and Shyam Diwan to fight the case in Apex Court.The border dispute dates back to the 1960s after the reorganisation of states on linguistic lines. Maharashtra laid claim to Belagavi which was part of the erstwhile Bombay Presidency as it has a sizable Marathi-speaking population. It also laid claim to 80 Marathi-speaking villages which are currently part of Karnataka.On 42 villages in Jath taluka of Maharashtra seeking the merger of their villages into Karnataka, Bommai said this problem is not new as they have been issuing such statements for the last so many years due to the non-availability of basic infrastructure in their villages. However, since the matter is pending before the Supreme Court, it will be discussed in an all-party meeting and take legal opinion before arriving at any final conclusion.When his attention was drawn to Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly Siddaramaiah's statement on this issue, the CM said  the resolution to supply water to was done by the previous Congress Government and why they did not include those villages in Karnataka. "Since I am in a responsible position I have to take decisions as per law and the Constitution".On the attack on KSRTC buses in Maharashtra, the CM said the state officials were in touch with some departments of Maharashtra, and the situation is under control.The CM also met Union Commerce Minister Piyush Goyal and requested him to expedite the process of setting up a textile park at Gulbarga. During his meeting with Environment and Forests Bhupender Yadav, the CM requested to declare a buffer zone in Bhimgad Wildlife Sanctuary in Belagavi District. During his meeting with Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, the CM requested him to sanction of more Sainik schools in Karnataka.