Only one of  7,124 cases of crimes against women has resulted into conviction in 2015.

ADVERTISEMENTThe figures were part of a letter written by Senior Special Commissioner of Police (Law and Order) Deepak Mishra to Delhi Commission for Women (DCW) chief Swati Maliwal.

The commission had asked Delhi Police Commissioner Bhim Sain Bassi to furnish information about crimes against women, after a 19-year-old girl was brutally stabbed to death in Anand Parbat in July.

According to the data, chargesheets are yet to be filed in 1,059 cases in 2012 (27.56 per cent of total cases registered), 3,218 cases in 2013 (34.71 per cent of total cases registered), 7,319 cases in 2014 (65.3 per cent of total cases registered) and 6,800 cases in 2015 (95.45 per cent of total cases registered).

Taking cognisance of the “disturbing” figures, Maliwal has again written to Bassi to take steps in preventing such crimes and increase the conviction rate.

“Majority of the crimes against women take place within the confines of home and only 3.5 per cent of such crimes are committed by strangers, leaving very less opportunity for police to avert it,” said Senior Special Commissioner of Police (Law and Order) Deepak Mishra in his reply to DCW.

However, countering this view, the DCW chief said, “I feel that this may not be the best approach by Delhi Police and needs to be revisited. This is because even if the crime is occurring at home or workplace and is carried out by a person known to the victim, police have a significant a role to play as in any other crime”.

“The role of police becomes paramount in promptly registering a case, conducting effective investigation and filing a chargesheet in a proper and timely manner, thereby adding conviction in Delhi following which crimes inside and outside homes will automatically come down,” she wrote in her letter to Bassi.

Mishra, in his letter had also expressed helplessness regarding providing the elaborated information on the reasons behind non-conviction and other such details as “the number of complaints of crime against women are received from various sources and the same is not tabulated in the requisite performa”.

To this, Maliwal replied that police headquarters should be aware of the number of complaints pertaining to crime against women being received in Delhi from various agencies.

“Only then, police will be able to adequately check non-registration of FIRs in cognisable offences. I would therefore reiterate the need to conduct an in-depth study into the complaints received, FIRs registered, chargesheet filed and convictions achieved,” said Maliwal.

Maliwal said the data is essential as the DCW is planning to conduct a study to assess the outcomes of the initiatives of Delhi Police in creating a safer environment for women in Delhi and suggest improvements on the same.