The ruling AAP on Tuesday launched an all out attack on the BJP-led central government and Delhi Police over uncontrolled crimes against, with Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tacitly dragging Prime Minister Narendra Modi into the controversy.

ADVERTISEMENTThe Delhi BJP, in turn, demanded that Kejriwal should expel all his MLAs accused of harassing women.

A day after four-year-old girl was raped by a neighbour in north Delhi, Kejriwal tweeted: “Women raped daily in Delhi. No security for them despite repeated requests. But PM providing security to his friends.”

Kejriwal also tweeted a news clip indicating that a business tycoon’s wife was being provided 10 commandos of a central police force.

The Chief Minister has repeatedly accused Modi and Home Minister Rajnath Singh of not devoting enough time to the city’s problem of crimes against women.

The AAP convenor’s tweets coincided with protests by AAP youth wing outside the residence of Home Minister Rajnath Singh and detention of AAP women protesters at Parliament Street police station.

In another development, an FIR has been registered against Delhi Commission for Women chief Swati Maliwal, who was earlier an AAP activist, for revealing the identity of a rape victim in north Delhi. The Delhi Police filed an FIR against Maliwal under penal provisions which carry a maximum punishment of two years’ imprisonment and fine.

Chandni Chowk legislator Alka Lamba led the AAP women legislators and supporters in an attempt to take their voice to the Union Home Minister for better security but she alleged they were detained for over three hours in police station.

In a tweet, Lamba took a dig at Delhi Police that criminals brutalising women were not afraid of the men in khaki but the law enforcers appeared to be afraid of women protesters who were detained at Parliament police station.

She said its woman MLAs wanted to ask the Home Minister what steps police had taken to address the issue of women safety.

AAP's Delhi unit convener Dilip Pandey earlier said the Centre was prompt in making use of Delhi Police to arrest AAP legislators but it lacked enthusiasm in tackling women safety issues.

He said the DCW has been demanding formation of a committee comprising the Home Minister, Lieutenant Governor Najeeb Jung, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and representatives of the DCW to address the issue but has found little success.

The rival BJP countered the AAP attack on the central government and demanded that Kejriwal should immediately expel all his MLAs accused of harassing women.

 Delhi BJP chief Satish Upadhyay wrote to the Lieutenant Governor Najeeb Jung and sought her removal as head of the DCW for violating the Commission’s sanctity by revealing the identity of a rape victim.

 Apart from the recent suicide by a Narela AAP worker Soni, Upadhyay pointed to two fresh alleged cases of harassment of women by ruling party leaders.

 Upadhyay said an FIR was registered by an AAP volunteer woman Sarita against another AAP volunteer Suman, also naming Janakpuri MLA Rajesh Rishi, for harassing her and her husband.

 Complainant Sarita tried to commit suicide and could be saved only after four days of hospitalisation, he said.

 The BJP leader also referred to a complaint of threat given by a north Delhi woman to Bawan Police against Aman Kumar, North West Delhi District President of AAP’s Youth Wing.

 He said Sheela, resident of Pooth Khurd area, alleged that the AAP leader allegedly assaulted her physically and threatened to kill her children as she tried to stop him from illegally occupying her plot.