Bengalureans are among top buyers of protected wildlife products being sold on e-tailer websites like Amazon, conservationists and forest officials say. Of the nine online wildlife sale rackets exposed last year, three were from Bengaluru. 

ADVERTISEMENTWildlife conservationists say they are working on 15 other cases, the leads of which came from Bengaluru. 

What explains Bengalureans’ seeming obsession with wildlife products? Shekhar Kumar Niraj, India Head of Traffic, the Wildlife Trade Monitoring Network of International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and Worldwide Fund (WWF), said the high per capita income of Bengalureans could provide a possible answer. Wildlife products are seen as social and cultural symbols. Bengalureans seem to be smitten by these products, he said. The IUCN is an international non-governmental organisation working in the field of nature conservation while the WWF is an international NGO working in the field of wilderness preservation. 

The demand is especially high for birds, table tops, key chains, reptiles, capuchin monkeys and aquatic species. There is also demand for tabletop starfish, seahorse, snakeheads, rainbow conch, pearl sea urchin conch, seashells, alligator heads, scorpions, butterflies, snare traps and manual on hunting. 

Kartick Satyanarayan, co-founder of Wildlife SOS, a wildlife conservation nonprofit, said Bengalureans also preferred slender loris, cha-meleons, ivory, tiger and bear claws. He said some websites sold wildlife products but pulled them out following complaints. Bengaluru is important in this trade because of connectivity and the information technology industry, he said. 

According to Niraj, the online sale of wildlife products is booming because the Internet provides buyers and sellers a big platform. 

“There is a need to sensitise people to wildlife rules and conservation. We have signed memorandums with leading e-tailers not to sell protected species,” he said.
 Wildlife SOS India recently wrote several letters to Additional Director General (Wildlife) and Inspector General (Wildlife) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the member secretary of National Tiger Conservation Authority, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, the chief wildlife wardens of Delhi and Karnataka, besides the Director General of Police, Karnataka, urging them to check the online sale.

‘Serious offence’Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) B J Hosmath acknowledged that the online sale of wildlife products was a “serious offence” and promised to curtail it with the help of cyber crime experts. 

Bhushan Gulabrao Borase, SP, Cyber Crime, CID, said that under the IT Act, the offence should be related to computer. This is a wildlife matter and the Wildlife Protection Act comes into picture here. So, the Forest Department has to look into. It has the power to register complaints, he said. 

Praveen Bhargav, managing trustee, Wildlife First, a wildlife conservation advocacy organisation, said the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, prohibited trade or commerce in animal articles or trophies and possession of snares which was defined as a weapon. 

The online sale of animal articles is a serious offence and a possible breach of CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna) regulations. The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau should immediately book e-commerce firms under the Wildlife Act, the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992, and the Customs Act, 1962, and begin investigation, he added.