The easiest and the most simplistic explanation for a rise in chilling incidents of robbery and murders in the metropolis of Delhi is to put all the blame on police laxity and further take the narrative to ever widening divide between the BJP-ruled Centre and the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government in the National Capital Territory. It is not to suggest that the Delhi Police excels itself as one of the efficient law enforcement outfits. The 80,000-odd strong force, directly under the Union Home Ministry, uses more than 20,000 of its man and woman power in protecting the VVIPs and VIPs who include, besides the President and the prime minister, Members of Parliament, visiting foreign dignitaries and chief ministers, governors and state ministers coming on official business to the Delhi. That leaves about 55,000-60,000 force for a population of over 16-17 million and their duties include controlling the chaotic traffic with a large number of red beacon vehicles. 

With an overbearing VIP culture, the average citizen does not get her share of police protection with the result that besides increasing incidents of robbery and murders, women’s safety has been far from satisfactory. No lessons seem to have been learnt from the 2012 Jyoti Singh (Nirbhaya) case. Recent incidents like the ones in Mayur Vihar and Dwarka point to a pattern and that is the increasing vulnerability of senior citizens. The problem has been worsened with the breaking of joint families. Among the middle and upper middle class families, more and more youngsters are migrating abroad for higher education and career opportunities, leaving their old parents alone insecure in Delhi and other metropolitan cities.
  
The situation becomes even more precarious in the case of single parents living retired lives depending on domestic helps made available from a pool of people from rest of the country without police verification, in most cases.  While there are no easy solutions to this issue, a holistic approach involving the police, resident welfare associations, NGOs and better watchdog machinery, must be followed to mitigate the risks for senior citizens. It must be pointed out, however, that a vast majority of domestic helps are decent folks, except those criminals who masquerade in the guise of servants and maids. Yet another reason for the alarming crime graph is the rising number of family disputes around properties which command values not in lakhs but crores of rupees. Unclear property titles add to these disputes with the police dragging itself in several cases as illegal arbitrators. Crime in the capital has different facets requiring different solutions.