Universal Pictures! Here are options for downloading or watching Beast streaming the full movie online for free on 123movies & Reddit, 1movies, 9movies, and yes movies, including where to watch Idris Elba's movie at home. Is Beast available to stream? Is watching Beast on Disney Plus, HBO Max, Netflix or Amazon Prime? Yes, we have found an authentic streaming option/service. Details on how you can watch the new Thriller movie Beast for free throughout the year are described below.

 

Watch Now: Beast Full Movie Online Free

 

Beast sees Idris Elba taking on an entirely new on-screen enemy: a large, ferocious lion who's become incredibly territorial and will stop at nothing to prove he's the one in charge.

 

Previously we've seen Idris Elba fighting supervillains in The Suicide Squad and Thor where he played the roles of Bloodsport and the Norse god Heimdall, but now he stars as Dr. Nate Samuels, a wildlife biologist taking a trip with his family.

 

His South African trip is important to him and it also gives him the opportunity to reconnect with an old friend, but as you can imagine, their peaceful safari is soon disrupted when an alpha-male lion makes his presence known. The movie is set for a summer release and was directed by Icelandic director Baltasar Kormákur who is known for the Netflix series Katla as well as films such as Everest and Adrift, here is everything we know so far about Beast.ADVERTISEMENTWhen and Where Is Beast Releasing?

Beast is set to roar exclusively into theatres towards the end of the Summer season, Friday, August 19, 2022, to be exact. This means that August will be a big month for Idris Elba considering how his next movie, Three Thousand Years of Longing, is set to come out a week and a half later on Wednesday, August 31, which has already premiered at Cannes to a warm reception.Where To Watch Beast online?

Unfortunately, Beast will not be simultaneously available on streaming at the time of its theatrical release on July 22. In order to see the film, you will need to travel to a theatre. Tickets can be purchased at your local theatre or through a service like Fandango or AMC.

 

Watch Now: Beast Full Movie Online Free

 

After the movie's theatrical run, you can purchase Beast on digital platforms like Amazon Prime, iTunes, YouTube, Google Play, and more. You'll also be able to stream the movie on Peacock—read on to learn more.

 

Is Beast on HBO Max?

No. Beast is a Universal movie, not a Warner Bros. Also, HBO Max will no longer be streaming theatrical movies in 2022. (Last year, Warner Bros. opted to simultaneously release its theatrical slate on streaming, meaning HBO Max subscribers could watch movies like Matrix Resurrections at home. This year, however, Warner Bros. theatrical movies will have a 45-day theatres-only run before moving to HBO Max.) It’s possible that Beast will be on HBO and HBO Max someday, but it will not be any time soon.

 

Is Beast on Peacock?

There is not yet a Peacock streaming release date for Beast. That said, we can make an educated guess as to when Beast will be on the streaming service. Another recent Universal movie, The Northman, began streaming on Peacock Premium after a 45-day theatrical run, and was also available on VOD the next day.

 

If Beast follows a similar streaming release strategy, you can expect Beast to release on Peacock around the second week of August 2022.

 

Is Beast on Netflix?

Beast will not be on Netflix any time soon. However, the movie may eventually go to Netflix, albeit not for another 4 years. A deal between Universal and Netflix gives the streaming service access to live-action films from Universal Filmed Entertainment Group, which includes Focus Features, about four years after they open in theatres. In the case of Beast, that means July 2026. That’s a long time to wait, so if you want to see the movie ASAP, your best bet is to go to a movie theatre or wait for it to come on Peacock.