A 13.5 foot long python weighing nearly 24 kg was spotted in the premises of a CNG testing station on Agra-Mathura Highway on Wednesday, from where it was rescued.

The massive constrictor, identified as Indian Rock Python, had reportedly taken shelter in the bushes of the station in Runakta near Dolphin Park on the highway. Fearing for the safety of the staff, the station’s manager contacted NGO Wildlife SOS for their assistance.

“The staff heard a rustling noise coming from the bushes and had a closer look.  They were shocked and terrified by the unexpected sight of the gigantic reptile and immediately reported the incident to us,” said Varun Kumar, Manager of the testing station.

On receiving the emergency call, the Wildlife SOS rapid response unit sent a team comprising of three trained snake rescuers which -after arriving at the site and upon careful observation- discovered that the python had sustained several injuries on its body.

The distressed python was under immense pain and it took almost 30 minutes for them to successfully carry out the rescue operation. “The python has several cuts all over its body and has sustained some serious tissue damage under the lower jaw. We believe that the injuries were caused by the sharp barbed wires along the boundary walls. We had given it the necessary treatment for its wounds and have sutured the deep gash on its neck,” said Dr M V Sharma, Veterinary Officer, Wildlife SOS.

Protected species
The Indian Rock Python (Python molurus) is a large non-venomous python species found in India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. This species is protected under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 and is listed under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES), which regulates the international trade of wildlife species.

“The python was injured but was still very active. Our team had to be extremely careful to avoid alarming or hurting it.  Sensitive rescues such as this one require patience and skill and we have professionally trained rescuers who are experienced in handling such critical rescues. It is currently undergoing treatment and we will return it back to its natural habitat, once our veterinarians deem it fit for release,” said Kartick Satyanarayan, Co-founder, Wildlife SOS.