The state police will soon have a state-of-the-art Forensic Sciences and Technology Centre (FSTC) which, will among others, will house an exclusive ballistic room, enabling the investigating officers to crack complicated crime cases.

Proposed to be built on a three-acre plot located at the Directorate of Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) premises at Madiwala in Bengaluru, the FSTC will have a separate Digital Forensic Division to deal with cyber crimes.

The Centre will come up on an area of one lakh sq ft, housing a large auditorium for training classes and state-of-the-art equipment. An exclusive laboratory to handle cases pertaining to narcotics will also be set up at the centre, which is estimated to cost Rs 30.16 crore.

Currently, narcotics cases are being referred to the chemical section. The other proposed sections to be set up under the digital forensic division are cyber, mobile and audio-video sections.

Ten different divisions — physical, chemical, questioned documents, toxicology, firearms, biology/serology, forensic psychology, photography, DNA and cyber forensics — are located at the cramped two-storey FSL building. All the divisions will be shifted to the proposed FSTC building. The new facility is expected to help the directorate in the speedy disposal of cases.

Due to the dearth of proper infrastructure, including technical staff, a large number of cases are pending to be investigated at the directorate. The number of cases being handled by the directorate is also on the rise — it received 20,031 cases last year and it is expected to touch 21,000 this year. This is actually forcing the Home department to refer important cases to FSLs in neighbouring states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.

FSL in-charge director and assistant inspector general of police M Ashwini said all these issues are now being addressed by the government. Steps are being taken to create separate divisions, aside from completely reorganising the directorate. The officer said the directorate will get 284 technical staff in addition to the 150 existing ones. It will also get four new divisions, which will function as full fledged labs, she added.

This apart, the directorate of FSL will also set up Scientific Aid Units in all districts, which will assist the district investigating officers in carrying out investigations. Currently, scientists have to travel from Bengaluru to various parts of the state to gather evidence and test them.