A gang of three was caught after it committed eight crimes over four days in and around Yelahanka New Town.ADVERTISEMENTWhat began with two bike thefts ended in a rape, even as the police closed in on them.Two of the suspects had to be shot in the leg when they tried to assault the policemen, police say.The gang comprised Shabarish (27), Imran Pasha (26) and Murali (21). Each had 20 to 25 earlier cases pending against each of them.“I have never seen offences committed in such quick succession. This is an unusual case where all crimes were committed at once by a single gang,” says C K Baba, deputy commissioner of police, north-east division.The crime came to light when he was on night patrol. “A vigilant team helped us crack down on them,” says Baba.Following the trailThe gang is unlettered, and took to crime in their teen years, police say.“They have now become habitual criminals. This is a gang involved in multiple offences over the years,” Baba says.The members of the gang were drunk when it went on a crime spree on February
4 and continued till February 9. The gang carried machetes and sharp weapons. On their earlier heists, they hired autos to go on their raids.According to the police, on February 4, the gang first stole two bikes during the Aero India show and used them to snatch four chains around Ramamurthy Nagar and Airport Road.On February 9, they again went on a robbing spree when they robbed an Uber driver, roughed him up and stole his cab, ATM card and mobile phone.They then drove away in the car, and stopped when they spotted a middle-aged man waiting for a cab in Yelahanka.They attacked the man and robbed him of his mobile phone and laptop.They stopped the car near a bus stop where they saw a woman walking towards the car.”“They dragged her into the vehicle and raped her inside,” says Baba.The woman works as a domestic help in 12 houses and begins her day as early as 4 am, he says.A senior police officer says the crime rate is higher in the northern parts of the city.“They are developing only now, and there is a lot of money there,” he adds.  Cooling their heelsShabarish was 18 when the first case was registered against him in 2012, and operated around Yelahanka and across the city. He was residing in Goripalya in J J Nagar. Imran is a habitual offender and committed crimes near Nelamangala. He was a highway robber and a rowdy sheeter.  Murali joined them recently. They come from broken homes, a police officer says.Crimes in a rowThe three-member gang committed a series of crimes between February 4 and 9, according to the north-east police.12 noon (Feb 4): They steal two bikes from Yelahanka during Aero India show.5 to 8 pm (Feb 4): They use the bikes to snatch four gold chains from women.11 to 11.30 pm (Feb 9): They mug an Uber driver and drive his car away.2.45 am to 3.15 am (Feb 9): They rob a man of his phone and laptop.3.45 am to 4 am (Feb 9): They drag a woman into the car and gang-rape her.(As told by the police.)