YSR Congress chief Y S Jaganmohan Reddy accused Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh of data theft for handing over the personal data of voters to private entities.ADVERTISEMENTJagan demanded stringent action against the TDP chief and his son Nara Lokesh, the IT minister of the state.Upping the ante on the ruling TDP in Andhra Pradesh on Wednesday, he, along with party leaders, met Governor E S L Narsimhan here at the Rajbhavan and explained the modus operandi of the data theft by the state government."I explained to the governor how vital the data of the voters is. The master data of Aadhar, bank details and voter IDs have been handed over to IT-Grids (India) pvt ltd, which is a crime by itself," Jagan said.He said the TDP has been ascertaining the political affiliation and preference of voters through two different surveys by telephonic conversation or in person. The information gathered this way will be uploaded through the party app 'Seva mitra' to the IT grid in Madapur."This is where the trick occurs. If the person is friendly with the TDP, another bogus vote will be created. If he is found to be against TDP then his vote vanishes," Jagan said.CEC took no actionJagan argued that he decided to fight it out because he lost the 2014 elections by a margin of 1% of votes."This addition and deletion has been happening for the past two years. In September last year, we made a complaint about 56 fake lakh votes to the CEC. No action was taken by the by CEC. In fact, the bogus votes increased by 3 more lakhs. Again we submitted evidence through 24 pen drives. We also started submitting Form 7. The state government started sending police to harass those used Form 7 and harassed them," Jagan said.He said he lodged his complaint in Hyderabad because that is where the theft occured."If you are from Andhra Pradesh but is robbed here in Hyderabad, where would you make a compliant? It is the same case, the data was robbed and manipulated here," he said.Meanwhile, the Hyderabad city police Commissioner of Anjani Kumar, addressing a press conference, explained the data theft procedure with the help of a map. He said that FIR basically looked at votes that are deleted or added.