The clip is part of a new video evidence which has emerged linking government forces to the war-crimes and an human rights watch group said that this warrants an international probe.

The New York based Human Rights Watch said the grisly contents of the five-minute video clip aired by Britain's channel 4 points to blind folded naked men and women being shot at close range.

The video also shows blood splattered body of a naked Tamil girl later identified as Isaippriya, a news reader with the Tamil Tiger run rebel news station. The clip also showed dozen other men and women, some with their hands tied lying dead besides her.

The Rights Group claimed that the video linked Sri Lanka's army's 53rd division with the war-crimes as the formation had conducted the final sweep with boxed-in rebels on a small strip of beach in the Mullaitivu.

The New York-based Human Rights watch (HRW) said it has seen a longer version of a video broadcast by a British television network last month showing the execution of a dozen people.

"Human Rights Watch has obtained a longer version of a video broadcast on November 30, 2010, by British Channel 4, and photographs of the same incident from other sources.
"The videos and photos show what appear to be the summary execution of prisoners by government troops.

At least a dozen dead bodies are visible," HRW said adding that the army's 53rd division was allegedly responsible.

Human Rights Watch has received independent confirmation from multiple sources, including family members, identifying one of the dead women in the photographs and video as Isaippiriya.ADVERTISEMENTSri Lanka's government has consistently denied any war crimes were committed by its troops when they defeated the LTTE by May last year.

Sri Lanka has also rejected the original video as a fabrication, but a UN investigator said it was authentic and has urged the government to investigate.

But, rights groups maintain that war crimes were committed by both sides and they must be independently probed.

"This horrific new evidence demonstrates graphically that the Sri Lankan army engaged in summary executions of prisoners during the final days of fighting in May 2009," said Brad Adams, Asia director at Human Rights Watch.

"The government's failure to investigate these serious war crimes in the face of overwhelming evidence shows the need for an independent, international investigation."

In June 2010, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon established a panel of three experts to provide him with advice on accountability for laws-of-war violations in Sri Lanka.

The panel's report is expected in January 2011.

"Each time new evidence emerges of a wartime atrocity, the government’s kneejerk reaction is to claim that it’s all part of some bizarre plot against it," said Adams.

"How many more photos and videos need to emerge before the government recognises that it can't hide the truth forever?"