A large footprint in the snow, the flash of a button glinting in the sunlight or a bus ticket thrown into the bushes could be important clues for a detective chasing a case. But for crime show enthusiasts, clues like these are the hooks that keep them riveted to their TV screens to watch detective serials. 

ADVERTISEMENTNever before has there been such a hunger for cop and detective TV shows, and the TV industry is happy to keep their audiences happy. There is no dearth of crime shows on television, ranging from The Mentalist, Monk, Criminal Minds, Dexter, Sherlock, Hannibal, Castle, True Detective and so many more. Gone are the days of the syrupy soaps and endless romantic sagas as gangsters, guns, grit and gore have taken over as the superstars of the small screen.

According to some psychologists, the appeal for such shows lies deep within our inner psyche that desires to seek justice. But most ardent crime show viewers say that there is nothing judgemental about their addiction to these shows. Their interest lies primarily in the drama, the pieces of the puzzle that finally fall into place and the suspense that builds up gently at first and gains incredible tempo as the show races to a finish.

Some like watching the slower shows like Monk with its brilliant but fastidious detective, while others like the brisk pace and crisp editing of shows like NYPD Blue or CSI. But whatever their personal tastes may be, TV viewers agree on one thing: it is the stimulating plot structure, the clues, the red herrings and the unravelling of a tale of crime that keeps them glued to their TV screens.

It is interesting to note that people of all ages love these shows, but there are variations in the kind of shows they watch. Most young people say they like serious plots, with no embellishments, no frills and no famous faces. An older audience often needs more entertainment value in the shows. A celebrity or two, pretty faces, trendy themes and super fast footage would appeal to them far more than a straight story.

Says MBA student Ayushman Brahma, “I enjoy serious detective shows far more than the popular crime shows on TV. For instance, there was a time when I was enthralled by the British crime show Wire in the Blood, which is an intense and gripping TV series. This show is about a clinical psychologist who teams up with the police to crack complicated cases. As I watch the same faces over and over again in the police station in each episode of this show, I always feel a sense of belonging.”

Another show that he enjoys greatly is called Death in Paradise, which is set in an island called Saint Marie, situated in the East Caribbean Sea. “I enjoy getting glimpses of the culture and the people of the island in each episode,” he adds. This breezy show which captures the gentle pace of life in this exotic island and follows an inspector who hates the sun, sea and sand, but is stuck in a place he does not want to be in, is fascinating on many levels. 

It is now scientifically proven that many of these shows offer “excellent workout for the brain”. According to researchers, “these shows challenge viewers to follow complicated plots, understand the clues and figure out the false leads”, all of which can be stimulating for the brain. The more you watch thought-provoking TV shows, the sharper you become. It helps people do some problem-solving in real life too, say some viewers. 

As crime shows get more technologically advanced and complex, the viewership is bound to rise too. Says young executive Sonia Thomas who loves shows like Law and Order: Special Victims Unit, FBI Files and CSI, “By watching these shows you learn how to live more carefully, watch out for danger and take care of yourself.”