Karnataka, which was the first state in the country to establish cyber crime police station, will add another feather to its cap. The state government is gearing up to create cyber crime squad to avert cyber crimes.

ADVERTISEMENTTo check cyber crimes across the state, the squad would have branches in all the district headquarters, Home Minister G Parameshwara announced during the inaugural ceremony of the 60th All India Police Duty Meet that began at the Karnataka Police Academy here on Monday.

Parameshwara said detection of cyber crimes is a challenge before the police as the culprits operate from different parts of the world. 

“Despite the United States being a technological power, the US presidential elections were hacked by criminals. This has made the Karnataka police to think twice on such crimes. Though 60% of the software in the country is developed in Karnataka, the state is not secure in terms of cyber crimes. With the advent of internet, the world has become very small and one can get any kind of information within a minute. At the same time, internet has created many disadvantages. Internet is a double-edged sword,” he said.

The minister said the 21st century has posed many challenges before the police, such as securing the state, protecting the nation, protecting women and children.
 “The participants of the meet would be introduced to handling cyber crimes, dog squads for investigation, intelligence gathering and other procedures. After cyber crime, protection of children and women is a major challenges before the security forces,’’ he added.

“The dog squad should be upgraded with latest technologies. The meet provides a wider exposure to the participants and, let them understand where they stand in terms of technology and investigation,” he said.

Governor Vajubhai Vala, Director General and Inspector General of Police Om Prakash, DGP (CID) H C Kishore Chandra, DGP (Training) Prem Shankar Meena, Additional Director General of Police (Crime and Technical Services) Bhaskar Rao and Mysuru Police Commissioner Dr A Subrahmanyeswara Rao were present.