The Whitefield division police have awarded 26 police personnel with Rs 10,000 in cash and four days’ holiday for the best crime detection.ADVERTISEMENTAbdul Ahad, DCP Whitefield, said those awarded included police constables and sub-inspectors who used exemplary skills and interest in detecting criminal cases. The photographs of award-winning policemen will be displayed at their respective police stations to encourage other policemen.In a major property recovery parade, the Whitefield division police detected numerous cases of housebreak thefts, robberies, bike thefts, drug peddling and cattle theft cases reported from December last year till March this year. The police recovered gold valuables which would be returned to the owners after court procedures, he added.Among the interesting cases was one where the K R Puram police took a 40-year-old Bangladeshi national into custody from the central jail and recovered gold valuables worth 
Rs 6 lakh from him. The accused Aslam had committed as many as six robberies in Whitefield division and was later arrested by the Delhi police for a similar crime. The 
KR Puram police, based on a tip-off from Delhi police, obtained his body warrant and got his custody.The KR Puram police also arrested a gang of seven involved in robbery cases. They recovered gold valuables and three mobile phones worth 1.8 lakh from them. The accused, Vishwanath (23), Kitty (31) and Prakash (30), along with others, would move around in an autorickshaw targeting IT employees returning home late in the night and rob them.The HAL police arrested a truck driver and his associate from Tamil Nadu and recovered red sanders worth Rs 30 lakh from them. The accused Dilip (37) and his associate Sethu (23) were intercepted by the police during routine vehicle checks. Dilip tried to speed away, but he was chased down. The Mahadevapura police arrested a gang of five which used to steal milch cows. The accused, Syed Imran (23), Prabhu (20), Asif (22), Appu (26) and Shanish (24) from Gandhinagar, used to move in a goods autorickshaw in and around Mahadevapura and steal cows and sell them to others. The policerecovered cows worth Rs 8 lakh from them.