Two coaches of Jodhpur-Bhopal passenger train derailed near Kota Junction earlier today. No casualties have been reported so far and rescue operation is underway. More details are awaited. Rehearsals for the 26th January Republic Day parade underway at Kartavya Path Enforcement Directorate (ED) arrested former Bongaon Municipality Chairman Shankar Adhya, in connection with a ration scam case. Massive fire breaks out at an oil company in Valsad. Details awaited#WATCH | Gujarat: A massive fire broke out at an oil company in Valsad. Fire tenders are present at the spot. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/prSK7leJe3— ANI (@ANI) January 6, 2024 DGCA has directed that the one-time emergency exit checks on the Boeing 737 Max should mandatorily be carried out by all operators by noon on 7th January 2024Reports ANI RSri Lankan MP Velusami Radhakrishnan offered prayers at Tirumala Temple in Tirupati earlier today.VIDEO | Sri Lankan MP Velusami Radhakrishnan offered prayers at Tirumala Temple in Tirupati earlier today. pic.twitter.com/FsZ1l3ZCzx— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) January 6, 2024 "What we have achieved today is the exact placement based on our measurement and very correct prediction of the velocity requirement. Right now, in our calculation, it is at the right place, but we are going to monitor for next few hours to see whether it is at the right place," says ISRO chairman S Somanath on the successful placing of Adiyta-L1, the first space-based Indian observatory to study the Sun, into its destination orbit Lagrange Point-1.VIDEO | "What we have achieved today is the exact placement based on our measurement and very correct prediction of the velocity requirement. Right now, in our calculation, it is at the right place, but we are going to monitor for next few hours to see whether it is at the right… pic.twitter.com/Aoa7mGVRMN— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) January 6, 2024 North Korea fires more than 60 coastal artillery rounds again, says South KoreaRead more