The Karnataka Public Service Commission (KPSC) office became a scene of crime on Monday when a woman employee was attacked with a machete by a spurned lover, also a staffer, allegedly over her affair with another co-worker. To top it all, the incident happened in the chamber of the commission’s secretary.ADVERTISEMENTThe 41-year-old victim sustained grievous injuries and was admitted to a private hospital where her condition is said to be critical.The assailant, Natraj (45), attacked two other male employees — Sarathi, a senior staffer in the computer section, and Ramu, the secretary’s attendant. All the four have 15 to 20 years of experience, working in the KPSC.KPSC sources said Natraj had an extramarital affair with the victim. He divorced his wife a year ago to marry her. Meanwhile, the victim, who was also married, was having an affair with Sarathi.Natraj recently came to know about their relationship and decided to kill her, the police learnt. On Monday, Natraj came to his office armed with a machete hidden in a wrapped newspaper, and around 11.15 am, he barged into the secretary’s locked chamber where he found the victim and Sarathi. Enraged, Natraj assaulted her with the machete. The victim’s blood splashed over the walls and floor of the chamber.The secretary’s attendant Ramu, who tried to intervene, was also hacked by Natraj who then started chasing Sarathi and attacked him as well. Sarathi sustained minor cuts and was rushed to a private hospital, KPSC sources said.Police have arrested Natraj, who worked in the confidential section preparing question papers. They will record the statements of the victims after they recover. The Vidhana Soudha Police have taken up a case of attempt to murder based on a complaint filed by Navamani, deputy secretary, KPSC.Romance in chamberPolice sources said the KPSC secretary’s chamber on the first floor was being misused by his junior staff as
he always arrived late around 1 pm.According to KPSC protocol, the secretary’s chamber should remain locked and sealed in his absence and even his PA is not authorised to enter the chamber which contains documents, including question papers and official secrets.The victim had the keys to the secretary’s chamber. Though she had a separate chamber, she had been misusing the secretary’s chamber for privacy, sources said.Upon questioning, Ramu said the victim had gone inside the chamber to keep some files when Sarathi followed her inside.“The access to the secretary’s chamber is definitely a breach of protocol and a departmental inquiry will ensue,” a senior KPSC official said.On Sunday (November 4), Sarathi allegedly made a phone call to Natraj, threatening to stay away from the victim.A year ago, the victim’s husband is said to have beaten up Natraj, warning him to stay off his wife.Natraj was accused of involvement in a KPSC question paper leak case about a year ago, and there were recommendations to expel him from the KPSC. It was the victim who took it up with the secretary recommending to retain him, sources said.Security lapsesThat Natraj could sneak in a huge machete into the KPSC building is a clear security lapse. Only two policemen, along with security personnel from a private agency, are deployed for routine duty on three shifts.