103 active cases of Monkey fever in the state as of now, says Karnataka Health Minister Dinesh Gundu MoS for External  and Parliamentary Affairs V Muraleedharan will represent India at G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (FMM) in Rio de Janeiro on February 21 and 22, 2024 President Droupadi Murmu visits historic Cellular Jail in Port Blair and laid wreath at the Martyr’s Column Prime Minister Narendra Modi extends wishes for Khelo India Games in Guwahati, Assam 'Glad to receive Ambassador Hiroshi Suzuki, Ambassador of Japan in India,' says EAM Dr S Jaishankar 'We want to have closer cooperation with India,' says Secretary of State at the Foreign Affairs Ministry of Poland, Władysław T Bartoszewski French Senate President Gerard Larcher, accompanied by a French delegation visits AICC HQ in New Delhi today Tejashwi Yadav to kickstart Jan Vishwas Yatra tomorrow On Chandigarh mayoral polls, SC slams 'horse-trading'; sends ballot papers, video of counting for scrutiny on Tuesday Earthquake of magnitude 5.2 occurred   in Kargil, Ladakh at 21:35 pm: National Centre for Seismology Centre says something else in the discussions and while speaking at the press conference outside, they say different things,' says Punjab Kisan Mazdoor Sangharsh Committee General Secretary Sarwan Singh Pandher 'The reason for not accepting government's proposal (on MSP guarantee) is that they said during the meeting that they will buy all the crops of the country, but at the press conference outside, they said a totally different thing,' says SKM (Non-Political) leader Jagjit Singh Dallewal 'West Bengal police  behaving as if they have caught Sheikh Shahjahan,' says Senior Editor at Republic Bangla Mayukh Ranjan Ghosh 'West Bengal police  behaving as if they have caught Sheikh Shahjahan,' says Senior Editor at Republic Bangla Mayukh Ranjan GhoshHe said," We are utterly shocked that police without any 41A notice, without any 91A notice, have dragged a reporter on ground, who was reporting one of the biggest shocking incidents (Sandeshkhali violence) in recent times in India. They have dragged the person and they have taken, and manhandled him in a way that he was Sheikh Shahjahan. We are amazed to see Mamata Banerjee's police, the state police are behaving as if they have caught Sheikh Shahjahan... We are going to intensify our coverage in Sandeshkhali, it's utterly shocking. We are taking all the legal help. We are approaching the court in our capacity... 'The reason for not accepting government's proposal (on MSP guarantee) is that they said during the meeting that they will buy all the crops of the country, but at the press conference outside, they said a totally different thing,' says SKM (Non-Political) leader Jagjit Singh DallewalHe said, "This means this is some kind of injustice with the farmers. They said that Rs 1.5 lakh crore will be spent to ensure MSP on pulses. But our expert said that this is completely wrong, crops of the entire can be bought for Rs 1.75 lakh crore. For February 21, we request the government to hold a peaceful protest (march to Delhi)."VIDEO | Here's what SKM (Non-Political) leader Jagjit Singh Dallewal said on farmer unions' decision to reject Centre's proposal of procuring pulses, maize, cotton at MSP for 5 years. 

"The reason for not accepting government's proposal (on MSP guarantee) is that they said… pic.twitter.com/EIdplo8Zmm— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) February 19, 2024 'Now a peaceful resolution must be found,' says Punjab Kisan Mazdoor Sangharsh Committee General Secretary Sarwan Singh Pandher He said, "We will request the government; they are powerful and we are farmers. We had a long discussion, now a peaceful resolution must be found."VIDEO | Here's what Punjab Kisan Mazdoor Sangharsh Committee General Secretary Sarwan Singh Pandher said on farmers' decision to reject Centre's proposal on MSP and their plan to march towards Delhi on February 21. 

"We will request the government; they are powerful and we are… pic.twitter.com/08ZaStheLv— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) February 19, 2024 'Centre says something else in the discussions and while speaking at the press conference outside, they say different things,' says Punjab Kisan Mazdoor Sangharsh Committee General Secretary Sarwan Singh PandherVIDEO | Here’s what Punjab Kisan Mazdoor Sangharsh Committee General Secretary Sarwan Singh Pandher said on ‘Delhi Chalo’ march.

“The Centre says something else in the discussions and while speaking at the press conference outside, they say different things. We have not given… pic.twitter.com/kzTD76DEON— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) February 19, 2024 Chairman of High-Level Committee on One Nation One Election, former President Ram Nath Kovind hold consultations with Justice Deepak Misra and Justice SA Bobde - former Chief Justices of India The Committee also held consultations with Justice D.N Patel, former Chief Justice of Delhi High Court on the issues. Union Home Minister Amit Shah, N. K. Singh, former Chairman, 15th Finance Commission; Dr. Subhash C. Kashyap, former Secretary General, Lok Sabha; and Sanjay Kothari, former Chief Vigilance Commissioner and Harish Salve, senior advocate also attended the meeting and reviewed the activities and progress made so far.