Lieutenant Governor Najeeb Jung on Thursday told Delhi Police to show concrete results on checking crimes against women by adopting a policy of zero tolerance against tormentors of women.

ADVERTISEMENTJung advised police to  activate local committees and engage with local NGOs working with women in their areas. He also instructed that patrolling be intensified, particularly in areas, which are more vulnerable and prone to such incidents.

Jung, who controls Delhi Police, held the review in the backdrop of the AAP government and Delhi Commission for Women Swati Maliwal accusing him of failure to improve law and order and making women feel safe.

The attacks on Jung and Delhi Police got louder after the gruesome stabbing of a woman by her spurned lover in Burari on September 20. The incident revived memories of a similar attack on a woman in Anand Parbat in 2015 in which the victim was stabbed several times.

He issued the directions in a meeting with Police Commissioner Alok Kumar, Special Commissioners (Law and Order), Joint Commissioners (all ranges), all DCPs and issued instructions for strict action and compliance with those.

Jung alerted the officers about hardships faced by people from North East states residing in Delhi and cautioned them to be careful of any targeted crime against them.

He said that individual responsibility of officers, including SHOs of the area, shall be fixed if there are crimes against people from North East states residing in Delhi.

On communal harmony, he said police must isolate elements trying to disrupt peace and communal harmony and deal with them strictly. SHOs should intensify their engagement with peace committees and regularly engage with people in their areas.

Jung also highlighted the issue of growing incidents of motor vehicle thefts and snatching and directed personnel of all ranges and districts to work concertedly towards bringing crimes down through greater intelligence gathering and by being extra vigilant.

He directed the DCPs to ensure that the conduct of SHOs and their subordinate staff, especially when dealing with the public, is of the highest standards. He instructed the police personnel on duty to demonstrate sensitivity to people and their issues.

“There can be no substitute for honesty and hard work. Please remember the two most sacred books for you are the Constitution of India and the CrPC,” he said.