Mangaluru: Environmental enthusiasts have opposed the proposal to open new trek routes in Kudremukh wildlife area to Elaneeru falls, Sooji Gudda and Bangara Palke.ADVERTISEMENTAll these years, the public access to these areas were restricted. These places fall under the Biodiversity hotspot of the Western Ghats and the influx of tourists and trekkers will disturb nature's balance as this place is also part of the Elephant Corridor, said members of various organisations in an email sent to Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife) and Chief Wildlife Warden, Karnataka (Wildlife) along with Conservator of Forest, Mangaluru Circle and DCF of Kudremukh Wildlife division.In an email, members of Sahyadri Sanchaya and Hasira Tapassu said; “Citizens and farmers of the western side of Western Ghats are already experiencing losses due to straying of elephants to the farmland destroying the crop. The only reason for this is unscientific projects taken up in the name of development, irrigation which has severely disturbed the elephant corridor. Now, opening up these additional peaks is the preface of disaster in the making.”Also Read:Elephant dies after falling into well in KodaguAlso Read:Elephant dies after falling into well in Kodagu The members sought to know who will be held accountable for the bottles and plastic garbage dumped by the visitors, who will nurse and care for the wild animals that get injured due to stepping on broken glass bottles thrown by irresponsible trekkers who just visit these divine spots just to party and vandalize nature ? They sought to know.In fact, the proposal to open the trekking route last year was stopped after Hasira tapassu, Mundaje and Sahyadri Sanchaya, Mangaluru had appealed to DCF, Kudremukh wildlife. Further, the members alleged that a few people have converted their houses within 1-km radius of the wildlife boundary as illegal homestays. They use part of their house as a homestay to earn additional income.The Karnataka Forest Department taking up a decision of opening these peaks for public access by turning blind eye towards the burning issues makes it look like protectors becoming predators. The members have urged the forest department to refrain from opening the gates of disaster by opening access to new peaks to the public, anywhere in the Western Ghat range. Any destruction of Western Ghats will have a negative impact on the region, warned Pavan P Kakathkar of Hasira Tapassu, Mundaje in the email.Environmental enthusiast Avinash Shishila said; “trekking to new peaks in Kudremukh wildlife division should not be allowed. Nethravati peak already receives more than 300 visitors per day.”DCF Shivaram Babu said feasibility study is being carried out to explore the possibility of opening a trekking route at Bangara Palke. Our approach is regulated, trekking to Kudremukh and Netravathi was opened only after studying their carrying capacity. Bookings are made online."