Sometime ago, when Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal made a comment that “policemen are criminals in uniform”, there was outrage in the Delhi Police. A similar comment made earlier by a judge resulted in similar reactions. 

Recent incidents in Bengaluru involving policemen, both serving and retired, in criminal activities makes one feel that may be such comments are not entirely unfounded. In the last week alone, Bengaluru police arrested a retired deputy superintendent of police (DySP) and seven serving policemen on charges of robbing businessmen post demonetisation drive.

Few years ago, some police officers in Mysuru allegedly stopped a bus going to Kerala, detained a passenger and knocked off a huge amount of cash he was carrying. On his complaint, an investigation was conducted and some serving police officers were charged for the crime.

Earlier in the past, crimes alleged against police personnel used to centre around their corrupt activities or custodial violence. We had even heard of cases where stolen property recovered from the accused were misappropriated by unscrupulous police officers. 

However, policemen themselves planning and plotting robberies and dacoities were rare indeed. The fact that such incidents are now occurring frequently indicates that something is seriously wrong. 

There is no easy answer to the question as to why policemen turn criminals. Lure of quick and easy money, constant interaction with criminals and inherent behavioural problems may be cited as some reasons. 

But the larger question is how do such people get into the police force in the first place? Is there no system to screen such people from entering the system? Police recruitment does not have a system of identifying potential wrong doers. 

Usually physical efficiency test, written test and personal interviews are held for selection. Police departments of five states are now incorporating questions related to assessment of a person’s psychological makeup into the written test. 

But potential misfits are not flagged and removed based on their answers. In personal interviews of police sub-inspectors in Karnataka, a psychologist is part of the interview board. But no candidate seems to have been rejected based on the psychologist’s assessment.

Since it is difficult to prevent a person with criminal mind in getting selected into the police wing, it is incumbent upon police top bosses to inculcate values during induction training. While some states have introduced ethics as one of the subjects for police training, many still concentrate on subjects like law and police duties. 

It is also a well-known that police training does not get the importance it deserves. Hence even at this stage, undesirable persons do not usually get weeded out. 

If a person with a criminal mind manages to get selected and gets confirmed in the police force, the only way to make him pursue a path of law is by constant supervision. It is a pity there are no periodical assessments to gauge the mental makeup of a police constable or a sub-inspector. 

The department normally goes by whatever is written by  seniors in the Annual Appraisal Reports (ARRs). More often, these reports are written routinely. In the armed forces or in the central police forces, an assessment of a person’s performance and mental makeup is periodically made and black sheep are mercilessly weeded out. 

As per the data of the National Crime Research Bureau (NCRB), the total number of criminal cases registered against policemen were 1,989 in 2013; 2,600 in 2014 and 5,526 in 2015. Of these 5,526 cases, Kerala itself accounted for 3,080 cases, whereas Karnataka reported only 84 cases. Considering that people in general do not make complaints against policemen in India, this figure is alarming. 

Rare punishments
Out of the 5,526 cases, 4,367 cases were charge sheeted and in 1,512 cases police personnel were arrested. However, the total number of police personnel convicted is only 25. These figures indicate that wrongdoers rarely get punished. 

Can such crimes be stopped? The answer is ‘no’. There will be black sheep in the department. However, such crimes can be minimised. 

This can be done by screening the applicants for police jobs by using well established psychometric tests, instilling strong sense of values during training and having periodic refresher training courses, taking strict action including dismissing from the service against those with criminal bent of mind and constantly monitoring the activities of at least those police men who come to adverse notice. 

Whistle blowers in the department need to be encouraged and protected. Efforts should be made to see that those police men charge sheeted for serious crimes do not escape punishment. 

Merely having a Police Complaints Authority in every state does not solve the problem. A system of policing the police needs to be introduced. If police leaders do not sit up and take corrective measures, the situation will go out of hand.

(The writer is former Director General of Police, Karnataka)ADVERTISEMENT