The UN's drugs and crime office launched a new media awareness campaign today to highlight the threat posed by the multi-billion dollar operations run by organised crime groups worldwide.

ADVERTISEMENTInternational crime rackets pull in an estimated annual turnover of USD 870 billion, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) said in a statement issued early morning.

That sum was the equivalent of 1.5 per cent  of global GDP -- or six times the amount spent officially on development aid around the world, it added.

"Transnational organised crime reaches into every region and every country across the world," said Yury Fedotov, executive director of UNODC, which is based in Vienna.

"Stopping this transnational threat represents one of the international community's greatest global challenges," he added.

UNODC'S multimedia campaign will underline the huge sums of money involved in organised crime, which covers everything from drug and arms trafficking to cyber crime to the smuggling of migrants.

And it will stress that these are anything but victimless crimes.
"Crime groups can destabilise countries and entire regions, undermining development assistance in those areas and increasing domestic corruption, extortion, racketeering and violence," said UNODC's statement.

The agency identified drug trafficking as by far the most lucrative trade for criminals: they estimated it brings in USD 320 billion per year.

The counterfeiting of goods, it said, brought in USD 250 billion annually.
Human trafficking and migrant smuggling totals an estimated USD 39 billion a year; while trading of ivory and animal parts generates USD 3.5 billion in criminal revenue.

According to the World Health Organisation, around 1.0 per cent  of the world's medicines are thought to be counterfeit, a figure which rises as high as 30 per cent  in parts of Asia, Africa and South America.

The campaign will go out on Twitter, Facebook and the social networking site Google+ as well as on the dedicated site www.unodc.org/toc.