A member of Karnataka State Board for Wildlife (KSBW) is on the run for the last one month after a case was booked by the Excise department for brewing illicit liquor in the Nagarahole Tiger Reserve. 

ADVERTISEMENTThe department has registered an FIR against P M Subru (56), the member in question. He also happens to be a member of the Tithimathi Gram Panchayat in Virajpet, Kodagu. 

He is charged with brewing illicit liquor in Anechoukur range of the Nagarhole Tiger Reserve. His brother P M Rao (32) is also named in the FIR. Anechoukur houses a healthy elephant population. 

Cases under the Excise Act, 1965, were registered against them in August 2016. During the raid, the Excise department seized eight litres of illicit liquor and 45 litres of pulaganji (jaggery wash). 

This, however, is not the first time that Subru is booked for such an offence. In 2006, the department had registered a similar case against him. It was dropped in 2012 due to errors in conducting the mahajar.  

In 2014, Subru was booked for felling timber illegally in the forest area. This case is still pending. 

Gundlupet, Tithimathi and Maldare divisions are hotspots of man-elephant conflict. Brewing illicit liquor increases the chances of this conflict, say officials and local residents. Elephants are attracted to the smell of the brew. 

“We conducted three raids in the same location and in two cases, we saw elephants raiding liquor drums,” an excise official from Virajpet said. 

According to National Board for Wildlife (NBW) rules, a board member can be removed if he is convicted of any offence including moral turpitude or his conduct is found to be unbecoming of a member. But Subru remains a member of the KSBW. 

The Forest department has no information about the FIR filed against Subru. B J Hosmath, principal chief conservator of forests, wildlife, said, “The matter will be investigated, a report will be prepared and submitted to the Board for action.” 

Forest Minister Ramanath Rai, who is also the KSWB vice chairman, said he was not aware of the case. “I will look into the matter and surely take action,” he said. 

Raman Sukumar, elephant expert and NBW member, said rules for NBW and the State Board were similar and if a person is accused, he should be removed. Praveen Bhargav, trustee of Wildlife First, said the government must act in such cases as they come under wildlife and excise Acts.