The Karnataka Cabinet on Thursday approved the Cyber Security Policy 2023, a move that comes in the wake of increasing cyber crimes in the state. ADVERTISEMENTBriefing reporters, Law & Parliamentary Affairs Minister HK Patil said the government had taken this decision in order to mitigate cyber crimes.Also Read:Beware of apps to register for govt schemes, warns Bengaluru's cyber policeAlso Read:Beware of apps to register for govt schemes, warns Bengaluru's cyber police The policy will give a roadmap to create awareness about cyber safety and data security. The policy talks about putting the onus on the state government and the local bodies to implement awareness programmes from time to time. Towards this end, the government will work in coordination with social media, tech industry, volunteers and educational institutions. The government will take up a study on the current situation of cyber security and data privacy, the minister explained.The Cabinet also gave administrative approval of Rs 30.74 crore for installing vehicle tracking and panic button facility in KSRTC buses. People will be able to get live updates on the whereabouts of the buses, which will eliminate waiting uncertainly for buses, Patil said.In another decision, the Cabinet approved Rs 66 crore for switching to sunflower oil from palm oil in meals provided at Anganwadi centres in the state. Switching to sunflower oil will cost the government an additional Rs 9.9 crore annually. This move is not just a healthier option but will also help farmers in the state as sunflower oil is locally produced as opposed to palm oil which is imported, the minister cited the rationale behind the move.The Cabinet also gave its nod for revised estimate of 391 crore from the earlier Rs 288 crore for setting up the Centre of Excellence in Aerospace and Defence at the VTU regional centre in Bengaluru. The VTU, Department of IT/BT, Science & Technology and European multinational software corporation Dassault Systèmes are involved in running the centre.Patil said the government had approved the centre in 2017. It will become operational this year. OTHER DECISIONS:* MH Nagesh, assistant commissioner of commercial taxes, to be dismissed after being convicted for misappropriation of funds. A sessions court ordered a 5-year simple imprisonment and Rs 20 lakh fine.* Compulsory retirement for two health department doctors -- Usha SK and SG Nagamani -- after they were caught in a Lokayukta trap on corruption charges.* Approval for cost escalation from Rs 140 crore to Rs 187 crore to set up a super specialty hospital under Belagavi Institute of Medical Sciences.