Virat Kohli and Anushka Sharma blessed with a baby boy, the Indian cricketer announced on his Instagram. The Centre on Tuesday notified the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024. The provisions of the act would apply with immediate effect dated February 20, 2024: MHA I would appeal to the farmers and the farmers organisations which are connected with this (protest) to maintain peace. We have to take it forward from discussion to solutions: Union Minister Arjun Munda on Jasprit Bumrah released from Indian squad, KL Rahul ruled out of fourth Test against England in Ranchi. Union Minister Nityanand Rai on Sandeshkhali incidentVIDEO | Here’s what Union Minister Nityanand Rai (@nityanandraibjp) said on #Sandeshkhali incident.

“Entire country and the world is watching West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee's ruthlessness in the Sandeshkhali case. Perpetrators in this case are under protection of CM Mamata, and… pic.twitter.com/yiyWNQTeRS— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) February 20, 2024 Shiv Sena (UBT) MP Priyanka Chaturvedi on Maratha Reservation Bill#WATCH | Delhi: On the passing of Maratha Reservation Bill, Shiv Sena (UBT) MP Priyanka Chaturvedi says, "Just as we had given full support to the Women's Reservation Bill while being in the opposition...Similarly, the demand for the Maratha reservation was a long-standing demand… pic.twitter.com/GKW0Ky812C— ANI (@ANI) February 20, 2024 White House promises 'major sanctions package' on Russia on Friday in response to the death of opposition leader Navalny, reports AP I would appeal to the farmers and the farmers organisations which are connected with this (protest) to maintain peace. We have to take it forward from discussion to solutions: Union Minister Arjun Munda on #WATCH | Farmer leaders reject the Government's proposal over MSP | Union Minister Arjun Munda says, "I would appeal to the farmers and the farmers organisations which are connected with this (protest) to maintain peace. We have to take it forward from discussion to solutions...… pic.twitter.com/WDvqIb38EQ— ANI (@ANI) February 20, 2024


 Farmer leaders reject the Government's proposal over MSP | Union Minister Arjun Munda says, "We want to do good and several opinions can be given for doing so, as we always welcome good opinions... But to find a way on how that opinion will be fruitful, the only way is conversation. Through conversation, a solution will surely come out..."