Former chief minister and BJP state president B S Yeddyurappa on Tuesday, criticised the Congress government for turning a blind eye to the “rising crime rate and poor law and order situation” in the state.

ADVERTISEMENTAddressing media persons here on Tuesday, Yeddyurappa said that the Congress government had failed miserably in tackling law and order problems. He pointed at the murder of a RSS worker in Bengaluru recently, rising atrocities against women, farmers’ death and others. 

“The entire system has collapsed and murder of activists belonging to Hindu outfits are rising. The murder of Kuttappa and Prashant Pujari in Madikeri, Raju in Mysuru and Rudresh in Bengaluru have created fear among the people. The government has failed to trace the murder accused in a few cases,” he alleged.

Protest today

Condemning the government’s failure, a mega protest will be staged in Bengaluru on October 19, Yeddyurappa said.

Answering to a query on BJP trying to politicise the recent murder, Yeddyurappa said, “They are doing their duty as the Opposition party and not politicising the issue. The 
Congress in the state is in total confusion. V Srinivas Prasad, who has tendered his resignation, has revealed the weaknesses of the party. Chief Minister Siddaramaiah is meteing out injustice to the people of the state by stalling pro-people schemes introduced by the BJP government.”

He said that the state was witnessing the worst drought in the last four decades. All water sources have dried up and several parts of the state had been facing severe water crisis. 

“But, the state government has not taken the issue seriously. The chief minister, who should tackle the issue on a war-footing is struggling to save his position,” Yeddyurappa criticised.
The government had not been releasing funds despite availability. The cooperative societies should waive farmers’ loans, he stressed. With the Centre releasing sufficient funds, the works in connection with the railway overbridge near the new bus stand in Hassan will be launched soon, he said.

Assembly poll

Speaking about the 2018 Assembly polls, Yeddyurappa exuded confidence that the BJP candidates would win in three Assembly constituencies in the district. Lauding the efforts of district unit president Yoga Ramesh, he warned stringent action against those involved in activities that bring disrepute to the party.

Replying to a question on Rayanna Brigade, Yeddyurappa said, the difference of opinion over the brigade between him and K S Eshwarappa has been solved mutually.