Whilst the nation celebrated the consecration of the Lord Ram temple in Ayodhya on January 22, there was good news from Kuno National Park as well, where female cheeta Jwala gave birth to three cubs on Monday. The story was shared by the authorities on Tuesday. ADVERTISEMENTThe health of the newly born cubs placed in the enclosure was normal and fine, informed DFO Thirukural R. With this, the total headcount of cheetahs in KNP (Kuno National Park) has reached 20, including 13 adults and 7 cubs. Of the 13 surviving adults, 6 are male while 7 are female cheetahs which were translocated from Namibia and South Africa to KNP. Thirukural R said, the cubs were sired by father Pawan, who along with Veera, is in the jungle. At this point, only 2 cheetahs have been released into the jungle while others are still in the enclosure. However, authorities are contemplating releasing more animals in the jungle following clearance from the steering committee, added Thirukural R.Union Minister Bhupendra Yadav also congratulated KNP officials. In his X social media account Yadav said, "Namibian cheetah named Jwala has given birth to three cubs."Kuno’s new cubs!

Namibian Cheetah named Jwala has given birth to three cubs. This comes just weeks after Namibian Cheetah Aasha gave birth to her cubs.  

Congratulations to all wildlife frontline warriors and wildlife lovers across the country.

May Bharat’s wildlife thrive… pic.twitter.com/aasusRiXtG— Bhupender Yadav (@byadavbjp) January 23, 2024


This comes just 2 weeks after Namibia cheetah Aasha gave birth to her cubs. The Union Minister congratulated all wildlife frontline worriers and wildlife lovers across the country. "May Bharat wildlife thrive", he added. Also Read:Another Namibian cheetah passes away at MP's Kuno National ParkAlso Read:Another Namibian cheetah passes away at MP's Kuno National ParkFurther, KNP officials remarked that Jwala has made Kuno proud once again by giving birth to three 'adorable' cubs, only 25 days after cheetah Aasha giving birth to 3 cubs. Kuno, once again, is enriched with 3 more new members, they said, adding that the day lord Ram arrived in Ayodhya, Kuno National Park welcomed these ‘Three little sparks of speed’ to its family. Jwala had conceived twice and delivered 7 cubs on 2 separate occasions. Of the 7, 4 have survived including three born on January 22, 2024.According to DFO Thirukural R, the KNP is spread over 1200 sq km and can be home to 20-21 cheetahs at present. There is a sufficient prey base, and it is on the rise with the passage of time, officials noted. Meanwhile, officials also claimed to have prepared a fresh proposal and which they have forwarded to ministry for approval to add another 600 sq km area with KNP. This additional tract of land is part of Sheopur and Shivpuri district respectively. Once the proposal is approved the cheetah action plan will have to re-worked again, they noted. Everything including the relocation of villages, if required, will be carried out in phases, an official added.