The Ayodhya temple reflects the sentiment of 140 cr Indians: Piyush Goyal Saket Sadan, formerly known as ‘Afeem Kothi’, is being transformed into a tourist site by Uttar Pradesh Projects Corporation Limited in Ayodhya. No strike is going to take place tomorrow, says Bal Malkit Singh, president of the core committee of the All India Motor Transport Congress (AIMTC). As part of the defence cooperation, India has offered us technical support purely on a humanitarian basis to bring our people from the islands to Male:  Former Maldives Defence Minister Mariya Ahmed Didi#WATCH | Male: On the row over Maldives MP's post on Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Former Maldives Defence Minister Mariya Ahmed Didi says, "We have never had the (Indian) troops in the traditional sense in the Maldives. As part of the defence cooperation, India has offered us… pic.twitter.com/a4EBW2sXN1— ANI (@ANI) January 8, 2024 We have cooperated with each other from time immemorial, and it is not feasible for us to even think that we can replace our closest neighbour: Former Maldives Defence Minister Mariya Ahmed Didi on  the row over Maldives MP's post on Prime Minister Narendra Modi#WATCH | Male: On the row over Maldives MP's post on Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Former Maldives Defence Minister Mariya Ahmed Didi says, "I would think as close friends, as neighbours, as part of the global community, and we would keep our international commitments and… pic.twitter.com/8LipQWAprF— ANI (@ANI) January 8, 2024 Watch | Visuals of Prime Minister's VVIP Lounge at Mahatma Mandir in Gandhinagar, the venue of the  Vibrant Gujarat  Summit, scheduled to begin on January 10.VIDEO | Visuals of Prime Minister's VVIP Lounge at Mahatma Mandir in Gandhinagar, the venue of the @VibrantGujarat Summit, scheduled to begin on January 10. pic.twitter.com/6JrFFJlAjr— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) January 8, 2024 No strike is going to take place tomorrow, says Bal Malkit Singh, president of the core committee of the All India Motor Transport Congress (AIMTC).VIDEO | “There are rumours going around that tomorrow a ‘chakka jam’ (strike) is going to be organised against the hit-and-run law introduced in 2023. I want to assure my countrymen that this issue has been resolved and the government has clearly said that this law is not being… pic.twitter.com/6kRILMOh5D— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) January 8, 2024 Bullet train project is a dream project of the Railways ministry and the PM: Union MoS  Darshana Jardosh .VIDEO | “Bullet train project is a dream project of the Railways ministry and the PM. 99% of the land has been acquired for it and the work is taking place at a fast pace. I am sure that we will deliver on the 2026 deadline for the trial run of the Bilimora-Surat corridor. This… pic.twitter.com/qsXLJetnA0— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) January 8, 2024