Superintendent of Police K T Balakrishna said the main accused in multibillionaire businessman Bhaskar Shetty murder case, Niranjan Bhat, was taken to all the crime spots and the samples were collected by the DNA experts on Saturday.

ADVERTISEMENTStating that the evidences collected are being analysed, Balakrishna said that there are many developments, which have strengthened the case in view of conviction.

“The three teams formed are working at their best to collect comprehensive information with the links connecting and helping the police to rebuild the chain of events involving the crime. The team comprising DNA experts is working on proving the circumstantial evidences. The other team, which is purely utilised for technical expertise, is analyzing the video clippings and telephone calls. The third team is into paper works and performing ‘Mahajar’ in various places,” explained the police officer.

The SP, who has visited the crime spots, accompanied the other teams who were into the investigation, taking the accused along with them. The officer said that Mahajar has to be conducted in many places.

Udupi-Chikkamagaluru MP Shobha Karandlaje, who spoke to mediapersons, Karandlaje termed the crime as the rarest of the rare and has horrified the people of the coastal district. She said that the accused should not be spared from the conviction and the police should work out sincerely to collect all the circumstantial evidences to ensure their conviction.

She added that, owing to the replacing of officers frequently, the continuity in the case is lost. “The Congress-led state government is into frequent transfer of police officials. The former SP Annamalai should have been continued in the district for at least some time, as it would have ensured speedy investigation and the truth would have been out at the earliest. However, the case findings should be revealed to the public,” said the MP.

She demanded that the police officers who had accomplice with the accused be transferred or suspended. The previous IO is alleged to have been involved in the crime. The home minister should take action against him, she said.

Meanwhile, Rajya Sabha MP Oscar Fernandes visited Gulabhi Shetty, the mother of the deceased, and offered condolence as well as assured for the impartial inquiry.