The state BJP on Thursday accused the Congress government of failing on all fronts and not living up to the aspirations of the people during the past four years.

The party on Thursday released a 64-page booklet, which it termed a “charge sheet” on “failures” of the government during the past four years. The Siddaramaiah government completes four years in office on May 13.

Addressing a press conference after releasing the booklet, BJP state president B S Yeddyurappa and Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly Jagadish Shettar said Karnataka had gained the dubious distinction of being the  most corrupt state in the country.
Yeddyurappa said that the law and order in the state has completely failed and, crime and extortion rates had increased. In Bengaluru alone, 1.24 lakh criminal cases were registered during the past four years. Crimes against women were on the rise. During the Congress regime, so far 3,102 rape cases have been registered, and 2,534 women were murdered, he claimed.

The government had made false claims on release of funds for irrigation projects. Siddaramaiah in his first budget in the present regime in 2013 had stated that Rs 50,000 crore will be released for irrigation projects but only Rs 41,439 crore was allotted of which 
Rs 32,326 crore had been spent during the past four years, Shettar said. The chief minister like his government is also into “sleeping mode,” he said.

The charge sheet claims that Karnataka stands second in the country in number of farmers suicides. As many as 2,573 farmers committed suicide due to crop failure or inability to repay crop loans during the Congress regime.

Bunch of lies
Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) president G Parameshwara described the booklet released by the BJP as ‘a bunch of lies.’ Parameshwara said statistics in the booklet are incorrect and misleading. “The BJP is trying to misguide people with wrong statistics and facts. They should know that the BJP-ruled states such as Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh contribute more to the crime in the entire country than Karnataka,” he told reporters. 

Karnataka's contribution to overall crimes in the country is just 4.7%. Whereas it is 9.3% in Maharashtra, 9.1% in Madhya Pradesh and 6.5% in Delhi. They (BJP) should have cross checked the statistics before printing them,” he said, quoting the National Crime Records Bureau statistics. 

Parameshwara also rubbished the claims of the BJP that the state has been financially indisciplined.KPCC working president Dinesh Gundu Rao said none of ministers in the party government is tainted. Unlike the BJP government in the past, Chief Minister Siddaramaiah has provided a corruption-free and stable government in the past four years. 

The booklet released by the BJP shows that there is a lot of confusion in the saffron party; the booklet does not have the picture of the Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Council K S Eshwarappa, he pointed out.