Strength of 'vikas', 'virasat' will take India forward: PM Modi in Ayodhya Whole world waiting for historic moment of 'pran pratishtha' ceremony in Ayodhya on January 22: PM Modi Shardul Thakur gets hit on shoulder at nets in South Africa CCB sleuths arrest man over possesion of MDMA worth Rs 5 lakhThe CCB sleuths arrested a man on Saturday for allegedly attempting to sell MDMA worth Rs 5 lakh for New Year’s celebrations. The arrested is Mahammad Rameez, alias Lemon Tea Rameez (33) from Ullal.
Commissioner of Police Anupam Agrawal said that he was arrested on the charges of attempting to sell MDMA to college students and the public for New Year celebrations in Ullal. Acting on a tip off, the police conducted a raid near the Fiza Mall ground, opposite KS Hegde Hospital at Deralakatte, and seized 100 grams of MDMA.
The commissioner said that the arrested had procured the MDMA from Bengaluru for distribution during the New Year celebrations in Ullal. The police also seized two mobile phones and a digital weighing machine. The total value of the seized property is Rs 5,11,000. The arrested has a criminal background including charges of dacoity, conspiracy to commit dacoity and attempt to murder cases at Ullal police station, and a dacoity case in Konaje police station limits. Dense fog covers shrouds parts of Delhi. Visuals from the Akshardham areaVIDEO | Dense fog covers shrouds parts of Delhi. Visuals from the Akshardham area. pic.twitter.com/kakf5svjls— Press Trust of India (@PTI_News) December 30, 2023 Australia beat India by 3 runs in second women's ODI to take unassailable 2-0 lead in three-match series in Mumbai BJP leader C T Ravi gets PhD degree from KSOUFormer minister and BJP leader C T Ravi has completed his PhD degree in Political Science from Mysuru-based Karnataka State Open University (KSOU).“It is a proud moment for me to share with You all that I have successfully defended my PhD Thesis “A Study on Coalition Governments in Bharat - Issues and Challenges” submitted to the Political Science Department of KSOU, Mysuru. I did the research and completed my thesis under the guidance of Prof. Dr K J Suresh of the KSOU. Today, I take this opportunity to thank every individual who supported and blessed me in my journey to study about a very relevant topic close to my heart." (sic) Ravi posted on X on Friday.The PhD degree will be conferred to him during the next convocation of KSOU. Three engineering students drown in Karnataka's Kodagu Three students of the Coorg Institute of Technology (CIT) in Ponnampet drowned while swimming in a stream. According to the police, the deceased are K G Rashik Kushalappa, U S Sudesh Ayyappa, both hailing from Srimangala, and M C Akash Biddappa from Ponnampet. The trio had been to Arjihole, situated five kilometers away from the college, around 1 pm. After having food by the banks of the stream, they had entered the water for swimming. However, they drowned after getting caught in the currents, said police. All the students were doing their second year of engineering. A case has been registered and probe is under way.