Encrypted messages on social networking sites like WhatsApp have raked up privacy and cyber security concerns, felt CID DGP Kishore Chandra.

He was speaking at the 17th cyber crime awareness workshop for law enforcement agencies organised by Data Security Council of India (DSCI), Karnataka Police and Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology here on Tuesday.

The DGP said the new security features in social networking sites encrypt all types of data that can be read or viewed only by recipients. This has been posing a challenge to social security.

Prompt response to complaints on cyber crime is necessary to check loss of money to phishing or online bank frauds by deactivating SIM cards of bank customers and attempt to siphoning of cash. There is a need to change rules of procedure to CrPC, various changes in IPC Act to tackle cyber crime. The police need to keep up with the times as IT is developing at a fast pace.

The DGP later told reporters that the workshop was organised in Mangaluru, a growing city, with many banks where cyber-related activities are high.ADGP Prathap Reddy said cybercrime is a challenge as the physical presence of the accused is unknown.

With an increase in concern over privacy and regulatory framework, it is difficult to reach the accused. Regular upgrade of skills is essential for the investigation officers regarding cyber crime. Stressing on the need to include uses and abusers of social media in school curriculum, IGP (Western Range) P Harishekaran said topics related to cyber crime and social media should be taught to children from Class 8.

City Police Commissioner M Chandra Sekhar said the IT Act came into existence in 2000, but investigation officers face a lot of challenges while dealing with cyber crime especially due to development and use of technology in all walks of life.

With the recent demonetisation, increased digitisation of the economy will give digital transactions higher security to deal with related cyber crimes. He said there is a need to constantly upgrade skills giving an expert to stations in handling offences like derogatory remarks on social networking sites.ADVERTISEMENT