Twenty-seven days after the disappearance of Jawahar Lal Nehru student Najeeb Ahmed, Delhi Police on Friday transferred the investigation into the case to its Crime Branch.

ADVERTISEMENTA special investigation team (SIT) headed by an additional deputy commissioner-ranked officer of the south Delhi police district had been investigating the case till now.

The development came after alleged sightings of Najeeb were reported from Darbhanga in Bihar. A Delhi Police team was sent to Darbhanga, the team however returned empty-handed.

"Whenever and from wherever any information is coming about Najeeb, teams are being sent there. A team was also sent to Darbhanga," a senior police officer said.

An M.Sc Biotechnology student, Najeeb had disappeared from the campus on October 15 following a scuffle with three university students.

The incident has led the campus to be on boil. Once the agitating students kept Vice Chancellor M Jagadesh Kumar and other senior officials under siege for over 20 hours alleging inaction on the administration’s part.

Following protests by students, Home Minister Rajnath Singh had directed Delhi Police to set up an SIT to trace the missing student.

Over 200 police teams were fanned out in different parts of the country for Najeeb’s search. Police have also put a reward of Rs 2 lakh if anyone provides information about Najeeb’s presence.

Meanwhile, a Delhi Police team also went to Badaun, the home town of Najeeb, to speak to a doctor, who was allegedly treating Najeeb for depression and Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD).  His family members however claimed that he was suffering from insomnia only and no other mental disorder.

Country-wide protests

JNUSU and several students’ organisations will hold country-wide protests on Saturday over alleged inaction against those who assaulted Najeeb Ahmad and police’s failure to trace him, reports PTI from New Delhi.

The students’ groups will stage protests and burn effigies of the vice chancellor of JNU and the Home Minister on Saturday across campuses in the country. It will to be followed by campaign “Chalo JNU” on Sunday and Monday and a protest meeting on November 15.

JNUSU President Mohit Kumar Pandey said, “The disappearance of a student from a central university in the national capital after he was assaulted and intimidated by right-wing lumpens is no doubt an ominous reflection of the dark times we are living in.”

“For the past four weeks, students, teachers, staff members of JNU, and citizens of Delhi have been taking to the streets demanding institutional accountability to bring back Najeeb. What is shocking and shameful is the partisan role of the university administration,” he said.