Thiruvananthapuram: Over 910 persons have been killed in Kerala in man-animal conflicts since 2016. The back-to-back incidents of wild animals entering human settlements and even killing persons have triggered strong protest from people living close to the forest areas across Kerala. ADVERTISEMENTApart from reasons like changes in forest vegetation, the scorching climate is also considered to be a reason for the recent man-animal conflicts as there could be water scarcity.Ajeesh was trampled to death by  a wild elephant that crossed over to Kerala from Karnataka, on Saturday.  He was the second victim of wild elephant attack in Wayanad district this year.The frequent man-animal conflicts are also snowballing into a political row as the Lok Sabha elections are approaching. Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, who represents Wayanad in the Lok Sabha, said that there was no comprehensive action plan to tackle the issue and urged the Centre and the state governments to take decisive steps. He said that effective response mechanisms that could protect both our communities and the wildlife should be put in place.Some Christian priests have also openly criticised the government for failing in ensuring protection of people, mainly farmers, living close to forests.As per data presented by the state government in the Assembly recently, more than hundred lives were lost every year owing to wild animal attacks. While 909 were killed from 2016 to 2023, as many as 7,492 persons suffered injuries in man-animal conflicts and crops worth Rs 68.43 crore were damaged in wild animal attacks during the period.Government sources said that apart from the loss to human lives and crops, the man-animal conflict was also causing a huge financial burden for setting up mitigation measures like setting up various types of fences.Protest over delay in capturing 'Belur Makhna' The forest department is continuing the efforts to track and capture wild elephant 'Belur Makhna' that trampled to death one person at Mananthavady in Wayanad on Saturday. Local people were staging protests against the delay in capturing the elephant.A team comprising forest officials and veterinary doctors are tracking the tusker. Four trained elephants are also deployed. The elephant was reported to be located near Kattikulam - Bavali forest regions by Sunday afternoon. Since the elephant kept on moving inside the forest area, the forest team was finding it difficult to capture it.Sources said that the plan was to translocate the tusker to Muthanga elephant camp. A wild elephant 'Thaneer Komban' that was translocated from Wayanad to Bandipur Ramapura camp died. Hence the operation is being carried out meticulously. Owing to the hot climate, tranquilising the elephant also involved risks, forest department sources said.