Our planet’s biodiversity is in grave peril. According to the World Wildlife Fund’s Living Planet Report 2016, more than two-thirds of the world’s wildlife could be gone by 2020, if action isn’t taken soon. Around half of India’s wildlife could vanish, the report says. It points to alarming damage already done; since 1970, there has been a 58% overall decline in the numbers of fish, mammals, amphibians, birds and reptiles worldwide. Creatures living in freshwater habitats have suffered the most grievously.

 Species here have declined by 81% between 1970 and 2012. Other reports have echoed the WWF’s alarming findings. The recent Great Elephant census found a 30% decline in the African elephant population in just seven years. For the first time since the extinction of dinosaurs 65 million years ago, the world is facing a mass extinction of wildlife. This is the sixth mass extinction ever, the WWF report says, attributing the disappearance of wildlife to “human pressure.” Human beings are destroying other living beings of this planet at a rapidly increasing rate. Loss and degradation of habitat that results from unsustainable agriculture, fishing, mining, pollution, acidifica-tion of the ocean and climate change-related activities is turning this planet into a vast graveyard for wildlife.

This is reason for serious concern. Not only would future generations be denied the experience of seeing these magnificent creatures but also it spells doom for human survival and the earth itself. All life is interdependent and preservation of biodiversity is necessary to keep our forests, oceans and rivers in good health. Taking away entire species will undermine the health of the ecosystem, threatening the wellbeing, even survival of human beings. However, human activity, greed and consumption that far exceed the earth’s capacity for regeneration are contributing to 
the destruction of this balance.

Although the WWF report paints a grim picture, the situation is not hopeless. We can prevent the grave scenario staring at us by acting now. In this regard, the WWF report points out that the Paris Climate Agreement is heartening. By seeking to address global warming, it provides hope for wildlife populations. More robust action is necessary against poaching and hunting. Big dams that transform wild rivers into man-made lakes are disastrous for fish and other freshwater species. Road and railway lines are being constructed with little thought or concern for animal migratory paths. It is not impossible to reverse or at least arrest the damage done. 

It requires political will, community efforts and individual commitment.
ADVERTISEMENT