No Vizag Travel Guide would be complete without the famous RK Beach. One of the Valluring beaches on the Eastern Coast with the famous Kali Temple. APTDC conducts boat rides from the fishing harbour. Aircraft Museum (02 km) Mighty war hero, the TU-142 Aircraft served the Indian Armed Forces for 29 years and is now converted into a museum. Submarine Museum (02 km) INS Kursura Submarine Museum is a one-of-its-kind in Asia. Experience the fascinating world of submariners. Visakha Museum (03 km) The Indian Maritime and the Archaeology Museum houses rare treasures and artefacts linked to Vizag’s history. Kailasagiri (06 km) Atop a hillock, a 40-foot tall Shiva-Parvathi idol overlooks the city. It has a panoramic viewpoint, a ropeway and a toy train. It is also home to the Telugu Heritage Museum. Tenneti Park (05 km) At the foothills of Kailasagiri, this park offers breath-taking views of the Bay of Bengal. The park also has swings and rides for children to enjoy. Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary (09 km) The sanctuary is an abode for rare species of endemic flora and wildlife. Trekking and bird-watching are popular activities. Also, check out the eco-friendly adventure activities. The Indira Gandhi Zoological Park (09 km) This 625-acre zoo accommodates 97 species of mammals, birds and reptiles. In addition, it has an aquarium with 30 freshwater fish species and a beautiful butterfly park. Ramanaidu Studio (16 km) The greatest attraction in this place is the “Museum of Cinema”. Experience the fascinating world of movie making. Rushikonda Beach (11 km) Rushikonda Beach is home to various water-sports like kayaking, surfing, parasailing, speed boating and jet skiing. Thotlakonda (17 km) This ancient Buddhist Heritage site from 3rd Century BC to 3rd Century AD gives us a glimpse of Vizag is ancient links to Buddhism. It also offers a panoramic view of the Bay. Bavikonda (44 km) Bavikonda acquired its name due to the many wells carved out to collect rain water for drinking. Pottery and coins from Roman and Satavahana period, dating back to 3rd century BC and 2nd century AD, were recovered here. Erra Matti Dibbalu (23 km) The vast stretch of deeply gullied red hillocks is naturally formed over thousands of years. It is an awe-inspiring Geo Heritage site. Mangamaripeta Beach (18 km) Mangamaripeta Beach is known for its natural environs, water-sports, scuba diving and more. There is a go-karting track next to the beach. Bheemili (27 km) The scenic beach road heading North along the sea coast leads to the quaint town of Bheemili. Discover the Dutch Cemetery, lighthouse and the clock tower. Simhachalam Temple (20 km) This 11th Century AD Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha Temple, situated atop a hill, is an architectural marvel. The temple is adorned with ancient scriptures engraved centuries ago. Sri Kanaka Mahalakshmi Temple (05 km) In the narrow by-lanes of One Town area, the uniqueness of the Sri Kanaka Mahalakshmi Temple is that though there is a big roofed hall, the idol has no roof above; and is exposed to the vagaries of nature. St Paul’s Church (30 km) The St Paul’s Church is a spotless white overarching structure which is over 180 years old and melds with the 21st-century modernity of Vizag beautifully. Central Park (00 km) Enjoy India’s third-highest colourful musical fountain, the bonsai and bamboo gardens, spread across 22 acres of this park. It also has five distinct entertainment zones and over a hundred ageless trees. Yarada (46 km) Offering a spectacular view of the bay and coastline is the pristine beach of Yarada. One can ferry across the Port Channel and trek on the Dolphin Hill. Alternatively, the drive through ghat road is breathtakingly beautiful too. Appikonda (35 km) Sky-blue waters make this beach a great outing destination at the sea front. With waters that are perfect for fishing, those interested can also take a boat ride into the sea. Etikoppaka (81 km) Awarded with a GI tag, Etikoppaka is famous for its handmade wooden toys made with natural dyes. A notable place on the Vizag Travel Guide. Bojjanakonda (44 km) Bojjanakonda and Lingalakonda are ancient Buddhist heritage sites most active from 4th to 9th Century AD. Kondakarla Ava (53 km) Kondakarla Ava Lake is the second largest freshwater lake in the State and is recognised as an Eco-Tourism Destination. It is a favoured spot for migratory birds. Lambasingi (116 km) Moving ahead with our Vizag Travel Guide, the next stop is the beauty of Lambasingi. Located at a high altitude with minimal pollution, makes this a wonderful place for pitching up tents and star-gazing. Tents by APTA have been built and cottages will soon be operational too. Tyda (74 km) Tyda is a small tribal village, on the Araku Road with a railway station. APTDC has property here with log huts for an overnight stay. It is perfect for bird watching and trekking. Borra Caves (92 km) These million-year-old limestone caves are at a height of 705 meters above sea level. Discover the fascinating world of cave formations. Ananthagiri (89 km) Ananthagiri is a beautiful hill station, on the way to Araku Valley famed for its extensive coffee plantations. APTDC has property here with rooms overlooking the valley below. Araku Tribal Museum (116 km) Araku Tribal Museum gives a glimpse into the early lifestyle and cultures of the tribal communities indigenous to the Eastern Ghats. Araku Coffee Museum (116 km) Sample the internationally acclaimed ‘Araku’ coffee and trace the history of the aromatic beverage, in this unique café-cum museum. Padmapuram Gardens (119 km) A botanical garden that has various rare types of flowers and trees endemic to the area. Exotic species of plants can also be purchased. Chaparai (129 km) Situated about 15 kms away from Araku en route Paderu, this picturesque picnic spot has a charming water cascade and lush green surroundings. Araku Valley (117 km) Araku Valley is known for its pleasant climate, lush greenery and streams. It is home to several tribal communities. Tatipudi Reservoir (70 km) Tatipudi is a charming picnic spot away from the city bustle. One can enjoy boat rides in the natural ambience of this reservoir. Ramanarayanam (52 km) Spread over 15 acres, and themed entirely on Valmiki’s Ramayana, Ramanarayanam has various zones. Each showcases the diverse aspects of the life and times of Lord Rama. Ponduru (103 km) Make a pitstop and invest in some of the fabric from the famed village that spins soft Ponduru Khadi. Arasavalli (103 km) This 7th Century Sun Temple of Kalinga Architecture at Arasavalli is 1 km East of Srikakulam Town. The Sun God is depicted riding on a chariot. Srikurmam (115 km) This is the only temple dedicated to the second avatar of Sri Mahavishnu- Kurmavataram. Legend has it that the presiding deity is the fossil of an actual tortoise. Salihundam (125 km) This 2nd to 12th Century AD ancient Buddhist site has the remnants of Mahayana, Theravada and Vajrayana periods of Buddhism. Srimukhalingam (150 km) In this Siva temple, the lingam depicts facial features and hence has become popular as Sri Mukhalingam. Also called Dakshina Kasi, a visit to this ancient temple is said to bestow ‘moksha’. Telineelapuram Bird Sanctuary (158 km) Finishing our Vizag Travel Guide is Telineelapuram, which is host to migratory birds such as Painted Storks, Adjutant Storks and Spot-Billed Pelicans. Watch these birds as they repair their nests and look after their young ones.