Snakes, especially King Cobras, might be spotted around this time. The reason being mid-March is the mating season for a snake. Also, summer has officially begun. It is assumed that in search of food and water, snakes lurk in human habitations during this dry season. The plains are relatively cooler with the last remaining watering holes which are said to call out the snakes from their hideouts uphill. In the Eastern Ghats, in the Visakhapatnam District, it is during this season that humans often encounter snakes and wish there were rescuers around. So, fear not and call trained snake rescuers if you happen to see one in the Visakhapatnam District, instead of killing it. During the periods of March-June, the Eastern Ghats Wildlife Society (EGWS), in collaboration with the Andhra Pradesh Forest Department, run a campaign asking for people to call for snake rescuers instead of taking matters into their own hands. In conversation with Yo! Vizag, Murthy Kantimahanti, conservation practitioner and founder of EGWS, says that there is no reason to panic at the sight of snakes. He added that trained snake rescuers and help from the forest department are within our reach which can avoid rampant killing of snakes. He informed that to date, the society has rescued up to 50 King Cobras in the North Andhra region and Visakhapatnam District. It is a lesser-known fact that King Cobra (Ophiophagus hannah), the world’s longest venomous snake, is protected under the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972. Despite its size, King Cobra is shy and always tries to avoid humans. It is primarily a snake-eater and actually helps in controlling other deadly venomous snake populations in the region by feeding on them. However, such rare and ecologically valuable species are indiscriminately being killed only due to perceptive fear and lack of awareness. Moreover, many species of harmless non-venomous snakes are also being killed due to false beliefs and misconceptions. Increased habitat destruction and unsustainable agriculture practices further threaten snake populations in the Eastern Ghats. The Eastern Ghats is yet to adopt the radio-telemetry study which tracks the snakes’ movements. Over time, the locals have gained comfort and report snake-sightings instead of recklessly killing them. Recently, a couple of weeks ago, locals of Madugula in the Visakhapatnam District have reported spotting venomous snakes crossing the road. The snakes only act in self-defence and if left alone, will not attack humans in most circumstances. The fact that thousands of people die, each year, from venomous snake bites in rural parts of the country does surely become a reason for fear. However, what many do not know is that simple precautionary measures can go a long way in saving lives. An urgent need to reduce conflict between humans and snakes is much needed. This will not only reduce the human casualties from snakebites but also protect the threatened King Cobra populations. As hard as it is to not panic, we must immediately report if a snake is seen rather than unnecessarily killing in a state of fear or as a defence mechanism. In case of any snake-spotting in the Devarapalli, Chodavaram, Madugula, and Cheedikada areas of Visakhapatnam District, kindly call the rescuers at +918639124883.