After a long and stressful day, one would be looking forward to a relaxing day off or two where one could unwind. While some find staying home all day with a good book or their favorite show relaxing, some would be looking forward to setting on short adventures like trekking into the wilderness. So, to make it easier for the nature enthusiasts who are always in search of new places, we made a list of amazing places where one could spend their time trekking. Tyda Nature Camp Also known as Jungle Bells, Tyda nature camp is located in a small tribal village 30 KM from Araku valley. One can call it one of the most beautiful trails in Andhra Pradesh. Surrounded by lush green jungle, one could easily get lost in the beauty of it as you push through the bamboos while the little creatures call for your attention. A two-day plan would be perfect as you can spend the night interacting with the locals. You can plan such that you can also spend time for bird watching and rock climbing. This would be the perfect place if you are planning to take a break from your stressful life. Madhavdara – Simhachalm The view of Vizag this place has to offer during this trail is amazing. Starting from Madhav Swamy temple in Madhavdara, one can reach the top of the hill in two hours. Madhavdara – Simhachalm trail is one of the first and oldest trails from the temple at the foot of the hill to Simhachalm. One the way you can find some beautiful viewpoints from which the city looks beautiful. You can stop by a lake that you will across while climbing to relax. Pavuralakonda Pavuralakonda which means ‘hill of pigeons’ is located 24 KM away from Visakhapatnam. It is a perfect choice for an unplanned trek. We can witness a spectacular view of Bheemili and the bay area from the hill which is also known for its ancient Buddhist monastery. You will also get to see different species of birds and pigeons which is perfect if you also want to go on bird watching. Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary A beautiful evergreen forest located in the heart of the district is an apt place for a lazy Sunday trek with friends. With diverse flora and fauna, it is a must place for anyone who is planning their first trek. There are many organizing clubs which can help with your plans. In addition to this, you can also try river crossing, boating, nature trails. Kailasagiri Located within the city, it is one of the most popular places in Vizag. It is an easy trail which will take about an hour to reach the top. But the view you get to witness from the top of the hill is amazing. If you are confused as to what to do with your day off, this could be a nice option.