The Indira Gandhi Zoological Park will probably the first zoo in India to go through a digital transformation. In lieu of the Digital India drive, they will be facilitating e-health and mobile apps that include My.Gov.In, Attendance.gov.in, Swachh Bharat, e-education, and a digital knowledge centre and e-booking. The zoo launched its WiFi services in collaboration with Reliance Jio and upgraded its website yesterday. It will soon be launching an e-hospital application and provide animal health services such as online registration for information, diagnostic reports, enquiry on various methods of treatment and exchange of information and solutions. They have also adapted an extensive zoological information management system where the information related to animals is maintained. Eastern Naval Command HCS Bisht was the chief guest for the occasion and he stated that hopefully the launch of digital services and website helps bring in tourists. He also hoped that the night safari would soon commence here. The e-education through website is aimed to provide information about the history of the zoo, a list of the different species housed there, animal husbandry, habitat, flora and fauna, events taking place at the zoo, botanical species, ecology, relevance of wildlife conservation and research. The website will prove useful for schools and the e-booking app will help visitors book tickets online while providing them with information about the animal exchange programmes, new arrivals to the zoo, amenities for visitors, and guides and information on touring executives. A digi-locker facility will provide employees with access to government issued documents. Further, with their security and surveillance network, their WiFi and cameras will help monitor animals closely and achieve collaboration for action during emergencies. Card readers, alarm systems, temperature controls and motion sensors over the electric fences will soon be in place. The free WiFi facility will benefit visitors to get information about the animals in the zoo.