Vizag is fast emerging as a major tourist destination in Andhra Pradesh. While nature cover, which includes lush green hills and deep blue waters, held our captive since times immemorial, multiple activities brought in by the officials have bolstered the city’s fame as a tourist heaven for many. Here are 10 such exciting activities that are set to establish Vizag as a popular tourist hub in the nation. One activity that has been pushing “Brand Vizag” is that of Scuba diving. A one-of-its-kind activity, Scuba diving certainly promises to thrill everyone who has the privilege to experience it. Scuba diving in India has been restricted to popular destinations such as Goa, Pondicherry, and Andaman islands among others. The feasible connectivity and the huge potential can cause Visakhapatnam to emerge as one of the major scuba diving destinations in the country, and possibly the world. Also, an international scuba diving academy is slated to be established in the city with the support of the government. This is the perfect destination for an adventure holiday underwater! For a sneak-peek of marine life, you could indulge in the simplest of all underwater activities, snorkelling. This might just be the best thing you could experience at few of the city’s wildlife sanctuaries. Paddling your way into a beautiful lake cocooned in greenery, the calmness and beauty around you are so attractive and appealing that you do not want to leave. The nature around you seems to come alive when you ride a kayak into that beautiful lake. The recently held Vizag Yachting Festival would play a major role in establishing Vizag as a yachting destination. Also, two yachts will be placed permanently in the city to engage the tourists. City’s divers have recently discovered two shipwrecks in the waters of Vizag. Both the wrecks, being discovered at shallow depths, surely seem poised to establish Vizag as a premier diving destination. In fact, Simply Scuba, a Scuba Diving equipment company based out in the UK, had made a video describing Vizag’s Scuba Diving spot. The reviewer said that the historians will see if the shipwreck discovered here is the world’s shallowest shipwreck and if it does turn out to be so, Vizag can emerge as a major diving destination. In addition to these, other activities such as jet-skiing, zip lining, horse-riding, etc, seem to be doubling the excitement.