In the city of beaches, you are always in the lap of nature wherever you go in Vizag. There are quite a few places in the city where citizens can enjoy the peace and calm that they need. And since today, 5 June 2021 is World Environment Day, here we are looking at some pristine locations in and near Vizag which will bring peace to your soul and make you love Vizag even more. One of the best places to experience nature in Vizag, Kambalakonda wildlife sanctuary is where you go for a peaceful Sunday afternoon filled with some strolling among the trees and enjoying the sceneries. The sceneries here are so spectacular that they regularly attract photographers, especially wildlife photographers, in Vizag. Though there’s not much here in terms of wildlife, you can see the odd spotted deer or a rare bird. All in all, a very serene place to be if you love nature. And on the exact opposite to the Kambalakonda wildlife sanctuary lies the Indira Gandhi Zoological Park, one of the prime tourist attractions in the city. This place houses a large diaspora of animal species and is one of the best zoos in southern India. From the African lion to the tiger to the crocodile, they all can be found here. With state-of-the-art animal care facilities and hardworking staff, Vizag zoo continues to be a place where you can get in touch with nature at ease. At a distance of about 30 km from Vizag, Kondakarla Ava is one of the best picnic spots for Vizagites. Especially the youth of the city come here very often with the hopes of enjoying the offbeat atmosphere and the lake in which you can boat. But the prime attraction of this sanctuary is the wide variety of bird species at hand. Another great place for a wildlife photographer to be but also for aspiring Ornithologists. Definitely, a place you must visit once with your friends or family. There is a great roster of beaches in Vizag to pick from but let’s go with the one where you most likely to be in tune with nature. At Mangamaripeta beach, you have the serene experience of just listening to the ocean and let it take away your worries. There are also some interesting rock formations here which can make for a great photography spot, especially the natural arch with the sea in the background. On the outskirts of Vizag, Mangamaripeta is where you can turn off and relax. Before Vanjangi turned into THE tourist spot to be at, it was a peaceful place to be for all trekking and nature enthusiasts. Even now though, with all the loads of visitors pouring in every year, Vanjangi is where your heart beats a new rhythm. While the view of the Eastern Ghats and the Araku Valley is spectacular here any time of the day, you don’t want to miss the sunrise here that is simply out of the world, which is why it is recommended for all tourists to camp overnight here. We end with the most easily accessible tourist spot in the city- Kailasagiri. While getting to the top of this peak, be it by road or ropeway, is a surreal experience in itself, once you get to the top, it gets even better. There’s a large Shiva-Parvati statue at the top which lies in the centre of a huge park. From kids to old people, everyone loves coming to Kailasagiri for a stroll among the woods. To add to that, the view of the city below from here is simply breathtaking and something you don’t want to miss, especially from the Titanic Sea View Point. So, this World Environment Day, we remind you of all the great places in Vizag the nature lovers can be.