The rains have started in the city and the coming weekends will be more exciting. While there are only few getaways in the city, you can always get in your car and drive away. The city of destiny is blessed to have some amazing spots nearby where you can spend time with your loved ones and enjoy each moment with joy. Here is a list of places you can drive to and have amazing time over the weekend. Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary Situated 186 kms away from Vizag in Odisha, this wildlife sanctuary is filled with abundant flora and fauna. The Sunabeda Wildlife Sanctuary is a proposed tiger reserve with a total area of 500 kms. This sanctuary harbours a great diversity of wildlife habitats, with a vast plateau and canyons with 11 waterfalls and also forms the catchment area of the Jonk River. The forest rest house makes a good place to stay while other hotels are located on Khariar road at some distance. Chilika Lake Spread over the Puri, Khudra and Ganjam districts of Odisha state on the east coast of India, Chilika lake is a brakish water lagoon. This lake is home to a number of threatened species of plants and animals and is the largest wintering ground for migratory birds on the Indian sub-continent. With the availability of abundant hotels and resorts, this place makes a good spot for spending a lazy weekend and is situated only 338 kms from Vizag. Dindi village At a distance of 265 kms from Vizag, the Dindi village is the best option to spend a long weekend. Filled with straight palm trees and lakes, this village has abundant hotels and spas for tourists. With an amazing view of the Godavari River, this village attracts many people in monsoon for its spectactular views and amazing local food. Corigna Wildlife Sanctuary Situated in Andhra Pradesh, Corigna Wildlife Sanctuary is an estuary and is the second largest stretch of mangrove forests in India with 24 mangrove tree species and more than 120 bird species.  This sanctuary is home to the endangered white-black vulture and also the long billed vulture. Situated at 173.3 kms from the city of Vizag, this spot serves with best views in rains. Now that you have the list, pack your bags, grab your car keys and go on a road trip that you will cherish for a long time. Happy monsoon.