Winter is here. And a three-hour drive, early in the morning, from the heart of Visakhapatnam city takes you to Lambasingi, a place that has now gained a reputation as the Kashmir of Andhra Pradesh. The journey towards this quaint hamlet is equally joyful with towering hills by the side. From the dull grey emerge green mountains, winding roads, and a white mist that seems to wrap everything in it. The picturesque views of the twilight catching the hilltops, unfold the scenery around you. Adding to its beauty, Lambasingi has become a thriving spot for moths and butterflies. Taking us through the fluttering world of Lambasingi, Rahaman, Operator at Crescent Adventures and Water Sports shared how he spotted them first at the Haritha Resort Recalling his first encounter with butterflies at Lambasingi, Mr Rahaman says, “Imagine waking up to a kaleidoscope of butterflies surrounding you. Wouldn’t it be an out-of-the-world experience? When I first witnessed it, I was dumbstruck.” When asked the exact location of the butterfly sighting, he adds, “We at Crescent Adventures and Water Sports in collaboration with Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation (APTDC) are offering camping services at Haritha Resort in Lambasingi. There we set up tents for our customers. Over the last three months, we have been witnessing a wide variety of butterflies and moths visiting the camping site.” Sharing details of the winged beauties spotted at Lambasingi, the Adventures and Water Sports operator noted that he has been documenting the butterfly and moth species found here. Adding further, he says, “I am not an expert in this field. Hence, I’m connecting with the Forest Department and Wildlife Experts to get the scientific names of these species. Some of the moths and butterflies seen at Lambasingi include Dysgonia Algira, Mocis Undata, Amata Passalis, Trigonodes Hyppasia, Glyphodes Bicolor, Parasa Lepida, Clouded Tiger Moth, Silk Moth, Emerald Moth, and Atlas Moth.” Noting that these colourful and vibrant beauties should be conserved, Mr Rahaman suggests that by setting up a state-of-the-art Butterfly Park on par with the one at Dubai, at Lambasingi, we might be able to take a step ahead. “If the state government takes up the initiative, it would definitely boost the tourism. A butterfly park would let thousands of nature enthusiasts like me to experience the beauty of these fluttering butterflies,” he concludes.