Must visit places in Visakhapatnam: Visakhapatnam is, arguably, one of the most beautiful cities in India. A city that is charmingly sandwiched between hills and water, Visakhapatnam has struck a chord with nature lovers since times immemorial. Be it the lush green landscapes, the sparkling blue waters, or even the impeccably well-maintained heritage sites, this city has innumerable tourist spots to catch the imagination of all. Visakhapatnam is filled with several captivating tourist spots that attract enthusiasts from different corners of the world. Be it the heritage sites, or nature escapades or even the man-made wonders, the port city has it all. Here are 13 must visit places in Visakhapatnam that you can’t miss visiting. Within the city, Ramakrishna mission beach is long lovely stretch of sea and sands. There are various statues, the Kali Temple, the Ramakrishna Ashram, the Submarine Museum, Visakha Museum, War Memorial to soldiers of the 1971 war – ‘Victory at Sea’ and other attractions along the beach road. A little further on, the Rushikonda Beach is popular amongst locals and tourists as the sea at this beach is safest to bathe or surf, though precaution is always advised. The Government owned Punnami Resorts offer rooms at reasonable rates for tourists. The 14th century Sri Sapta Rusheswara Temple surrounded by seven hills is located in Rushikonda. Another serene beach in Vizag is the Yarada Beach, a fabulous beach with an exotic blend of golden sands and the lush green stretch of hills. Nestled between the hills on all the three sides and the Bay of Bengal on one side, this beach is an ideal spot for a day out. Dolphin’s Nose, a mammoth rocky headland of about 174 meter high, is situated in the southern part of Visakhapatnam city. The rock resembles a dolphin’s nose is nicely placed at an altitude of 358 meter with its projection to the Bay of Bengal in Visakhapatnam. This elevated rock is also the site for a powerful light house highly useful for the shippers with a light beam that can be seen as far as 64 km out at sea. Tyda, an eco-tourism haven is about 40 km from Araku Valley lies in the Eastern Ghats. At an altitude of 1520 ft above sea level it is a great spot for treks in the hills, bird watching, tracking, a bit of wildlife spotting for rock climbing, trekking and target shooting with bow and arrows. For overnight camps, there are rooms, log huts and tents to choose from at the popular camp resort, the Jungle Bells Nature Camp. Popularly referred to as the Vuda Park, this popular leisure spot in Visakhapatnam was actually named after the late Chief Minister Sri N T Rama Rao, as “Nandamuri Taraka Rama Sagara Teera Aaramam”. Located near the Rama Krishna Beach, this scenic park has boating facilities, a roller skating rink, beautiful long lawns, flower gardens, yoga centre, theme park, dancing fountains show and a children’s play area. The Rama Naidu Studio perched on an imposing hill, encircled by verdant environs commands a breathtaking view of the shimmering, blue waters of Bay of Bengal. The studio is spread out on 9 acres of land and with the scope of further expansion to 35 acres. Ananthagiri is a beautiful hill station in the lush undulating ranges of the Eastern Ghats, on the way to Araku Valley. The clean fresh air makes it a perfect health resort. Ananthagiri is famed for its extensive coffee plantations and numerous waterfalls like Tadinada waterfalls. The Ananthagiri hill resort is a perfect getaway from the hot and humid weather of the summer months. The river Muchkunda originates from Anantagiri and flows along with several small streams. The medicinal and herbal plants comprise the flora of the hill resort. About 4 kms away from Borra Caves, a hundred steps and a two-kilometre trek amidst the thick greens to reach Katiki Waterfall is worth every ounce of energy spent. Splashing in the cool water of this perennial waterfall or climbing up to its summit, the childlike joy of playing in water and beauty of the scene overwhelms you. The Katiki waterfall has its source at the Gosthani River, and an approximately 50 feet drop. Situated about 15 kms away from Araku on the route to Paderu, this picturesque picnic spot has charming waterfalls and lush green surroundings. While the currents can be strong in the monsoon, the waterfalls are fun otherwise, though caution is advised. About 15 Kms down the road to Paderu from Araku, comes a scenic spot with a rivulet winding through the boulders against the backdrop of an ancient Shiva temple, Sri Matsyalingeswara Swamy Temple. In the belief the Lord Shiva protects the fish in these waters; they are not caught or eaten. The Red Hills (yerra konda) near Bhimili are a specialty. The red hills on the seashore are described as red dunes. The red sand hills of this type are found only at three places – Sri Lanka, Rameswaram in Tamil Nadu and the third here. Araku valley; labelled Andhra’s Ooty, in the Eastern Ghats, is home to a number of tribal communities. Spread over an area of 36sq. kms with a pleasant climate, lush greenery, waterfalls and streams, this tourist spot has a tribal museum showcasing the lives and styles of the locals. Accommodation facilities are available, but pre-booking is advised. The APTDC tour package includes a glimpse of the Dhimsa Dance by the locals. 112 km from Visakhapatnam, the journey to Araku valley on the Eastern Ghats with thick forest on either side is exciting with breathtaking locales along the route. Tyda is a small tribal village in the Eastern Ghats, on the Araku Road. There is an eco-tourism park, ‘Jungle Bells’ with rock climbing, trekking, target shooting and availability of naturalists or guides. There are cottages and log huts for a stay. Araku is easily among the must visit places in Visakhapatnam.