Beach is love, the beach is bae and the beach is that one warm place we find solace in. Many Vizagites have a soul connection with the beach and we bet your phone is filled with pictures with at least a dozen clicks at with the sand and the Bay of Bengal in the background. While obsessing over its beauty (yes! at the beach again) we thought, how about taking a break and exploring other picturesque locations of our beloved city! Here’s a list of a few of the many places in Vizag that offer captivating views and awesome backgrounds for your dreamy photoshoot. Head to this freshwater lake for some bird watching and a peaceful day-out. The palm-log boat ride in the lake, filled with lotus flowers and leaves, is sure to leave you with a sense of tranquility. The scenery is so beautiful that you can’t help but capture it. Want to catch some Goa feels but can’t travel right now? Take a ride to Ross Hill to capture the beauty of hill church on one side and port view on the other. The church’s architecture will add just the right amount of character to your photos. Green looks great in pictures, doesn’t it?! And that is all you can find around at Kambalakonda. Paint your photos green with the lush backgrounds that this wildlife sanctuary offers. The sanctuary also has various adventure sports and activities to keep you occupied. If you are the one who loves adding heritage sites to their photos, you should definitely add Thotlakonda to your list. This archeological site has Buddhist stupas and structures constructed 2000 years ago. Add a hint of history to your pictures with the unusual design of the place. Next up is the famous Kailashgiri hill. It has been a popular destination for ages, yet continues to charm us with the beautiful views every single time. If you haven’t already, you should for sure capture the city-lights from the hilltop. Yet another hilltop location, Ramanaidu Studios has a lot to offer. The sets and cafes here make for interesting and pretty backgrounds to click pictures. You can either be a hill person or a beach person, but the best thing about vizag is that you can be both! It is where the hills meet the beaches and so you don’t have to fit in one. Graffiti walls of Vizag The city is filled with beautifully painted walls. Every time we take a ride to Hanumanthwaka, we just can’t take our eyes off the vibrantly painted houses and the huge paintings on the sidewalls. With a little exploration of the city, we can find many graffiti art walls as well. The bright colors add drama and character to the pictures, but we recommend being extra cautious with these locations as they are usually on busy roads.