Indian Naval Sailing Vessel (INSV) Tarini left Port Stanley on 04 Feb 18 for its onwards journey to Cape Town (South Africa). INSV Tarini had arrived at Port Stanley on 21 January 2018 after completion of third leg of it’s maiden voyage to circumnavigate the globe. This historic circumnavigation attempt by an all-women crew is being led by Lieutenant Commander Vartika Joshi, and the crew comprises Lieutenant Commanders Pratibha Jamwal, P Swathi, and Lieutenants S Vijaya Devi, B Aishwarya and Payal Gupta. Mr Nigel Philips, CBE, Governor of the Falkland Islands and her Majesty’s Commissioner of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands welcomed Tarini into Port Stanley on 21 January 2018. As part of their stay in harbour, Team Tarini interacted with students from Falkland Islands Community School for Secondary Education, Brownies and Girl Guides, Beavers and Boy Scouts and young adults from the Hockey Club. The crew also visited sites related with the 1982 conflict and paid respects at the 2 Para memorial. They also visited the Argentine Military Cemetery at Darwin. The Governor Mr Nigel Philips, CBE and Mrs Emma Philips visited INSV Tarini. The Falkland Islands Hockey Team and local populace also visited the vessel while she was open for onboard visits. Team Tarini visited Infant, Junior and Mount Pleasant Schools and interacted with the children and also with Falkland Women’s Association and the Women’s Network. The Skipper Lieutenant Commander Vartika Joshi along with Lieutenant Commander Pratibha Jamwal gave a talk and presentation at the Falkland Islands Museum. The crew also visited various military facilities including HMS Protector and interacted with British Forces in South Atlantic Islands. The crew also experienced the vast ecological and biological diversity of the Islands which is particularly rich in wildlife. This is in consonance with the theme to promote awareness about marine pollution and contribute to their efforts towards environmental Consciousness. The visit of INSV Tarini to Port Stanley was covered widely in the International social media and the Falklands print and electronic media. The next port halt is scheduled at Cape Town, South Africa on 08 Mar 18. The above has been put forward as received in Press Release