Visakhapatnam is one of the most beautiful growing cities of South India and it is soon going to transform into a smart city too. The city has been attracting more and more tourists every year and nobody wants to leave once they visit here. No doubt that the geographical beauty of Vizag is hallucinating and it feels comfortable with the positive vibes that the city emits. Here are few pictures that will make anybody to leave their city and come and settle in Vizag. Also, if you are a Vizagite, this article will make you super proud of the city. Have a look. The mornings in Visakhapatnam looks like this. Who doesn’t want a view like this with a steaming cup of coffee every morning? The beaches here can give a tough competition to Goa and are extremely photogenic. Photo-shoot anyone? The beach road in the morning time belongs to exercise loving people and no vehicles are allowed till 7:30 am. The hills in the city are THIS beautiful. Isn’t it calming to the eyes! This is the Aerial View of the port. Look how magnificent and organised everything looks. The hill chapel, which gives positivity boost along with the hint of religion, is a place where one would go often. The view from this place is to die for. This is how the food looks here. Ps. The local food is really tasty and healthy along with maintained hygiene. Beach resorts and hotels in Vizag are AMAZING. See for yourself. The wide roads with greenery are so beautiful that you would drive here till your fuel tank empties. The beach road looks like this when it rains. Imagine a cup of hot chocolate and a balcony with this view. The perk of having a wildlife sanctuary in the midst of the city is that you can enjoy this view anytime you want. The dusk paints the city everyday and everything becomes magical. This is a common view here. Clouds and hills have always shows love to the city. The bird sanctuary by the city looks like this. WOW After dark view from Kailasagiri is this stunning. So, when are you booking tickets for Vizag? Ps. All the pictures have been sourced from various sites. All the credits are given.