Visakhapatnam is, arguably, one of the most beautiful cities in India. A city that is charmingly sandwiched between hills and water, Visakhapatnam has struck a chord with nature lovers since times immemorial. Be it the lush green landscapes, the sparkling blue waters, or even the impeccably well-maintained heritage sites, this city has innumerable tourist spots to catch the imagination of all. Visakhapatnam is filled with several captivating tourist spots that attract enthusiasts from different corners of the world. Be it the heritage sites, or nature escapades or even the man-made wonders, the port city has it all. Here, we take you on an exhilarating journey of 10 famous tourist spots of Visakhapatnam. The cable car experience at Kailasagiri gives unbeatable views of Visakhapatnam and is worth the time taken awaiting your turn in the queue. You can also take the really-slow train ride, go souvenir shopping and unwind atop the hill which has some wonderful viewpoints. Tenneti Park has witnessed an increase in the crowd and people seem to flock here as soon as the sun dawns and the spot remains crowded till late night. With lots of food and drinks options available, Tenneti Park is serving the city its best with a magnificent view of the Bay of Bengal and scenic sunrises. About 20 km out of the city, Erra Matti Dibbalu (Red Mud Hillocks) are the naturally formed ravines. These have been formed over the years because of wind currents and soil erosion. These ravines located near Bhemili were once almost 40 Mt high, and now only about 15 Mt high owing to erosion and human interference. The million-year-old vast stretch of red hillock covered by green vegetation with blue waters of the Bay of Bengal on one side provides a quaint feast for the visitors. RushikondaOver the years, Rushikonda has proved to be a major tourist attraction in Visakhapatnam. Be it the surrounding beaches, or the adventure activities, or even the recently introduced government initiatives, Rushikonda has been an integral part of a tourist’s guide to the city. For a heady rush of adrenalin, for the thrill of capturing leopards, jackals or even the viper, head to the Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary; which is actually a part of the reserve forest. Tucked away in the arms of the Eastern Ghats, the serene verdant precincts of the Indira Gandhi Zoological Park offers a sneak peek at some of the exquisite moments of the mysterious animal world. Whether you’re a tourist or a local from the city, you just can’t miss the Submarine Museum. Located along the scenic RK Beach, this unique museum is the only one of its kind in Asia. Apart from being another attractive feature on Visakhapatnam’s tourist map, the TU 142 gives us an opportunity to get a glimpse of our rich heritage. In addition to the many pristine beaches in the city, Bheemili beach too offers a breathtaking experience to many nature enthusiasts. When one pictures historical places, one does it with a measure of respect and awe for everything the place stands for. It is a site that is revered by one and all, and visiting it is expected to be a learning experience in spiritualism, love or whatever else the site is known for. One of the well-known heritage sites in Visakhapatnam happens to be the Thotlakonda Buddhist Complex.