Though Vizag is popularly known as the city of beaches, when the sun reigns over the city, the heat can get very unbearable. On such days, we wish to escape the city and search “places to visit near Vizag” on our phones. But going to the beach on a sunny day is not ideal at all. In fact, it’s better if people avoid going out at all. However, some people are bitten by the travel bug and they can’t resist travelling. These are the times when Araku Valley turns into a refuge for many. On the other hand, a day full of the sun is also when nature is at its lively best and hence, many people visit forest reserves on such days. After all, December and January might be the best time to visit Araku Valley but hot sunny days, in the middle of the year, are when we all need Araku Valley as well. With the heat wave striking Vizag currently, here are some places near the city which you might want to visit on a sunny day: The general rule of thumb is that when it gets sunny and hot, you go higher. Despite all that it has to offer, the lack of accessibility makes Duduma a less popular tourist attraction than it is meant to be. With a wonderful group of waterfalls on the Andhra Pradesh – Odisha border, and separated from all kinds of urbanity, Duduma is where the sun is easy on you. The cool weather dissipates and you get to enjoy the sun in the mix of the waterfalls. Due to the peace and natural beauty it offers, Duduma is the perfect place to visit on a tropical day. Distance from Vizag: 177 km Situated at Paderu, in the foothills of the Araku Valley, it is named so because of the famous pool which houses a large variety of fish. The temperatures are not troublesomely high here and sitting at the banks of this pool, you can enjoy a wonderful picnic with your family or friends. There’s a tiny bridge across this stream that gives you the chance to capture a serene view of all the greenery around the valley. Distance from Vizag: 109 km If you’re seeking a proper hill station to beat the Vizag heat, Lambasingi is your best option. Not more than 100 km from the city, this place differs starkly from the coastal city in climate. You know it when you enter Lambasingi because the mist envelopes you and puts the chill in your body. In the cool weather, you might choose to trek a hill and catch a breathtaking view or go for an easygoing activity like strawberry picking. Either way, you’re going to have a wonderful time. Distance from Vizag: 101 km For those who simply want to escape the heat, and visit an untapped, peaceful valley, Deomali is your best bet. Unlike Araku which can be crowded with tourists for most of the year, Deomali is much less known. With a combination of hills and plains, this place offers the perfect in-between temperatures for you to not feel too cold or too hot. To add to that, the summer and monsoon seasons give this valley a fresh colour and make it more attractive for tourists. Distance from Vizag: 165 km Vanjangi is every Vizagite’s new favourite winter destination. But who’s stopping anyone from visiting this beautiful place when the sun is on top of you? While the trek atop this mountain can be slightly challenging for amateur trekkers, the view from the peak makes you forget all the pains you suffered and even the sweat you broke on the way. Here’s a guide to help you prepare for your Vanjangi trip and allow you to have the best possible time there. Currently, it’s one of the most popular places to visit near Vizag. Distance from Vizag: 99 km Yes, Kakinada is another coastal town and not much, unlike Vizag. But you can avoid the beaches here and choose to visit the Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary. Nestled in the second largest mangrove forest in India, this place is a sanctuary from the heat and you shouldn’t have much difficulty finding shade here. From birds to plants, you get to see so many rare natural species here. You can also walk by the Godavari Delta, and capture a wonderful sunset by the river. Distance from Vizag: 153 km There are so many waterfalls in Araku and they are all excellent in their own way to beat the heat. Going with your friends, taking a bath in these waterfalls, or just sitting at the banks, you get to have a lot of cooling fun either way. From Devarapalli to Katiki to Chaparai to Thatiguda to Kothapalli, there are just so many waterfalls in the Araku Valley that the list is too long. But nevertheless, here’s a list of all popular waterfalls in the Araku Valley. Distance from Vizag to Araku: 114 km On a typical sunny day, the freshwater lake at Kondakarla Ava bird sanctuary mirrors the blue skies in its still water, while offering a serene environment for people to relish nature in. Bring your cameras with you if you want to capture some of the rarest bird species while rowing in the lake with your friends. It’s not too far from the city and yet, far enough for it to not be disturbed by the city’s pollution or crowds. On most days, you find Kondakarla Ava to be the perfect escape that doesn’t eat away your whole day. Distance from Vizag: 31 km