Kaamya Karthikeyan, the youngest mountaineer in the world to conquer the fierce Stok Kangiri (20,000 ft, Leh, Ladakh) is from Vizag. Wonder kid and young achiever, Kaamya Karthikeyan is the second youngest girl in the world to conquer Mt.Everest base camp. The Vizag girl is 9 years old and has to her credit, summits which few adults have conquered. She is a winner and conquered the 20,000 ft high peak Stok Kangiri. The target,Mt.Stok Kangiri is in Leh ladakh. A treacherous climb for any adult and more so for her. Cudos on accoumplishing this feat. She is expected to conquer much more ahead. Team Yo!Vizag wishes her all the very best and continued friendship with her in her career. (Updated content on post of July,29th 2017.) Read ahead to know more about Kaamya Karthikeyan. Kaamya Karthikeyan: A young girl’s journey to Mt.Everest and beyond. Blessed with an avid mountaineer in her Father who is part of the Everest Expedition Team and Mother who motivates her every step of the way, for little Kaamya there is no mountain high enough. Starting early, she accompanied her parents on weekend treks to Duke’s Nose in Lonavala where they were posted. At 3 and 4 years of age, she took on the Sahyadris and the challenging circuit of Rajgad in Pune later. If you ask her how difficult did she find it, she laughs it off. She loves it and always has and proudly acknowledges how her mother accompanies her on every trek. In Vizag there was no stopping Kaamya. She has trekked Dolphin Hills countless times, going from the base to the Lighthouse on top and taking the trekking route downhill. This is no mean feat and it prepared her for the tough, high altitude Himalayan treks she would undertake.  In May 2015 she scaled her first summit at Chandrashila at 12000ft before moving on to the dangerous Har ki Dun(11500ft), Kedarnath(12850) and Roopkund(16500), done in continuum in October 2016. Looking unto her Father for inspiration, Kaamya had prepared well for the Everest trek and aimed to accompany Him as high as possible on the risky slopes. Asked how she does it, Kaamya tells us that she would carry heavy baggage on her tender shoulders and brave the Dolphin Hill circuit, simulating and preparing for the difficult trek ahead. She maintains throughout that doing what you like, reduces the difficulties you face and pushes you forward, beyond breaks and falls. Her summer holidays are spent trekking and pursuing the slopes but its justice to books once back. I compensate by studying harder she says and smiles always. This young successor to Tenzing Norgay forged her difficult climb with a group called India Hikes. The hike was from Jiri, the last motorable road to the base of Mt.Everest in Nepal. Her smile belies the tests that Nature must have put her to. The rarified air and ragged path have won her many hearts and friends along the way. Whats next on her agenda? Something tall?? Yes. Stok Kangiri(20,500ft) in Leh, which is the highest trekkable summit in India in July and August is what she looks ahead to. For life she has plans. While training in Judo, Piano, Bharatnatyam and Carnatic music as hobbies, Kaamya will always put Nature first. She plans to be a Forest Officer and merge passion and profession. She speaks of a connect with evergreens she experienced on her many visits to Natural Reserves and Wildlife Sancturies. We wish our very own Everest Girl a safe passage on her heroic path and victory wherever her little foot falls.