Camping, the off-beat traveller’s soul-searching modus operandi. Camping spells adventure, pleasure, getaway, escape, fun and more in just one word. There is no better way to enjoy a combination of nature and adventure than by living it. Camping is all about living in nature, and Visakhapatnam is a treasure of undiscovered beauty as there are many spots to explore. Here’s all you need to know about this fun-filled activity in Visakhapatnam. Be it on the mountain reaches of Araku, the wilderness of Tyda, or the peaceful beach spots near Anakapalle, setting up camp is delightful. A few places that are ideal spots for camping and get you to scenic spaces are Paduva, Marthaguda, Jammguda and also the coffee plantations of Ananthagiri. If you are on a trip to a new place, then the localites in the region can also help in identifying places in the neighbourhood that are good for camping. While camping, take essentials like water, charged batteries, matches, easy to cook food, outdoor clothing, blankets/sleeping bags and insect repellents. Choose good quality camping gear and invest in sturdy tents that are easy to set up and dismantle. Choose your campsite before you are heading out and give yourself ample daylight time to pitch your tents. Travel in a group, and preferably with people who know the region. Check about the wildlife that you may encounter. And yes, be sure to seek permission or make prior bookings for a smooth-going trip. Starting from pitching tents, setting up camp to the open fire cooking and singing or chatting by the bonfire, there is everything and much more to love and do when camping. Enthusiasts recommend that you club this with another activity like a nature trail that can be enjoyed during the daytime. For the best experience, go with a group of friends or family and the serenity is apt for bonding and spending quality time. Let the urban way of life recede as you enjoy the basics in life. Plan your camping, rappelling and zummering trips with the DARE group. Contact Sridhar at 9000812348. (With inputs from Sridhar Vaddi)