THANE: Faced with an increasing number of rescued star tortoises within their limited enclosures, three wildlife NGOs including the Thane SPCA, the Resinq Association for Wildlife Welfare and the Wildlife Conservation and Animal Welfare Association, in collaboration with the Thane forest department has initiated the repatriation to their original habitats.
Over the past few years, the forest department had busted a number of poaching activities and had seized hundreds of endangered star tortoises, which are protected under the schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
However, of all these tortoises, not many survive as the mortality rate of these reptiles increases when they are removed from their natural habitat and kept under captivity.
With the overall increase in the numbers of these rescued tortoises and with it the number of those that die in the process, wildlife activists here realised it was high time these creatures were sent back to their original habitats, and thus initiated the repatriation initiative a couple of months ago.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoShakuntala Majumdar, president of Thane based NGO TSPCA, said, “Over the past years, the forest department has had a number of these encounters with poachers and confiscated hundreds of these start tortoises which they either kept at our Thane SPCA, the WCAWA in Dahanu, RAWW and with the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). While keeping them here for long is not advisable as they are not natives of this area and this climate, they have been left here for years as there is no other option, which has resulted in the death of many.”
“For the past three years, we at the Thane SPCA have been asking the forest department to repatriate these endangered tortoises back to their habitats, and thus not only reduce the pressure on those taking care of them here, but also their life span. Finally, in March, we sent four random samples of our lot and Dr Dinesh Vinherkar sent four samples from among the 17 star tortoises at WCAWA to the centre for cellular and molecular biology (CCMB) in Hyderabad for testing. In the first week of June, the test results revealed that they are all from the south India and the repatriation process is underway,” she added. As part of the repatriation process, the DNA mapping of the tortoises is conducted, wherein their habitat is identified.
“Once the DNA mapping is complete, the forest department reaches out to the other state forest officials and informs them about these tortoises. They then identify wildlife groups which take the responsibility of fostering these tortoises and slowly weaning them back into their wild way of living. As it is easier for any specie to survive in its own habitat, this decreases their mortality rate,” said Pawan Sharma, honorary wildlife warden and founder of NGO RAWW.
Forest officials here assert that the repatriation process is underway and over 270 star tortoises will be sent back home soon.
“In addition to the seven star tortoises at the Thane SPCA and the 17 at the WCAWA, there are around 200 star tortoises with us at the WCCB at the moment. The repatriation process in underway and there is a dialogue between the Maharashtra state forest department and the Karnataka state forest department about the transfer of these 270 odd endangered star tortoises,” said Dr Jitendra Ramgaokar, deputy conservator of forests (Thane).
Even within the star tortoise family, there are sub species which can be identified by DNA or gene mapping. Under this process, the DNA of the tortoise is analysed at the CCMB in Hyderabad and then analysed which part of the country the turtle belongs to. This process ensures that if a star tortoise is originally from north Maharashtra or Gujarat area it isn’t sent to the Karnataka side