SHIMLA: Himachal Pradesh government has constituted a high-level inter-agency coordination committee at the state level to control wildlife crime, poaching and illicit wildlife trafficking. It will also focus on strengthening information networks and enforcement mechanisms to combat wildlife crime by improving the coordination between different enforcement agencies in the state.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis committee will be headed by the principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife)-cum-chief wildlife warden, Himachal Pradesh, and have 16 members.
According to the state government's gazette notification issued on Tuesday, this committee will have the mandate for collection, collation and sharing of intelligence related to organized wildlife crime-related activities and its further dissemination to other enforcement agencies and their field units. It will also ensure co-ordination of actions among enforcement agencies and other authorities in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
The committee will issue an advisory regarding urgent matters related to wildlife crime and also advise the state government on issues related to wildlife crime and related laws. The committee would meet every six months or earlier, as per need. The wildlife wing of the state forest department will also be the nodal department.
The principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife)-cum-chief wildlife warden would be the chairperson of the inter-agency coordination committee. Its other members include the DGP or his representative not below the rank of IG; GOC-in-C, Western Command, Chandimandir, or his representative not below the rank of brigadier; additional director, wildlife crime control bureau, New Delhi, or his representative; commissioner (transport) or his representative not below the rank of joint commissioner; DIG, ITBP, Shimla; deputy director (enforcement directorate), Shimla; director of Shimla airport; senior divisional security commissioner, Railway Protection Force, Northern Railways Ambala or his representative not below the rank of DSP; director, state forensic science laboratory, Junga; director, prosecution department or his representative not below the rank of joint director; chief postmaster general, HP circle Shimla or his representative not below the rank of director; representative of CISF, Shimla airport; representative of department of customs; representative of Sashastra Seema Bal not below the rank of DIG. The additional principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife)/chief conservator of forests (wildlife) will be the member secretary.