NAGPUR: In a relief to Maharashtra government, Supreme Court on Friday refused to initiate contempt proceedings against its top officers in the case of alleged illegal shooting of Pandharkawada tigress T1, popularly known as Avni.
After hearing all sides, a bench led by Chief Justice Sharad Bobde, agreed to dismiss the case, but petitioner Sangeeta Dogra requested to withdraw it. The bench, also comprising justices AS Bopanna and V Ramasubramanian, then allowed her prayer and disposed of the plea.
Alleging breach of the apex court’s orders of September 11, 2018, by the government while allowing killing of the tigress, the petitioner had knocked SC’s doors praying for contempt against respondents.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoQuoting a postmortem report, she contended that the tigress was not a man-eater and gunshot wounds on her body were suppressed. She also claimed that a silver trophy was gifted by the forest department to shooter, Asghar Ali Khan, in violation of the SC order.
Dogra had named chief minister’s principal secretary Vikas Kharge, who was also in charge of state revenue and forest department, as one of the respondents. She pointed out that the government fabricated documents and filed false affidavit before the top court.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSubsequently on February 2, the SC had issued notices to Kharge along with former principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF) AK Mishra and deputy conservator KM Abharna, asking them to personally appear before the bench on Friday.
Pleading on respondents’ behalf, lawyer Kartik Shukul strongly contended that the Nagpur bench of Bombay high court’s orders on the same issue were already tested before the SC and raising the same allegations again would amount to review of its orders.
He pointed out that the petitioner’s allegation on breach of the SC orders was false as no specific act was ascribed to the respondents. “Two committees have already looked into the incident and submitted their reports. The state law and judiciary department had given its opinion on those and Mantralaya would work on it within four months. There’s no suppression in the postmortem report and it clearly refers to the gunshot wound in multiple places,” Shukul said.
He further argued that the question of whether or not the tigress was a man-eater was already decided by the HC as well as the SC.
After Khan killed the tigress on November 2, 2018, NGO’s — Earth Brigade Foundation and Bezuban Public Welfare Trust — filed a PIL in HC praying for directives to the state and the NTCA to initiate criminal proceedings against the shooters for illegal hunting, tampering with evidence at the crime scene and dereliction of duties under Section 9 of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Section 3 of Arms Act, 1959, Section 30 of Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.