CHENNAI: Pangolins, known as scaly anteaters, are one of the most commonly poached wildlife fortheir scales. In the last five years, 1,203 Indian pangolins were poached and trafficked in the illegal wildlife trade in the country, showed a recent study by TRAFFIC, a wildlife crime detection wing of the World Wide Fund for Nature - India (WWF-I). The study was done based on the seizures of scales, claws, carcass and other parts of the animal.

In Tamil Nadu, the number of cases of poaching/trading of pangolins is low, but the number of animals trapped is more than that of other states where the seizures are higher.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe study recommends there is a need for monitoring online sites, differentiating Indian and Chinese pangolins, DNA-based tech to track the source of the captured animals and sharing the information with the states where the animals are found is important to ensure its protection. 
Merwyn Fernandes, programme coordinator, TRAFFIC, said the poached pangolins are smuggled out of the country to east and southeast Asian countries. 
Between 2015 and 2021 in Asia, India had the highest number of cases of 287 pangolin seizures. The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence seized 336.9 kg of pangolin scales in 2019-2022, he said. Analysis of data showed that 1kg scale is plucked from an adult pangolin. The total number of pangolins in the illicit trade derived from the seizure data is only a conservative estimate, said the study. In India, Odisha reported the maximum number of seizures and the number of pangolins seized was 154.
The study also recommended that knowledge to identify and differentiate between Indian and Chinese pangolins in trade can play a significant role in understanding the impact of illegal trade on a particular species.
Trade of pangolins on social media posed a serious concern. Online sites are clandestine spaces that allow for direct trading and money transfer among traffickers and buyers. Hence, effective online monitoring is the need of the hour, it suggested.