BHOPAL/JABALPUR: A special judge in Sagar has acquitted 11 of 13 people sentenced to 7 years’ jail for allegedly poaching and smuggling pangolins and endangered turtles. The sentences of the two others have been reduced by three years, which means they can be released soon.
The appellate ADJ court also waived their penalty in its 148-page judgment, delivered on Saturday.Forest officials said the department will appeal against this verdict.
One of the key accused, Manni Murugushan, will continue to be in jail since Interpol has issued a red-corner notice (RCN) and an extradition case is pending.
As many as 37 people were named as accused in this case, 11 of whom are from Hong Kong, Bangladesh, Thailand, Malaysia, Sri Lanka and Madagascar. Efforts are still on to arrest foreign nationals through diplomatic channels. This was the first case in which the forest department had issued a lookout circular for the suspects. One of the accused died during the trials. A chief judicial magistrate (CJM) court sentenced 13 of them to prison terms in June this year.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAccording to K V S Thakur, counsel for accused Thamim Ansari, forest officials failed to prove that the accused were part of an organized syndicate. “There are no direct links between the accused. Moreover, forest guards were produced as cyber experts. There are several other flaws in the investigations,” Thakur told TOI.
All of them have been in jail for more than three years. “Those convicted will also be released soon since they have completed their term, as the sentence has been reduced by three years,” said Thakur.
The case was registered by Madhya Pradesh STF-wildlife (also known as State Tiger Strike Force) at Sagar on May 5, 2017, to investigate inputs on poaching and smuggling of pangolin scales and various turtle species, including one endemic to the Ganga basin, the red-crowned roofed turtle (Batagur Kachuga).
The MPSTF (wildlife), headed by DCF Ritesh Sirothia, conducted an investigation and booked 37 people under Wildlife (Protection) Act-1972. The penalty for crimes related to protected species of turtles includes three to seven years in jail and a minimum fine of Rs 10,000.
Sixteen of the accused were arrested from Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Twelve of them are previous offenders, some with multiple criminal records of involvement in crime of the same nature.
The other 21 have been tagged absconders — 10 are Indians and 11 are foreign nationals. Their bail requests have all along been rejected, from district courts to high court and Supreme Court.
The trial court has issued arrest warrants against all 21 absconders. The SC, while hearing a bail plea, had directed a speedy trial, following which CJM Sagar heard the case on a day-to-day basis and the high court monitored the progress.
Manni Murugushan was arrested at Swarnabhumi Airport by Thailand police in August 2012. He never appeared in court after getting bail from the Thai court, which issued an arrest warrant. Due to his fugitive status in Thailand, Interpol has issued an RCN against him.
Sirothia and his team had confiscated a Mercedes from him that was allegedly used for illegal transportation of turtles from Gwalior to Agra and Chennai.