NEW DELHI: Airports in India, including Delhi’s Indira Gandhi International Airport, are major conduits for trafficking wildlife contraband, according to a report by wildlife trade monitoring network TRAFFIC. It says that over 70,000 native and exotic wild animals and their body parts or derivatives and banned forest products weighing around 4,000kg were seized in 141 cases from 18 Indian airports between 2011 and 2020.
Chennai International Airport topped the list, followed by Mumbai and Delhi airports.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe seizures included flora and fauna, native and exotic, protected under the Wildlife Protection Act (1972).

The report titled ‘High Flying: Insight into wildlife trafficking through India’s airports’ said that among the common native species seized at Indian airports between 2011 and 2020 were Indian star tortoise, leopard cubs, red-eared slider turtle, iguana, python, spider, marmoset, tamarin monkey, tricolour squirrel and exotic birds. These were discovered in check-in and hand baggage. Floral species like agarwood, red sanders, sandalwood and medicinal and aromatic plants like Kuth saussurea costus were also seized.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreWCCB officials explained that airports offered low risks for those involved in illegal wildlife trade because of “shorter travel time and extensive reach”. The strict scrutiny at airports also detects trafficking more than at other transport hubs. Tilotama Varma, additional director, WCCB, said, “Traffickers smuggle wildlife and their derivatives through check-in luggage and personal baggage, by concealing contraband within passenger clothing, footwear and other wearables and through the wrong declaration of protected species, all of which makes detection cumbersome for enforcement agencies. The newly developed resources under the project will prove useful for bridging such gaps.”
The data for the report came from open sources and the actual number of species being smuggled out couldn’t be tracked. A TRAFFIC official said, “These are the minimum numbers reported. The actual trafficking would be higher. The items apprehended also included pangolin scales, leopard and tiger skin, monitor lizard skin bags and Tibetan antelope shawls. The list is quite long.”
TRAFFIC, with the assistance of United Nation Environment Program and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), has developed a programme for customs and the Central Industrial Security Force deployed at airports to detect wildlife trafficking. “TRAFFIC’s study of wildlife seizures at Indian airports has reinstated the need to strengthen enforcement efforts to curb the exploitation of the airline sector for conducting illegal wildlife trade,” noted Dr Saket Badola, head (India), TRAFFIC.
Officials said that to minimise violations of the Wildlife Protection Act, it was important to sensitise the frontline staff at airports. The tools developed for this include two online courses on curbing wildlife smuggling. These acquaint enforcement officials about relevant laws and regulations, point out how traffickers operate through airports and provides checklist for day-to-day operations. There are also posters and standees offering vital information about commonly trafficked wildlife species.
“The new awareness and capacity building tools developed for use in the air transport sector were launched at an event recently at the National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes & Narcotics, Faridabad. The programme aims at capacity building among the customs and CISF frontline staff,” said a TRAFFIC official.