NAGPUR: The Nagpur bench of Bombay high court on Wednesday permitted intervention filed by wildlife activist Sangeeta Dogra into alleged shooting of Pandharkawada tigress T1, popularly known as Avni. Dogra had prayed for reopening the case and fresh hearing. 
After hearing her through virtual mode, a division bench comprising justices Sunil Shukre and Anil Kilor said they were satisfied by her submissions that she is competent to assist HC in a dignified manner for upholding the cause of justice relating to the issue.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoShe is also allowed to appear in-person whenever hearing of her various applications related to the case would be scheduled. 
Dogra, also the director at Red Lynx Confederation, had challenged grant of permission by the competent authority to eliminate the problem tigress. Her another application was for recalling HC’s September 6, 2018, order where it had directed the PCCF and CCF to tranquilize the tigress and capture it and in case the capture teams fail, to eliminate her.
Before listing Dogra’s applications for hearing after four weeks, the bench directed her to provide their copies to the petitioner’s counsel Tushar Mandlekar, assistant solicitor general of India Ulhas Aurangabadkar, assistant government pleader NR Patil and respondents’ lawyer Kartik Shukul.
The directives came while hearing a PIL filed by wildlife lover Dr Jerryl Banait seeking stay against orders to shoot the problem tigress.
After the tigress was shot by the private shooter Asghar Ali Khan on November 2, 2018, NGO’s Earth Brigade Foundation and Bezuban Public Welfare Trust filed a PIL in HC praying for directives to state and National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) to initiate criminal proceedings against him for illegal hunting, tampering with evidence at the crime scene, and dereliction of duties under Section 9 of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Section 3 of Arms Act, 1959, Section 30 of Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
Dogra had earlier knocked the Supreme Court’s doors for the same case alleging breach of its September 11, 2018, orders by the Maharashtra government while allowing killing of the feline. 
Quoting a postmortem report, Dogra contended that the tigress was not a man-eater and gunshot wounds on her body were suppressed. She also claimed that the forest department presented a silver trophy to the shooter in a violation of the SC order. However, after the top court refused to initiate contempt against the government, she withdrew the case.