CUTTACK: The functioning of the ‘Wildlife Crime Cell’ created in the CID-Crime Branch of State police has come under judicial scrutiny with the Orissa high court seeking a status report on it since its creation seven years ago.
The HC sought the report on Monday while hearing a PIL highlighting the issue concerning deaths of elephants on account of illegal poaching in the state.
Replying to a query on the counter affidavit filed by the wildlife wing of forest department’s wildlife wing the state counsel drew the Court’s attention to the ‘Wildlife Crime Cell’ created in the CID-Crime Branch on October 16, 2016.
Not impressed by it, the two-judge bench of Chief Justice S Muralidhar and Justice R K Pattanaik sought on affidavit the present composition of the cell along with the actual number of cases it has investigated since its creation and whether it has resulted in trial and conviction of the offenders.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe bench directed the chief conservator of forest (Wildlife) to himself file an additional affidavit giving the details as it found the counter affidavit to be “vague in its particulars” in relation to the actual number of incidents of illegal poaching of elephants.
The bench further directed the Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) to give the details of the instances of illegal poaching of elephants in the last five years.
While directing for the additional affidavit to be filed within two weeks the bench expected it to provide details including the place/region where the incident took place, the actual action taken that is in the form of registering FIR, listing out the suspects/accused persons, arresting the accused persons, filing of chargesheet, details of the court in which the case is pending, status of the trial and whether there has been any conviction in the cases.
The bench posted the matter to August 8 for further nearing and sought the presence of the deponent in virtual mode on that day to answer the queries of the court.
Gita Rout (40), a resident of the city filed the petition. Advocate Ashis Kumar Mishra appeared on behalf of the petitioner.
The HC felt the counter affidavit filed in pursuance of the court’s July 5 order had limited itself to broadly talking of the steps taken for enforcement of the Wildlife (Protection) Act in general and the preventive and counter measures taken against illegal poaching of the elephants.
The HC in its July 5 order sought details on what corrective measures have been put in place to counter the challenges posed due to it.
“The court takes judicial notice of the fact that in the past two to three years there have been numerous incidents where forest officials have come across carcasses of dead elephants with bullet wounds and other injuries and have issued press statements acknowledging that these animals were victims of illegal poaching”, the bench had then also observed.