PILIBHIT: The district administration has approved allotment of 1.5 acres of land on the banks of Phulhar lake, where river Gomti originates, in Pilibhit's Madhotanda tehsil for setting up a turtle rescue and research centre under the Turtle Survival Alliance (TSA), a US-based organization working for the conservation of the amphibian.
Pilibhit is home to 10 identified species of turtles, including seven categorized in schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, out of the total 26 species found in India.Phulhar lake has a sizable population of the Indian soft shell turtle, one of the schedule I species.
District magistrate Pulkit Khare said, "Directions have been issued to revenue officials to execute the work on a warfooting.”
The decision has paved the way for identifying the turtle species in various wetlands in the district and to formulate strategies for their conservation.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe plan was pending for the last two years since the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) had identified Pilibhit-Kheri region as one of the five most sensitive destinations in UP prone to poaching and illegal trading of turtles.
Shailendra Singh, India programme director of TSA, said, “As the last turtle survey was conducted 10 years ago, there is an urgent need for reviewing the present status of turtle species in Pilibhit to find out any increase or decrease in their numbers and the actual loss to their habitats due to encroachments on the water bodies. The proposed project is aimed at carrying out a five-year research and conservation work in its first phase."
The project also envisages the setting up of an interpretation centre for a better understanding about this nature's scavenger, threats to its survival and role in aquatic eco-systems, said Singh. The project proposal to the tune of Rs 99 lakh had already been sent to the principal secretary, forests, but it was pending for the allotment of requisite land by the district administration, the TSA director said.
“As TSA has now been made an integral part of Namami Gange project and the turtle’s survival is closely linked with a wetlands, we have included the wetland conservation in our project,” Singh added.