BAREILLY/PILIBHIT: Forest department in UP has finally begun to penalise those who harm an animal either deliberately or due to negligence by enforcing the almost forgotten provisions of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. The authorities at Dudhwa Tiger Reserve (DTR) on Thursday imposed a penalty of Rs 4.5 lakh on a tourist bus for mowing down a chital -- spotted deer -- on a road that passes through the forest.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOfficials claimed that the driver was speeding.In Pilibhit, the forest and wildlife division booked and fined six villagers Rs 10,000 each for trapping a monkey near Mala forest range of Pilibhit Tiger Reserve (PTR) and smearing its face and body with black sticky motor oil.
According to Dudhwa officials, the bus from Gujarat was heading to Gaurifanta on the Indo-Nepal border in Lakhimpur Kheri district, when it ran over a chital in the buffer range of DTR on Wednesday. Since the bus was carrying Nepalese nationals, the forest department allowed the bus to drop the passengers but kept its documents. Upon returning from Gaurifanta, the bus was seized by Manoj Sonkar, deputy director of DTR. The driver was also detained. The bus was registered in the name of a Surat-based transporter, who agreed to pay the penalty for the accident. The bus was released on Thursday.
Sanjay Pathak, field director of DTR, told TOI, “The incident happened a few kilometres outside the core area of the reserve. The chital falls under schedule 3 of the Wildlife Protection Act, which is why a cash penalty was imposed on the bus owner. If the accident had taken place in the core area, the driver would have been sent to jail for sure. Several signboards are placed in the region requesting people to drive slow but a few people exceed the speed limit and risk the lives of wild animals.”
In a separate incident in Pilibhit, a case was registered against six villagers of Methi Saidullaganj village by forest and wildlife division for allegedly being cruel to a monkey that was "terrorising" people, damaging household goods and ripping their clothes put out for drying. They had trapped the animal and poured motor oil over it, smudging its face and body. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe incident took place on July 13, but the matter came to the fore after a video of the act went viral on Thursday.
Sanjeev Kumar, divisional forest officer, termed the act as a crime against the monkey, that is listed in schedule II of the Wildlife Protection Act. He said all the six accused were rounded up and booked under relevant sections of the Act. They were released on personal bonds only after each paid Rs 10,000 as penalty.
Meanwhile, forest department staff located the monkey, managed to capture it and cleaned it up before setting it free.