CHENNAI: The star tortoise is one of the wildlife species that is still heavily traded illegally out of Chennai. According to wildlife experts, live star tortoises are frequently shipped from the city to different locations.
M Kirupasankar, deputy director of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau for the southern region, stated that more than 2,200 live star tortoises had been seized in two locations within the country and one abroad.In both cases, the consigment originated from Chennai. The first seizure occurred in Bengaluru in December last year, while the other two occurred in Kolkata and Bangkok in July.
Speaking of the smugglers' methods, Kirupasankar said they transported live star tortoises by train from Chennai to Kolkata, where railway police apprehended them. He said that Tamil Nadu-based smugglers were arrested in both cases.
According to a state wildlife official, the star tortoise is a protected species under Schedule IV of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Those who engage in this trade, particularly first-time offenders, will be penalised. However, depending on the seriousness of the offence, if a person is proven to be a repeat offender, the penalty amount will escalate with imprisonment and/or both.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeGrammarly Discover How To Craft High-Quality Writing Faster (Learn How)Grammarly "We suspect that it reaches northeast India and from there to various southeast Asian countries, where there is great demand for keeping this animal as pets," he said.
According to a state wildlife official, inadequate vigilance at locations of collection and a lack of data on the species' population are the two main causes that support trade in this species. The department has already located some of the sources from which live star tortoises were gathered and brought into the country illegally. This includes Palamner forests in Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh and Vedharanyam forest and Tiruvallur district's bordering forests with that state.
A study by a team of researchers seven years ago recommended that a detailed study has to be carried out to establish the impact of this illegal activity. It also recommended that wildlife laws and enforcement efforts alone cannot yield results.