Kochi: When it was reported that 30kg ambergris was seized from Thrissur last year it had sparked a flutter for it was for the first time that the illegal trade in the rare treasure found in whales’ bellies was reported from the state. 
Though several such cases have cropped up since then lab tests have confirmed that many of these seized substances were fake forcing forest officials to take such claims with a pinch of salt. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
In fact, the authorities have not been able to confirm the authenticity of the so-called ambergris seized in any of the five cases recorded in the state so far. Forest officials figure that what is mostly going by the name of ambergris trade may be just a ploy to make some quick bucks with fake products.
In one instance, the ‘ambergris’ seized from Munnar last year was found to be frankincense upon lab inspection. “In another instance, the samples of so-called ambergris seized in a case were sent for testing at a laboratory in the state to confirm its authenticity. The lab was not able to extract DNA from it. We suspect it might be a concoction of chemical compounds. It has to be noted that it is impossible to get ambergris off Kerala coast. It is mostly seen off the Oman coast. Since the authenticity of the ambergris seized in many cases could not be established so far, we decided to exercise caution while dealing with such cases and not to jump into conclusions. Police can register cheating cases against the accused for money laundering,” said an official with the forest department.
He said around five cases were registered in connection with the seizure of ‘ambergris’ in the state in the past one year. “A news story about fishermen in Yemen who made a fortune from ambergris appeared last year. In Kerala, cases of ambergris seizures started to crop up soon after this incident. The first case from the state was reported in Thrissur when forest authorities, along with Wildlife Crime Control Bureau seized 30kg ‘ambergris’. The case is sub-judice,” said the official.
Scientists in the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) too said in many instances seized ‘ambergris’ were found to be fake. “In several cases, the substances seized from Kerala and Tamil Nadu were not genuine. ZSI managed to extract DNA from a sample at its lab in Kolkata,” said Dr Bineesh K K, senior scientist with ZSI.