MADURAI: Citing a Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) report that Tamil Nadu elephants were being poached by culprits from other states and that no action was being taken against middlemen and kingpins, Madras high court has ordered a CBI probe into all elephant poaching cases in the state. The central agency is to submit a status report before the court after three months. The court had also directed the WCCB to assist the CBI in the probe.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The court passed the order while hearing a batch of public interest writ petitions before the Madurai bench in 2018, seeking to prevent poaching and electrocution of elephants in Tamil Nadu. A division bench of Justice MM Sundresh and Justice N Sathish Kumar said the WCCB revealed transactions including transfer of money through banks, and added: "Poaching activities are not done merely for livelihood but for international trade and sadistic pleasure in creating art with other living beings. The greed of man could be seen from the transactions that had happened."
Citing the recent death of at least eight elephants and recovery of 300kg ivory from the possession of criminals, the judges asked how come only male elephants got ‘electrocuted’ and how such deaths happened despite the presence of a large number of field level forest personnel and their watchful eyes.
The judges said that the crime which had been happening in Tamil Nadu forests prior to 2015 extended not only to other states but beyond the national borders now, and added: “We are not dealing with a case of mere poaching. Demand has been created by unknown customers, whose name would come out only after the investigation.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe judges also observed that though the WCCB report was also sent to higher officials in 2019, they have not dealt with the specifics given in the report nor had taken action against middlemen or kingpins.
The judges said there are two types of cases – those where no complaint was filed under the Wildlife Protection Act; and cases where no action was taken despite availability of information. Noting that a cross-border investigation was necessary, they then directed the CBI to take over the investigation in the pending cases. The judges said that WCCB could render their assistance to the CBI in these cases as the issue came to light only after their investigation. 
The judges observed that the WCCB had submitted a separate report giving several recommendations to prevent the electrocution of elephants due to overhead transmission lines and illegal solar powered fencing by private persons. Though the State had stated that they had accepted the suggestion of WCCB and the work is in progress, the judges noted that such works are only done in the Megamalai forest areas in Theni district. They directed the government to give effect to the WCCB report in all the forest areas across the state and submit a compliance report. The cases were then adjourned to June 10 for further hearing.