DEHRADUN : In the first high level meeting between director general of police and principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) and, the fellow officials of both police and wildlife to deliberate over wildlife crime, the emphasis was laid on coordination and sharing of intelligence between both the departments. In wake of several incidents of wildlife crime in the state, primarily the most sensitive among them, the seizure of five tiger skins and subsequently one more tiger skin recently, the chief minister had directed top brass of both the departments to work in tandem and hold regular meetings to control the wildlife crime.
PCCF (wildlife ) DVS Khati said, “It has been seen that police nab the poachers from some other states and show their arrest near a wildlife area to the media, which paints a bad picture of the wildlife department.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThey would also magnify the cost of the animal organs as per international market to hype the matter. They also corroborate if the skins are of animals from Corbett or some other places. However now it has been decided that they would take along wildlife officials in the press briefing and give responsible statements. “
He said, meeting held by the topmost officials of police and wildlife department would send message down the ranks to coordinate with each other at every step. Khati also added that the investigation in the five tiger skins is quite slow as the police is also inundated with several other cases.
Neena Grewal, director of Rajaji Tiger Reserve said, the police would also share intelligence about wildlife criminals with the wildlife department and would include their team in the investigation.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSpecial Task Force (STF) of Police has been proactive in nabbing the wildlife criminals with their consignments lately. Senior Superintendent of Police, (STF) P. Renuka Devi said, “The police always nab the criminals from the spot where they carry out dealings about sale of wildlife organs. The criminals might have killed animals at any forest before. Police also consult forest officials in identifying the animal body parts as well as evaluating their cost. So this way, we coordinate with the wildlife wherever it is necessary and will continue to do so.”
On the issue of intelligence, she said, wildlife department too has its own Central intelligence agency , Wildlife Crime Control Bureau which keeps tab over the wildlife crime and the criminals related to them. Now the state wildlife department, also is gearing up its intelligence set up. However, she said, the police would continue to support the wildlife in intelligence sharing.