DEHRADUN: The Enforcement Directorate (ED) has joined hands with state and central agencies to fight wildlife crimes. ED would now attach properties of the kingpins who have amassed wealth on account of committing wildlife crimes. 
 Tilotma Verma, additional director, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), told TOI, “The leopard skin seizures in Uttarakhand has been a frequent where involvement of Nepalese suggests a cross-border nexus.The mandate of WCCB is to collect intelligence and make the state coordinate with all the stakeholders and intelligence agencies. So, we need to put all of them, including those related to customs, ports, airports, on board to handle cross-border crimes. The role of ED in forfeiting the proceeds from the wildlife crime is an important step in that direction.” 
 Dhananjai Mohan, chief conservator of forests, said that the decision of taking along ED in the initial state of inquiry itself and later in attaching properties of kingpins under the Money Laundering Act will prove to be a big deterrence in wildlife crime. 
 “Other central agencies, such as SSB, ITBP, Railway Protection Force, and state agencies, such as Regional Transport Office and Special Task Force, expressed keenness in getting training in understanding the forest and wildlife related laws as well as the rare and endangered wild animals to take effective action against the criminals in their domain. In that light, special training modules will soon be prepared and executed with the collaboration of WWCB for these agencies,” he said. 
 In view of the availability of the online wildlife data on the WCCB website, Mohan said that each divisional forest official will now feed in the crime data in the online portal, as and when crime is committed in their areas. “This will help in creating profile sheet of the criminals as well as help investigators dig out their entire details, even if they come from some other state, commit crime in Uttarakhand and take refuge in a different state,” he said.