RAIPUR: Chhattisgarh's wildlife is on the target of poachers as Gariyaband police on Wednesday arrested a 55-year-old man for allegedly trying to smuggle skin of a leopard in the region after he killed it to sell it in markets.
The accused in Kasaarpani told police that he had killed the leopard by poisoning the water and then peeled its skin with an axe.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe accused Ramnath Netam had then sprinkled salt on skin to let it dry on a tree stem. He had destroyed and burnt the teeth, nails and remaining hair of leopard in fear of being caught and had hidden the skin later under a rock till he went out to find a purchaser. 

Gariyaband SP Bhojram Patel said police learnt that the accused was searching for customers in Barula village to sell the leopard skin.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreOne of the police constables, posed as a customer approached him and he struck a deal with the accused for Rs one lakh. The accused asked him to wait till he gets the leopard skin. He returned after an hour empty handed with a condition for advance payment of Rs 50000 before he hands over the skin. But police then didn't wait and other cops present in civil dress on spot arrested the accused. It was during interrogation, Netam revealed the truth and confessed to the crime.
As per the police and forest officials, the exact value of the seized skin was yet to be ascertained, though it may range in several lakhs in the international market. The length of the skin, excluding the tail, is 46 inch and the width is 13 inches.
Police arrested the accused under sections 2 (16), 9, 39 (3), 49 (B) of Wildlife Protection Act 1972 and was sent to jail on judicial remand.
The spotted big cats are under threat with increasing numbers of leopards being poached for their body parts, including bones, claws and skin, and villagers killing them for straying into human settlements.