RANCHI: The state forests and environment department is making efforts to improve its relationship with the locals to put a leash on wildlife crimes across its command areas.
 The department will train its frontline foresters and officers in ways to deal with locals living in the area under its new resolutions to prevent wildlife crimes like poaching and illegal tree-felling racquets in the state's reserves, national parks and sanctuaries.
 Information has become the prime focus of the department. The new wildlife crime control protection scheme, whose draft regulation got the necessary cabinet nod for implementation on Tuesday, will give the department the authority to set up state level wildlife criminal cell.
 The department will train frontline foresters in raising awareness among locals living closer to the protected animal habitats and reach out with the need for environment conservation to school children.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More "The scheme is very new and not everything is crystallized at this time," forest and environment secretary Sukhdeo Singh told TOI on Wednesday. "The basic idea is to reduce the crime against wild animals and man-animal conflict. We are trying to incorporate the best practices of other states in fighting crimes against wild animals," Singh added.
 A training programme will be rolled out for the frontline staff in latest tranquilization techniques and modern search tool kits which will be followed by their procurement, insiders said. "Extensive awareness campaigns and interactions with locals for information exchange will also be undertaken," an officer said, maintaining anonymity. The department has provisioned Rs 3 crore in the 2015-16 fiscal for the scheme, Singh said.
 Though the department officially refused to divulge its plans, insiders said the regulation will focus on better patrolling in the reserves including patrolling on foot, which would in turn expand the ambit of patrolling.