BHUBANESWAR: The Odisha forest department has moved the Enforcement Directorate (ED) to register money laundering cases against three persons, including a woman, for allegedly monetising their social media accounts by displaying various protected animals, including snakes and langurs.
Susanta Nanda, principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife), recently wrote to the ED and sought a detailed financial investigation against the three offenders, who were arrested by the forest department last month for alleged violation of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTOI has seen the forest department’s letter addressed to the ED headquarters in Delhi.
Badrinarayan Bhadra and his wife Monalisha Bhadra, residents of Jajpur district, were arrested on March 27 for allegedly possessing some scheduled animals, including langurs. In another case, Mirza Mohammed Arif of Bhadrak district was arrested on March 23 for allegedly hunting monocled cobras.
The trio allegedly exhibited the illegally captured animals on their social media handles including YouTube, drawing millions of subscribers and viewers. “In both the cases, they have been suspected of getting a hefty amount of proceeds of crime as revenue from YouTube and other social media platforms. It is requested to take necessary action as per provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002,” the letter read.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe ED’s regional office in Bhubaneswar said they will look into the charges. “We will first conduct a formal inquiry. If we get evidence, a money laundering case will be registered,” an ED source said.
In the wake of circulation of photographs and videos of endangered animals on social media handles, the forest department on March 15 had warned of stringent action against violators. According to the forest officials, taking selfies with Schedule-1 species and dead animals is an offence under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
“It is seen that people are posting their photographs, selfies taken with scheduled wild animals on social media. Taking photographs-selfies with such wild animals not only disturb the normal life cycle of the animals but also leads to violation of provisions under Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. The offender is liable for punishment under the Act with imprisonment up to seven years,” read the department’s letter addressed to divisional forest officers, deputy director of Similipal Tiger Reserve (north and south) and director of Nandankanan Zoological Park, urging them to monitor social media and identify violators.