MEERUT: Close to one lakh mongooses are beaten to death every year in India for their fur that are used in making paints and varnish brushes, according to Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). The trade survived raids and seizures throughout the country due to their high demand. 
Now, during the lockdown, WCCB has come up with ‘Operation Clean Art’, a novel idea to kill its market.In a first such step, the WCCB will use social media platforms to reach out to students through their schools, colleges and make them aware about how paint brushes are made from mongoose fur.
"Mongoose plays an important role in the food chain of ecosystem, especially in agriculture as it renders a perfect biological control over pests. More than 90% of the artist community is ignorant about the source of hair brush. Students are also unaware about the fact that the brushes could be made of mongoose. Mongoose is protected under part II of Schedule II of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972. Thousands of mongooses are poached every year to meet the demand of the high quality brushes. So, through Operation Clean Art, we appeal all to stop using mongoose hair brush and contribute in keeping the ecological balance,” said HV Girisha, IFS and regional deputy director, northern region, WCCB.
Sister Gail Alfonzo, principal of Meerut-based Sophia Girls School, said, "This is indeed an eye-opener. The awareness campaign will not only expose students to animal trafficking and subsequent killing but also contribute immensely towards the conservation of wildlife by not indirectly becoming part of it." 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreIt is very easy to differentiate between the mongoose fur brushes and synthetic brushes. “If even one strand of brush is burnt and it gives the smell of burning flesh, it means it is made from animal fur otherwise synthetic strand leave smell of burning plastic, said Girisha. 
Although the present form of Operation Clean Art is only for the purpose of pan-India campaign against selling of Mongoose fur, it was first started as a nationwide drive to catch the poachers. More than 50,000 brushes and 113 kg of hair were seized across India after the operation began in November last year.
“For every kilogram of mongoose hair that is used in brushes, about 50 animals are killed. This is because only about 20 grams of good hair comes from every mongoose,” said Girisha.