NAGPUR: In a bid to curb wildlife crime, the state-level steering committee headed by chief minister Devendra Fadnavis has given a nod to set up a special task force (STF) in Maharashtra.
The STF in Maharashtra will be on the lines of Madhya Pradesh where it is called as Special Tiger Strike Force (STSF) which comprises five units.
State’s chief wildlife warden Nitin Kakodkar said the decision had been taken by a 12-member steering committee which met on December 5, 2018.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt was confirmed a few days ago after the state government gave the formal go-ahead to the forest department. “It is a good move and we will work on the modalities to set up the STF,” he said.
Maharashtra already has the NTCA-sponsored special tiger protection force (STPF) in Pench, Tadoba and Melghat tiger reserves, but this force is specific to a reserve and its buffer. The STF will be an independent entity with units and function like crime branch in police department.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteUndo“It is not that Maharashtra has not taken steps to curb wildlife crime by setting up anti-poaching squads and wildlife crime cyber cells in tiger reserves which have even powers to verify call details records (CDRs) of criminals. Due to lack of seriousness these units have virtually become defunct,” say forest officials.
The demand for STF was raised several times since 2013 when an organized tiger poaching gang was cracked involving international traders and Baheliya poachers trafficking 20-25 tiger skins from Vidarbha.
Official sources said the STF in state will train staff on legal and enforcement aspects of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, as well as wildlife crime prevention components such as the basics of anti-poaching patrolling techniques, intelligence gathering, informer network and handling, search and seizure, interrogation, hunting communities, crime scene investigation and the preparation of preliminary offence reports (PORs).
“The proposed STF will also brief on relevant provisions of Indian Evidence Act, Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Proceedings, and the powers conferred on them therein for the prosecution of wildlife crimes by especially territorial and FDCM staff, which is poor in handling such cases,” said officials.
“Due to multiple role of forest officials, there is lack of focus delaying investigations in wildlife crime cases. Hence, STF will be a better option, which can also deal with suspicious tiger deaths involving poaching,” said a wildlife officer.
“During the last 3 years, we cracked 400 plus cases in MP including international racket of pangolin smuggling. Of these cases, 15 were transferred to us by forest department. Over 31 cases are being fought in high court and 3 in Supreme Court. We have an employee strength of 32, which also includes clerical staff of 10,” DyCF Ritesh Sarotia, who heads STSF, told TOI.
Sarotia said the STSF deals with organized wildlife criminals in coordination with police and forest departments. “We also build capacity of staff and equip them to handle crime and trade issues in their respective areas,” he added.