DEHRADUN: The Union ministry of environment and forests (MoEF) is framing a set of guidelines to reduce mortality from snakebites in the country. This comes after snake — a wildlife species that claims as many as 58,000 lives in India every year— was officially added to the country’s list of “conflict species” earlier this year. 
The list is a classification of animals in the wild that humans have the most encounters with and was prepared by a developmental agency under the aegis of the German government for the MoEF.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe agency in collaboration with Dehradun-based Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is now framing draft guidelines to curb snakebite mortalities for the MoEF. 
Neeraj Khera, team leader at Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, which partnered with the MoEF in 2018 to craft guidelines to mitigate man-animal conflict, told TOI that the agency has maintained a list of “conflict species” in India since the past three years. The list has 10 species, including leopards, Asiatic elephants, nilgai and mugger crocodiles. 
Wolves, which were part of the list, were replaced with snakes in February this year, taking into account that the reptiles likely claim the highest number of human lives than any other wildlife species. Estimates suggest 58,000 people die every year due to snakebites in the country. According to the World Health Organisation, India records 2.8 million snakebites every year, the highest in the world. 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“There is a pressing need to address this issue as emergency complaints about snakebites to forest officials in the country have been on the rise. We will submit our draft guidelines to reduce animal-snake conflict to the MoEF by next month,” said Khera.
The guidelines will be made operational in three states — Karnataka, Uttarakhand and West Bengal — as part of a pilot project before being rolled out nationwide, said Khera.
Scientists at WII believe that a systematic approach to curb snakebites could help reduce mortalities. “Majority of the snakebite-related mortalities are due to the ‘big four’ — Indian cobra (Naja naja), common krait (Bungarush caeruleus), Russell’s viper (Daboia russelii) and India saw-scaled viper (Echis caninatus),” said scientist Chinnasamy Ramesh. 
India has as many as 500 snake species, but only 60 of them are venomous. So increasing awareness among stakeholders on ways to identify different species and bites, coordinating with hospitals that store antivenom, and disbursing information on measures to mitigate occupational hazards while rescuing snakes are some of the things the draft guidelines will address. 
Ramesh said the current rescue practices were “not acceptable”. “Snakes are rescued using bare hands or tongs, both incorrect practices that could harm the species. So the guidelines will also lay down standards for rescue.”
Other experts expressed hope that increased spotlight on snakebites could help address another issue — lack of options when it comes to antivenom.
Jose Louies, deputy director and chief of the Wildlife Crime Control Division at Wildlife Trust of India (Kerala), told TOI that India has only one kind of antivenom to treat all snakebites. “The same antivenom has been in use since the 1930s and may not be as effective in all kinds of snakebites. So there is need for research and development there.” Louies also said that Kerala is also bringing a policy to allow only certified snake rescuers to catch snakes in emergency situations.