CHENNAI: The state wildlife crime control bureau created four months ago to monitor wildlife crime has booked 105 cases. But it has been struggling with lack of resources, adequate number of vehicles, manpower and delayed payment of salaries.
Despite being a separate bureau, the cases are still handed over to the state forest department to arrest the culprits, in the specific ranges.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
A senior official told TOI that the non-payment of salaries was due to an administrative reason and not due to lack of resources. 
"For the past few months, employees have been registered with the Integrated Financial and Human Resource Management System (IFHRMS) which is an online portal for government officers for salary. All crime control bureau posts are mapped in the IFHRM portal and since many have been employed from other departments, they need to be added and that process will be completed soon," said the official. The problem has been resolved for Ramnad and Madurai. The process for Chennai and Coimbatore is still on.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThere are about 88 employees in the bureau of which only 42 have received their salaries until April. The issue will be resolved in a week, an official said.
The forest department is yet to give complete autonomy for the bureau to work on the cases. It has been working in coordination with central wildlife crime control bureau and is using intelligence from state forest department field officials on wildlife trophies and wildlife trafficking.
Tamil Nadu state wildlife crime control bureau, head, R Kanchana, said that bureau is new and different processes are being worked out. "We mainly focus on collecting intel on wildlife trade and trafficking across the state and already have several informers. We will work more on this network and improve the team. In a few months, they will become a formidable body," she said.