SURAT: Forest officials have arrested three persons and recovered suspected tiger skin from them at Ushker village in Surat district. The three were testing the skin by dipping it in water to confirm if it was real and were in search of a buyer to sell it for Rs 5 lakh. 
Forest officials got the skin tested by a government veterinary officer who opined that the skin was of an animal and it had similarity with tiger skin in look.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHowever, the officer suggested a test from the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, for confirmation. The skin samples will be sent to WII by the forest department. 
The three arrested persons were identified as Jetha Jaha Satiya (25), Dhiru Sama Gamit (54), and Raju Gamit (38). They were nabbed from Satiya’s home. The accused were produced in a local court on Friday and were sent to judicial custody. 
“Tiger is a protected animal under Schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act and trade of any of its body parts is a punishable offence. During investigation of another crime related to wildlife in Vyara, details of these accused were found and we arrested them,” said a forest official. Satiya told the forest officials that he had bought the skin for Rs 2 lakh and he was yet to pay the money to that person. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe was planning to sell the skin for Rs 5 lakh and the other two accused were helping him in looking for buyers. They were to get commission.
After purchasing the skin, the accused tested it by dipping it in water. “They were told by the seller that it was original. The accused are not aware from where the skin reached Surat,” the official added. The supplier of the skin has been identified and forest officials will arrest him soon. 
In the past, police had recovered suspected tiger skin in the city. But during tests, it was confirmed that the skin was of a cow and the stripes were painted using black colour. .