Rajasthan's chief wildlife warden Arindam Tomar feels lucky to head the wing in a state where people demand more tigers and reserves. But this also brings several challenges. TOI speaks with him on 50 years of Project Tiger. Read on...
Tiger population is constantly increasing and habitats are shrinking. Is there any effort to overcome the challenge?
With better protection, the number of tigers will continue to increase.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis has led to the need to find new potential forest areas suitable for tiger habitat. Now, we are looking at Udaipur forest which can host tigers. There are also many corridors in the region connected with Madhya Pradesh. After seeking the neighboring state support, the state forest department plans to revive these corridors.
Similarly, after the biosphere area did not become a reality, most of the areas earmarked has been converted into tiger reserves including Ramgarh Vishdhari. It takes care of most of the corridor between Sawai Madhopur and Kota. Similarly, Dholpur will be declared as tiger reserve (TR) and it will protect another corridor. This is how we have been successful in protecting the Chambal landscape for tigers. In Sariska, two forest areas of Alwar division will be included to expand the tiger reserve.
Fear of tiger reserves turning into islands. Your comments
As the human population increases, tiger areas will become islands. Wildlife theory states that once a tiger moves out of a protected area such as a sanctuary or a reserve, its chances of survival fall sharply, and hence it can be counted among the population likely to 'sink'. Our focus is to create more sources (a high-quality habitat that on average allows the population to increase) and keep the existing one safe.
Any work on revival of corridors?
We have a challenge to link up Sarsika Tiger Reserve with Ranthambore. In past, tigers were migrating between two reserves along the river. We have successfully retained the corridor between Ranthambore and Ramgarh Vishdhari. Tigers from Ranthambore had also gone to Mukundra Hills Tiger Reserve. We are able to sustain corridors and learning from the past will help make better management and efforts for the revival of new corridors. Normally in Rajasthan, tigers travel along the water channels and if we work to save some part of the water channels, connectivity will be improved.
Can a voluntary village relocation programme be expedited if the package is increased?
There is no limit to a better package. Once a higher package is provided, villagers' demands and expectations increase, and they wait for the next offer. We are not worried about tigers living with humans everywhere, the worry is tigers living without humans in some sources.
Is the surveillance system installed in TRs effective? How do you manage to keep poachers at bay?
Initial promise was to identify the tigers using the system. However, in all the photographs I receive, I get to see a tiger once in a month. Currently, it has not worked out, maybe in years to come, it can give better results.
To control poaching, all that we do here is the same as crime control in any police department. There is no guarantee that crime could be curbed. But we have an efficient staff and strength has increased.
Do you agree, tourism helps in effective monitoring? 
Tourism has advantages and disadvantages, if we say there are more eyes on the habitat, there is more protection. Ranthambore is the only reserve where there are so many eyes to look at. But the growth of tigers in other states including Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra is better, where there is less tourism comparatively. I do not buy that argument. When we have full staff and people's support, we do not require tourism for the purpose of protection.
But it has its different importance. It is required as people are economically benefited, and they support the conservation. Therefore, I value the tourism part.
Tiger reintroduction efforts failed in Mukundra? Your comments
There are only two success stories, Panna and Sariska to some extent. There has not been much success with reintroduction of tigers. We are still struggling and trying to learn from our past mistakes. But one cannot give up trying. Ramgarh Visdhari was always better than MHTR as it was less narrow and its buffer was wider. 
What challenges do you see ahead? Your take on project tiger
Rajasthan is the only state in the country where people demand for tigers and tiger reserves after the success story of Ranthambore. I have been lucky, but at the same time it's full of responsibilities.
Project tiger was built on the concept that since we are protecting the apex species, the whole ecosystem will be protected. this is not turning out to be true. We have tigers in STR, Ranthambore, but many other species have disappeared. Our focus is to bring them back to maintain the ecosystem. For instance, sloth bears are no more in Sariska. In the short-term absence of sloth bear will not make a difference, but it is one of the main species, which propagates large and seeded tree species. If a bear is absent from the forest for a long time, these trees will disappear and not regenerate.