Nagpur: India’s fight against wildlife crime got further boost when 14 young wildlife sniffer dogs, also known as ‘Super Sniffers, along with their 28 handlers will join the force after completing a seven-month-long training course in Haryana. 
Since 2008, Maharashtra has received 10 sniffers and will get three more for Amravati, Gondia, and Pandharkawda forest divisions, two each will join Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, and Odisha forests, and one each will be for Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, and Tamil Nadu forest departments.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTwo sniffers will join Railway Protection Force (RPF). 
The latest unit of wildlife sniffer dogs passed out from the Basic Training Centre Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force (BTC-ITBP) camp in Panchkula (Haryana), and is the ninth batch to be trained since the launch of TRAFFIC and WWF India’s pioneering wildlife sniffer dog training programme in 2008. To date, 88 wildlife sniffer dog squads have been trained. 
This programme was carefully designed to accommodate both basic obedience and detection skills specifically to combat the illegal wildlife trade. The dogs were taught to detect tiger and leopard skin, elephant tusk, skin, and antlers of spotted deer and sambar at the training institute.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe trainers used small-sized wildlife articles to accustom the dogs to find targets with low scent concentration in these complex environments. 
TRAFFIC’s India office head Dr Saket Badola said, “The sniffer dogs trained under the programme are working relentlessly in tough terrains and have so far assisted the agencies in over 400 wildlife crime cases. The response from the forest departments to deploy and use ‘Super Sniffers’ to control wildlife crime has been overwhelming.”
Badola said, “Other agencies such as the Railway Protection Force (RPF) and Customs are also interested in deploying wildlife sniffer dogs. We hope that in the coming years, wildlife sniffer dogs will be used by more enforcement agencies, who are mandated to protect and conserve India’s wildlife.” 
The two dog squads will be deployed by the Southern and West Central regions of Indian Railways under TRAFFIC’s newly formed alliance with the RPF. Last year, the RPF deployed two specialized wildlife sniffer dog squads for the first time in India to curb the smuggling of wildlife contraband through the extensive railway network. 
Ravi Singh, secretary-general & CEO, WWF India, said, “Starting with just two wildlife sniffer dogs in 2008, today that number has grown to 88. The dedication and commitment of the wildlife sniffer dog squads are admirable, and the dogs have been a game-changer in the efforts against wildlife crime.”