BHUBANESWAR: A joint team of state Crime Branch and forest department on Tuesday blew the lid off a well organised racket, involving online trading of endangered monitor lizard and other wildlife products. The sleuths raided a house in Brahmeswarpatna here and seized 210 dried sexual organs of the monitor lizards. 
The wildlife crime cell of the Crime Branch was questioning Chintak Joshi from whose possession the wildlife products were seized.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“Sale and purchase of monitor lizards and its organs is a criminal offence as the animal is listed under schedule-1 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Acting on tip-off, we raided the house. The veterinary experts of Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology (OUAT) examined the seized products and confirmed that the dried sexual organs belonged to monitor lizards,” special director general (crime) B K Sharma told TOI. Wildlife crime cell, a dedicated wing under the Crime Branch, is investigating the case registered under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
Sources said monitor lizard is high in demand in different states and abroad for their meat, oil and fat that are used in traditional treatment of bone fractures, chronic pain and other ailments. “We are trying to estimate the value of the seized wildlife products. We are also trying to know about the use of the lizard’s dried sexual organs. Prima facie, we learnt the wildlife organs were being traded online. We are trying to know the source from where Joshi procured the monitor lizards,” Sharma said. 
Official sources said smugglers buy each monitor lizard for Rs 2, 000 and sell them for Rs 6,000 or more. “The cost depends on the weight of the lizard. Its meat is used for food in some places in the country as many believe it is good for the muscles. Their oil and fat is extracted and sold for their medicinal properties,” said a wildlife expert. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreExperts said if anyone is caught with smuggling these animals, then the person can be punished with three to six months' imprisonment or a fine of Rs 25,000 to Rs 45,000 or both depending on the listed schedule of the species mentioned in Wildlife Protection Act.