Nagpur: Chief minister Uddhav Thackeray and state home minister Dilip Walse-Patil on Friday will inaugurate country’s first state government-owned Wildlife DNA analysis laboratory at Regional Forensic Science Laboratory (RFSL) in city. There are two central government-owned Wildlife DNA laboratory at Dehradun and Hyderabad. 
Walse-Patil, who would be in the city for a law and order review, will be present for the function while CM would remain virtually present. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Apart from Wildlife DNA laboratory, a fast-track DNA test unit at RFSL will also be inaugurated along with the same facilities in Mumbai and Pune exclusively for cases registered under the provisions of Protection of Children From Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act, 2012. The five laboratories in the state, including Nanded and Kolhapur, would have a fast-track DNA testing unit developed with the special fund of Rs 53 crore under Nirbhaya Yojana of Central government.
Director general of police, legal and technical, Sandeep Bishnoi, who was flanked by director of laboratories Sangeeta Ghumatkar and deputy director of RFSL, Vijay Thakare, on Thursday said that the wildlife DNA analysis laboratory would make Maharashtra the first state to own such a facility. “This laboratory would help in species identification and other tests apart from strengthening the prosecution arms against wildlife crime. We can now test the blood on the weapon seized from a poacher,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoBishnoi also said that he would suggest the CM and HM to bring institutes of forensic science under home department rather than education department.
Walse-Patil will also inaugurate a new premises for Hudkeshwar police station, creche facilities at six police stations, new police quarters and chair separate crime and law and order review meetings for Nagpur City, range and Gadchiroli range.