Coimbatore: Protecting the wilderness has become a more dangerous task than it was 20 years ago, said Ruth Padel, at a panel discussion on Wednesday, citing the murders of several environmental activists across the globe.
Speaking at the plenary session of the discussion titled EcoGuardians Unite: A panel discussion on Elephant Conservation and Environmental Harmony at the Kumaraguru campus, Padel, a poet, conservationist and Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and Zoological Society of London, said, “Protecting wilderness has become even more dangerous than it was 20 years ago.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoA good conservation should only oppose blind progress undermining nature and wildlife.”
“Any opposition will invite retaliation. Since the signing of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change, pro-environment activists have been killed across the globe. Most of them were killed for opposing dams, mining, large agri-business and exposing wildlife crime. So, in some places, conservation is a more dangerous task” she added.
Describing the younger generation as the future defendants of the wild, Padel said while the problems of conservation activities are universal, the solutions are always local.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute She mentioned a few of the remedies practiced in south India like flashing lights to chase away elephants and using honeybees to divert elephants as the solution to avoid conflicts.
She said that that Asian elephants live in 13 countries and are all across Southeast Asia adding that Nilgiris has the largest concentration of Asian elephants in the world. 
She said she was hopeful for the younger generation on whose hands lies the future generation of elephants.
Saravanan Chandrasekaran, Assistant Vice President, Kumaraguru Institutions moderated the session.