MUMBAI: A shocking statistic that nearly 60 exotic turtles -- mainly the red-eared sliders -- have been callously abandoned by the pet owners in the last six months during the ongoing pandemic.
 The wildlife NGO Resqink Association for Wildlife Welfare (RAWW) had rescued most of these abandoned marine pets from Navi Mumbai, Thane and Mumbai areas.
Just this Sunday, a red-eared slider turtle was found at Juhu Beach, close to Ramada hotel, in Mumbai, informed advocate Anil Dsouza, who had visited the shore with his family.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Honorary wildlife wardenand founder of RAWW, Pawan Sharma, said: ``Just recently, two red-eared sliders were rescued from Airoli creek (on December 2) and a waterbody in Ghansoli (on November 21). Pet owners who are not able to take care of these exotic pets during the pandemic are cruelly releasing such marine species in ponds, lakes and even beaches. However, since these foreign breeds cannot survive for long, they have to be rescued.''
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSharma added that besides rescues in Navi Mumbai and Thane areas, the exotic turtles and even species of Indian star tortoise have been rescued within Mumbai at CST, Dadar, Andheri, Chembur, Powai , Santacruz, Kanjurmarg , Mulund among other areas earlier this year. ``Some of the turtles were also abandoned in gardens or dumped inside dustbins. It is better to hand over the exotic pets to a responsible animal NGO, if the pet owners are unable to afford their maintenance costs,'' he added.
The red-eared sliders are originally from south America and Mexico; but because of their attractive looks, they are smuggled all over the world to be sold as pets.
``It is harmful and illegal to release exotic marine animals in local Indian environment as it can lead to an inter-species tussle with the indigenous turtles and tortoises. The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau has in the past take action against the smuggling of exotic turtles and other wild species,'' added Sharma.