Capturing the attention of audiences the world over, Prime Video’s Original crime series, Poacher, has zoomed atop watchlists and recommendations as it premiered this week. Written, created, and directed by Richie Mehta, the riveting series is based on true events about the largest ivory poaching raid in the history of India.
But what really sets the series apart from what you’ve already seen before: 
Murder is murder, whether it is that of humankind or animals
The story of Poacher deals with the grim reality of murders, that of the animals, for selfish human gains.With Poacher, Richie Mehta, the writer, director and creator of the series, focuses on the brutality of elephant poaching for the purpose of fueling the ivory trade economy. The series sheds light on the consequences of human actions on these endangered species, thus, emphasising the risk of consequences, including the extinction of the entire animal species from the planet. 
A gripping story based on true events
Poacher is a series based on the true events that unfolded in Kerala in 2015. The story was submitted to Richie in 2015 while he was working on a crowdsourced documentary. One such footage that he received during that time was that of an ivory raid in Delhi, which was submitted by the NGO Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). Upon further investigation, Richie found out that the WTI executed the largest ivory bust in Indian history on that day, after a 9-month investigation around the biggest wildlife smuggling ring in the country. After hearing about this raid, he took it upon himself to begin a thorough research. As he progressed with his research, it became clear to him that this wasn’t just about saving elephants from getting assassinated, but it needed to address dozens of issues ranging from our relationship to all other life on earth, to indigenous people and how they are integrated (or segregated) in society, to what the laws of the jungle truly are (both the natural and asphalt one!), and how they are ingrained in us. That’s how Poacher took life. 
The characters of the show are modeled on real wildlife crime fighters

The lead characters of the series, Mala Jogi (played by Nimisha Sajayan), Alan Joseph (Played by Roshan Mathew), Neel Banerjee (played by Dibyedu Bhattacharya) along with Vishal, Alan’s mentor (played by Sudhanva Deshpande) are modelled on real-life crime fighters. 
Nimisha Sajayan plays Mala Jogi, a range officer from the Kerala Forest Department who leads the field investigation. While the character represents several individuals Richie met during the series research, it’s mainly modelled on Manu Sathyan, DCF of Kerala Forest Department, who played a pivotal role in the real-life operation to tackle India’s largest Ivory poaching ring. 
Roshan Mathew as Alan Joseph, a tech-savvy conservationist and a wildlife crime fighter at WTI, is a role inspired by Jose Louies, the chief of the Wildlife Crime Control division at WTI. 
Dibyendu Bhattacharya portrays Neel Banerjee, who is serving as a field director in the Kerala Forest Department and a former intelligence officer employing intelligence-gathering techniques for the operation. The role is inspired by Amit Mallick, the driving force behind real-life operations, who ensured the execution of the mission with clinical precision.
Shot in real locations

To uphold the story’s authenticity, Poacher has been filmed in real-life settings in Kerala and New Delhi. The extensive forest scenes were shot in the forests of Kuttumpuzha in Kerala. 
The visionary behind the lens - Richie Mehta

Richie Mehta is an Emmy Award-winning director, creator, writer and executive producer. Mehta's first feature film, 'Amal' (2013), starred Naseeruddin Shah, Roshan Seth, and Seema Biswas. The film won over 30 international awards, was nominated for 6 Genie awards, including Best Picture, Director, and Adapted Screenplay, and was named one of the top 10 Canadian films of the decade by the Canadian trade magazine Playback. He then wrote and directed 'I'll Follow You Down’ (2013), a sci-fi drama starring Gillian Anderson, Rufus Sewell, and Victor Garber, and 'Siddharth’ (2013), a Hindi-language film that premiered at the Venice Film Festival. Siddharth received over 25 international awards and was shortlisted for Best Foreign Language Film at the 2015 Golden Globe Awards. Mehta then directed the feature documentary 'India in a Day’ (2016), tracking a day in the life of India, produced by Ridley Scott, and an episode of the Apple TV+ anthology series 'Extrapolations’ (2023). Mehta recently created, wrote, and directed the 7-part series 'Delhi Crime’ (2019), revolving around the Delhi Police’s investigation of the infamous gang-rape of a young medical student on a bus in 2012. The series garnered widespread critical acclaim and won several awards - including India’s first International Emmy for Best Drama Series and the Asian Academy Award for Best Drama Series and Best Director.
Poacher: Truly a worldwide release
To maintain the authenticity of the story, Richie Mehta shot the series in the spoken languages of all the people involved in the operation. The series primarily unfolds in Malayalam, Hindi and English. It will also be available for audiences in English, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Hindi and will have subtitles in 35+ foreign languages.
Produced by QC Entertainment in association with Alia Bhatt’s Eternal Sunshine Productions, Suitable Pictures and Poor Man’s Productions, Poacher will be available to stream in 240 countries and territories starting Feb 23, 2024. 
Disclaimer: This article has been produced on behalf of Amazon Prime Video by Times Internet’s Spotlight team.