LUCKNOW: In a boost to crackdown on sandalwood thefts, the special task force of UP Police arrested wildlife criminal Rahul Gulabsingh alias Kuttu from Lakhimpur Kheri on Thursday. 
Logs of 8-10 sandalwood trees were found from his hideout. 
Member of the Baheliya community, which is infamous for poaching, skinning and deboning tigers and other forest crimes, Kuttu managed to escape from the custody of Maharashtra Police in January.He was arrested by CBI in March 2015 from Katni in Madhya Pradesh. In his 30s, Kuttu is accused of poaching at least five tigers.
STF additional superintendent Arvind Chaturvedi said, “Through informers and some local tribes we learned a gang was attempting to poach a tiger in Dudhwa Tiger Reserve. It was worrying because Kuttu is adept at using primitive metal traps.”
Chaturvedi said some members of Kuttu’s gang have worked for Veerappan in the past.
Due to constant eyes of central law enforcement agencies such as CBI and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau. He was found to have been staying in a roadside tent in an isolated part of Kheri town, at a distance of 40km from the core forest area.
Tiger population in Dudhwa was pegged at 118 in the last count. 
Chaturvedi said some Pardhi tribe members worked for Kuttu. “Kuttu’s area of expertise is forest and wildlife. He knows how to raise money even in desperate times. He knows the value of sandalwood trees,” added Chaturvedi.
In October and November, 35 to 40 sandalwood trees have been hacked in the region. In Lucknow, three FIRs have been lodged pertaining to sandalwood thefts. Using motorized saw and light commercial vehicles, miscreants have been able to cut down matured trees at highly secured and gated compounds such as NBRI (near Sikandarbagh in Hazratganj), CSIR (Khurramnagar) and the bungalow of a senior army officer in Cantt.
Kuttu’s role was also being examined in disappearance of Rashtrapati, an extremely popular tiger from Nazgira tiger reserve in Maharashtra. He is believed to be have been killed by Kuttu.