NAGPUR: India’s efforts in countering wildlife crimes have generally focused on large, iconic species. But lesser-known, less-charismatic and relatively abundant species like golden jackals may form a large part of illegal wildlife trade. 
Another conservation concern is the use of wildlife in religious and superstitious practices. It has given rise to national and international online markets.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
In a new study, scientists from the Wildlife Conservation Society–India, University of Florida (USA), Ashoka Trust for Ecology & Environment, Wildlife Conservation Trust, National Centre for Biological Sciences, James Cook University (Australia) and Conservation Initiatives find that golden jackals in India are threatened by poaching and trade, driven by religious beliefs in sorcery and superstition.
Scientists collected publicly available information from government seizure data, news reports, social media posts, blogs and e-commerce platforms to create a repository of jackal hunting, poaching and trade incidences from 2013 to 2019. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe findings revealed that 126 skins, 8 tails, more than 370 jackal horns, 16 skulls and two live jackals were seized by the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). 
The analysis brought to light a widespread demand for a talisman that appears to be derived from the jackal skull known as ‘jackal horn’ in English, ‘siyar singhi’ in Hindi and ‘nari kombu’ in Tamil/Kannada/Telugu. 
The ‘jackal horn’ trade is fuelled by extensive online endorsement and unsubstantiated claims made by religious practitioners. The demand, based on superstitious and ritualistic beliefs, points to a largely ignored threat to India’s wildlife that similarly targets monitor lizards, pangolins, leopards, musk deer, snakes, owls and other species.
“Our preliminary assessment is an important first step to understanding the type and nature of poaching threats to a relatively common but often overlooked species. The data base of open source reports could fill knowledge gaps related to the jackal trade in India,” said Malaika Mathew Chawla, the lead author of the study.
Co-author Arjun Srivathsa explains, “Many aspects of the trade like demand and supply chains remain unknown and require further investigation and research. The illegal wildlife market, driven by sorcery and superstitious practices, potentially threatens a wide range of rare as well as common wildlife species.”
The study titled — ‘Do wildlife crimes against less charismatic species go unnoticed? — a case study of golden jackal poaching and trade in India’ was conducted as part of the Wild Canids – India Project and published in a Journal of Threatened Taxa.
The study also showed that jackal meat is consumed by several communities in the north-eastern states and parts of western, central and southern India. Jackal body parts such as head, skin, tail and teeth find use in traditional and cultural practices in southern India and jackal organs are believed to have medicinal properties in Central India. 
The scientists said poaching and trade of skin, teeth, tail and hair have been documented in media reports from several Indian states. The sale of jackal horn appears to be common place in Indian trade markets as evidenced by advertisements on social media and popular online retail outlets.