Emmy Award-winning filmmaker Richie Mehta’s crime series ‘Poacher’ is finally streaming on Prime Video. The show, starring Nimisha Sajayan, Roshan Mathew, and Dibyendu Bhattacharya in crucial roles, is garnering rave reviews from netizens. The series started streaming on OTT today, February 23.
Interestingly, ‘Poacher’ also marks Mollywood stars Nimisha Sajayan and Roshan Mathew’s third project together after ‘Chera’ and ‘Oru Thekkan Thallu Case’.Ahead of the release of the show, Nimisha Sajayan penned a heartfelt note for her team, and also praised her co-star Roshan Mathew. In her note, Nimisha Sajayan said, “@roshan.matthew My ALAN. Every time I work with you on a project I am constantly amazed by your talent. This was my third project with you, and I continue to be in awe of the way you perform.”

Roshan Mathew too penned a sweet note for her, which reads, “@nimisha_sajayan my constant collaborator and the unpredictable ball of energy on set. I’m proud of you.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More
 An eight-part crime drama ‘Poacher’ is based on true events, which uncovers the largest ivory poaching ring in Indian history. 
'Poacher' Malayalam Trailer: Nimisha Sajayan and Roshan Mathew starrer 'Poacher' Official Trailer
Nimisha Sajayan, who plays the role of Mala Jogi, a Forest Department officer, earlier stated that the show has been a transformative experience for her. “Being a part of Poacher has been a transformative experience for me. My character is intricately layered, having nuances of a strong-willed forest official with deep empathy and love for wildlife. She is driven to bring the poachers to trial, and goes beyond the call of duty to unearth the deep and wide network of ivory smuggling. The series will compel viewers to ponder on the irreversible impact of humans' actions on animals and the environment. It is a story that needed to be told, and I am grateful to be a part of a forthright project highlighting such an important issue,” she said in a statemen