A driver has been arrested in the wildlife act breach case involving actor Srabanti Chatterjee. Last month West Bengal forest department had issued a notice to Srabanti for allegedly shooting with a chained mongoose and sharing the photographs on social media. On Wednesday the driver who used to keep the chained mongoose with him always was taken into custody after further questioning. The mongoose was also rescued from the driver’s home in South 24 Parganas’ Nepalgunge.
After preliminary investigation, the forest department officials have revealed that the driver was working for the production house with whom Srabanti is doing a film right now.The actress had earlier told the officials that she found the mongoose with that driver named Bharat Haati. 
Srabanti was booked under sections 9, 11, 39, 48A, 49 and 49A of the Wildlife Protection Act 1972 for illegal wildlife capture, transport and possession of the animals in violation of the act and was also asked to appear before the office of Wildlife Crime Control Cell and Data Management Unit in Salt Lake. If proven guilty, she could be jailed for up to seven years. 
The notice was sent to her on February 15 and she was asked to appear before the investigating officers within three days. However, she skipped two dates and finally met the forest officials on Monday.
 The forest officials are saying that Srabanti has admitted she didn’t know about the act and had taken a few pictures with the chained mongoose in between her shooting schedule. 
 The officials had asked Srabanti, the driver and a few members of the shooting unit to appear again for further questioning.

 Meanwhile, a senior forest department official has said that it is not only a crime to capture scheduled and protected wild animals but a public personality like her indulging in such act can also influence others to commit the mistake. The officials have requested the actress to cooperate with them in the investigation and help the department in its fight to protect wildlife.