NEW DELHI: Mohammed Shahnawaz Alam possesses the unique ability to prepare a clean, refined improvised explosive device (IED) using ordinary chemicals, say the cops. The extensive knowledge of explosives of the 31-year-old mining engineer, arrested by Delhi Police's Special Cell for suspected terror activities, has surprised even the hardened sleuths of the anti-terror unit.Top Picks For You3 suspected IS terrorists, all engineers, held by Delhi cops'Working for Islamic State': Delhi Police operation brings spotlight back on ISI role
During interrogation, police found that Alam had read extensive material on blasting, blast designs and rock blasting operations during his BTech course at NIT Visvesvaraya, Nagpur, in 2016 and had allegedly been using this knowledge to create IEDs. From his phone, the cops have retrieved several recipes of IEDs using easy-to-procure chemicals. They mention commonly available materials like hydrogen peroxide, acetone and hydrochloric acid and an elaborate procedure to make crystallised explosives which, when detonated, can affect an area within a radius of 60 metres.

The resume of his arrested associate, Arshad Warsi, 29, is even more impressive. Warsi earned a BTech in mechanics following which he completed an MBA in marketing & operations. He was currently pursuing his PhD in Islamic principle in management from Jamia Millia Islamia. "He also works as a physics teacher at an institute in Jamia Nagar and provides home tuition in science and mathematics," special commissioner of police HGS Dhaliwal said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More
Alam, the cops revealed, came to Delhi in November 2016 and stayed at Abul Fazal Enclave in southeast Delhi. He used to listen to religious lectures at Shaheen Bagh and later got influenced by the ideology of terror organisation Islamic State. The same year, he met Mohammed Rizwan Ashraf and became friends with him. They started following various pro-ISIS entities on Telegram and other channels.
Warsi revealed to the cops that after pursuing his BTech from Aligarh Muslim University he came to Delhi in 2016 for further studies and lived in Jamia Nagar. He came in contact with Alam while attending some programmes.
Additional commissioner Pramod Kushwaha said, "Rizwan Ashraf, 28, was born in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, in a middle-class family. His father worked with a shipping company. He completed the Alimiyat in Arabic (equivalent to Class XII) in 2009 and pursued his BTech in information technology in Ghaziabad/Noida in 2017."

Soon, Alam and Warsi began communicating with a foreign handler who claimed to be from IS. On his instructions, Alam conducted a reconnaissance of some potential areas in various states where IEDs could be planted and target killings carried out. Rizwan, police said, was in contact with the same foreign handler and had taken a pledge to join ISIS.
IS terrorist Shahnawaz was under long-term surveillance by Delhi police: Held terror camps in India
On the instructions of their handler, the module members started scouting for forested spots to set up a base where they could prepare, test and store IEDs. "They visited Lavasa, Mahabaleshwar, Goa, Hubli, the Saraswati wildlife area in Karnataka, Udupi, Kerala, Valsad wildlife sanctuary, Nallamala mountain ranges and Chandauli to find suitable hideouts and base in the Western Ghats," said an officer.
The cops have recovered geographical maps of India and found markings that show these spots. The suspects also had the map of west Rajasthan locating the IED testing point. During interrogation, Alam and Warsi revealed that they first prepared some sample IEDs and tested them in remote locations in Rajasthan and Uttarakhand.
In March 2021, Alam got married to a girl from Aligarh called Basanti Patel, who later converted and changed her name to Khadeeja Maryam.
When police raided the men's hideouts on Sunday, they found a range of material used to fabricate IEDs. "There were glass bottles of acid apart from plastic canes containing chemicals, powders of different colours, etc., which have all been sent for forensic examination," revealed Kushwaha.
For making the IEDs, the module used small steel balls to cause extensive damage upon explosion, said an officer. The module members apparently collected the phosphorus on matchsticks and crackers to fill the IEDs. "We have recovered a lot of matchboxes. The prepared mixture was filled in iron pipes and secured with electrical tapes," the officer said, elaborating on the recoveries.
For detonation, the module simply used Chinese LED decoration lights, many of which come with a remote. A timer watch was also used in the IEDs being prepared by the men. The cops have also seized batteries and connectors besides mobile phones from the suspects.