Bhubaneswar: The special task force (STF) of the Crime Branch has urged the state government to fill up the vacant posts of sub-inspectors (SI) and assistant sub-inspectors (ASI) in the wings, whose workload has increased over the years.
Only two SIs and nine ASIs are currently on duty against the sanctioned strength of 13 SIs and 15 ASIs in the STF.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“We have requested the government to fill up the vacant posts for smooth functioning of the wing,” a senior Crime Branch official said.
The government had created the STF and economic offences wing (EOW) under the Crime Branch in August 2011. The EOW’s aim is to probe economic crimes like land-related fraud, job rackets, banking and credit card frauds. 
The STF investigates cases relating to organised crimes, including extortion, kidnapping, drug trafficking and left-wing extremism. Though the STF’s main mandate is to curb organized crimes in the state, the agency has been busting rackets involved in drug trafficking and wildlife smuggling. The STF registered 31 cases in 2020 and 38 in 2021. While most of the cases involved narcotic drugs smuggling, other cases are recovery of wildlife parts. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Our job profile has increased manifold as we have been dealing with different types of crimes. Owing to acute shortage of SIs and ASIs, who do bulk of the fieldwork, we have been facing hardships in executing our missions,” an STF official said.
The STF’s workload increased after the government set up a dedicated narcotics control unit under it in June 2021. Though the government sanctioned 27 new posts, including one in the rank of superintendent of police (STF) and three deputy superintendents of police (DSPs), the posts have not been filled yet. 
The STF seized more than 55 kg of brown sugar worth Rs 55 crore in the last two years. Assets worth over Rs 21 crore owned by some drug mafia have been forfeited by the STF in the last few months.