NEW DELHI: The forest department is now left with only one wildlife inspector who is set to retire in December this year, after another officer retired on Wednesday. The remaining five posts of wildlife inspectors have been lying vacant for over six years. 
Tasked with preventing wildlife crime, ensuring wildlife rescue and protecting the green cover, the forest department has been facing acute shortage of manpower on the ground.Apart from wildlife inspectors, the other posts lying vacant are of range officers, assistant conservators, wildlife guards and forest guards. Following an order of National Green Tribunal (NGT) last year, 290 new posts were created in the department but the process of recruitment was delayed due to Covid-19 and rules for appointment has to be framed in some cases. 
Times ViewPrevention of wildlife crimes is critical work for the forest department. Keeping posts vacant is not going to help. Besides that, when jobs are scarce, creative intervention is required to get around coronavirus in times of new normalcy. Many government departments are doing it, why not the forest department?
A senior official told TOI that it will take around six months to one year to fill all the vacant posts. “As we are understaffed, the department is overburdened. For instance, if we get complaints about tree pruning, only a few ground staff are available to visit the spot and submit a report in the matter,” said an official. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAccording to officials, the forest department had only 108 posts, but NGT created 290 new posts last year. Of the new posts — 66 foresters, one veterinarian, two compounders and one legal advisor have to be recruited for the first time. “We have to frame rules for appointment of staff at new posts,” said an official. 
Principal chief conservator of forests Ishwar Singh said, “We are planning to hire retired wildlife inspector on a contract basis. Besides, the first level exam for recruitment was conducted for appointment of three wildlife inspectors and second level exam will be organised soon.” 
He added, “Though the results have been declared after the exam was conducted for recruitment of four range officers, the candidates will now have to undergo physical test of walking 28km in four hours on October 7. Similarly, exam results for hiring of 11 wildlife guards are out and they will join this month. Besides, we have received 7.5 lakh applications for posts of 211 forest guards and online exams will be conducted at pan-India level.” 
However, even after range officers and wildlife inspectors are appointed, they won’t be able to immediately resume duty as they will have to undergo mandatory training of 18 months as their posts have statutory power.