BHUBANESWAR: A toll-free number to receive complaints from people regarding wildlife crimes and timber smuggling has gone defunct. 
Although the wildlife wing of the forest department claims to have deployed a dedicated man to take the calls, the phone is hardly ever attended.
Two years ago, the toll-free number 18003456771 was set up in the office of chief wildlife warden to facilitate people to lodge complaints in case they come across attempted poaching, poaching, trespassing of unauthorized persons into prohibited areas, timber trafficking and forest fire.But, the phone hardly works or even if it works, nobody picks it up. 
"I was passing through Pipili, when I saw some traders selling birds on the roadside. Since I knew that it was illegal, I dialed the toll-free number. None took the call. Earlier also on several occasions, I made calls only to hear the ringing sound," said Alok Patnaik, a wildlife lover. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe toll-free number was mooted by then forest minister Bijayshree Routray in 2013 and it became a reality in 2014. But, its implementation is still a far cry.
 According to the plan, the toll-free telephone would have worked like the dedicated number to call police, fire tenders and ambulance.
Since the toll-free number doesn't work, many wildlife crimes such as poaching, attempted poaching, timber smuggling and deliberate forest fire are not reaching the official concerned in due time.
 "Many crimes can be avoided if the information reaches to the wildlife personnel early. At times it is too late when forest department discovers carcasses of dead animals," said Wildlife Society of Odisha secretary Biswajit Mohanty, who has shot off a letter to the forest secretary Suresh Mohapatra. 
According to sources, the toll-free control room has been set up by forest department in several states.
 "It is an effective tool to get quick information on movement of poachers. This will also help check corruption in the department. The toll-free number will also act as a deterrent against corruption. The forest department should sincerely implement it by deploying more persons for the job," Mohanty said.
Principal chief conservator of forests (wildlife) Siddhant Das said there may be some technical snag with the telephone. "We will look into the matter and soon fix it," he told TOI.