KOCHI: City police are mulling over registering more cases against Syju Thankachan, who was arrested for allegedly tailing the Ford Figo car which met with an accident at Vyttila in which three including two models had died on November 1. According to sources, investigation was on into the chat history and visuals found in Syju’s phone which indicated possible violations of the NDPS Act and the Wildlife (Protection) Act.
Syju is in the custody of city crime branch after it was found that he had followed the ill-fated car. According to a report filed in court by the police, sleuths have found visuals from his phone which indicated that he used drugs at parties on multiple occasions.
A senior officer with the city police said that locations within the district and outside have been found wherein he had allegedly abused drugs. Concerned police stations have been alerted to gather evidence in this regard for further action, including registration of FIRs, said an official.
A source said that the data retrieved from the phone indicates that he had abused drugs in a flat within the Infopark police station limits on four occasions. An investigation is on to substantiate these findings with evidence, said an official.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MorePolice had said in its report before the court that his chat history indicates that he had consumed the meat of a wild bison in violation of the Wildlife (Protection) Act. Forest department too has been alerted about this, sources said.
Police are mulling invoking the IT Act as pornographic films were also recovered from his phone. CB sleuths are likely to soon meet Roy J Vayalat, the owner of the Fort Kochi-based hotel where the victims had attended a party before the accident. Roy has been undergoing treatment for cardiac issues and police are trying to find if he was fit to be questioned again.
Miss South India Ansi Kabeer and Miss Kerala first runner-up (2019) Anjana Shajan and their friend Mohammad Ashiq had died in the accident when they were returning from a party at a hotel in Fort Kochi on November 1.