Bhubaneswar: The Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) formed in 2013 in Similipal Tiger Reserve (STR) will soon launch combing operations in the forest with drones and sniffer dogs in a bid to generate fear among poachers, who live in the fringe areas of Similipal.
The combing operations by STPF — the second such force in India after Bandipur Tiger Reserve in Karnataka — will also be a deterrent so that villagers refrain from entering the prohibited areas of the forest and indulge in hunting and tree felling.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
STR officials said member of STPF carry firearms and have been trained to find their way inside forests. Initially, the STPF’s had not given enough power and resources and they were just working like watchers. In the past three years, their training and resources were augmented. Currently, 56 personnel of the special force are deployed in three locations — Bhanjabasa, two core areas of Jenabil and Gurguria (outside the core area). 
M Yogajayanand, STR field director said the STPF will be made a highly skilled force in future to prevent wildlife crime and to protect wildlife. “We will very soon start orientation training to be imparted by the police. They (STPF personnel) will learn the intricacies of combing operations from the police. We have provided them with a force-friendly patrolling app along with walkie-talkies. They carry their essentials, a stick and double barreled gun. The range officer carries a revolver,” Yogajayanand said. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreSTR is spread over 2,750 sq km with a core of area over 1,195 sq km and buffer zone of 1,550 sq km. Maoist attack in the reserve in 2009 had paved way for poachers to enter the sanctuary and kill prey and other animals. Following this, the wildlife evolved special measures such as setting up of more than 100 protection camps, introduction of foot patrolling during monsoon season and identifying and prosecuting the poachers. 
In 2014, the STR authorities removed as many as 15 anti-poaching camps from the core area to ensure disturbance-free habitat for the big cats. The camps were relocated outside the core area by creating raised platforms on trees.