Coimbatore: In a first, the Coimbatore forest division would get the native dog breed Chippiparai to sniff out wildlife crimes. 
The dog, along with three other dogs of the same breed, is currently undergoing training at the Tamil Nadu Forestry Training College at Vaigai dam in Theni district. It will be deployed as the sniffer dog in the forest division from June.
The remaining three dogs would be deployed in Pollachi, Nilgiris and Gudalur forest divisions.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The forest department had bought the four Chippiparai puppies a month ago and handed them over to the training college. They have also been named – Valavan (for Coimbatore) Kaduvan (for Pollachi), Kaligan (for Nilgiris) and Athavai (for Gudalur forest division).
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreR Rajmohan, principal, Tamil Nadu Forestry Training College, said the four dogs were being trained by the trainers with the Tamil Nadu police department and Indian military. “They have been training the dogs to obey commands for the past one month. Hereafter, they will be trained to detect forest crimes.”
He said the dogs could easily sniff sandal and teak woods, and skins of various wild animals. “If people are illegally possessing sandalwood or deer meat, the dogs could easily detect them. The maintenance for this native dog breed is very less than that of imported dog breeds.”
Rajmohan said the native dog breed could be taken to the reserve forest, where it could easily be put up in a place for 15 days. “But the imported breeds need more medications and maintenance. Chippiparai and Kombai breeds are very sharp to detect wildlife crimes. Kombai is one of the best guarding dogs and we can leave a wildlife crime accused with Kombai, as it won’t allow that person to escape.”
Pointing out that the dogs would complete the three-month training by May-end, he said they would then be handed over to the respective forest divisions.
The Coimbatore forest division has appointed two anti-poaching watchers as the sniffer dog handler and helper. The duo will take care of the dog and familiarize them with the Madukkarai, Boluvampatti, Coimbatore, Periyanaickenpalayam, Karamadai, Mettupalayam and Sirumugai forest ranges in the division to detect wildlife crimes.