Nagpur: The Pench tigers poaching case has opened up a Pandora’s box, with two more arrests on Sunday. The accused are likely to be involved in the killing of another tiger, which will take the tally of tigers killed in and around Pench to three.
The two accused have been identified as Mukesh Nanak Uike of Shirepani village in Chhindwara, and Ramdas Tarachand Warkhade of Kolitmara in West Pench.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoTill now, six accused have been nabbed in the poaching racket. All of them, allegedly involved in illegal fishing inside Pench, have been remanded to forest custody (FCR) till July 3.
The racket was busted on June 27 by Pench officials and till now four accused — Devidas Kumre and Babulal Kumre of Usripaar, Chunnu alias SP Sariyam and HG Kunjam of Garra on the fringes of Pench — had confessed to killing two tigers, one in Golpahadi area and another at Manegaon in Deolapar range of Mansinghdeo Wildlife Sanctuary.
A third tiger is now feared to have been killed a kilometre away from National Highway 7. Sources said there is more to the Pench poaching racket and it is feared that up to five tigers may have been killed in and around Pench, including territorial area. The facts will come to light as more arrests are expected. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoSenior officials said killing of tigers by fishermen continues in Pench right under the nose of Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF) and staff. “The fishermen are not professional organized poachers, who never leave behind any evidence,” they said.
In the two cases that came to light, the poachers did not have the skills or experience to remove the skin. They haphazardly cut the skin and removed only body parts like claws, nails and bones.
“It is possible these may be cases of revenge killing by fishermen for not being allowed to fish in Totladoh. It may also be for superstition, done on the direction of tantriks. This angle needs to be probed,” said some wildlife lovers.
In the meanwhile, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), a wildlife enforcement agency under MoEFCC, has sought a report on the tiger poaching inside Pench. WCCB, Western Region, officials are keeping an eye on happenings.
“This is the second biggest exposure after 2013 tiger poaching cases, where trafficking of at least 20 tiger skins was reported from Maharashtra,” a senior WCCB official told TOI.