BHOPAL: A 35-year-old tribal, who was summoned by forest officials in connection with the probe into the beheading of a tiger in Churna area of Satpura Tiger Reserve (STR) in MP has died by suicide.
The victim was identified as Aneesh Uikey of Dhansai village in Betul district. Betul SP, Siddharth Chaudhary, told TOI that Uikey had been summoned for questioning on June 30, and he hanged himself the next night.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoPolice learned about it on July 2.
Uikey, who also worked as a Gypsy driver at Churna gate in Narmadapuram district, close to Dhansai village, did not leave behind a suicide note. According to SP Chaudhary, Uikey shared his phone password and UPI ID with his son before taking his own life.
L Krishnamurthy, field director of STR, said that Uikey was on their list of suspects but was yet to be questioned. "We don't know why he committed suicide before being questioned. We are in contact with senior police officials on this," he said.
Sources told TOI that Uikey, along with three men from the village, were taken to Bhimkund outpost for questioning on June 30. Uikey was dropped off in the village in a Gypsy around 10pm that night.
Activist demands judicial investigation in tribal man's death 
 After having dinner on the night of July 1, Uikey went to sleep. The following morning, his body was found hanging from a tree in a nearby field.
"The motive remains unclear, but it occurred shortly after the Tiger Strike Force (TSF) and STR teams had interrogated him and three others," said a local police officer. 
Several others from the village were questioned by the STR team and later released.
They were initially suspected due to their involvement in witchcraft and as traditional 'healers', say sources.
Uikey's family alleges that the pressure of the interrogation may have contributed to his suicide. Police have so far not found any financial burden that may have affected him. Wildlife activist Ajay Dubey has appealed to chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan for a judicial inquiry into the tribal's death.
Several people are being questioned in connection with the case. The forest department has announced a reward of Rs 25,000 for information leading to the arrest of those responsible for the tiger's beheading. 
The mutilated, decomposed carcass was found in the Dabra Dev beat of Churna, around 1.8 km from the STR buffer. The head was missing, but other organs remained intact.
Forest teams are using sniffer dogs to find the poachers and are checking villages close to the forest, such as Dhansai, Badh-Chapra, Bhatna, and Ranapura.TNN