Belinda Wright, tiger conservationist and founder and executive director of the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), speaks to TOI on Project Tiger completing 50 years and the challenges.
EXCERPTS:
■ How do you see the country’s progress in tiger conservation in the past 50 years?
Can you shed some light on the current wildlife scenario in India? I think it is a miracle that in this day and age we still have forests where tiger populations are doing so well.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoMuch of this has to do with the tiger’s resilience, and the long-standing tolerance of people who live on the fringes of the tiger’s habitat, but it is also an extraordinary conservation success story for which India should be very proud. There are huge challenges ahead, and in particular the growing and festering conflict between wildlife and people. Tolerance is diminishing and the demand for fuel wood (particularly since gas subsidies were stopped), illegal sand mining for construction work, and illegal electric fences for crop protection are all issues that have to be addressed, along with the growing number of feral dogs killing prey species, and forest fires. Even sound pollution is becoming a problem, with DJ equipment being constantly used in villages and resorts around prime wildlife habitat.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More■ Do you honestly feel poaching activities in tiger reserves have reduced? Is India still a major contributor of illegal tiger products in the international market?
Due to concerted enforcement efforts, the deadly organised tiger poaching gangs — like those that emptied Sariska (by 2004) and Panna (by 2009) of their tigers — have greatly reduced. However, local poaching is still widespread on the fringes of most tiger reserves, largely for bush meat but also opportunistically for big cats. As long as there is a lucrative demand for tiger products in international markets, there will always be some illegal trade in tiger parts. And of course, the more tigers you have the more deaths there will be, from old age, injuries, and disease, but also from infighting, and vehicle and train deaths.
■ Is the nation suffering from dilution of environmental laws, and infra projects getting preference over conservation?
India’s tiger reserves are perhaps our greatest natural treasure, and thesanctity of this tiny percentage of the country’s landmass should be respected and preserved at all cost. There is virtually always an alternative route for highways and sites for infrastructure projects. For so many reasons, not the least of which is securing a future for the incomparable tiger, it will be a huge loss to the well-being of India if we continue to nibble away at our precious Protected Area network. Surrounded by an estimated 1,70,000 villages, the network already has pressure enough for its limited resources.

■ The tiger population increased, and reserves too. Do we need more stringent laws to protect tigers?
India already has excellent wildlife and environmental laws. It is their implementation that is generally poor. The issue of wildlife protection needs bold and sustained political leadership and better field-level training and motivation.
■ Do you think Project Tiger did not evolve with time?
Initially, from 1993 (when 287 kg of tiger bones, eight tiger skins and 43 leopard skins were seized in Delhi) to 2009 (when Panna Tiger Reserve finally lost all its tigers), Project Tiger did not come to terms with the clear evidence of widespread and organised tiger poaching gangs. But, with better resources and improvements in communication, Project Tiger — which evolved into NTCA — is now much better informed and reactive to the many problems that arise in the field.
■ Do you think prosecution of poachers is still a major challenge?
Prosecution of any crime through the over-burdened courts in India is a challenge. Poaching cases used to take 15 to 20 years or more to reach a verdict, during which time evidence material, witnesses and even the accused were often long gone. Fortunately, the judiciary and civil society are now more aware about the issue of poaching, and in some areas courts are fast-tracking the more important cases involving endangered species such as the tiger.
■ Do you think the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau is equipped to control wildlife crimes, including tiger poaching, or there is chronic shortage of staff and lack of support?
The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau does its best with limited resources. Unfortunately, some investigations are hampered as the bureau has to get permission to collect intelligence or assist enforcement in many of the states, which leads to delays. In recent years, five regional and three sub-regional offices have been set up, along with five border units. This has greatly improved the agency’s access to wildlife crime hubs and infield training.