CHENNAI: Shekhar Kumar Niraj, an Indian Forest Service officer from Tamil Nadu received Royal Bank of Scotland Foundation’s prestigious ‘Earth Heroes – Green Warrior’ award for 2017.
An official release said the award was presented to him for his contributions to wildlife protection and the wildlife crime investigations he took up between 2013 and 2017, as head of TRAFFIC, a wildlife crime prevention wing of the World Wide Fund for Nature – India.He is the first forest officer from Tamil Nadu cadre to receive the award.
The Royal Bank of Scotland Foundation selects five to six individuals and institutions every year, based on their contributions to the field of wildlife species conservation, habitat conservation and work for wildlife protection in India.
The awardees are selected by a board comprising policy makers, scientists of international eminence, civil society members, media persons and conservationists. The current board is headed by M K Ranjitsinh, former secretary in the Union ministry of environment and forests, known as the architect of Indian conservation. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe awards were presented at a function attended by more than 500 prople at Manekshaw Center in New Delhi Cantonment Area on October 26. Lok Sabha speaker Sumitra Mahajan gave away the awards.
Between 2013 and 2017, Shekhar initiated several programmes to combat wildlife crimes and illegal trade in various regions in India and in trans-border regions, in interior forests in Assam and Bengal to protect rhinoceroses, elephants and tigers.
He took several initiatives to protect lesser known species like pangolins, monitor lizards and slender lorises in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala. He was involved in training more than 10,000 officials of various enforcement agencies including the paramilitary forces, forest and police officials.
Thanks to his efforts, 15 states in India have wildlife-trained sniffer dogs to strengthen anti-poaching and illegal wildlife trade, the release added.