When Shanthi Pillai joined the Tamil Nadu wildlife crime control bureau in 2013, her first call was about aquarium fish being smuggled into Chennai. “The next call was for six snakes. Over the years, the frequency of calls and number and type of animals went up,” says Shanthi, wildlife inspector (recently posted in Mumbai).
Chennai, which is well-connected to southeast Asia by air and sea, has become the capital for wildlife trafficking to meet the increasing demands of the pet trade.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAnimals are sold at major Chennai markets, at Kolathur, Pallavaram and Broadway. 
In the past few years, the smuggling has spawned a new industry — breeding exotics. Wildlife is being home-bred on farms on the outskirts as well as inside small apartments and on terraces in the heart of the city. “It is about economics and connectivity,” says K P Jayakar, former additional deputy commissioner of Chennai customs. 
Traders at Kolathur, a `1000-crore pet market, say only 30% of the animals are sold in the city. The rest are either sent to breeding farms or shunted to other districts via road and to other countries via the Myanmar, Bhutan route.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteCosts for pets at Chennai’s breeding farms range from `1,000 to `50 lakh. “The rarer the animal, the more in demand it is. They are seen as a status symbol, an addiction. Many sellers are now crossbreeding and creating new species without a thought to ecological risks,” says E Prashant, Chennai’s wildlife warden.
In Chennai, more than 24 breeding farms function like state-of-the-art factories. While some resemble resorts complete with ornamental plants, petting zones and walk-in cages, others are spread across several acres with separate zones for lodging, mating, birthing and ‘day care’ (where wild animals are fed by humans to domesticate them). Tier-II cities have breeding farms for mammals such as meerkats, monkeys, and even crocodiles from Brazil.
Adding fuel to the fire is the legal grey area. The 2022 amendment to the wildlife protection act, 1972, has made it illegal to own any species protected under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). It is a violation to carry animals without documents such as Parivesh certificate approved by the Union ministry of environment, forest and climate change and a quarantine certificate from the Animal quarantine certification services. “Owners also need a no objection certificate under the Animal Welfare Board of India’s Performing Animals Rules to exhibit animals,” says Prashant. “Only zoos under Central Zoo Authority are exempt. People can exhibit animals they own but cannot collect a fee without a zoo licence.”
Traffickers, say officials, sedate and smuggle in exotic wildlife in checked-in luggage, as there are few curbs once they hoodwink customs and enter the country. The investigation wing of the customs —the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence —pays more attention to gold and drugs in baggage than reptiles.
Ideally, a govt agency should be able to take cognizance of cases, register FIRs like any other investigation agency, take the cases to trial and prosecute the offenders, resulting in stringent punishments. Section 49 N of the amended Act requires people breeding animals in captivity or artificially propagating a scheduled specimen to have applied for a licence by June 2023. But not even 1% has done so.
“The amendment changes nothing,” says Babu, a Kolathur-based pet smuggler. “All the smuggled animals will be shown as progeny of locally bred exotics. We did the same in 2017 when the Parivesh portal was launched. We continue to get animals from overseas.” The amendment came into effect in April 2023, but officials say they “still await guidelines”. “Right now, the maximum legal action that can be taken is a `50 fine under AWBI’s prevention of cruelty to animals act,” says Srinivas Reddy, chief wildlife warden. 
The lines are blurred now, says Supriya Sahu, secretary, TN environment department. “Once guidelines are in place, I think there will be more clarity. We plan to create a separate wing to investigate these cases and set up rescue centres to curb the trade.”
(The writer is a former journalist based out of Chennai)
This story was produced with support from Internews' Earth Journalism Network.