NAVI MUMBAI: Large quantities of peacock feathers are currently being sold at various traffic signals, railway stations and bus depots ahead of the festive season, raising doubts on how these tail feathers of the national bird were procured.
Wildlife activists have raised suspicion that there is a possibility of the peacocks being poached for their feathers. "Every trader or vendor of peacock feathers is supposed to have a valid wildlife permit with regards to how these have been procured.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIf these are certified naturally shed feathers that are being sold, then it is legitimate. However, looking at the high numbers of peacock tail feathers being openly sold in the city, it is doubtful if all these feathers were naturally shed in the jungles. There should be an inquiry," said the wildlife activist of Resqink Association for Wildlife Welfare (RAWW), Pawan Sharma.
"Citizens should avoid buying these peacock feathers which have inundated our city and surrounding areas, as it is possible that the birds were killed. The forest department must also seriously look into the matter," said the honorary wildlife warden and founder of Plant and Animals Welfare Society (PAWS-Mumbai), Sunish Subramanian.
When TOI contacted the deputy conservator of forest (territorial), Jitendra Ramgaonkar, he said: "Last year we had seized several peacock feathers from vendors; however, it could not be proved that any birds were poached or killed for selling their feathers. Without proof, it is not possible to take legal action on those selling peacock feathers."
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteOn speaking to a few of the vendors with peacock tail feathers at Navi Mumbai, it was gathered that a large consignment of these feathers had recently arrived in Mumbai and then distributed in various areas, including Thane, Navi Mumbai, to sell them. ``Many hawkers also get them from Crawford Market in south Mumbai," said one such vendor at Vashi.
The western region head of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, M Maranko, commented: "If these tail feathers have a shrunken end, then they have been naturally shed. We have not come across any peacock poaching cases of late. In south India recently, some peacocks had died after accidentally eating poisonous pesticides at a farm; so that cannot be called poaching."
Activist Hemant Chhajed, commented: "A legal procurement certificate for vending naturally shed peacock feathers is a must. None of these roadside hawkers have any such certificate. Hence, I too feel that the forest authorities must thoroughly probe these instances. It is also strange that none of the valid shops or malls are selling peacock feathers, which are now mostly seen on traffic signals."
Interestingly, e-commerce websites like Amazon are also selling peacock feathers online.
PETA India activist, Meet Asher, commented: "Public must be sensitized and made aware that violence and wildlife products like animal skins, feathers etc go hand-in-hand. It is best to admire peacock feathers attacked to their original owners, which is our precious national bird. Do not buy such wildlife good, in order to safeguard our wildlife."