CHENNAI: A three-tier enforcement mechanism — comprising dedicated intelligence wing, officials to detect and arrest wildlife offenders, and prudent lawyers to ensure such offenders get maximum punishment — is the need of the hour to stop the spiralling trade in wildlife, say officials. The state government must set up such an enforcement system to protect the wildlife and marine life.

The demand to set up such a mechanism has arisen following the seizure of 111kg of pangolin scales, 160kg of dried seahorses, 180kg of dried pipefish, 125kg of manta and mobula rays and 79kg of shark fins in north Chennai last week.

    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreAdditional principal chief conservator of forests Shekhar Kumar Niraj said a strong and dedicated intelligence wing would be able to gather information about the movement of wildlife offenders.
 “With the information, the law-enforcing team can nab them to curtail the offences,” he said.
“The role of a legal wing is crucial in controlling wildlife trade. The team must ensure that the offenders get the punishment as per law. At present, the conviction rate is very low. There is no deterrent. Because of this, many offenders get bail. The customs and the DRI have a dedicated intelligence wing with a strong legal team to ensure punishment,” Niraj said.
The state forest department can make use of sniffer dog squads to detect illegal wildlife trade. Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra have been successful in this, he said.
But wildlife is no more restricted to the forests. Poaching of marine life is lucrative and with very little deterrence on the high seas, it is rampant. Former Zoological Survey of India director K Venkataraman said in the 1990s, fishermen used to carry gunny bags to the Palk Bay and Gulf of Mannar areas.
“They used to get bags full of seahorses, pipefish and sea cucumber. Population of all the three species has come down drastically due to over collection. Nowadays, the fishermen do not get more than 15 specimens a day,” he said. While seahorses and pipefish are dried and sold, sea cucumbers are boiled, dried and then sold.
Pangolin scales, dried seahorses, sea cucumbers, shark fins and gills of manta and mobula rays are in huge demand in the international market. The illegal trade of these endangered species is driven based on the demand in the international market, Niraj said.