PATNA: Bihar has emerged as the transit hub for poached animal body parts and even live animals, which are mainly sent to China and some South Asian countries. To control this menace, the state forest department plans to train its officers and staffers to catch poachers and build airtight cases against them with evidence.
According to environment and forest department additional chief secretary Dipak Kumar Singh, the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau has already given a presentation on the subject and proper training of forest officials will begin in November.
“My department officials will be imparted training mainly on how to catch hold of poachers with evidence. To collect evidence is very important in wildlife crime, or else it is difficult to get the poachers convicted,” Singh said.
He appreciated the efforts of his department in busting several gangs involved in smuggling of animals to China. Forest department officials claimed most of the animals are sent to China where they are used in making traditional medicines.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreForest officials said Bihar is an important transit point as poachers either go via Nepal, or they move towards WB and then to Myanmar and finally to China and other South Asian countries.
The latest haul for the forest department came on Thursday when officials recovered a ‘Tokay Gecko’, a rare nocturnal lizard, from a city hotel in Kankarbagh locality and arrested two persons.
“One person was from West Bengal and another from Katihar. They had brought this Tokay Gecko from WB and were going to sell it to some middleman in Patna. They have a chain,” said Ruchi, adding, this nocturnal lizard is sold at exorbitant prices and mainly sent to China.
Pangolins, also known as scaly anteaters, are also in huge demand in the Chinese markets. The mammals have hard scales, which is believed to increase immunity and is used in traditional medicines and even its flesh is eaten. However, the International Union for Conservation of Nature has listed the Indian pangolin as an endangered creature.
Kaimur DFO Pradyumn Gaurav said in April this year, their team had caught Pangolin smugglers. “A local community which resides in Kaimur hills is involved in its trade. They have their relatives staying in the foothills. When they get customers, they climb up the hill to catch live pangolins as buyers look for live ones to assure themselves that they are getting original scales. Our team members had gone as buyers to catch the culprits.”
He further said these mammals are dipped in boiling water and their scales are removed, adding, “This animal is also mainly sent to China.”
His team also caught a man from Sasaram involved in selling leopard skin. Gaurav said, “We caught him a fortnight back and an investigation is on to nab all those involved in the trade.” This raid was a part of WildLife Control Bureau- Operation Wild Net 3 and officials in Bihar were alerted from Kolkata regarding a man who had shown interest in selling leopard skin online.
Gopalganj DFO Abhishek Kumar Singh said they had caught a gang with 1,100 turtles in September last year. These turtles were packed in sacks with their feet tied with string. “They were brought from Uttar Pradesh and were supposed to be sent to Muzaffarpur and then to West Bengal and North East regions. On interrogation, we got to know that these turtles are finally sold in the China market. Their shell is ground to powder and used in traditional medicine,” Singh said.