CUTTACK: Director General of Police (DGP) K B Singh on Saturday urged police personnel to consider wildlife crime cases at par with other serious crimes. He directed police personnel to take up investigation of cases pertaining to wildlife crimes like poaching on a priority basis.
 “Odisha is rich in wildlife resources. Besides, the state has a long unprotected coastline, which attracts many animal species including rare Olive Ridley turtles.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoKeeping in mind the strategic and yet vulnerable geographic location of the state there is utmost need to protect wildlife and ensure proper implementation of wildlife laws in the state,” said Singh while inaugurating a one-day workshop on strengthening wildlife law enforcement and conservation in the state at the crime branch here.
Odisha is one of the few states which have a dedicated wildlife cell for investigation of wildlife crimes. On the occasion, Special DG (crime branch) B K Sharma stressed on the significant role that the Police needs to play in combating wildlife crimes.“We have successfully cracked some wildlife cases in last few years, including arrest of notorious poacher Afzal Baig. Police officers have to work in tandem with forest officials to ensure implementation of wildlife laws,” said Sharma. Sharma also highlighted that crime branch have plans to strengthen Wildlife cell, which was set up last year. “We are preparing a database on wildlife poachers, who are active in the state. Besides, there is plan to add more young and energetic manpower to the dedicated Wildlife Cell,” added Sharma. Presently, the wildlife cell, functioning under the crime branch, has seven staff members. Plans are there to increase the staff strength to 15.
The workshop, organised to sensitize and train the officers of police stations that lie within or nearby sanctuaries to curb the illegal poaching and wildlife trade, was also attended by state principal chief conservator of forest(PCCF wildlife) Siddhanta Das. “Due to lack of proper case records and enough evidences, arrested poachers and wildlife criminals easily manage to get relief. I am hopeful that the workshop will enlighten police officials about building up a strong case against the criminals,” said Das.
 A team of experts from Wildlife Crime Control Bureau(WCCB) provided deliberations to officers on wildlife forensics, investigation and prosecution and insight into Wildlife Protection Act.