Panaji: Even as the world has been hit by the Covid-19 pandemic, founder of Wildlife Trust of India, Vivek Menon said that shutting down wet markets in China or across the world was not ideal.
“There is a lot of misinformation on the trade of wet markets of China. It’s not true that a lot of illegal products are sold there. A lot of traders supply legitimate goods to communities,” he said.
Menon said that one cannot buy fish in Goa without entering a wet market.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo“A market where live chicken is sold is also a wet market. So, wet markets cannot be shut down, unless the whole world is turning vegetarian,” he said.
He, however, said that there is a need to curb the illegal trade of wildlife
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“The major issue in Covid is the transport of exotic animals from different parts to different places and selling them there. If they’re taking pangolins from India and selling or eating them there, then that’s an issue. It’s also happening in South East Asia and Vietnam. If it’s illegal, it must be clamped down. If it’s happening legally, then we must campaign and make people understand that they need to rethink their law,” Menon said, adding that bats do not spread Covid.
Menon was speaking on ‘tackling wildlife crime — a conservation imperative’ at a webinar on Sunday. I
t was organised by Global Shapers, an environmental organisation.
In his talk, he said that besides confiscating them from forests, even captive breeding of animals recognised under the Indian Wildlife Act as a crime.
“Birds within the schedules of the Wildlife Act are not allowed to be captively bred, sold or kept. If you’re importing an exotic bird that does not fall under the schedule, there must be a local forest department certificate and appropriate paperwork to keep it,” Menon said.
He added that village institutions and communities can help in stopping of poaching of elephants, tigers and other wildlife.