KOLKATA: For the past three years, a section of cage guards in Alipore zoo wakes up early to offer fruits and health drinks to Basanti, Chottu and Mastan. The guards' daily routine, ever since the three chimpanzees were rescued from an animal trader's house in Baguiati in 2014, includes keeping them in the open arena for a few hours before shifting them inside the cage as soon as heat sets in.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoBut the guards are staring at a possible separation from the primates.
After Customs dropped all charges against the trader, Supradip Guha, the zoo had moved court seeking a breather that ends in three days -on September 5. If the chimps are handed over to the trader, then it will set a wrong example, felt animal rights activists. State zoo authority chairman V K Yadav said: “We have already moved high court. The Enforcement Directorate has written to the zoo director that they are probing the case. Wildlife Crime Control Bureau is also probing it. Unless the probes are over we can't hand over the chimpanzees.“ Protected under appendix I of Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES), international trade in these species is prohibited.According to the Customs order to the zoo, a New-Delhi-based vet had issued birth certificates for the three chimpanzees, according to which they were bred by Guha and were born on September15, 2010, March 5, 2011and November15, 2011.“This logically rules out allegation of importation... The doctor, too, has recorded statements under Section 108 of the Customs Act 1962,“ read the order that reached the zoo last September.
K L Ghosh, who was zoo director in 2014, said at the time of rescue the primates were probably aged between six months and one year. “The pinkish colour of their faces and palms indicated they were juvenile,“ he said. But according to the birth certificates mentioned by the Customs, the youngest chimpanzee was aged more than two years at the time of rescue.
Shubhobroto Ghosh, author of the `Indian Zoo Inquiry', said: “The young chimpanzees that have been seized in Kolkata in January 2014 do not appear to be more than one year old.“ Asked how to determine actual age of chimpanzees, Wildlife Institute of India's scientist S P Goyal said: “It can be determined through their body weight and structure, facial structure and lower mandible (jaw or jawbone).“
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreA source said based on the Customs letter, the trader had, in August last year, secured a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate court order for taking back the trio.“But we appealed against it in a city sessions court and secured a stay that ends on September 5.“ Ex-commissioner of Customs (preventive), N K Soren, said: “We had dropped charges against the trader. I don't know what happened after that."