BHUBANESWAR: When you browse through any e-commerce websites and come across stuffs like double engine, scooter, four-wheeler, pipe, aalo (potato), pyaz (onion) dhariwala chaddar and chhota dhariwala chaddar, those may not be the real products. If the state Crime Branch is to be believed, wildlife smugglers upload these names as code words to sell costly wildlife products. 
TOI possesses copy of a Crime Branch letter, sent to all district SPs on June 20, to remain alert about the online trading of wildlife organs in camouflaged manner. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
"We came to know that the smugglers gave code names of double engine for sand boa snake, four- wheeler for tortoise, pyaz for bear bile, pipe for ivory, aaloo for musk, dhariwala chaddar for tiger skin and chhota dhariwala chaddar for leopard skin," special director general (Crime) B K Sharma told TOI. 
The wildlife cell of the Crime Branch cracked such code words after busting a well organised racket here, involving online trading of endangered monitor lizard and other wildlife products on May 30. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo"We have asked all SPs and inspectors-in-charge of police stations to start the practice of web patrolling or web surfing to detect illegal traders selling wildlife contrabands. Species, most commonly offered for online sale must be identified and enforcement actions intensified. Online trading gained momentum due to technological innovations and easy access to internet," Sharma said. 
Crime Branch asked all SPs to gather intelligence and act on the inputs for detecting trade portals, social media platforms and individuals offering prohibited wildlife articles for sale. "We also asked the police in districts to remain in touch with security agencies outside the state where online trading of wildlife organs is rampant," Sharma said. 
Sale and purchase of wildlife organs is a criminal offence as such animals are listed under schedule-1 of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
Experts said if anyone is caught with smuggling these animals, then the person can be punished with three to six months' imprisonment or a fine of Rs 25,000 to Rs 45,000 or both depending on the listed schedule of the species mentioned in Wildlife (Protection) Act.