Mysuru: Faced with the problem of staff shortage, foresters at the Nagarahole Tiger Reserve are making up for it by being more vigilant. Their commitment and efforts are paying off, as reflected by their success in protecting the teeming wildlife in the thick jungle and the conspicuous absence of illegal activities in and around the reserve. 
Recently, the foresters nabbed one of the three members of a gang that is involved in smuggling of sandalwood.They also confiscated sandalwood logs that were in possession of the accused, along with sharp weapons. The forest is spread across an area of 650sqkm, and the only way that its bounteous resources can be protected is by remaining vigilant round-the-clock. Meanwhile, foresters are on the lookout for the other two members of the gang, while a police complaint has also been lodged in connection with the incident.
Notwithstanding the handicap of staff shortage, foresters at Nagarahole have been immensely successful in safeguarding the forest. Six months ago, a gang was nabbed red-handed with sandalwood logs. Foresters who attempted to nab the gang were compelled to fire at the members, who tried to attack them.
 However, the foresters have come under attack for the recent arrest of members of a tribal community. The foresters alleged that the controversy surrounding the incident was part of a campaign being orchestrated by a syndicate involved in crimes in the forest. Some of the foresters suspected the involvement of prominent personalities in this syndicate.
 Nagarahole Tiger Reserve director D Mahesh Kumar said that they had stepped up vigilance across the forest to clamp down on those involved in the felling and smuggling of sandalwood trees. “In the recent incident wherein, we nabbed one of the miscreants with sandalwood logs, we found sharp weapons in their possession. We are currently in the process of locating the place where the miscreants felled the sandalwood trees. We have stepped up vigilance in the wake of this incident,” he said.
 Mahesh Kumar added that an investigation had been ordered to ascertain the identity of the head honcho whom they suspected of masterminding the many criminal activities inside the forest. “There is the possibility of locals and members of tribal communities being lured into this racket with the promise of paltry sums and alcohol. Only a thorough probe will help uncover the truth. We are also looking into the possibility of this syndicate operating in other protected forests,” he said.