GUWAHATI: Sleuths from the state's forest department and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) arrested three persons, including a wanted poacher, with tiger bones and skin in Biswanath district on Friday. 
The trio have been identified as Shairam Narzary (poacher), Ramprasad Basumatary and Rupnath Narzary, a school teacher. The complete skin of a tiger, its skull, bones, teeth, nails and other parts were seized from their possession.
"Shairam gunned down the tiger almost two months ago somewhere in the jungles of Assam-Arunachal Pradesh border.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe skin has not even dried up yet. He had killed the animal and was trying to sell it to agents in Nagaland and Manipur from where it would have crossed the international border to Myanmar and finally reach China and then other parts of the world. The other two were helping him in selling it," a WCCB source said.
Sources said Shairam was in touch with at least four to five buyers of the skin and bones. Then he had fixed to sell the animal parts for some Rs 18 lakh. All of them were caught on the Biswantah-Pabhoi road. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute"Animal parts are in high demand across Southeast Asia, particularly in China, where they are used to make traditional medicines. Racketeers from both Nagaland and Manipur have been working as couriers and joined hands with their counterparts in Assam for animal parts. Besides tiger, body parts of leopards, bears, and pangolins are also in high demand," a source said. There is also alleged involvement of forest department personnel and officials from neighbouring states in several cases.
Experts have described tigers as 'walking gold' worth a fortune in the black market. Tiger bones are smuggled almost exclusively to China where they are used to make tiger bone wine - a pricey traditional Chinese medicine tonic thought to impart the tiger's great strength and vigour. Tiger skins are primarily used for high-end luxury decor in the Communist country.
This is the second seizure of body parts of a big cat within a month. In October, WCCB sleuths had seized the skin of an endangered clouded leopard. In August, too, two leopard skins and around 3 kg of leopard bones were seized in the city's Gorchuk area.