CHENNAI: Between 2001 and 2020, Chennai international airport had the dubious distinction of topping the country in wildlife smuggling, accounting for 36.1% of the seizures made across India, says a recent study by TRAFFIC, which monitors the illegal trade, said. 
 Saket Badola, head of TRAFFIC (an arm of WWF-India), said 54 of the 150 seizures made at Indian airports during the period were in Chennai, followed by 22 (14.8%) at Mumbai’s Chatrapathi Shivaji international airport.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe increase in wildlife smuggling cases airports, Badola said, was because the unprecedented growth of the aviation sector had facilitated the smooth transit of individuals and goods across the globe that was being used by wildlife smugglers to move wildlife products speedily with significantly fewer losses. While International Air Transport Association (IATA) research says the country’ airline sector is expected to become the world’s third largest by 2024, India is among the top 10 countries whose airline sector is used for trafficking wildlife, he said. Star tortoises and black pond turtles are the among the most smuggled from India. A TN forest department official said in some villages of Tiruvallur district, which borders Andhra Pradesh, star tortoises are reared in private farmhouses. Gangs collect them as hatchlings and raise them before smuggling them out through airports. The International Union for Conservation of Natural Flora and Fauna (IUCN) has categorised star tortoises as a ‘vulnerable’ species, but they continue to be smuggled out. Black pond turtles are collected from central India and West Bengal. Both the turtle species, popular as pets, are in great demand and the price is fixed according to the size of the individuals.
 In an effort to increase vigil at airports, TRAFFIC along with the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, United Nations Environment Programme and WWF-India developed capacity building tools that are accessible online to law enforcing agencies deployed at airports. They include online courses, and informative videos highlighting wildlife trafficking through airports for enforcement officials.