Nagpur: In a first, wildlife wing of the state forest department opened wildlife crime cell at Van Bhavan in Civil Lines this week. The cell will provide real-time data to officials on past and present cases in the entire state.
“With centralized data in place, the cell will be able to look into backward and forward linkages and monitor all cases. Now, officials will be able to get all details about the accused, conviction, legal status etc.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOur first step will be data compilation,” said Sunil Limaye, principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF), Wildlife, Maharashtra.
“At present, though officials register preliminary offences (PORs), but we don’t know whether these cases are being taken to the logical end. The crime cell will compile all such data and a deputy conservator or DFO rank officer with some staff from Maharashtra Zoo Authority will look after the cell,” Limaye told TOI.
At present, Kerala is the only state where such a cell is in operation since 2017, with the support of NGO Wildlife Trust of India (WTI). It is assisted by a team headed by Jose Louies, chief, wildlife crime control division of WTI.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThough Melghat Tiger Reserve (MTR) in Amravati too has a crime cell, it operates as a cyber cell on the lines of the police department by providing leads on wildlife criminals.
Limaye said, “We are preparing an excel sheet format which will have comprehensive details about a crime like spot, GPS location, POR number, sections imposed, reason for death, conviction, acquittal etc. The data will have to be filled by officials at the range level. A meeting will be held every month to review the cases and division officials will be asked to explain reasons for deviation, if any.”
Sources said the wildlife wing is also in the process of procuring a software — HAWK (Hostile Activity Watch Kernel) — for centralized information management system. The WTI is customizing this software for Maharashtra. Even if the forest department may be doing it now, there is no preventive intelligence. All information is scattered and a new incumbent joining the area doesn’t know about history of the crime.
“The wildlife crime cell will also give an overview of all cases and help assess the performance of the officials. Our second step would be digitization of all cases. It will remove procedural mistakes in the documentation. For example, if an RFO is registering a POR in Thane, those manning the cell here will come to know about it immediately. The division-level officials will have access to the system,” said Limaye.