When I watched Poacher and saw myself in the series, there was a sense of déjà vu. It was in 1991, I was in the early stages of my career and almost exactly as seen in the series, a man came up to the forest department and confessed to having killed elephants. It was a wake-up call for everyone. I was pressed into action then, just as Alan is in Poacher.PollDo you believe in the concept of karma?NoYes
Unfortunately, poaching remains omnipresent even now. It is not going away. Whether it is elephants or tigers or rhinos that are very much in the trade, it is a continuous battle for us. Sometimes there are vigilant conservationists and forest officers who make sure the number of animals goes up. But there are also moments when we get complacent and take our eyes off the ball. 
The threat to our wildlife is real and intense – the value of animal parts in the Far East is still quite high. Our wild animals have always been vulnerable and more so, because in the rest of Asia their numbers have been going down. Whether it is elephants or tigers – all over southeast Asia, there are very few animals left in the wild. The pressure is on us to save them. It is imperative for us to tell these stories of wildlife crimes.
I have worked as a conservationist for 38 years and if there is one area where I have failed – it is in the aspect of mainstreaming conservation. It is still very niche. Awareness is increasing but there are very few people who know or appreciate or understand anything about wildlife. The nuances of what conservationists are fighting against is not known. Small example. During lockdown, I was flooded with images of people sharing pictures of ‘rare birds’ perched on their balconies. Irony is, the birds and the squirrels were always there. COVID put these creatures in our homes. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteOver the years, there has developed a sense of gloom over the future of wildlife in the world. The trend is to blame our governments for the failures and the problems. But there are also people in our midst who are committed to the cause and doing their bit, even as commoners. WTI’s ambassador Dia Mirza, who I have known for a decade, is a rare celebrity who understands conservation. But my interactions with others in the industry gave me the feeling that most people were unaware of the nature of the work that we do.
Even in the space of wildlife documentaries, there is a lot that can be done in terms of the scale and grandeur of visuals. While the ’80s and ’90s were the golden decades for wildlife documentaries in India, many of them were made by filmmakers abroad. The world knows and respects David Attenborough for his tremendous work as a biologist, broadcaster, natural historian and author. But how many Indians know about the narration in films done by our very own Valmik Thapar?
When Richie Mehta came to meet me five years back with the script of Poacher, he told me only an OTT platform would take the risk of doing a project like this. We must change this perception.
The way people have responded to the recent shows and documentaries about conservation, tells me that this is perhaps the right time to engage the stakeholders in the film industry in a more meaningful way. To convince them to take up stories about the few good people who are not dropping their guard in the continuing battle to save our wildlife and our world. To make films and shows that instil hope about the future of wildlife in India.
Vivek Menon
Vivek Menon is the founder and Executive Director of Wildlife Trust of India, author and photographer with a passion for elephants. His fight against organised wildlife crime for three decades earned him a guest feature in the series Poacher. 

 107935679