Koraput: The forest department has formed a wildlife crime control and coordination committee (WCCCC) to tackle illegal activities in the five forest divisions under Korput circle. 
"There has been a rise in wildlife and forest crime in the past few years. We don't have a database of criminals, who manage to flee in the absence of proper coordination among different forest divisions.The committee will help tackle the menace in a coordinated manner," said regional chief conservator of forests (RCCF), Koraput, Malot Mohan. 
The principal chief conservator of forests (PCCF) S S Srivastava inaugurated the WCCCC at Koraput on May 28. 
Jeypore, Koraput, Rayagada, Nabarangpur and Malkangiri forest divisions under Koraput circle have witnessed several wildlife crimes in the recent past. On February 2, five persons were arrested in Nabarangpur and six leopard skins were seized from them. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoMohan said the committee will prepare a database of criminals and middlemen and share the information with all five forest divisions. 
"Over the years, wildlife crime has become highly organized. Systematic identification will help bust the networks. The profiling will make it easy for our officials to keep tabs on the movement of criminals in reserve forests," he said. 
Officials said the committee will have the power to collect intelligence related to wildlife crime and establish wildlife crime databank. "We will urge police to share information on wildlife criminals and take their help to investigate cases," the RCCF said. 
In most cases, poachers manage to give the department a slip and it's the middleman who is nabbed, he said. 
According to the recent tiger census, there are 15 leopards, seven among them female, in Koraput forest circle. 
The highest six leopards were spotted in Rayagada forest division followed by five in Jeypore, two in Koraput and one each in Nabarangpur and Malkangiri divisions.