NAGPUR: Expressing dismay over circulation of tiger photographs and their locations on social media, the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) has raised the matter with chief wildlife wardens of all tiger range states in the country. On Friday, NTCA issued a letter that circulation of such information in public domain “has the potential to be used for committing wildlife crimes”. NTCA has asserted that no such photographs or information should be shared on social media.
“The authority has received information of tiger photographs as well as camera trap pictures circulating on WhatsApp groups and Facebook, which is highlighting the said animals’ location,” stated the letter issued by Vaibhav Mathur, assistant inspector general of forests (NTCA).
Senior NTCA officials from Delhi told TOI that a recent case of Odisha prompted the authorities to issue this circular. “The presence of rare melanistic tiger in Simlipal Tiger Reserve got leaked and went viral on social media. From conservation point of view, this information should have been kept a secret,” officials said.
Recently, a guide had uploaded a camera trap image of a full-grown male tiger of Brahmapuri division. After he put the picture on Facebook, a person identified the tiger as the same one he saw in Tadoba some years back.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoWildlife spokesperson and divisional forest officer (DFO) GK Vashishtha said that the department was yet to receive NTCA’s circular. “After receiving it, we will circulate the letter to concerned officials and staffers. They will be sensitized on not leaking pictures and locations of tigers,” he said. 
Conservationists have mixed views on the NTCA move. Expressing approval of the step, wildlife conservationist Uday Patel said he was against circulation of camera trap pictures. “They should not be uploaded on social media since it could trigger unnoticed poaching and congregation of tourists at a particular spot. This increases the risk of trapping of tigers by poachers,” he said.
Agreeing with him, naturalist Arun Sahay said NTCA took the right step. “Guidelines are a must for forest officials and staffers. Without their involvement, camera trap pictures cannot be leaked. The forest department must sensitize field staffers about the dangers of uploading such pictures,” he said.
On the other hand, Central India director of Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) Nitin Desai expressed doubts over enforcement of NTCA’s direction. “Even if people uploading the pictures are identified, on what grounds can they be questioned? The move is good from the security angle but organized poachers have their own information network, and have hardly anything to do with images on WhatsApp etc,” he said.
Desai, however, added that people need to be more responsible. “Few months back, I became aware of a WhatsApp group of forest guides. After the safari, they would post pictures and exact locations of tigers. Putting geo tags might not lure poachers but definitely a large number of tourists would go to that particular spot and this is not healthy for animals,” he said.
Giving the example of iconic tiger Jai, Desai said that the tiger’s ‘fame’ on social media didn’t do him any good.