Around this time last year, three passengers arrived at Bengaluru International Airport from Bangkok with 18 rare exotic animals including yellow and green anacondas and an alligator in their checked-in baggage. Caught in the wild, packaged in Thailand, they were brought in to star in a petting zone in Chennai.
The seizure led Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) officers to a man from Chennai who had set up a farm in Bengaluru with 140 exotic animals.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoAll were handed over to the Bannerghatta Biological Park. The case also led them to a farm in Puducherry where several animals were seized. “The farm owner said he was a biologist and passionate about reptiles, which was why he wanted to open a petting zone,” says Shanthi Pillai, WCCB wildlife inspector.
While exotics make for great selfies, they are illegal in India. 
“Initially, wildlife was smuggled in for people seeking exotic pets,” says M Kirupa Shankar, director of WCCB-Southern Region. “Breeding farms then cropped up to cater to the growing demand. When the animals started to breed and the numbers became unmanageable, breeders started setting up petting zones. They see it as a way to market the animals. We have seen several cropping up in the past two years.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstitutePetting zones sell tickets for `500 upwards, to play with the animals. But officials say it puts the wildlife under tremendous stress as they are not used to being handled by people. They can sometimes become aggressive.
Officials have begun cracking down on petting zones. In Chennai, a zone was shut down in 2022, and another was not allowed to open in 2023 as they didn’t have documents from Animal Welfare Board of India. “We wanted to create awareness on conservation but were refused permission,” says a member of the team that was shut down.
On paper, the ministry of Environment, forest, and climate change advisory requires exotic pet owners to register them. However, there are no rules defining what an exotic species is. “For now, the department cannot book cases, only monitor the trade,” says Srinivas Reddy, chief wildlife warden.
Email your feedback to southpole.toi@timesgroup.com