GUWAHATI: A thriving wildlife racket between Assam and Arunachal Pradesh was busted on Sunday with the arrest of two kingpins and the seizure of a large number of animal body parts. Officials of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB), police and the forest department arrested the two persons and seized 42 bear gall bladders, five leopard nails and three suspected tiger bones.
Identified as Sarbat Pradhan and Ajit Saha, both hailed from Harmuti, close to the inter-state border with Arunachal Pradesh.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWCCB officials said the estimated worth of the animal parts seized would be around Rs 50 lakh in the international grey market. A senior WCCB official said the duo had been running the racket for almost nine years now.
“They (the arrested duo) sourced the wildlife body parts from Arunachal Pradesh. During initial interrogation of the duo, it came to light that contraband items are supplied to a particular buyer from another state in the northeast. We do not want to disclose the state’s name at the moment because it may alert the buyer, who may escape our net. We are pursuing the entire operation of this racket,” the official said.
The official said the operation was launched following substantial intelligence inputs on the thriving racket. Arunachal Pradesh forest department officials also assisted in the bust. The bust also brought to the fore that it is not only the rhinos that are killed for their horns but also other species that are being increasingly targeted by poachers to meet the soaring demand of wildlife body parts in international grey markets. “Forty two bear gall bladders mean the same number of bears were killed by poachers. Bears are Schedule I species, just like rhinos. The magnitude of wildlife crimes involving poaching of different species of animals in the northeast is indeed serious,” secretary general of biodiversity conservation NGO, Bibhab Kumar Talukdar, said. Talukdar, who is also in the chair of IUCN Asian Rhino Specialist Group, said poachers are always on the lookout for species that can be easily targeted.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“This year, the state has experienced comparatively fewer instances of rhino poaching because of stepped up vigilance in protected areas. It does not mean poachers are sitting idle. They are always looking for other species for body parts,” Talukdar added.
Former National Tiger Conservation Authority member M Firoz Ahmed said it is high time the government put serious efforts into curbing wildlife crimes on species which generally do not get as much attention. “There are several wildlife species which are targeted by poachers for their body parts and smuggled in the international grey market. This is a serious issue which needs concerted effort from all stakeholders,” Ahmed added.