Jaipur: The forest department is in the process of digitizing all the wildlife and forest offences that were until now registered manually. 
The digitization will be done only for the pending cases up to 2016, and from 2017 till now, all the cases irrespective of their status will be uploaded. The department will do the same for forest areas where there is encroachment.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
G V Reddy, principal chief conservator of forest (PCCF) told TOI, “Till now, all the cases of forest and wildlife offences were maintained in a register manually at the district level. However, we are now in the process of digitizing them, in order to analyse the type of offences and the number which is pending along with the reasons for the same. With one click, we will be able to see all the cases, which was not possible till now. We are very serious about curbing such offences and this would help us in doing so,” Reddy said.
The matter was discussed during a video conference meeting of officials on forest protection held on Tuesday. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe data will be uploaded for the last ten years, though only the pending cases till 2016 will be digitised. “After 2016, all the cases whether the investigation has been completed or pending will be uploaded. This would help us in identifying the repeat offenders as well so that we can take the needful action,” added Reddy. 
The department will also identify the areas where forest has been encroached upon, as well as have a digital record of the same. Elaborating further, the top forest official said, “Forest encroachment is also an offence and till now, the data was only on register. We will make it digital and also mark the encroached areas so they are visible on Google so that we can see them virtually. Up till now, they are not visible in this manner.”