NAGPUR:With an aim to assess and analyse current global wildlife crime scenario, including its various dynamics, a two-day meeting has been organized at Vienna in Austria on September 29 and 30.
 City-based expert Nitin Desai, who is Central India director of Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI), has been invited by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to attend the meeting of scientific advisory group.
 “The UNODC has undertaken a research project on international wildlife crime.The aim of the project is to assess and analyse current global wildlife crime scenario including its various dynamics,” said Desai.
 This is being done by creating a database of global wildlife seizures, including data provided to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) by various states and the International Consortium on Combating Wildlife Crime (ICCWC) which includes the Interpol and the World Customs Organisation.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo Researchers at UNODC will also be conducting market assessments by some case studies of important cases of illegal wildlife trade. The final objective of the research is to provide key indicators to stake holder states so that they can understand and address the illegal trade in a better way.
 Once an emerging threat, wildlife and forest crime today has transformed into one of the largest transnational organized criminal activities alongside drug trafficking, arms, and trafficking in human beings.
 Criminal groups are using the same routes and techniques for wildlife trafficking as for smuggling of other illicit commodities, exploiting gaps in national law enforcement and criminal justice systems.
 The billions of dollars generated by this illegal business are being used to further nefarious ends. Wildlife and forest transnational organized crime is particularly acute in developing countries as under-resourced governments often lack the capacity to regulate the exploitation of their natural assets.