COIMBATORE: The Forest department officials from Tirupur forest division arrested three persons on Saturday evening for attempting to sell four pieces of an elephant tusks for Rs 80 lakh in Tirupur city. 
The arrested persons were remanded in judicial custody and were lodged at Tirupur sub-jail on Sunday. The officials recovered the four pieces from the trio.
The arrested persons were identified as V Veerappan, 63, P Murugan, 45, both hailed from Velliankadu in Tirupur and M Avinashiyappan, 37, from Avinashi in Tirupur district.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
S Senthilkumar, forest range officer, Tirupur range, his team and officials from the wildlife crime control bureau (WCCB) got a tip off, four days ago about the illegal sale of tusks and they worked together to arrest the seller. Senthilkumar and his team conducted a vehicle check in Tirupur city on Saturday evening and stopped two motorcycles. The two motorists and a pillion rider kept two travel bags and the officials checked the bag and found four pieces of elephant tusks.
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreImmediately, they were taken to the office of the Tirupur range officer for further inquiry. The preliminary inquiry revealed that Veerappan owned a textile shop a few years ago and he was facing huge losses in the business. He borrowed a few lakhs of rupees from various people and was not able to return the amount and he was struggling with the financial crisis. His wife and son were residing in Trichy and another son died recently. He was residing in a rental room and became a loadman in garment units in Tirupur. Murugan and Avinashiyappan were engaged with ironing clothes at garment units in Tirupur.
Veerappan often travelled in a truck laden with bananas to Cumbum in Theni district and often visited a tea shop where he developed a few friendships. He approached some people for ivory and told them that he would sell them. But the owner of the ivories should provide ten percent of commission for him. One of the persons in Theni visited Tirupur city and brought the four pieces of an elephant tusks in two travel bags and handed them over to Veerappan.
“Veerappan approached his friends Murugan and Avinashiyappan to find a receiver. The trio were attempting to sell the tusks for Rs 80 lakhs. Meanwhile we nabbed them on Saturday evening and they were arrested under the Wildlife Protection Act and were produced before the judicial magistrate on Sunday. They were remanded in judicial custody. We have seized the four pieces of tusks and two motorcycles from them,” said Senthilkumar.