VADODARA: Wildlife smugglers seem to have gone hi-tech for reaching out to customers across the country. Forest officials say that many of the traders dealing in exotic animals or birds have taken to dark web and social media sites over the last few years. And the forest department has now begun training its staff in chasing these criminals online.
"Many of the traders have started using the dark web to sell the banned items as well as exotic species.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoIt is tough to track the sellers or buyers on the dark web but our technical team has managed to trace a few. Even the social media sites are now used for this illegal trade," said Yogesh Warkad, regional deputy director, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) of western region.
"Our online surveillance has become better and we are also training forest department staff in monitoring and tracing such traders online," Warkad told TOI.
The forest department, along with WCCB, has organised a two-day capacity building training programme for forest officials, staff and police personnel in the city.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreFrom beat guards to senior officials, all are being trained in various aspects of surveillance, intelligence gathering, analysing evidence and understanding the latest amendments to the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
Vishal Thakur of Canine Group Association and wildlife conservationist Rushi Pathak had suggested the idea of organising the training programme to the forest department.
"The training programme includes wildlife crime scenarios in India, understanding the modus operandi of the smugglers and the laws related to wildlife crime and identification of the wildlife products," said Dr Anshuman Sharma, conservator of forests, Vadodara circle.
Forest officials said that in Gujarat smugglers usually trade in leopard claws, black coral and parakeets. Recently, a rhino horn was also seized from two persons who were also dealing in ivory products in the city.