JAIPUR: To control the wildlife crime in the state’s tiger reserves, control rooms have been set up in Ranthambore National Park (RNP) and Sariska Tiger Reserve (STR).
The villagers and wildlife lovers can contact these control rooms to report crimes or illegal activities occurring in forest areas. Information to rescue wildlife animals can also be provided at these stations.
An officer in RNP said, “On Tuesday, a wireless control room was established in forest department headquarters in Sawai Madhopur.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoPeople can report us at 07462- 220530,” he said. Taking a lead, on December 4, the STR also launched in control room and contact number 9662881277 was distributed to the locals. Field director of Sariska Tiger Reserve, R N Meena said, “The initiative is showing positive response and so far, we have received three complaints. The move has strengthened the forest department’s patrolling. Three staff members are also deployed 24X7, for the same,” he said.
After a camera trap picture with a wire snare around the neck of tiger T-108 in (RNP) surfaced last week, the forest department on Saturday issued a red alert in all tiger reserves, sanctuaries and parks in Rajasthan. Taking a serious note of the poaching incidents, Shruti Sharma, head of the forest force (HOFF) also cancelled the leaves of all the field officers till February on Saturday and issued directions for effective patrolling in all the protected areas to curb illegal activities. Sources claims, the forest is receiving little assistance from the Wildlife Surveillance and Anti-Poaching System (WS and APS), which was aimed for effective monitoring and surveillance of wildlife animals.
A source at STR said, “There are 16 cameras installed at the Sariska and majority of them are non- functional. The responsible firm for maintenance has been contacted several times. But the firm has expressed it helplessness citing payment dues,” he said.
The forest officials at RNP also highlighted shortage of staff at the reserve, which is major hindrance in effective ground monitoring.