BHUBANESWAR: The state government has decided to set up a robust communication and information cell in Odisha Police to improve policing through extensive use of social media. 

The proposed Odisha Police Strategic Communication and Information (OPSC&I) cell will be manned by highly tech-savvy non-police personnel. 
The broader objective of the cell is to help the police in achieving various objectives like crime prevention, investigation, crime reporting, community engagement, soliciting tips, grievance redressal and other related issues through various media and social media channels. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe cell will be responsible for advancing the practice of community policing by raising awareness about emerging crimes, including cyber fraud, crime against women, road safety, wildlife crime, economic offences and substance abuse. 
“The cell will broadcast citizen-centric, relevant and emergency information like clarification on rumours, road diversions, road closures, accidents, disasters, safety of women, senior citizens and children, new rules and regulations through the social media handles of the police,” a senior police officer said. At present, some establishments of Odisha Police and offices of SPs have assigned their own officers to share information through social media handles. However, the bulk of the social media posts are of meetings and newspaper clippings on arrests. 
“Our proposed OPSC&I cell will be an end-to-end communication agency for the entire length and breadth of Odisha Police, starting from the police stations and moving upwards to district police offices, range offices, state headquarters and various wings of state police like crime branch, commissionerate police and state forensic science laboratory,” the officer said. 
SPs, range offices and various wings of Odisha Police will nominate nodal officers who will interact with the cell for communication or dissemination of good work, advisories and crime updates, among others. The cell will design, develop, create, and publish content on current and upcoming communication channels like Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, text message, Telegram and WhatsApp. 
“The cell will draw a detailed plan for grievance redressal and feedback mechanism for internal staff and citizens,” the officer said.