KOLKATA: A course on wildlife and biodiversity, aimed at providing a critical understanding of socio-economic, political and cultural impact of climate change on wildlife habitats, biodiversity and rivers, has been readied to be taught at Scottish Church College from August.
The eight-week-long certificate course, designed by conservationists, foresters and environmental experts and jointly organised by West Bengal State University, Scottish Church College and Society for Heritage and Ecological Researches, will be open to people from all walks of life, including students, teachers, businessmen and professionals.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis course will help create awareness among participants about the complex challenges of conserving natural resources, like wildlife habitats, freshwaters and biodiversity amid climate change, an official said. To be taught by conservationists, researchers, foresters and professors, the course will focus on how the common man can conserve biodiversity, wildlife and environment and prevent wildlife crimes.
“The entire discourse on climate change and biodiversity conservation needs to become more contextual so that it becomes easier for people to understand the impact. Issues, like global warming, and problems that are likely to come up in future have to be explained in terms of their impact on our daily lives,” said Silanjan Bhattacharyya, course director and professor of zoology at West Bengal State University. “A lot of people have the intention to save the environment, but they have no idea how to go about it. This course is aimed at them.”
The course will be taught through lectures, seminars and exploration of key issues, like wildlife crimes and intervention, debate between development and eco-conservation and the rationale behind conserving tigers in a rapidly changing nation. “In a time of extreme environmental crisis, which is pushing life on earth fast towards a mega extinction event, endangering the very existence of human civilizations on earth, needs awareness and attention on the challenges in conservation of our biodiversity and wildlife. The impetus to protect and augment nature’s role must come from setting goals by preparing individuals into climate-informed citizens,” said Joydeep Kundu, the course co-ordinator. 
The last day of enrolment is August 17.