Margao: Notwithstanding the ban by the state forest department on visiting the Dudhsagar waterfalls located inside the Bhagwan Mahavir Wildlife Sanctuary, hordes of tourists descended on the narrow stretch of railway tracks near the falls in the Braganza Ghat section early Sunday morning. Faced with the unprecedented situation that threatened to spiral into a law and order situation, Railway Protection Force (RPF) personnel managed to clear the tracks of the tourists by bundling them into the next available train or walking them down to Castle Rock, the nearest station.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
Dudhsagar station, which cannot be accessed by road, is not a commercial halt for trains, and no tickets are issued here for passengers. It’s designated as a technical halt where a train may stop for operational purposes, like crew change, crossing of trains, etc.
“Nobody, other than on-duty railway staff is allowed to board or deboard trains at Dudhsagar station,” Jitin Sharma, divisional security commissioner, South Western Railway (SWR), Hubbali, told TOI. “Doing so is a crime that attracts provisions under Section 147 of the Railways Act. But as they seemed to be young and educated, they were not charged, and we persuaded them to clear the tracks.”
Tourists visiting the falls thus alight either at Dudhsagar station or walk down along the railway tracks after getting down at Castle Rock station ahead of Dudhsagar.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreWhile a video of RPF personnel punishing a group of tourists by making them do sit-ups went viral on social media, Sharma said the security force exercised utmost restraint while dealing with some unruly elements who resorted to stone pelting. 
“It was a crowd of over 1,000 people on a narrow stretch of track in the Ghat section. Considering the movement of running trains along the route and the safety of the public, my men showed great restraint. At one point, the crowd got wild and hurled abuses and pelted stones at my men on realising that they could not get to the waterfall after having travelled such a distance. At least one RPF constable sustained severe injuries on account of stone pelting,” said Sharma.
Railway sources attributed the unusually large crowd of tourists to the arrival of two or more trains in quick succession on account of delayed movement of trains. 
SWR officials blamed the situation on “misinformation” by tourist guides, bloggers, and others.
Sharma said that a concerted plan would soon be worked out in coordination with Goa Police and RPF to rein in the tourists who violate the ban in force, including the deployment of more security personnel.
“Such situations can potentially endanger the safety of passengers also. At times, they resort to putting obstacles on railway tracks, like placing stones, tree trunks, etc, which attracts serious sections under the Railways Act, and carries imprisonment of up to five years,” he said.
Forest officials said it was “unfortunate” that tourists were getting down on the tracks to visit the falls. “Entry of tourists has been banned to waterfalls inside wildlife sanctuaries at present, and violating these orders can invite prosecution under the Wildlife Protection Act," said a senior forest official.
He said that tourists are putting their lives at risk with these actions, as going near waterfalls at present can be dangerous. Due to the heavy rainfall, water levels may rise suddenly without warning.
South Goa collector Asvin Chandru A told TOI that the administration is seized of the matter and that a joint inspection with the railways will be conducted next week to review the situation.