PANAJI: In a substantial blow to the fight against cybercrime, a tender floated by Goa police for the setting up of a new state cybercrime forensic laboratory cum training centre saw zero bidders. 
“No bid was received for the setting up of the cybercrime lab,” a senior officer said. The tender was opened last Thursday. The officer added that Goa police is likely to refloat the tender.
The lab, which was expected to be set up under the Cybercrime Prevention Against Women and Children (CCPWC) scheme, would be a welcome addition to the force.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoOfficers hoped that the new lab would help Goa police solve the many pending cases by identifying or locating the accused, as the case may be. Currently, crime branch has a small lab set up under corporate social responsibility.
Nearly 80% of all cybercrime cases reported in the state have remained unsolved due to lack of infrastructure and cyber experts. Of the 99 cases registered in 2015, only 20 were detected, while ten have been chargesheeted and are pending trial.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe Centre has approved Rs 1.4 crore for Goa police to set up a cyber lab.
The lack of skilled manpower is another problem Goa police is facing. Investigation of cybercrime requires computer skills, mainly for on-site imaging of disks and on-site analysis and tracking of leads.
Sources in the force say that special software and tools are required for the securing of digital evidence. “There is a need for officers to handle and apply forensic tools and techniques,” an officer said. 
In December 2013, the state government had granted permission to set up a cybercrime cell in the state and to recruit technical persons for the same. A year later, the same was operational. The CCC investigates financial crimes involving cheating, credit card frauds, money laundering, cyber photography involving production and distribution of pornographic material, sale of illegal articles such as narcotics, weapons and wildlife, intellectual property crimes such as theft of computer source code, software piracy, copyright infringement, trademark violation, deployment of virus, cyber-attack, cyber terrorism, etc.