BHUBANESWAR: The Wildlife Society of Odisha (WSO) has alleged that the forest department has been covering up elephant deaths and destroying evidences by burning and burying the carcass in secret, a claim dismissed by the forest department. 
The allegation surfaced after an elephant carcass was exhumed by the special task force (STF) of the state Crime Branch in Narasinghpur range of Athgarh forest division on Tuesday.The WSO alleged that the incident indicated the forest department tried to cover up poaching. It has cited at least 10 examples of such cover up and demanded action against the erring forest department employees.
The WSO said out of 770 elephant deaths in the past 10 years the cause of death could not be ascertained in 161 cases. Of these, in 146 cases, the carcasses were highly decomposed. The WSO claimed that since April 2012, there have been at least 10 elephant deaths that have been covered up. 
“The postmortem in the Narasinghpur incident, conducted by Odisha University of Agriculture and Technology (OUAT), has confirmed that it was a 12-year-old elephant whose tusks were removed. In November 2021, an elephant death was not reported in Angul circle although a video of the disposal of carcass had gone viral. There are eight other similar incidents,” alleged WSO secretary Biswajit Mohanty.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreHe pointed out that cover up has been easy as the carcass, upon being discovered, was not in a condition to throw light on anything. “Lower-rung employees have only faced action with the top officers at the division level escaping punishment,” Mohanty claimed.
Chief wildlife warden and principal chief conservator of forests, Sashi Paul, asked, “Had it been easy for the department to hide elephant deaths, then how are they even getting detected? It is not possible to hide the death of such a huge animal. Let the probe and laboratory reports come. The investigation is being done by the crime branch.”
Jai Narayan Pankaj, deputy inspector general (STF), said they are waiting for the lab report to come from the Wildlife Institute of India.