New Delhi: Delhi forest and wildlife department, which has been facing an acute shortage of manpower for the past few years, has started the recruitment process with the appointment of 11 wildlife guards and four forest rangers. Two retired wildlife inspectors have also been appointed on a contractual basis. 
Online examinations to recruit 211 forest guards are underway across the country, while the exams for wildlife inspector will be conducted in the second week of this month.The functioning of the forest department — whose work is to protect the green cover, rescue wildlife and prevent wildlife crimes — has been affected with no appointments for many posts for the last few years.
A senior forest official said that the present staff is overburdened. “For instance, few ground staff members are available for inspection if we receive many complaints related to damage done to trees. For rescue of animals, we are mostly dependent on NGOs,” the official said. 
The 11 wildlife guards’ posts have been lying vacant for a long time and after the fresh appointment, seven have joined duty while four are expected to report soon. Before the recent appointment of four rangers, only one wildlife ranger on deputation was available in the department. The four rangers, who will soon join duty, will have to undergo mandatory training of 18 months as their posts have statutory power. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteSimilarly, all seven posts of wildlife inspectors, who are mainly tasked with preventing smuggling of wildlife articles and ensuring wildlife rescue, were lying vacant following the retirement of the lone officer in December last year. “We have appointed two wildlife inspectors on contract basis and for the permanent appointments, an examination will be conducted in the second week of March. The posts of wildlife inspector also have statutory power and after recruitment, they will have to do training of 18 months,” said an official. 
The forest department had only a total of 108 posts but National Green Tribunal (NGT) created 290 new posts in 2019. On NGT direction, 211 forest guards have to be appointed. However, the forest department received over 7 lakhs applications from candidates across the country for 211 posts of forest guards. “Considering the huge number of applicants, it was decided to organize online exams across the country. However, the process of conducting online exams was delayed due to Covid-19 pandemic. The exams which began on March 1 will continue till March 7. After exams, the selected candidates will have to go for a physical test,” said an official. Of the total new posts created by NGT, 66 foresters, one veterinarian, two compounders and one legal advisor will be recruited for the first time and the process of their recruitment is under way.