RAJKOT: In a tragic incident in Gujarat's Junagadh district, a six-month-old baby girl became a victim of gender discrimination when her mother, who had been tortured by her in-laws, threw her into a drain while she was asleep. This act led to the baby's untimely death.
The woman, Kirti Parmar (27), was taken into custody.
The incident occurred under the Maliya Hatina police station area.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The police discovered the lifeless body of the girl in a drain on Friday after her father, Hiren, reported her missing from the cradle.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoInitially, there were suspicions that an animal might have taken the girl, considering the area's wildlife habitat. However, after a search operation conducted by the police with the assistance of a dog squad, it became evident that the incident was a clear case of murder, as there were no injury marks on the girl's body.
During the investigation, the police continued their interrogation of family members, despite the sensitive circumstances surrounding the girl's death. Eventually, Trisha's mother broke down and confessed to throwing her daughter into the drain early Friday morning.
Deputy Superintendent of Police, Mangrol division, D V Kodiyatar, revealed that the woman had been subjected to torture by her in-laws due to giving birth to a girl child. The constant taunting had pushed her into depression, but she couldn't seek solace with her parents as her father had passed away, and she was one of eleven sisters. To escape the daily torture, she decided to kill her daughter and even contemplated suicide, but she couldn't go through with it after throwing the girl.
The family was also dealing with a conjunctivitis infection.
Kirti's husband, Hiren, was sleeping separately in his parents' room. As a result, they were unaware of Kirti leaving the house early in the morning.
Kirti is educated and has completed a diploma in a primary teacher course, while her husband is involved in agriculture.