GUWAHATI: In a joint operation by customs and wildlife crime control bureau (WCCB) sleuths on Wednesday evening, two persons were nabbed with two leopard skins and around 3 kg leopard bones at the Gorchuk area. In a separate operation, two persons were arrested at Bogribari in Dhubri district while trying to smuggle a tokay gecko. 
The two persons arrested at Gorchuk, identified as Ranjan Rabha and Subal Rabha, both in their early 30s, hail from Chaygaon area in Kamrup.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoSources said they were acting as carriers and were on their way to sell the animal parts. Preliminary investigation revealed that the duo had brought the animal parts from Meghalaya and were bringing the consignments through Chandubi near the Assam-Meghalaya border.
Customs superintendent M Sarania said, "The seized items include the skin of one clouded leopard and one common leopard along with their bones. The clouded leopard skin measured 6.6 feet and the common leopard skin was measured at 6 feet. There were packets of bones belonging to the animals weighing around 3.67 kilos. The total seizure was estimated at around Rs 5.5 lakh."
The two persons arrested at Bogribari, identified as Md Samar Ali and Md Anwar Ali Seikh, were apprehended while trying to sell the gecko for Rs 5 lakh. "In both the cases, the lizard and the animal parts were brought from Meghalaya. The Assam-Meghalaya borders have become a major hub for illegal wildlife smuggling and the city has become the transit point," a senior WCCB official said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoThe smuggling of animal parts through the northeast region to China and southeast Asian countries has become a major concern in recent times. The Dimapur-Imphal-Moreh route is said to be favoured for the smuggling of bones, skulls and skins of endangered animals. 
Sources said poor infrastructure along the Assam-Meghalaya border is allowing this racket to prosper. "Due to poor road connectivity and police surveillance, illegal traders use the walking routes through the dense jungles in the Assam-Meghalaya bordering areas," sources said.