Nagpur: Now, forest officials delaying compensation payout for human and cattle kills in wild animal attacks or crop depredation will have to pay interest from their salaries if dues are not settled in 30 days. The law in this regard was passed by both houses of the state legislature on Friday.
Forest minister Sudhir Mungantiwar told TOI, “There is huge resentment among victims’ kin and farmers against delayed compensation to kin of victims.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThis ostensibly leads to revenge killing of wild animals by electrocuting them with farm fences.”
Mungantiwar said there is also a proposal to increase compensation for human deaths in wild animal attacks from the present ₹20 lakh to ₹25 lakh, and ex-gratia for injured persons admitted to private hospitals for treatment.
 But, wildlife conservationists have dubbed the minister’s move as a populist step.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA Institute“If at all compensation has to be increased, a condition should be put in GR that if any attack happens in forest area, no compensation will be paid,” demanded Suresh Chopane, president of Green Planet Society, Chandrapur.
On August 23, 2022, the state had hiked compensation from ₹15 lakh to ₹20 lakh. Prior to that, in 2018, Mungantiwar hiked the compensation for human kills from ₹10 lakh to ₹15 lakh. The minister’s idea may be to reduce man-animal conflict but figures contradict his claims.
“Chances of the package being misused are bright. We have observed that on occasion even accident cases in forest areas and crimes are also presented as tiger and leopard kills,” said Chopane.
Official figures show that even after the increase in compensation thrice since 2018, there is no let up in human deaths and injuries. Since 2018-19 (April-March), there has been a steep rise in conflict.
In 2018-19, 36 human kills were reported, and 349 people were injured in the state. In 2019-20, 47 people died and 299 were injured. Similarly, in 2020-2021, 80 died and 400 were injured followed by 86 deaths and 553 injuries in 2021-2022. In 2022-23, 106 people died and 707 were injured.
“These figures show that more the compensation more the deaths. History shows that ex-gratia amount was negligible for humans, and minors are not eligible for payment in case of tiger/panther attack in the state,” said wildlife conservationist Prafulla Bhamburkar.
“Basically, the idea behind the scheme is to safeguard wild animals by providing immediate relief to families of the victims. But even after the highest amount being paid in the entire country, tigers continue to be threatened by death and capture,” said Bhamburkar.
Chopne recalled that after the compensation was increased, many senior citizens are being sent to the forest for cattle grazing. The new package will be even more than the ₹15 lakh relocation package declared by the NTCA.
Full report on www.toi.in