DEHRADUN: A 10-year analysis of the use of Indian airports to commit illegal wildlife trade has revealed that roughly 70,000 wild animal body parts and their derivatives were found in 141 seizures across 18 airports between 2011 and 2020. During these seizures, species belonging to South America, Australia, and Africa were also found. The study was conducted by Traffic, a global organisation that monitors the trade of wild animals.
Among the seized animals, 46% were reptiles, 18% mammals, and 10% marine species.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe findings of the study, published on March 30, suggest that India has become a “demand country” for certain wildlife species and that poachers don’t hesitate to use the air route to smuggle wildlife body parts despite the presence of detectors. The exotic red-eared slider turtle and Indian star tortoise were found in most of the seizures.
“Airports have emerged as a popular mode for transporting wildlife contrabands due to shorter travel times and extensive reach,” said Tilotama Varma, additional director, Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, a statutory body under the environment ministry.
The situation is worrisome, especially when India is planning to create 220 more airports by 2025. This means that wildlife traffickers from rural areas will have broader access to airway connectivity, experts said. Baggage of air travellers hid many things wild and endangered -- from the hide of tigers, live leopard cubs to tusks of Asian elephants. From roughly 550 kg of pangolin scales to almost 50 kg of peacock feathers, everything was flying around, said the study called 'High Flying: Insight Into Wildlife Trafficking Through India's Airports'.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoIn the past 10 years, most seizures were concentrated in the southern regions of India; the highest from Chennai airport, Mumbai's Chhatrapati Shivaji airport, New Delhi's Indira Gandhi international airport, and Kolkata's Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose airport.