PILIBHIT: The district administration will soon be signing a memorandum of understanding with US-based international organization, Turtle Survival Alliance (TSA), for setting up a turtle rescue and conservation centre on the banks of Phulhar lake at Madhotanda village in Pilibhit’s Kalinagar tehsil. 
A decision to the effect was taken on Sunday after district magistrate Pulkit Khare and India programme director of TSA inspected a 2.5-acre land on the banks of the lake, where river Gomti originates. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
The rescue centre will comprise a turtle breeding centre, an interpretation centre, research centre and a theme park. 
The conservation programme will cover over 300 wetlands in the district with an aim to notify those with diverse aquatic species by the state Wetlands Authority, said DM Khare. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPilibhit is one of the five most sensitive districts in UP prone to turtle poaching and illegal trading, according to the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB). 
Shailendra Singh, TSA director, said Pilibhit is home to 12 identified species of turtles out of the total 26 species found in India. These include seven turtle species listed in schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. Phulhar lake has a sizable population of the Indian soft shell turtle, one of the schedule I species. 
The TSA will primarily be involved in monitoring of turtle species, their population and rehabilitation. The turtles will be kept at the rescue centre till judicial order is obtained for releasing them in a safe water body, Singh explained. 
The TSA will soon organize a training session for the forest personnel as well as local stakeholders as community participation is vital for the turtle conservation programme, Singh added.