PILIBHIT: Autopsy reports of two adult male tigers of Pilibhit Tiger Reserve have confirmed involvement of poachers in their killing. The post-mortems were conducted by the Bareilly-based Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) that submitted its reports recently.
 The autopsy reports, provided to TOI by PTR’s divisional forest officer Kailash Prakash on Friday, said both adult tigers died due to snares set up by poachers.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
 The report has brought to the fore the issue of safety of wild animals in PTR. When asked about anti-poaching strategies and action plan PTR would adopt for the safety of wildlife, state’s principal chief conservator of forest (wildlife) SK Upadhyay said, “I have sought from the DFO all autopsy reports of tigers that died in the previous year for a review. This will prove to be a clinching factor in finalizing a flawless strategy.”
 The reserve lost four tigers in quick succession between March 29 and May 20. Besides the two adult male tigers, carcass of one sub-adult tigress and another sub-adult big cat were found. The forest division of Pilibhit has been witness to deaths of 16 big cats, including 15 tigers and one leopard, since May 24, 2012.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndo The autopsy report of the adult male tiger found dead in Sharda Sagar dam on March 29 described the cause of death as “deep maggot infested wound encircling neck, suggesting killing by snaring the neck”.
 With reference to the death of a five-year-old adult male tiger whose carcass was found in Mahof forest range on April 19, the autopsy report said its death was caused due to “traumatic injury on neck caused by metallic snare leading to massive bleeding and strangulation”.
 The third post-mortem report of a sub-adult tigress, whose carcass was recovered on April 11 from an outlet canal of Sharda Sagar dam, revealed that it died on account of “heavy parasitic infection of multiple parasitic species”.
 The report of the fourth sub-adult tiger, whose carcass was found in the same outlet canal of Sarda Sagar dam on May 20, is awaited. However, wildlife veterinarians suspect poisoning as cause of death.
 Responding to a question over seeking coordination with special task force (STF) of UP and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau towards launching a drive against poachers like in 2015, Upadhyay said, “I will certainly resort to this inevitable measure for which a draft on the course of search and seizure operation will soon be prepared.”
 He said he would also submit a request to state government and the National Tiger Conservation Authority to equip PTR with infrastructure and address the problem of acute staff crunch.