DEHRADUN: For the first time, squads of ‘super sniffer’ dogs, specialised in detecting smuggling of wildlife and other related contraband, have been introduced in the Railway Protection Force (RPF). These teams have been introduced in the northern and eastern railway divisions in the first phase to curb the rampant wildlife trafficking along the India-Nepal border.
According to sources, ‘super sniffer’ squads, comprising a German Shepherd, its handler and assistant handler, would be deployed across the railway network in the country in phases to curb wildlife crimes.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoWildlife trade monitoring network TRAFFIC-India head Saket Badola said, “Trafficking of wildlife through railways is common in the northern and eastern regions, especially across the Nepal border. We even had cases of tiger and leopard remains being smuggled through trains on this stretch. Hence, we wanted to step up vigil in these areas.” 
RPF director general Arun Kumar said, “Railways is increasingly being used as a transportation medium for smuggling of narcotics and wildlife items. Hence, we are exploring all means to ramp up our potential to curb such crimes. As these dogs are specially trained at tracking wildlife contraband, it will be of immense help to us.” 
Another TRAFFIC official said, “These ‘super sniffer’ dogs were trained for nine months at the police training school (dogs) in Madhya Pradesh. The animal, its handler and assistant handler act like each other’s close aides. They understand each other and share a strong bond. Even though the dogs are trained in detecting wildlife items, their handlers will further teach them how to identify species endemic to a particular zone where the squad is deployed.” 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAccording to conservative estimates, India records around 350 to 400 wildlife crimes every year. Hence, TRAFFIC introduced ‘super sniffer’ dogs in the country in 2008 to detect such instances. There are 74 such squads at present which have helped crack around 400 cases.