CHENNAI: The Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI) has directed the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau and the State Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Department to investigate Junglii, an “exotic petting zone”, located in Injambakkam, East Coast Road. 
The order comes after a complaint was raised against the petting zoo for allegedly housing exotic animals such as ball python, pygmy goats and iguanas inside a building in inapt conditions and charging a varying range of fees for visitors to touch, pet and play with them.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
 In the order, sent to the departments on July 1, the AWBI cites the complaint by animal rights activist Antony Rubin, who claims that he paid `3,097 for three visitors and a mobile camera to enter the centre.
 Chennai’s wildlife warden, Prasanth E, who ran an inspection of Junglii along with his team following the order, says the centre does not house any category of animals that are covered under India’s Wildlife Protection Act 1972. This poses a challenge for any legal action to be initiated. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Currently, there is no law governing the sale or upkeep of exotic animals in India. While the import of exotic animals is regulated by the Directorate General of Foreign Trade, illegal pet trading remains a grey area,” he says.
 But what Junglii – opened four months ago – does explicitly violate is The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act (PCA’s) Performing Animals Registration Rules, 2001, by charging visitors anywhere between `399 and `9,999, to handle and play with the animals, when it is running as a centre registered under Pet Shop Rules 2018.
 “When I visited the place, I found reptiles, hedgehogs and other animals under tremendous stress on being constantly handled by people. Their enclosures were cramped and starkly alienated from their habitats, which is detrimental to their health and wellbeing,” says Antony.
 Vijay AR, consultant at Junglii, says the fee is directed towards personal consultations on the animals’ requirements and upkeep before they are purchased. Their website, however, offers packages for spending time with, and petting the animals. Coordinator at State Animal Husbandry Board said a team will head to the Junglii and carry out an investigation on Wednesday..