Nagpur: In the first, new awareness and capacity-building tools developed under the project ‘Deterring and disrupting wildlife trafficking in the air transport sector in India’ were launched on March 25 at the National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes & Narcotics (NACIN), Faridabad.
Developed by NGO TRAFFIC and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in collaboration with Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) and WWF-India, the tools are accessible at www.IWTKnowledgeHub.in and include online courses on relevant laws and regulations, and how to curb wildlife trafficking.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
It also has an informative video highlighting wildlife trafficking through airports, checklists for enforcement officials to use in their day-to-day operations, posters and standees offering vital information about commonly trafficked wildlife species.
To utilize the coming together of agencies, the launch event also included training of trainers attended by over 40 officials from various NACIN academies across India, customs, Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), WCCB and partner organizations.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoTraffickers are exploiting the growth of the aviation sector to move illegal wildlife products across India and its international borders. The tools would arm enforcement officials with the knowledge and skills to combat this crime that fuels decline in many Indian and international species.
TRAFFIC’s ‘High flying: Insight into wildlife trafficking through India’s airports’ analysis found trafficking of over 70,000 native and exotic wild animals, including their body parts or derivatives (weighing around 4,000kg) in 141 wildlife seizures incidents at 18 Indian airports between 2011-2020.
Of the total seizures, 46% were reptiles, including the vulnerable Indian star tortoise, in which traffickers clearly disregard the international rules prohibiting its trade to protect the species. “The study reinstates the need to strengthen enforcement efforts to curb exploitation of the airline sector for conducting illegal wildlife trade,” said Dr Saket Badola, head of India office of TRAFFIC, the lead agency responsible for developing and implementing new awareness and capacity-building tools.
“We thank UNEP and our partners for their support in launching a first-of-its-kind project in India focused on working with enforcement officials to detect and deter wildlife trafficking through airports,” said Badola.
Atul Bagai, head of the UNEP country office in India, said, “Illegal wildlife trade through airports is a major conservation threat magnified by the growth in the airline sector. It is important for enforcement agencies to prioritize bringing an end to wildlife trafficking. It will help strengthen the detection of illegal wildlife trade at airports.”
Tilotama Varma, additional director, WCCB, said, “Airports have emerged as a popular mode for transporting wildlife contrabands due to the shorter travel time and extensive reach. Traffickers smuggle wildlife and their derivatives through checked luggage and personal baggage, by concealment of wildlife contraband within passenger clothing, footwear and other wearables, and through the wrong declaration of protected species, all of which makes detection cumbersome for enforcement agencies. The newly developed resources under the project will prove useful for bridging such gaps.”
Yogendra Garg, additional director general, NACIN, said, “Customs need to continuously acquire new skills to keep pace with the latest trends in smuggling. Training tools and resources are thus crucial for upscaling their skills to detect crime. Also, there is a dire need to create awareness about emerging issues like wildlife crime from time-to-time. We at NACIN are glad that a dedicated effort for curbing wildlife trafficking through airports has been initiated through this project.”
Ravi Singh, secretary-general & CEO, WWF-India, said, “Wildlife needs our support more than ever due to the ever-increasing threats caused by human interventions, climate change and illegal wildlife trade. The new project engages with nodal agencies at airports and helps to increase the awareness and prevention of illegal wildlife trade.”