GUWAHATI: A local court in Assam’s Golaghat district on Saturday convicted two former Ulfa leaders-turned-MLAs, one of who is currently a BJP member, and three others and sentenced to two years imprisonment in a wildlife case relating to illegally entering Kaziranga National Park and fishing inside the protected area more than 12 years ago when they were legislators.
They have also been slapped with a fine of Rs 5,000 each, failing to pay which would entail an additional two months in jail.
The court ordered that the AK-47 rifle with magazine and ammunition, which were confiscated at the sight of the incident, be returned to the state.
The court, however, acquitted all the accused of other charges under IPC and Arms Act. 
Further, as the five convicted are on bail, they will not have to go behind bars immediately as the term awarded to them is less than three years.
Additional district sessions judge K Hazarika in his order said, "I find myself foreclosed from all sides but to convict accused Jiten Gogoi, Tarun Bora, Dambarudhar Gogoi, Babu Gogoi and Kushal Duwari for committing the offence punishable u/s 51(1) of the Wild Life(Protection) Act, 1972... they are convicted." Both Jiten Gogoi and Kushal Duwari have been members of the Assam legislative assembly after they quit Ulfa. Both Gogoi and Duwari were Independent MLAs when the incident took place in 2009. In 2016, Duwari won the election as a BJP candidate from Thowra and was dropped by the party in 2021 polls.
Gogoi said, "We are appealing in the higher court against this verdict today."
The then forest ranger D Boro had filed a police case against them on March 17, 2009 saying the staff of Mihimukh and Hulalpath camps had told him that Gogoi and his companions with firearms, entered Kaziranga and were fishing illegally. When Boro tried to stop them from fishing, he was threatened with his life. The judge said there was absolutely no evidence that Gogoi either assaulted Boro or used criminal force to prevent him from discharging his official duty and acquitted him of this charge.