Panaji: The work on setting up of a cyber forensic lab cum training centre is in the final stages of completion, and is likely to become function soon. As of now, over 50% cyber crime cases have been closed due to lack of evidence.
Speaking to TOI, crime branch superintendent of police Shobit Saxena said, “Once the work of the lab is completed, it will immensely help investigations using cutting-edge technology and tools to detect cyber crime and forensic investigations of such crimes.”
Saxena said that most of the work on the lab has been completed and some equipment will arrive next week. PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNo
“The lab will soon be functional,” he said.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe Cyber Crime Cell (CCC) of the Goa police has closed over half of its cases due to lack of evidence. Not a single person has been convicted in the state for cyber crime. Since 2014, 118 cases have been registered at the CCC and closure reports have been filed in 61 cases.
Currently, the crime branch has a small lab set up under corporate social responsibility. An alarming rise in cyber crime cases in the state have remained unsolved due to lack of infrastructure and cyber experts.
Investigations into cyber crimes including financial crimes involving cheating, credit card frauds, money laundering, cyber photography involving production and distribution of pornographic material, sale of illegal articles such as narcotics, weapons and wildlife, intellectual property crimes such as theft of computer source code, software piracy, copyright infringement, trademark violation, deployment of virus, cyber-attack, cyber terrorism, etc, requires computer skills, mainly for on-site imaging of disks and on-site analysis and tracking of leads. However, the lack of skilled manpower is a major problem Goa police is facing. 
In December 2013, the state government had granted permission to set up a cyber crime cell in the state and to recruit technical persons for the same. A year later, the same was operational.