PANAJI: The state’s first cyber forensics laboratory was finally made operational on Wednesday at the Goa police’s cyber crime cell at Ribandar, reports Gauree Malkarnekar. The lab is expected to help improve detection of cyber crimes in the state. Until now, over 50% of cyber crime cases reported in the state had to be closed due to lack of evidence. The Goa government first gave its nod to set up the cyber crime cell in the state in December 2013, along with permission to recruit technical persons for the same.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoBut establishment of the lab did not materialise.
Now that it is functional, the laboratory is expected to help investigations using technology and tools to detect cybercrime and forensic investigations of such crimes. 
The lab is a well-equipped, dedicated facility, where trained police personnel will make use of digital and forensics analysis for detection, extraction and analysis of data to help bring cyber criminals to book, said crime branch SP Shobit Saxena.
So far, not a single person has been convicted in the state for a cyber crime. Since 2014, 118 cases have been registered at the cyber crime cell at Ribandar, and closure reports have been filed in 61 cases.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoPolice, however, said that the two fake call centres that were recently busted in the state were detected through investigations at the new lab. 
Last year, the Union government approved Rs 1.4 crore for Goa police to set up the cyber lab.
So far, the cyber crimes reported in Goa include financial crimes involving cheating, credit card frauds, money laundering, cyber photography involving production and distribution of pornographic material, sale of illegal articles such as narcotics, weapons and wildlife, intellectual property crimes such as theft of computer source code, software piracy, copyright infringement, trademark violation, deployment of virus, cyber-attack, cyber terrorism, etc. Investigating these requires computer skills, mainly for on-site imaging of disks and on-site analysis and tracking of leads.
The digital forensic lab (DFL), besides cyber crime detection, is also equipped to carry out all types of training across a wide range of digital forensic capabilities.
The lab also provides the facilities to undertake forensic investigations and data recovery functions. Fully equipped with licensed digital forensics software, DFL can assist in providing forensic expertise to any mobile, computer, hard disk incidents, police said.