A division bench of the Madras high court has put on hold the transfer of principal chief conservator of forests and Tamil Nadu chief wildlife warden Shekar Kumar Niraj. 
Nine months into the job, the official has been flagging loopholes in conservation practices of the state and the court wants the assistance of the IFS official in probing wildlife offences. In an interview with Shantha Thiagarajan, he talks about data mismatch with regard to elephant deaths, the need for meticulous investigation and a rethink in conservation strategies.Excerpts:
› Is there a problem in the government data of elephant deaths in Tamil Nadu?
Yes. From 2011 to 2020, there were many elephant deaths in Tamil Nadu. Many of the deaths were not reported. A Kerala case of ivory seizure in 2018 brought to light that many elephants were poached or killed in Tamil Nadu too. A batch of PILs were raised in the Madras high court seeking investigation of elephant deaths across the state.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More› From your assessment, how many elephant deaths were not reported?
When I joined as chief wildlife warden in July last year, there was no proper data available regarding elephant deaths in TN. One of the fl aws in our system is that we are not good
at data management and analysis. I found a lot of mismatch between data in media, from NGOs and government records. The difference in the numbers indicate non-reporting of elephant deaths. Data is the main element to understand the pattern. We have started collating data for at least the past 10 years. I found it to be alarming. Between 2011 and 2020 more than 1,000 elephants have died and more than 200 deaths have gone unreported. The same must have been true for the period before this too. No lab test reports are available in most of the cases. For example, the death of a male elephant of 15 years is recorded as a natural death, without any lab report. In a 2019 case, the photo shows a male elephant, but the report says it was a female. Now the Madurai branch of the Madras high court has asked the CBI to investigate the cases.
› What action can the forest department take now?
Every death needs to be investigated. It was not done in any of the previous cases, especially those involving young elephants. When we know that ivory is a commercial commodity that is in demand, we need to be meticulous when a death is reported.
A Wildlife Crime Control Bureau report shows that a number of electrocutions are suspected to be poaching. Given the mess in the investiga-
tion and reporting of elephant deaths, my perception is that a lot of jumbos might have been poached and there was suppression of facts at the fi eld level. Now the CBI will investigate.
› While compiling data of the previous years, how will it be ascertained if a case is of poaching or natural death?
It is diffi cult to confi rm the cause of death now as the documents are not good enough to point to those facts. Postmortems were shabbily done; no DNA or proper pathological test reports are available. There was no crime scene or death scene management practised in the department. This is a sheer fl aw in the department.
› Does deputation of veterinarians from other departments and shortage of vets contribute to the problem?
We need to hire veterinarians directly and not as deputation from the animal husbandry department. For the rescue centre that we are planning to create, we have plans to hire veterinarians. It will be a challenge to get the right kind of people with skills and passion for wildlife. We have plans to hire at least two vets in each tiger reserve and one in each of the national parks and one in each forest division. It is the plan for the next two years towards a course correction.
› How do you look at the human-elephant conflict in Tamil Nadu?
The conflict is high in TN and there are quite a few reasons for that. Earlier the understanding about this was not very clear. In 2019, a committee was set up under my chairmanship to study the issues as the number of elephant deaths increased between 2011 and 2018.
In Coimbatore, the conflict is high because of migration of elephants through a corridor that is lost due to various developmental activities. In the Kallar corridor, a national highway passes through. 
The traffic disrupts elephant movements and confl ict occurs. Change in land use patterns in corridors is another factor, this is seen in the Sigur corridor in the Nilgiris. In the Gudalur division, confl ict is highest because of fragmentation of forests (earlier there were gold mines) and the proximity of ‘janmam’ lands, where land-use pattern has also changed over the years. The other reason is that despite warnings and awareness, people venture out at night in the confl ict-prone areas.
› What are the strategies to manage the conflict?
It is a challenging issue, but it is not that it cannot be managed. Ensuring zero confl ict is not possible in a country like India with a high density of population, where there are no distinct forest boundaries or buffer areas. One of the best examples is the case of Rivaldo. It was being fed by some people and there were others who wanted it to be captured and put into a kraal.
I consulted veterinarians, wildlife experts and ecologists and went through the history of kraals. I found that there is no reason to sustain this. We prepared an SOP to re-wild the animal. Elephant confl ict is a management issue whereas elephant monitoring is an issue of science. We joined these together. 
The same strategy of surveillance and communication was applied in Gudalur and Coimbatore to handle the confl ict. Also, the elite force in the department is not always used. In Coimbatore, they were involved. As a result, in the past one year, the number of deaths of elephants and humans has come down