Emmy-award winning director Richie Mehta, who was behind the hit series 'Delhi Crime', is returning to the streaming universe with new crime drama 'Poacher', which is set to premiere on Prime Video from February 23.
 Mehta has created, written and directed the series that boasts of a diverse and talented cast comprising Nimisha Sajayan, Roshan Mathew, and Dibyendu Bhattacharya in pivotal roles. 
The first three episodes of the eight-episode series premiered at the 2023 Sundance Film Festival, where it received critical appreciation. 
Based on court documents and testimonials, 'Poacher' is a fictional dramatisation of events that transpired in the dense forests of Kerala and the concrete jungle of Delhi. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteThe series showcases the immense contributions made by Indian forest service officers, NGO workers from the Wildlife Trust of India, police constables, and good samaritans who risked their lives to investigate the largest ivory poaching ring in Indian history, according the official synopsis provided by the streamer. 
'Poacher' has been filmed in Kerala and New Delhi, and unfolds primarily in Malayalam, Hindi and English. 
"We are thrilled to present this investigative crime series-which has been deeply researched, powerfully conceptualized and masterfully directed by Richie Mehta-on our service. 'Poacher' promises to engage the audiences within India as well as across the world with its fascinating, edge-of-the-seat narrative, and compel us as human beings to introspect how our actions can have an irrevocable impact on the environment. 
'Kubra' Trailer: Cagatay Ulusoy and Aslıhan Malbora starrer 'Kubra' Official Trailer
"This narrative based on true events, has the power to make viewers aware, and inspire communities to take action," said Manish Menghani, director, content licensing, Prime Video India. 
After Netflix's 'Delhi Crime', it is another true-crime series for Mehta, who said it took him four years to research the show. 
"After putting the last four years into exploring the themes and characters in this complex world of crime fighting, and the extraordinarily high stakes involved, I couldn't be more thrilled to partner with Prime Video to take Poacher to a worldwide audience," said creator, director, and writer Richie Mehta. 

"Working with the team at QC Entertainment has been a dream come true, from a creative, logistical, and emotional standpoint, as was collaborating with our actors, crew, and the real subjects on which this series is inspired by," he added. 
Poacher is executive produced by QC Entertainment's Edward H. Hamm Jr., Raymond Mansfield and Sean McKittrick. Alan McAlex serves as producer for Suitable Pictures.