DEHRADUN: Uttarakhand, which has the third-highest population of tigers in the country, has lost five big cats in a span of two and a half months – two to natural causes and two to infighting whereas one died in an accident. Three of the deaths took place in Corbett Tiger Reserve (CTR). Last year, six tiger deaths had been recorded in 12 months.
In 2019, 13 tiger deaths were reported, whereas eight deaths were recorded in 2018, 14 in 2017, seven in 2016 and 13 in 2015.
Uttarakhand has an estimated total population of 442 tigers in the wild. The first tiger death of this year was on January 7 in Ramnagar forest division due to an accident. On January 15, a second big cat died in Haridwar forest division’s Shyampur range. The death was attributed to “natural causes.” 
Most of the state’s tigers are in CTR (231), as per the latest estimate of the Wildlife Institute of India. At 14 tigers per 100 sq km, CTR has the highest tiger density among all tiger reserves in the country. Speaking with TOI, director of CTR, Rahul (who goes by his first name only) said that since Corbett has a high density of tiger population, violent territorial fights are common which sometimes result in deaths. 
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreUndoAccording to forest department data accessed exclusively by TOI, the first tiger death in the reserve occurred on February 1 and was categorised as a natural death. On March 15, a tiger was found dead in CTR’s Kalagarh range. Within a week, on March 21, another was found dead in the tiger reserve’s Dhela range. The deaths have been put under the “infighting” category.
The tiger reserve has been on high alert since the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) nabbed poachers with ivory from the region. With the Haridwar Maha Kumbh nearing, footfall has increased in the region. Forest fires are another cause of concern for officials, as the blazes drive wild animals out of forests and into traps set by poachers. Moreover, the WCCB has alerted forest authorities about members of UP’s notorious Bawariya gang of poachers moving closer to Uttarakhand.
However, authorities do not believe any of the tiger deaths this year were caused by the Bawariya gang. “If a member of the Bawariya gang kills a tiger, they do not leave a trace of it. That was not the case this year,” said an official who did not wish to be named.
Meanwhile, one more healthy adult male tiger was found in a wounded state in a fringe village of Terai East, Haldwani. The big cat has been tranquilised and moved to a rescue centre at Ranibagh.