BENGALURU : About a year ago, forest officials at Kulgi range in Kali Tiger Reserve (KTR) were struggling for leads and unable to nab teak wood smugglers. With their efforts bearing no fruit, they summoned Quipper. 
Quipper, a seven-year-old male German Shepherd, worked like an expert. After sniffing the crime scene, he led his colleagues from the forest department on a 3km walk and they found themselves at the home of one of the accused.
Having joined the KTR forest team in 2016, Quipper has worked on 34 cases related to smuggling and poaching. He was brought from Hyderabad and trained at the Border Security Force (BSF) training centre at Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh.
Today, he is not only loved by the department but also by locals and wildlife enthusiasts. He is reliable and efficient, department officials said, adding that he has helped nab 15 accused and solve 27 cases. Venkatesh S 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreBiradar, Quipper’s caretaker and handler, told TOI solving 27 cases out of 34 is an exceptional record.
“About a month ago, his operation led to the revelation of the crime scene where a leopard was shot. We were summoned to Yallapur after forest officials were unable to find the spot where the poachers had shot the big cat,” Biradar said.
Quipper and Biradar then arrived at the spot where the leopard was found dead. “He sniffed the carcass and left to the place where the animal was hunted down. We found blood stains there. Now, the case is under investigation and the team is close to nabbing the accused,” Biradar said.
The dog has worked not only in Dandeli area, but also in Dharwad, Khanapur, Hangal, Sirsi, Honnavar, and Karwar. Keeping active A disciplined routine and training keep him sharp. Quipper’s routine involves a walk and small tasks of finding hidden articles or people, among other things.
“We make one of our staff take an article from a particular place and the dog is assigned to find both the article and the person who took it. He does it almost every day. The practice helps him complete his assignment successfully. ”
Rahul Bavaji, a wildlife rescuer from Dandeli, said: “After this dog’s induction, the success rate of solving cases has increased substantially. The forest department has to think seriously about hiring more dogs in various reserve forests and tiger reserves to crack down on smuggling and poaching. ”