Bengaluru: With less than 15 days to go for the end of the three-month deadline for surrendering wildlife articles to the forest department, the response has been lukewarm.
Despite wide publicity and repeated pleas by the chief minister and forest minister, only 65 people surrendered such articles until the first week of March.
More than 80% of the people are from Bengaluru; the rest are from Tumakuru, Mysuru, Shivamogga, and Dharwad.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoThe last date to surrender wildlife articles is April 9. Sources with Aranya Bhavan told TOI that some of the individuals surrendered more than one article.
“We were expecting more such declarations after the CM appealed to the people of Karnataka. In fact, we advertised widely, appealing to the public. Yet, there is hardly any response from citizens. Contrary to our belief, people from Bengaluru have declared wildlife articles in a big way,” said a senior forest official.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteWhile the entire controversy was triggered by tiger claws, only one such set has been surrendered so far.
The forest department expected more such declarations in Kodagu, Chikkamagaluru, Hassan, Dakshina Kannada, and Uttara Kannada districts. “Given the large forest cover in these districts, people would have preserved a lot of trophies that were either locally hunted or retrieved from a natural kill. While a few of them declared and obtained certificates previously, many people have kept them without any declaration and claimed it their family tradition. However, there are hardly any declarations from these districts,” explained the officer.
Bengaluru fond of antlers
An analysis of the surrendered articles in the state capital revealed that the prized possessions of Bengalureans were antlers of ungulates and elephant tusks. As many as 28 antlers of various ungulates such as spotted deer, black buck, barking deer, and sambhar are among the surrendered articles. In fact, 22 of the antlers are of spotted deer. Those who have returned the artefacts range from business tycoons to retired bureaucrats.
“We suspect that many of these could have been bought in local markets. Most of these antlers are 30-40 years old. Many claimed they did not know it was a crime to keep them at home. After reading reports in the newspapers, they made up their minds and convinced their parents to surrender them to the government,” a junior-rank official from Bengaluru Urban division said.
Among the trophies (taxidermy mounts), the surrendered articles include those of bison (Indian gaur), tigers and elephants. A few individuals had even kept pelts of deer, leopard and tiger, either for religious purposes or as sofa covers. 
While 12 articles have been surrendered to officials at Aranya Bhavan, five are handed over to range forest officials at KR Pura and the rest to the Bengaluru Range office, Kaggalipura and Yelahanka Range office.