THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The police have given a clean chit to forests and wildlife minister A K Saseendran in the complaint that the minister tried to suppress a molestation case, without informing the police, to save his party’s local leader.
In the report by DSP (Sasthamcotta) to SP (Kollam rural), it has been said that the minister did not call or speak directly to the survivor in the case. On examination of call detail records of the survivor’s father and that of the minister, it is clear that the minister spoke to the survivor’s father once on July 4 this year.On examination of the voice clip of this conversation, it cannot be inferred that the minister threatened the survivor or tried to suppress the complaint.
The minister can be heard saying that the matter should be “settled amicably” and also that it should be “settled without any difficulty”. There is no mention of the survivor’s name or anything against the survivor in the minister’s conversation, the police report said. “Under these circumstances, no crime as stated in the Indian Penal Code will hold good in this subject and therefore no further action is required in the complaint filed by advocate Sajal,” the police said.
Police said that the complainant Sajal had not spoken to the survivor or her father, and his complaint was solely on the basis of whatever he saw on television channels in this regard. 
    by Taboolaby TaboolaSponsored LinksSponsored LinksPromoted LinksPromoted LinksYou May LikeSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreEarlier, district government pleader and public prosecutor, Kollam, R Sethunathan Pillai, had given a legal opinion that the connotation in the minister’s conversation that the matter should be “settled amicably” is not illegal. There was no mention of the survivor’s name or anything against the survivor in the minister’s words. Neither was there any pressure from the minister to withdraw the complaint nor was the tone threatening, the legal opinion had said.
The complainant, a native of Kundara in Kollam, had petitioned the police on June 28 this year against two persons who had tried to defame her in a group titled “NCP Kollam”. The complainant also alleged that one of the two persons — Padmakaran— had tried to physically assault her. Since both the complainant’s father and the accused are NCP activists, the minister, who is an NCP leader in the state, had spoken to the father over the phone, and asked him to settle the dispute amicably. The minister’s intervention in the matter had become a controversy, and the opposition had raised the matter in the assembly on July 22.