BENGALURU: Considering the severe shortage of manpower and its impact on working of forensic science laboratories across the state, the high court has issued a series of interim directions for filling of vacancies, apart from stipulating timeline for test results.
The government is required to appoint Scene of Crime Officers (SOCOs) at all police stations in the state within six months.The state has also been told to operationalise in all districts within six months district scientific aid (DSA) units with staff comprising one senior scientific officer, two scientific officers and one lab attender along with a mobile forensic laboratory.
Acting on a suo motu PIL, a division bench comprising chief justice Abhay Shreeniwas Oka and justice Suraj Govindaraj said the one-month timeline, as recommended by KSLSA, should be followed for furnishing test reports by 13 sections such as biology, DNA and toxicology, among others.
Filling of top posts
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreRegarding the three vacant joint director posts, the bench said one post should be filled through deputation (IPS officer) within a month and one of the two remaining (promotional posts) on ad-hoc basis within four months.
The court added the government should undertake ad-hoc measures within four months for filling at least five posts of deputy directors, six of assistant directors and 20 of senior scientific officers. Regarding scientific officers, the government was told to abide by its assurance that all 138 vacancies will be filled by March 31, 2022. Similarly, the government is required to abide by its assurance on completion of recruitment process vis-a-vis lab assistants and EEG technicians by August 31,2021.
Expressing surprise vis-a-vis the statement that brain mapping and narco test are not being conducted owing to non-availability of OT attenders, the bench said one such attender should be recruited within four months. Considering the nature and number of cases relating to firearms, coming from Mangaluru or surrounding areas, the court directed for recruiting an armorer within four months to make that section in regional FSL at Mangaluru operational.
New labs, new sections
The bench directed the government to operationalise within one year additional regional forensic science laboratories at Hubballi and Ballari consisting of all 13 sections. The government and director of FSL were told to operationalise the additional sections, which have been proposed in connection with DNA testing, digital forensic (combining three sections of computer, mobile and audio-video forensics) in all regional FSLs.
“Certain new sections like advanced digital forensic, explosives and wildlife forensics are required to be made operational in state FSL and regional FSLs. We direct that it be done within 9 months,” the bench added. To consider the compliance report to be submitted by the government, the matter was directed to be listed on October 8, 2021.
The suo motu PIL was registered based on a single bench order dated December 22, 2020 after noticing there was a four-year delay in getting an FSL report in a case.