BHUBANESWAR: The Special Task Force (STF) of crime branch seized a hide of Royal Bengal Tiger (RBT) right inside the buffer area of Similipal Tiger Reserve in Udala range in Mayurbhanj district late on Tuesday night.
The raid was conducted by forest department and STF on the tip off of former honorary wildlife warden Bhanumitra Acharya. The accused has been identified as Phagu Hansda, resident of Sriramchandrapur under Udala police limits.PollDo you think opposition's demand for SC-appointed probe into allegations of irregularities in NEET-UG 2024 exams justified?YesNoHansda was about to sell the skin when the STF caught him red-handed. Another person fled from the place.
Jai Narayan Pankaj, deputy inspector general (STF) said the arrested person is just a carrier and he has divulged a name, which we have kept discreet to take the investigation forward. “The local poacher fled the scene. An effort is on to nab him. It is suspected that the tiger was hunt by the poacher from local/nearby forest area,” he told TOI. He added that they would send the hide to Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun for examination. “It is certain how old the hide is. The WII will be able to confirm it,” the STF DIG added.
The seizure of hide has triggered suspicion that it has been acquired from Similipal forest by hunting a RBT. While the dwindling big cat in Odisha is a big concern with second biggest reserve- Satkosia Tiger Reserve- being bereft of a single tiger, Similipal's latest big cat number is not known as for past four years tiger census has not been done. Wildlife lovers apprehend, Similipal may have lost many tigers to poachers meanwhile.
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn More“Similipal is on the verge of losing its majestic animals- elephants and tigers. It is very unfortunate that poachers have a free run in the reserve. Wildlife trade is going on in the periphery of the reserve. Had the wildlife crime information not been shared with STF, the poachers could never have been arrested. In case of burnt elephant also, the matter could have been buried in the forest without the media getting inkling of it,” Acharya, a wildlife enthusiast, who has helped STF and forest department crack several wildlife crimes.
According to 2018 census of National Tiger Conservation (NTCA) authority, Similipal has 28 big cats out of which eight had been captured in camera traps. The latest all India tiger estimation report is yet to be out. The reserve is spread over 2750 sq km with a core of area over 1195 sq km and buffer 1555 sq km. Maoist attack in the reserve in 2009 had paved way for poachers to enter the sanctuary and kill prey and other animals. Following this the wildlife evolved special measures such as setting up of more than 100 protection camps, introduction of foot patrolling during monsoon season and identifying and prosecuting the poachers.