JAIPUR: For better efficiency and reduction in administrative delays in the state forest department, the Union ministry of environment, forests and climate change has decided to set up an integrated regional office (IRO) in Jaipur in October. 
The IRO will include the offices of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), Central Zoo Authority (CZA), Forest Survey of India (FSI) and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) under one roof. 
Pink City is among 19 cities of the country where such regional offices will be established. For the same, the ministry issued a notification regarding the reorganisation of regional or sub-regional offices across the country. 
The move has been welcomed by office bearers and wildlife lovers as it aims to improve efficiency and ensure better coordination. Rajasthan NTCA member Diya Kumari said “The Jaipur office will have the additional responsibility of also handling Delhi apart from Rajasthan. It is indeed commendable that the MoEFF&CC is setting up 19 IROs in the country. These offices will surely provide improved, timely, effective and coordinated action and also optimally utilise the existing resource.”
    by Taboola by Taboola Sponsored Links Sponsored Links Promoted Links Promoted Links You May LikeCFA InstituteSet The StandardCFA InstituteLearn MoreThe notification further reads that these IROs will have a combined strength, including the ministry’s 319 personnel, NTCA (6), CZA (4), and WCCB (74). All the offices will be under one roof and it will be headed by the deputy director-general of forests. 
Mahendra Singh Kachhawa, an advocate at the high court (forest and environment) said, “All offices under one roof will ensure better efficiency and coordination. People can also receive appropriate clearances for industries, roads, mining, irrigation projects, cement and power projects without delay and in a transparent manner.”
Many believe this will also reduce illegal activities including mining, poaching, cutting of trees in the sanctuaries and tiger reserve of the state. Moreover, speedy correspondence with agencies like NTCA could benefit in tiger conservation. 
Tapeshwar Singh Bhati, president of the Mukundra Hills Environment and Wildlife Society, Kota, said, “The state has three tiger reserves and two are in the offing. After the death of two big cats in MHTR, the reintroduction programme is facing crisis. If NTCA office is established in the state, the officers will be able to regularly monitor the situation and can issue timely directions. Also, it will curb rampant illegal mining in Sariska and Mukundra as it will keep a check on forest staff.”