Just behind Vuong Van Ga’s house in Doi village, lies the first and only community nursery in this central Vietnamese region. There—in 10 oblong, brick-enclosed garden beds, shielded from the harsh tropical sun by low-slung green mesh netting—grows an assortment of plants native to this part of Viet Nam, a biodiversity hotspot known as the Central Annamites. The nursery boasts up to 20 different species of plants: ironwood and Hopea pierrei that make for good, sturdy furniture; malva nut and kim tien thao (Desmodium styracifolium) prized as a salve for sore throats and to remove kidney stones; shampoo ginger and thien nien kien (Homalomena occulta) used as ingredients in shampoo and soap. “A lot of these native and medicinal plants have disappeared in the wild,” says Ga, who is in charge of the community nursery. “But it’s a part of our heritage—our parents and grandparents showed us how to use these plants. I don’t want to be in a situation where we lose what our ancestors had.” The nursery’s plants are all seedlings, in various stages of early growth. But once they are big enough, they will be transferred by hand to the forest in the nearby hills that nestle outside Ga’s village—something that Ga, his family, and 10 fellow villagers who tend to the garden do every couple of months, carrying the young plants in tall, hand-woven wicker baskets upon their backs. The aim of all this effort? To restore the local forest. “Everyone wants to protect the forest and make it nice, and to protect our watershed too,” explains Ga, whose primary occupation—like many others in Doi—is rice farming. “I believe that this nursery is important because without it, I believe that our efforts to bring native forests back would not succeed.” Concerned, Ga decided in 2021 that it was time to do something. What if the villagers could slowly replant this beloved forest with native species that once grew abundant there, he wondered. When a call was presented to the village looking for community livelihood initiative ideas that benefit nature, Ga raised the idea with representatives from the WWF’s Leading the Change team as well as their partner, the local nonprofit Center for Rural Development—whose aims are to help Indigenous Peoples such as Ga’s Co Tu ethnic community actively participate in natural resource governance, and bring about sustainable rural development, respectively. Both groups welcomed the idea. Working together with fellow villagers “is very fun” and helps foster a stronger sense of community, adds Ga’s wife Ho Thi Lia, who on a recent morning was chatting softly with La as the two women spread flat, thumb-sized ironwood seeds out to dry on a large mat in the front yard, in preparation for sowing. Meanwhile, La’s husband was sprinkling lime onto a nearby soil bed, as other members of their garden group sat in a circle on their heels, packing fresh soil into small grow bags. “I love my garden,” Ga says proudly. “I hope the nursery will continue to do well and that we can plant more trees and sell more of them to help regrow the forest. It also helps raise people’s awareness of forest conservation.”