Dr. Jennie L. Stephens on heirs’ property In her 17 years as CEO of the Center for Heirs’ Property Preservation®, Dr. Jennie Stephens has made a career of righting wrongs, specifically related to land title issues among Black and other historically underserved communities in the American South. “I have a strong justice bent. I always want to fix things,” says Dr. Stephens. “Helping people help themselves is my motto. That’s who I am.” “My advice is to keep your focus on the ancestors who made this possible instead of ‘Where’s mine?’” says Dr. Stephens. In the American South, many of these ancestors were formerly enslaved people or their descendants. They struggled to gain and keep land in a country where their rights—property and otherwise—were not recognized and often violently opposed. “The thing that amazes me about my job is that folks who would be considered uneducated today held on to this land for generations,” she says. The Center for Heirs’ Property Preservation® began as a 501(c)(3) in South Carolina but has now spread to other states. It has grown substantially, from five employees in 2013 to 35 people today, with 50 staffers expected by the end of the year. This includes community liaisons who meet with local leaders and families to increase their awareness about heirs' property, as well as lawyers and foresters to help establish ownership and sustainably manage land, respectively. In 2021, with support from WWF and Kimberly-Clark, the Center for Heirs’ Property Preservation® and the Mississippi Center for Justice launched the Mobile Basin Heirs’ Property Support Initiative to help families in the Mobile Basin of Mississippi protect and keep their forestland. The two-year pilot combines legal services, information, and access to financial and forestry resources to help resolve land title issues and build generational wealth. This initiative will also serve as a model to replicate in other states, including Alabama. Establishing legal ownership from start to finish often takes several years, but Dr. Stephens and her colleagues won’t be discouraged. “What was hidden is now out in the open,” says Dr. Stephens. “Folks now see the value of our work and how many families are impacted by it.”