In the Colombian town of Acandí, leaders like Jesus Antonio Julio Cuestas are building a better future The collaboration between the fishers, Colombia's National Natural Parks, WWF, and other partners offers a balance that benefits fishers economically and socially, while also furthering environmental conservation. Recognizing the importance of maintaining their livelihoods as fishers, efforts support the community with the necessary tools and resources. This includes new engines for boats and the establishment of a restaurant where they can offer their daily catch. By fostering a circular economy within the community, the benefits generated by fishing activities remain within the local area. As the restaurant contributes to the economic sustainability of the community, it also promotes food safety. With the catch of the day, the fishers can provide fresh and locally sourced seafood, ensuring the quality and safety of the food consumed. It’s a collaborative and holistic approach to sustainable livelihoods and conservation, with ongoing collaboration and support, that seems to be working. "Fishing and conservation are compatible as long as we have good management practices and sustainable use of our fishing resources," says Cuestas. He, along with other park officials, actively monitors fishing activities in Acandí. Each morning, they visit the fish markets to gather data on fishery resources—including prices and sizes—to assess the state of the local fishing industry. Awareness-raising efforts by the community, government, and other stakeholders help protect the region’s sea turtle population. "This year the fishermen from the municipality of Acandí have not used the most lethal net that was causing the death of the leatherback sea turtle," explains Cuestas proudly. Changes include the coordination of anchoring boats to protect the seagrass that serves as feeding grounds for marine life; and an end to fishers throwing nets where turtles lay their eggs. This marine sanctuary in Acandí, Cuestas believes, is their greatest asset. He emphasizes continued strengthening and coordination with the community and its partners to improve the quality of life while conserving the marine ecosystem. By doing so, he envisions a future where individuals from the fishing community can pursue various professions, such as engineers or lawyers, proudly stating that they are the products of the fishing tradition in Acandí. Colombia ranks second in the world—behind only Brazil—for biodiversity. The goal of the Herencia Colombia (Heritage Colombia or HECO) program is to ensure the conservation and long-term financing of more than 79 million acres. The project works in protected areas and the s the landscapes and seascapes that surround them, supporting communities who depend on natural resources for their livelihoods. With support for sustainable management or alternative livelihoods, communities increase resilience to climate change and support conservation.