The way in which we produce and consume food—the food system—is pushing our planet to the brink. This global system is a major driver of heat-trapping greenhouse gas emissions and the loss of habitats and wildlife. We need a food system that conserves and restores nature while ensuring there is enough to feed current and future generations, nutritiously. Achieving this will take a transformation across the board, from fishing boats to crop fields, farm to market, kitchen to landfill. 



Luckily, there’s something each of us can do, something we already do several times a day. Adopt a diet that’s good for your health and for nature. 



WWF believes we need to shift to planet-based diets to help people understand the health and environmental impact of their diets. And yes, you read that right: a ‘Planet-Based Diet’ is one that is high in human health benefits and low in environmental impacts. Shifting our eating patterns can help us reverse nature loss, halt deforestation and conversion of other habitats like grasslands, reduce water use and pollution, and fight climate change. Around the world, or even across the street, everyone’s diet looks different. It depends on our bodies, our budgets, our cultures, our geography, our seasons, what’s available or accessible. Here are five ways you can think about eating for our planet: Here are five ways you can think about eating for our planet: There’s no ingredient that is universally sustainable or unsustainable—it all depends on how and where it is farmed or fished. One way to improve your environmental impact is to balance the amount of fruit and vegetables with the amount of meat, fish, eggs and dairy you eat. Meat (including poultry, pork, chicken, beef and lamb) fish, eggs, and dairy are all important sources of animal protein that are essential for nutrition but also have a high environmental impact. Your mother may have said there can be too much of a good thing. This is true for what we eat for our health and the planet! Our bodies need a variety of nutrients, and the planet benefits from crop diversity. Soils are healthier when different types of crops are grown together, and fertilizer use can be reduced by integrating different crops and livestock with trees and other plants. Cultivating a wider variety of foods also helps us be more resilient to shocks like pests, diseases, or extreme weather. A diverse diet can include many things but tend to have lots of whole grains, fruit and veg, and less sugar, oils, and fats. You can also try to eat different grains, produce, nuts, and pulses like chickpeas or lentils to achieve as much diversity as possible. The more processed a food is, generally the greater its environmental impact will be because more energy is used during its creation.