Empowering women to fight climate change In 1980, I traveled to a remote region of Namibia where isolated tribes were dealing with a seven-year drought. I met women who were keeping their families alive—despite hellish conditions—through resourcefulness, determination and incredible effort. I've witnessed firsthand that the burden of climate change falls especially hard on women and girls. During droughts women spend hours each day searching for water and fuel; they nurse the sick as diseases spread. When climate disasters hit, men often migrate ahead, leaving women to follow along with the children, the elderly and the infirm. They simply carry a bigger load. Nevertheless, women are great investors in the future, showing fortitude in the face of nearly every tragedy I've seen, and always giving back: According to the World Bank's International Finance Corporation, women reinvest 90% of their income in family and the community, whereas men reinvest only 30%-40%. Women are also great resources on how to survive and even mitigate global warming, but their stories are sadly underreported. To change that, I founded Ripple Effect Images, a nonprofit collective of award-winning photographers, writers and filmmakers dedicated to covering aid programs that empower women and girls in the developing world—particularly as they deal with the added stress of climate change. Since 2010 we've created 22 films and a photo archive of more than 15,000 images, while helping our beneficiaries raise more than a million dollars for their work. —Annie Griffiths
 Executive Director, Ripple Effect Images —Annie Griffiths Battambang Province, Cambodia 
 Photograph by Annie Griffiths The area of Cambodia near the Thai border—one of the last stronghold of the Khmer Rouge—is no stranger to disasters. In 2011, abnormal flooding was so bad that villagers fled to a nearby pagoda nightly for over two months, afraid to sleep at home should the local dam break in the dark. Many had worked in nearby rice fields that were destroyed by the floods. Looking for income, most of the able-bodied were forced to take refuge in Thailand, leaving behind older residents like Nuon Non (right, 75) and Prum Ut (left, 90). View all issues h