Two foreign policy experts discuss the connections Standing before the West Point Class of 2014 this spring, President Obama pointed to climate change as the “creeping national security crisis that will help shape your time in uniform.” He spoke of refugee flows, disasters and resource competition, and his intention to work towards a new global emissions framework. And with new US power plant regulations announced—as well as hints from China that it will for the first time consider binding emissions targets—there is real hope that just such a framework can be delivered at the 2015 United Nations Conference of the Parties on climate change in Paris. But what would that look like and what could it mean for national security? Here are three things we know: Since the mid-1990s, the climate community has considered 2 degrees Celsius (2°C or 3.6°F) of warming to be the absolute limit we can reach and still avoid catastrophic climate change. Although rooted in science, 2°C was always more of a political goal (a clear number that governments around the world could and would commit to). But as the US government works towards a global climate accord, staying within the 2°C limit looks increasingly difficult. Nowhere is this clearer than in the most recent reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). For the first time ever, the reports include a mitigation scenario, intended to provide policy makers with a view of how the worst impacts of climate change could be avoided. But if one takes a closer look at the modeling that supports that pathway, the lion’s share of the emissions reductions are found in just two solutions: the widespread commercial use of Carbon Capture and Sequestration (CCS) and a mind-boggling growth in biofuels production and use. Even with aggressive, coordinated global action to mitigate climate change, we are undoubtedly entering an era of political, social and economic disruption and conflict. The security community faces manifold challenges: securing our own defense infrastructure and readiness, responding to increasingly frequent and severe humanitarian crises caused by extreme weather, and—perhaps the most challenging—the destabilization associated with resource competition and mass migration. One needs to look no further than the Arab Spring to get a sense of what’s to come. While those uprisings and the fracturing of the compact between citizens and state were caused by a lack of economic opportunity and political rights, the catalyst was a dramatic rise in food prices. Droughts in Argentina, China, Russia and Ukraine, and storms in Australia, Brazil and Canada in 2010 drove up global food commodity prices, with an outsize impact on the Middle East, where more than 50% of food is imported. With the exception of Tunisia, which appears to be moving forward on a hopeful path, the outlook is bleak, with Libya in turmoil, Syria in full-scale civil war now spilling over into Iraq, and Egypt having ousted its first elected government. Sea level rise also presents a security risk—not just to our coastlines, cities and military installations, but also as a driver of mass migration. A 1.5-foot rise in sea levels, which is predicted even in an optimistic mitigation scenario, would displace 72 million people over this century. This is expected to be particularly severe in Asia, where population growth has been concentrated in low-lying coastal areas. Climate refugees—whether from sea level rise, desertification or extreme poverty associated with changing weather patterns—will require an increasing international response. And this will likely hit our own borders as well. Studies of the impact of climate change on Central and South America predict significant impacts on regional agricultural productivity, highlighting the particularly sensitive coffee sector, which today employs 1.4 million people in Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua. This will likely create growing pressure on our southern border, which is already so inundated that President Obama described it as an “urgent humanitarian situation” and committed $2 billion in new funding to safely care for detained immigrants. Claire Casey is managing director at Garten Rothkopf. Claire Casey is managing director at Garten Rothkopf. David Rothkopf is CEO of Garten Rothkopf and editor of the Foreign Policy Group/Foreign Policy magazine. David Rothkopf is CEO of Garten Rothkopf and editor of the Foreign Policy Group/Foreign Policy magazine. View all issues h