Our climate is changing around us faster than predicted. From more frequent and extreme storms to unprecedented heatwaves, we’re feeling the impacts of human-caused global warming. Rising sea levels could impact 1 billion people by the year 2050 Changes in water temperature causes algae to leave coral reefs, turning them white and making them vulnerable to disease and death—a phenomenon known as coral bleaching. Arctic sea ice recedes every summer, but still covers millions of square miles of ocean today. But the Arctic is warming faster than anywhere else on Earth and ice-free summers could become a reality. Heat waves will become more frequent and severe around the world, affecting hundreds of millions—or even billions—of people if we don’t act. Global warming increases the risk of more frequent—and heavier—rainfall, snowfall, and other precipitation. And as that risk increases, so too does the risk of flooding. As the earth continues to warm, crucial habitats may no longer be hospitable for certain animals or plants. This puts a variety of species at risk, depending on whether they can adapt or move. *Animals with a backbone We know the solutions. The average US citizen emits 20 tons of greenhouse gas emissions per year, most of which come from transportation, electricity generation, and the food system. (This is 10 times the emissions from the average person in India, for example.) It’s important for our communities, cities, states, and country to tackle the climate crisis. Here are a few ways they can take action: It’s critical for our leaders to support a just transition to power new homes and buildings with 100% clean energy. Consider getting solar panels or checking if your utilities offer renewable energy options (most do). In addition, consider shifting your home off of gas, switching to alternatives such as heat pumps for heating and cooling. By electrifying cars and trucks, expanding public transportation, and building bicycle and pedestrian-friendly infrastructure, we can slash greenhouse gas emissions while strengthening public health. You can reduce the fossil fuel impact of your daily commute by riding your bike, taking public transportation, or driving an electric car. Agriculture is a large driver of greenhouse gas emissions. If possible, buy locally grown food to minimize the impact on the climate while supporting local farmers. And when disposing of food, composting is kindest to the climate. Animations by Hannah P. Mode.