International talks—known as INC-4— mark key moment in curbing the crisis International leaders are meeting now to continue development of a new set of legally binding and equitable global agreements that define tangible steps and a timeline necessary to change how we produce and consume high-risk plastic. The fourth session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee to develop an international legally binding agreement on plastic pollution—known as INC-4—is a critical moment to prevent irreversible economic, health, and environmental damage from plastic pollution. WWF is advocating for the following outcomes from the negotiations: Global bans on the most harmful and avoidable high risk plastic products. Global product design requirements that ensure the remaining products can be easily and safely reused and recycled. A strong financial mechanism to support a just transition, particularly in the Global South. Leaders will meet once more at the end of 2024 to complete an agreement, and we must ensure that all responsible nations are on track for a successful final negotiation. By the end of April’s talks, we need to: Agree on text for key control measures and obligations, including bans, product design, and finance. Create a mandate for the chair of the negotiations to develop a new, updated draft of the treaty. Reach an agreement by all countries to formally meet before final negotiations to make progress on key decisions. Together we can put in place a strong plastic pollution treaty by the end of 2024. Together we can put in place a strong plastic pollution treaty by the end of 2024. There’s overwhelming support for efforts to reduce plastic pollution, even among major plastic-production countries. The majority of Americans (85%) think that plastic waste pollution is a serious and concerning problem that requires immediate political action to solve. The unique potential of a global, United Nations-led treaty is to hold all countries to a high common standard on plastic consumption and create a clear path toward a future free from plastic pollution. This will create a level playing field that incentivizes and supports national actions. Call for an ambitious and inclusive global treaty to end plastic pollution.