Wildlife depends on healthy habitats that extend unbroken. That’s especially true for big cats. As the top predators in their ecosystems, species such as Africa’s lions, Asia’s tigers and snow leopards, and the Americas’ jaguars require vast territories in which to hunt prey and find mates. But these large expanses of connected habitat are under threat—or disappearing altogether. From roads and fences to farms and canals, human activity and infrastructure often stand in the way of big cats’ movements. Marooned on shrinking islands of habitat, they may lack sufficient food or fail to encounter a mate, causing them to become genetically isolated and inbred. And as their habitats become increasingly fragmented, the carnivores are more likely to cross paths with people and livestock, raising the risk of retaliatory killings and poaching. “In today’s world, much of the landscape has been carved up by human activity,” says Dale Miquelle, the coordinator of the Wildlife Conservation Society’s Tiger Program, a WWF partner. “The trick to big cat conservation is figuring out how to piece together those patches of habitat to come up with a larger area in which big cats can move and breed.” With projects in key landscapes, WWF acts to maintain connectivity for big cats through a suite of interrelated efforts: managing protected areas while restoring and safeguarding the critical wildlife corridors between them; engaging with governments and other partners to ensure connected habitats remain intact; and supporting communities to implement integrated, holistic approaches to help people and big cats coexist. It’s a big job, but people are increasingly on board to help, says WWF lead wildlife scientist Robin Naidoo. To guide the work, he and a team of colleagues recently developed an index that measures the degree of connection for large mammals between each of the world’s terrestrial protected areas, allowing conservationists and policymakers to focus resources in places where connectivity is most at risk. Such linkages are vital not only for the continued survival of big cats, but for balanced ecosystems at large. For example, in order to thrive, jaguars need fully functioning habitats with a healthy prey base; diverse plant life to support that prey; and reliable water sources. When those habitats are protected and well-connected, countless other living things—including the people with whom they share the landscape—benefit too. “Big cats are a kind of bellwether for our ability to live with nature,” says Kate Vannelli, head of WWF’s Living with Big Cats Initiative. “If people can live alongside big cats in a state of coexistence, then we’re headed in a good direction for all of nature.” — Kirsten Weir View all issues h