Women are enhancing their livelihoods while protecting clean water Igombavu is one of 21 villages doing work supported by the CARE-WWF Alliance in the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania. The program was established in 2018 with the goal of increasing household incomes, primarily of women, while restoring and protecting the surrounding landscape and the water flows in the Great Ruaha River valley for wildlife and human needs. Click on the images to hear from participants Sarah Patison Ngairo × × Sarah Patison Ngairo
Secretary of Lugodalutali Village's Saving and Loan Association and co-owner of a nursery for water-friendly trees Sarah Patison Ngairo “Caring for the environment was not known or talked about for most of the community. We were misusing the environment, like cutting trees, planting near the water, and washing our clothes in the streams. But with the Alliance we learned that the health of the environment is for our own health. And now we stand together as a community to protect it.” Watch a video of Sarah Ngairo describing her experience with CARE-WWF Alliance Magreth Kewe × × Magreth Kewe
Member of Lugodalutali Village's Saving and Loan Association Magreth Kewe “I have gained great confidence. Through being in these groups I can stand up and talk in front of men and ask questions. I used to fear going to meetings. Now when they announce a meeting, I am the first one to be there—to ask questions about village development and other things. I want to see other women develop in this same way.” Emanuel Mbwiro × × Emanuel Mbwiro 
Community-based trainer from Ibumila Village Emanuel Mbwiro “The world has changed, but water remains the same. No water; no life. We conserve the environment so coming generations will find a good and peaceful place to live, so they enjoy it as we enjoy it now.” Agatha Titus Mkayula × × Agatha Titus Mkayula
Paraprofessional and advocate for climate-smart farming practices, Ibumila Village Agatha Titus Mkayula “It is very import for women to lead. Women trust their fellow women. Women would just wait for men to bring households needs. But now women are equally contributing to the welfare of the household, they are more active and competing with men and more or less independent. So as women leaders we have sensitized many women and built their confidence, like Samia [Hassan] who is a president and she is doing very well, and we pray she continue to lead the country so that we women follow her steps.”