The world’s environmental emergencies are as pressing as ever, underscoring a core WWF commitment: to support locally-led and designed conservation efforts to better recognize the inherent links between ecosystems and societies. For 28 years, WWF’s Russell E. Train Education for Nature Program (EFN) has done just that. The world’s environmental emergencies are as pressing as ever, underscoring a core WWF commitment: to support locally-led and designed conservation efforts to better recognize the inherent links between ecosystems and societies. For 28 years, WWF’s Russell E. Train Education for Nature Program (EFN) has done just that. WWF is excited to announce the 2022 recipients of EFN’s individual and institutional grants. WWF is excited to announce the 2022 recipients of EFN’s individual and institutional grants. This year’s recipients include 53 individuals and organizations from 21 countries across the globe, spanning the gamut of scientists and conservation leaders who are exploring solutions to myriad of challenges and disruptions in today’s ecological systems. Selected through a multi-step rigorous assessment, this year's cohort will focus on a diverse range of topics and activities, from conserving the endangered golden langur in Bhutan to assessing human-shark interactions in Mexico to determining the knowledge, attitudes, and distribution of pangolins in Tanzania. The 2022 recipients join EFN’s global community of over 3,000 individuals and 600 institutions across 60 countries whose contributions continue to significantly accelerate the pace of progress in addressing biodiversity challenges. The grant recipients and alumni test new ideas, evaluate what doesn't work, implement lessons learned, and serve as an inspiration for building the next generation of conservation scientists and leaders. EFN provides support through direct grants to individuals and institutions to enhance expertise and technical skills at all career levels and community restoration activities. This year’s award winners include: 20 outstanding conservation leaders from 12 countries received the Train Fellowship to support their master’s and PhD degrees in conservation-related fields. Upon completing their programs, these individuals continue to build upon their research to inform critical decisions, establish in-country academic programs, mentor the next generation of scientists and leaders, and more. 20 outstanding conservation leaders from 12 countries 3 Cassagnol Fellows became the inaugural recipients of the Cassagnol Fellowship intended to support their efforts in leading innovative programs that promote long-term outreach and capacity building in research, education, and training. 3 Cassagnol Fellows became the inaugural recipients 10 scholars from Royal Thimphu College in Bhutan and Ecole Normale Supérieure d'Antananarivo in Madagascar received the Russell and Aileen Train Legacy Scholarship. The Legacy Scholarships are awarded through partnerships with select universities to support students to attend conservation undergraduate and master’s degree programs in biodiversity-rich countries. The Legacy Program builds on EFN’s existing foundation and supports alumni by engaging universities where former Train Fellows serve as faculty members. 10 scholars from Royal Thimphu College in Bhutan and Ecole Normale Supérieure d'Antananarivo in Madagascar 3 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Grant recipients from Kenya and Tanzania received support to enhance capacities to address environmental and social impact assessment needs with an emphasis on local communities and local practitioners. 3 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Grant recipients from Kenya and Tanzania 17 Reforestation Grant recipients from 11 countries comprise local organizations in select WWF priority areas dedicated to restoring forest ecosystems whilst building the local capacity and promoting diversified livelihoods. 17 Reforestation Grant recipients from 11 countries Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × Benguerra Island, one of the most important tourist and conservation areas in the
Bazaruto Archipelago off the coast of Mozambique, is rich in biodiversity, with an
abundance of rare marine species of ecological and economic value. In recent years,
the island has been ravaged by natural disasters, such as cyclones and tropical
storms making the Benguerra coastal ecosystem susceptible to degradation, erosion,
floods, and unstable coastline. However, the impacts of these factors to the
stability of the Benguerra coastline have not been quantified and the current state
of conservation is not yet known. My research aims to evaluate the stability of the
Benguerra coast to identify the current state of conservation. I will also model the
future change of coastal ecosystems considering the effect of environmental and
anthropogenic forces. Findings will contribute to the development of measures to
reduce ecosystem degradation and improve the conservation of the region to support a
sustainable blue economy in Mozambique. × × Saltmarshes play an important role as transition ecosystems between mangroves and
terrestrial vegetation. They provide coastal protection and are habitats for diverse
species. My research intends to develop an in-depth mapping and taxonomic study of
the main species to better understand how saltmarshes can influence mangrove
recruitment in degraded mangrove forests. This study will be a tool for including
saltmarshes in the list of important coastal ecosystems in Mozambique. It will also
contribute to the limited knowledge regarding this ecosystem. Understanding the
interactions in this ecosystem with mangroves can provide guidelines for mangrove
and saltmarsh management and restoration. × × My research will investigate the distribution, transport, and accumulation of
pollutants during a landfall of tropical cyclones in Cabo Delgado, Mozambique. Due
to Mozambique's vulnerability to tropical cyclones, there is exacerbated transfer of
pollutants to the ocean, which could cause serious problems to coral reefs already
threatened by climate change and anthropogenic activities. This study will provide
scientific evidence on the potential of tropical cyclones to induce pollutants from
the ocean back to land, such as plastics, which enable detection of their optimal
removal locations, and will contribute to enhancing the conservation of coral reefs. × × My research will describe a free-living stubby-branching coral, Psammocora stellata that occurs at Floreana and Isabela Islands in the Galápagos Archipelago. This species is more resistant to bleaching, but during El Niño Southern Oscillation events in 1982-83, it disappeared from several locations. Over the past 40 years, this rubble-like coral has recovered to its pre-impacted levels and continues to expand. By increasing habitat complexity, P. stellata provides important ecosystems for invertebrates and fish. Therefore, this study will estimate the distribution of Psammocora stellata, facilitate population management, and further our understanding of their overall resilience and resistance to changing environmental conditions. × × When considering conservation, it should be noted that human behavior and disposition
towards sustainable practices play an essential role. The Ecuadorian coast is the
habitat of marine turtles, but it is also the living space of fishing communities.
Women, men, and turtles face the loss of valuable ecosystems due to climate change
and overexploitation. My research aims to understand the social context, the
adaptability to climate change, and the interactions between sea turtles and the
fishing communities of Northern Ecuador. This research will help promote sustainable
tourism and fishing practices through environmental education in ways that allow all
communities to participate actively in the search for solutions. × × The Global Ocean Report 2020 highlights the missing link between SDG 14 and gender,
yet women play a critical role in ocean science fisheries and resource conservation.
Voices of women are invisible due to various factors such as customary norms, values
and traditions resulting in exclusion from Marine Spatial Planning (MSP), a process
that rationalizes the use of marine space. My study aims to examine the role of
women in fisheries as a component of MSP in Kenya. The role of women fishers in
Kenya’s ocean economy has poorly been documented. I will develop inventories of
resource users in select villages, determine factors contributing to gender
disparities, map sites of fisheries resource extractions and examine the
participation rates of women in marine resource policy development and management.
Knowledge on the scale of resource use and participation level by women fishers will
contribute to conservation planning and inclusive participation and perspectives in
the MSP process. × × For nearly 7 years, I’ve had the opportunity to work with and contribute to the
conservation of marine fauna by researching its interactions with fisheries and
closely working with fishing communities. Now, with the support of EFN, I am able to
continue researching small-cetaceans bycatch, that despite its long-documented
history the area off Peru, considered as one with the greatest threat for
small-cetacean species, limited population studies have been conducted to examine
the impact of bycatch. My PhD research at the University of St. Andrews aims to
extend the information available of small-cetacean bycatch to new areas and to
evaluate demographic parameters such as abundance and distribution of these species.
Information delivered will support Peruvian and regional governments and entities to
develop and reinforce management and policy regulations. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × There is limited comprehensive information on Bhutan’s endangered golden langur’s genetic diversity, crop reliance behavior, and interactions with local people. My research will provide a holistic understanding of its genetic diversity and hybridization, feeding behavior, zoonotic disease transmission, response to anthropic habitats, and human-langur interactions, and governance at the landscape level. I will use mixed methods including field surveys, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) collection and analysis, GIS analysis, and ethnographic interviews and observations to examine the specific research components. Field observations combined with in-person interviews will enable me to identify anthropic factors affecting golden langurs, evaluate the extent of people-langur interaction, and assess people’s views of this endangered species. Findings will contribute to developing practical, sustainable conservation interventions that meet the needs of golden langurs and local people. × × There is sparsity of information on how Climate Variability and Change (CVC) impact assessments account for heterogeneities in both gender and agro-ecological perspectives in rural Kenya. Resource-dependent smallholders and agroecosystems in rural areas are more prone to CVC given their centrality in agricultural food production systems and cycles combined with rooted biases and discriminatory socio-cultural tradaitions, beliefs and norms regarding gender roles. My research will investigate the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of climate change and natural resources degradation through a gendered lense in relation to agro-ecological zones at a local micro plot, household, community and village scale levels. I will also evaluate the extent, rates, patterns, and costs of natural resource degradation. Smallholders’ gender and agro-ecological attributes will provide evidence for consideration in formulating strategies to alleviate poverty, enhance provision of agro-ecosystems and sustainably manage natural resources through adaptation, mitigation, and resilience to climate change. × × Biodiversity in drylands is not well understood, especially in hyper-arid systems. Particularly, soil microbes have been overlooked, as there has traditionally been a general perception that microbes do not contribute to ecosystem services as much as macroorganisms. Microbes play an outsized role in these systems in mediating ecosystem processes such as primary production, C and N cycling as well as biogeochemical processes. The proposed study will explore the taxonomic and functional diversity of soil microbial communities in the hyper-arid Namib Desert. This work will provide information to improve the predictive capacity of dryland ecosystem services under changing environmental conditions. × × Incidents of human-wildlife conflict (HWC) have increased in buffer zones of protected areas in Nepal. Local people having diverse livelihood strategies and land-use practices are differently affected by the severity of HWC incidents. My research aims to answer three core questions: What type of livelihood strategies and land use are more prone to HWC? Are current mitigation structures cost effective? Which sites are at risk from HWC? I will collect registered incidents over the past 10 years from respective protected area offices and visit individual sites for conflict related information and associated landscape variables through participatory approaches and damage site assessments. Combination of field-based evidence with ecological models will be essential in formulating policies and strategies to reduce HWC and secure livelihoods of rural communities. × × Habitat degradation is pervasive and constrains wildlife persistence at temporal and spatial scales. The tropical Andes exhibit high rates of land conversion but also contain critical habitats for biodiversity and ecosystem services provision. I will assess the effects of habitat loss and fragmentation by quantifying the contribution of land-use change to the extinction threshold hypothesis. I will identify anthropogenic drivers of land-use change and assess the wildlife response. I will conduct spatial analysis, dynamic occupancy modeling, and landscape genetics to infer functional connectivity, and ultimately produce a scientific-informed tool for supporting wildlife conservation in the Llanganates-Sangay Ecological Corridor. × × Indri indri is the most iconic species and the largest living lemur. However, the movement patterns of Indri indri remain understudied in Madagascar. The main aim of my research is to compare the activity and ranging patterns between groups of Indri indri, critically endangered lemurs that live in the same area but in patches that differ in terms of habitat quality and fragmentation. Specifically, I will examine the factors that govern the movement of three groups of Indri in Mahatsara, Ihofa, and Mantadia. Findings from my work will advance our knowledge on lemur behavior and movement ecology, which will improve conservation planning. × × I study the interaction between snakes and poisonous frog prey in the Amazon in collaboration with local community members. Poison frogs secrete neurotoxins against predators like colubrid snakes. These chemical defenses play a key role in ecosystems by changing interactions between species and creating new ecological opportunities for animals to specialize. Overall, I aim to reveal the genetic basis of toxin resistance in snakes and the potential role of coevolution in generating biodiversity. This research will contribute to our knowledge of tropical interactions and snake biodiversity, which will help guide their conservation by highlighting their important role in the ecosystem. × × Biodiversity is declining rapidly. We are probably entering the sixth mass extinction. At the same time, Earth's climate is changing at a rampant rate. However, extinctions and climate changes have been relatively common throughout Earth's history. Since the effects of mass extinctions and major climate changes are challenging to assess at an ecological scale, studying how Earth's biota have responded to climate dynamics in the deep past could be essential for understanding the current and future risks of climate change and biodiversity loss. Thus, my research will provide useful analogs of the causes and consequences of extinctions and how biodiversity has responded to climate change in the past to predict the present and future biota responses. × × My proposed research focuses on understanding the biogeographic relationships between woody savanna/savanna-like forests in Peru and the savannas of the Cerrado vegetation of Bolivia and Brazil. It is clear that these formations share species, but quantitative studies of these widespread distributions of species are limited. I aim to examine the evolutionary relationships of key species that are adapted to conditions of water stress and that have a discontinuous spatial distribution between Peru and the Cerrado Biome. The methodology will include floristic inventory of Peruvian Andean savannas, the quantitative exploration of floristic similarity with Cerrado and the taxonomy and phylogenetics of key species in Peruvian savannas to understand the age and nature of possible connections. Clarifying genetic distinctiveness of savanna and dry forests will inform management decisions, especially in areas that are yet to be conserved. × × Changes in land use, associated with agriculture, logging, mining, urbanization, among others, are subsequently modifying host-parasite interactions. My proposed research focuses on understanding the influence of anthropogenic habitat alteration on endoparasite infections in a rodent species in a semiarid ecosystem in Central Chile. Specifically, I will examine how habitat and individual features affect the presence of monoxenous and heteroxenous endoparasites in altered and non-altered habitats. Understanding infection patterns on parasites in wildlife based on habitat conditions contribute to developing control measures and policies to safeguard public health and wildlife conservation. × × My research focuses on assessing the conservation threats to endangered Asian elephants (nearly 200 remain in Nepal), exploring the causes of human-elephant conflict, the primary factor endangering elephants. Specifically, I will assess the spatio-temporal movement of elephants to understand their foraging patterns; and examine people’s dependence on forests. These findings will contribute to improve elephant conservation and livelihoods for people. Overall, obtaining a PhD will greatly enhance my skills in research, teaching, and conservation. Further, I am excited to develop other women scientists and build science and conservation capacity in Nepal. × × The research focuses on the analysis of the functional diversity of plants and its relationship with the provision of ecosystem services in the Alto Paraná Atlantic Forest (BAAPA), Paraguay. This ecoregion is one of the most threatened in the world, due to increasing anthropogenic actions such as overexploitation, encroachment for agricultural land, and burning of biomass. Therefore, there is a need to generate data to characterize the state of degradation and natural succession based on temporal dynamics and plant functional features and the effect on ecosystem services. This will contribute to developing best actions for restoration and sustainable use and management at country and regional level. × × Many central African’s restricted range species including the grey-necked picathartes (Picathartes oreas) are poorly studied, making significant obstructions in developing practical conservation management and monitoring plans. My research aims to understand the population status and distribution, dispersal patterns and breeding ecology of the grey-necked picathartes in changing landscape in Cameroon by modeling the occupancy of the species, examining its breeding success and population’s isolation. Findings will provide a baseline for population monitoring and science-informed conservation strategies for the species and the ecosystem in which it lives. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × Climate change is now an incontrovertible phenomenon that threatens livelihood sectors. In light of climate change, the lack of adaptation capabilities and capacities leads to higher climate change vulnerability. Empowering the adaptive capacity of rice and fish farmers, community-based, government, and non-governmental organizations through case-based knowledge sharing and training programs is a solution to tackle the increasing impacts of climate change. The community-based resource integrated management planning (CRIMP) is a new sustainable approach considering the trans-disciplinary sciences of climate change and ecosystem-based management aspects. Thus, empowering the adaptive capacity of the stakeholders through the application of the CRIMP approach will enable an improved awareness of climate change among the stakeholders and an understanding of the importance of climate change adaptation and resilience planning for farm households and communities in Myanmar. × × Islands in the Mexican Caribbean Sea (MCS) are global touristic sites with limited baseline socioecological data about sharks. Tourism, urban development, and growing fishing effort afflict society and biodiversity conservation, including sharks. I will use fishers' and divers' perceptions to document the presence and diversity of sharks on Cozumel, a global touristic island with a recreational diving and fishing history. Socioecological data will be integrated with underwater observations using geospatial tools. In collaboration with authorities, scientific results will be disseminated to raise awareness of the need for healthy oceans for human well-being and shark conservation. × × A glaring ‘leaky pipeline’ of conservation leadership may influence the recruitment and retention of Kenya’s current and next generation of ocean leaders and scientists. I will work with students and interns to develop an interactive monitoring framework for tracking their conservation research and leadership, facilitate approaches to communicate conservation outcomes, and develop an intergenerational mentorship think-tank that will connect young leaders with older experts to encourage interactions and foster learning, communication, and collaborations. Outcomes from this fellowship will serve as a baseline for individual mentors, research groups, and institutions to mitigate the loss of current and future ocean leaders and scientists. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × In Tanzania, little is known about tree and ground pangolins, including population status, local perspectives on the species, trade and hunting trade-offs resulting in delays in the development of a national conservation action plan. The project team will work with local communities in select villages located near Burigi-Chato, Rumanyika-Karagwe, and Ibanda-Kyerwa National Parks, an area with tree and ground pangolins to: determine population estimators such as occupancy, map pangolin distribution and threats, and assess the perspectives of local communities towards pangolins trade and hunting. Outcomes will inform the development of education and livelihood strategies, to engage the local communicates in place-based, relevant conservation action as well as national level conservation planning. × × Interventions to address challenges such as environmental degradation and over-exploitation of natural resources, due to human population, have included the use of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA). However, the success of these interventions highlights the need for intentional and better approaches in collaborating with local communities. The proposed study aims to work with two local community groups in the north and South Coast of Kenya to examine the use of environmental DNA (eDNA) analysis and local ecological knowledge in assessing social and environmental impacts associated with marine resources. We will document and co-design local approaches to ESIA and use microbial indicators for ecosystem health to prioritize, validate, and monitor the selected community conservation projects. Outcomes will have direct and indirect social and ecological outcomes necessary for sustainable marine conservation in Kenya. × × The proposed study aims to increase engagement of local communities in the management of the Uluguru Forest Reserve. The forest which has long been known for its unique biodiversity is currently threatened by anthropogenic activities such as agriculture, charcoal making, and logging. While communities are aware of the importance of forest ecosystems, their participation in economic-conservation dialogue and interventions remains a challenge. The study will apply participatory assessment methodology which is “Integrated Management Effectiveness tool” adopted from IUCN (Integrated Management Effectiveness Tool (IMET) | BIOPAMA RIS) and reflection Action model for participatory reflection and planning for action by adjacent communities in collaboration with local government and Uluguru Forest Authority. The study will create a space to unlock challenges and design locally-led solutions that benefit communities and the forest. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × Natural science is a profession that opens doors to a bunch of opportunities all over
the world, while offering many possibilities. Then, the increasing concerns about
the environment presents a challenge for our society. I am interested in research
that promotes the active involvement of students in reforestation work. The study
sites will Fokontany Ambohitsilaozana Ambatondrazaka, I will work in collaboration
with the deputy and mayor of Ambatondrazaka, the youth association and local
teachers to sensitize students and residents on the importance of forests, and
provide theoretical and practical training in effective reforestation. These
approaches will result in increased scientific spirit and belonging, and empower
young people in ensuring survival of forests. × × Conservation actively contributes to the sustainable development of a country,
especially when social, ecological, and environmental dimensions are considered. I
am interested in examining the restoration of the wetland ‘reed’ forest of Lake
Alaotra. The reed forestand the lake is currently threatened due to transformation
of marshland into new rice fields, and in turn endangering the endemic Alaotra
gentle lemur (Hapalemur alaotrensis). My research will investigate the approaches
for restoring reed forest in Andreba gara Ambatondrazaka. Specifically, I will work
with local communities to develop a monitoring program for planting of reeds as well
as raise awareness of the population on the eradication of uncontrolled and illicit
exploitation of reeds habitat of Hapalemure alaotrensis endemic to Lake Alaotra. The
findings of my work will contribute to the conservation of plant and animal species
especially endemic to Lake Alaotra and support ecotourism development of Madagascar. × × I am interested in contributing to research through adopting innovative approaches to
environmental education and awareness for local people in the rural commune of
Bejofo-Ambatondrazaka. Specifically, I would like to work with the local reception
center in Andrebagara to develop awareness materials such as images, posters, and
stories that represent the history of the wet zone, the characteristics of the
species, the anthropogenic pressures and measures that can be adopted to preserve
the wetland. × × My research aims to find strategies that can be used in the conservation of Ardea
humbloti which is listed as an endangered species on the IUCN Red List, and
undergoing continuing declines due to increasing degradation and overexploitation of
its habitats. Using participatory approaches, I will engage local communities in the
Manambolomaty area; Melaky region, a Ramsar site known as home for the Ardea
humbloti to assess their presence and absence in this site, and examine local
conservation measures. × × Erosion is a phenomenon that destroys several acres of primary forest in Madagascar.
Associated with deforestation, it increases every year. I will assess the scope of
damage caused by erosion in the Andasibe Mantadia National Park. I will also test
the efficacy of planting endemic species of deep-rooted plants as a natural method
for maintaining soil and preventing erosion. Results from this work will provide a
map showing the size of the erosion zones in the eastern forests of Madagascar and
recommendations for anti-erosion measures for protection of the forest ecosystem. × × This topic is important to the future of conservation in my country because wetlands
have several importance to the environment and development. Some of the wetlands in
Madagascar are endangered by human activities such as agriculture, the irrational
use of resources, and deforestation. Therefore, sensitizing local communities on the
protection and restoration of wetlands provides the solution to reduce threats.
Wetlands defend so many endemic fauna and flora of Madagascar like Raphia, marsh,
fish, bird, amphibian, mammal, reptile, and crustacean. The potential outcomes are
local communities are aware of the importance of wetlands and participate directly
in their protection and restoration. × × People in Bhutan started using chemical fertilizers knowingly or unknowingly of the
negative impact on the environment. The use of chemical fertilizers has led to
several issues such as serious soil degradation, nitrogen leaching, soil compaction,
and reduction in soil organic matter. I will work with farmers in Changyul, Punakha,
an area known for its varieties of vegetables especially chili, which is sold to
generate income. I aim to assess the adoption and use of natural manure compared to
chemical fertilizers following sensitization on the implications of chemical
fertilizers. The expected outcome is that farmers will be motivated to learn the
procedures for making compost manure from their kitchen and other degradable waste.
Findings will contribute to support policies to reduce the import and use of
chemical fertilizers. × × I am interested in examining approaches that can improve agricultural land uses to
ensure sustainable farming practices in Bhutan. I will conduct my study in Punakha,
Bhutan, where both wet and dry-land agriculture practices are carried out. Further,
the local communities in Punakha are mostly dependent on agricultural practices.
However, agricultural lands are declining due to developmental activities. I will
assess community members’ perspectives on the impact of developmental activities and
legislation on agricultural practices. The research will provide recommendations
including the various solutions to agricultural land use issues and measures for
sustainable agriculture for future generations. The outcomes of my study will be
important in supporting local and national efforts in developing practical solutions
to sustainable agricultural land uses. × × I will identify the ecosystem services that are prevalent in the community forest in
Tsirang due to its rich biodiversity. Specifically, I will examine the valuable
ecosystem services and quantify the economic value. I will conduct surveys through
working with members of the community forest to determine their perception on the
type and value of the ecosystem service. Findings will support monitoring and
evaluation of ecosystem services to mitigate degradation and depletion, enhance good
governance and promote conservation efforts. × × The world is developing at a rapid pace and human activities are linked to the environment like never before, therefore impacting our biodiversity and well-being. I am interested in Bhutan’s urban ecology. I aim to examine how social, political, and economic dimensions affect biodiversity. I will focus on Thimphu, Bhutan’s capital city, as my study site given that it’s the fastest growing city in the country, providing an opportunity to understand the implications of urbanization on the environment. Methods will include chemical techniques such as testing the pH and air quality index to measure content of pollutants as well as use of remote sensing data. The findings will be important in the sustainable development of Bhutan. Outcomes contribute to our understanding of urban ecology which is important in finding a balance between humans and their surroundings. Click on the images to learn more about each recipient. × × The objective of the project is to promote mangrove reforestation through the participation of communities and the private sector. Red 