The word “packaging” can trigger grimaces in conversations about trash and the environment. But packaging actually plays a critical role in protecting products and resources, and often helps reduce and prevent waste—especially when it comes to food. Using more packaging than a food product needs creates waste across the whole production process, from requiring more raw materials and energy to generating more trash. But underpackaging also strains the system, creating waste when food spoils or is damaged from lack of proper protection. The optimal packaging solution provides sufficient protection while minimizing its impact on the environment. The optimal packaging solution provides sufficient protection while minimizing its impact on the environment. Food spoils. And a lot of organic material that gets thrown away could probably be saved through better packaging. In the US in 2011, packaging made up 13.1% of all municipal solid waste (garbage from homes, businesses, schools and hospitals) that ended up in landfills. It accounted for just 8.4% in the EU and less than 3% in the UK. Organic material, on the other hand, is estimated to make up 46% of the waste stream worldwide. Organic material, on the other hand, is estimated to make up 46% of the waste stream worldwide. Maximum shelf life of beef sold in pre-sealed plastic packaging Shelf life of beef sold in butcher paper Period after which an unwrapped cucumber becomes unsalable Period after which a plastic-wrapped cucumber becomes unsalable Paper and cardboard made from tree-based fiber account for the biggest share of packaging waste in the US. They’re also the most recycled packaging materials: Of the 38 million tons generated in 2012, 29 million (76%) were recycled. Of the 38 million tons generated in 2012, 29 million (76%) were recycled. Cities exist with the help of packaging: Most of the food and other goods they require are grown and produced outside of urban centers. In 2009, 3.42 billion people lived in urban areas, a number that exceeded the population living in rural areas for the first time in history. Most of the food and other goods they require are grown and produced outside of urban centers. On average, packaging makes up only 10% of a food product’s energy footprint. In contrast, the food itself accounts for about 50% of the product’s energy footprint. So protecting that food through packaging means keeping a big part of its footprint in check. packaging makes up only 10% of a food product’s energy footprint The most important thing to do when you shop is choose the package that best meets your needs in order to avoid food waste. choose the package that best meets your needs avoid food waste View all issues h