WWF is expanding its engagement with Latino communities in the US and abroad. Here’s one reason why. NAME Vanessa Cardenas
 TITLE Director, Latino Outreach Cardenas brings together environmentally engaged Latinos, their communities in the US, and the countries they have ties to, to achieve progress on the issues we share. Climate change affects everyone, but it doesn't affect everyone in the same way. "Latinos and other people of color are hit the hardest by climate change and pollution," says Pedro Lopez, program director for the Phoenix-based Latino environmental justice program Chispa. "What's important about engaging those communities," he notes, is that "if [Latinos] vote and are active in their communities, they can make a difference." That's a sentiment echoed by scientist and clean air advocate Nicole Hernández Hammer, the Florida leader of Moms Clean Air Force. "Latinos and low-income communities are disproportionately at risk from the impacts of sea level rise. In the US, the cities identified by Climate Central as most vulnerable to sea level rise are almost identical to the places with the largest Latino populations." To help engage Latinos in climate activism and voting, WWF has launched ¡Climático!, a concerted national effort to partner with Latino leaders and communities across the United States, to raise awareness of climate risks from Latin America to North America, and to promote US action. 1/3 
of the US population will be Hispanic by 2050 US CENSUS BUREAU 17% 
of the total US population is Hispanic 54 
million Hispanics in the US PEW RESEARCH CENTER Fortunately, a powerful cadre of climate leaders is emerging from Latin America. Domestic-level climate and energy policies—from countries like Mexico, Chile, Colombia and Costa Rica—are setting standards for others to follow. In addition, Latin American countries have provided energy and momentum to previous UN climate talks, breaking the traditional stalemate between developed and developing countries. Those advances in the southern hemisphere also make it increasingly vital that WWF play its part, and partner with both US-based Latinos and leaders in Central and South America to present a unified, powerful call to action—one heard not only in international meetings, but in the districts many members of the US Congress call home. Moms Clean Air Force, for example, helps local people make their will known to government representatives in Florida. "We focus on educating parents on air pollution and climate change, and then connecting them with their elected officials, so we can drive a policy forward that protects our children's health," says Hernández Hammer. "For a long time now, we've had enough science to begin implementing sound policies that help us adapt to the impacts of climate change." Building people's awareness can translate into powerful action, Lopez confirms: "We want Latinos to feel comfortable explaining why they are involved in this fight. We need more champions in Congress to address climate change. And we need this work to start in the local communities." View all issues h