History is present everywhere in Myanmar— so much so that many still know the country by its former name, Burma. In Yangon, the country’s largest city and former capital, gleaming office towers and construction cranes rise above crumbling colonial- era buildings and warrens of ancient streets. Everywhere, it seems, people and wares are on the move, piled into pickup trucks, clinging to the rooftops of exhaust-belching buses. A massive new overpass is being built to smooth traffic, but instead snarls traditional roadways. So, immersed in Yangon’s tension between old and new, we head out on another road—this one a route linking Yangon to the ancient city of Bagan. There is no better way to feel a country’s pulse than to venture deep into its heartland, so we aim for the back roads north on a route that parallels the fabled Irrawaddy River. We pass the spectacular Shwedagon Pagoda and its immense golden spire and lavish shrines on our way out of town. Soon we break free of Yangon’s congested arteries and find ourselves winding our way through bucolic villages bordered by electricgreen rice paddies, where farmers topped with conical hats stoop to tend the precious crop. Kids with long poles on their shoulders balance buckets of water or baskets of grass. Motor scooters haul trailers loaded with stacks of green bamboo. We stop in the village of Hmaw to watch fishermen casting nets into a stream. Ko Mya Thein, 45, says he will sell his catfish to a local middleman, who in turn sells them to an exporter with connections in Japan and China. His teeth are stained red from chewing betel nut, a mild stimulant, and he’s wearing a baggy fatigue shirt two sizes too big for his wiry frame. “Life is hard,” he acknowledges, “but it’s getting better.” He’s not sure about the meaning of green development, but he knows his livelihood depends on abundant, clean water. His grandchildren are just starting school, and he hopes some day they will become well-paid professionals. He shoulders a beam loaded with scores of small fishing traps and wishes us well. Weighing around 11,000 pounds, this forest giant (Elephas maximus indicus) spends more than two thirds of its day grazing on available plants. Muntiacus feae inhabits the evergreen forests that hug the Thailand-Myanmar border. Extremely elusive, it rarely leaves the woods and its numbers are unknown. When it rains, Rhinopithecus strykeri—discovered only in 2010—tucks its head between its knees to keep water from entering its upturned nose. Panthera tigris corbetti can weigh up to 550 pounds. As of 2010, only 350 were estimated to be roaming the forests of the entire Greater Mekong region. Pitta gurneyi is endemic to Myanmar and Thailand. Thought extinct after the 1950s, the vibrantly colored little bird was rediscovered in 1986, but remains endangered. Over-collection of eggs has sped the decline in populations of the river dwelling Batagur baska, one of the world’s most threatened turtles. Rhodonessa caryophyllacea once frequented Myanmar’s riverine swamps, but this critically endangered bird is now believed extinct. Orcaella brevirostris, a blunt-snouted dolphin related to the killer whale, inhabits both the Irrawaddy and Mekong rivers. Less than 100 are thought left in the Mekong. In Myanmar, Gyps tenuirostris numbers are falling due to both eating drug-treated livestock carcasses and shrinking availability of prey. 1980: 34,474,755 
2012: 52,797,319 
Up 53.14% since 1980 1980: 2012: 53.14% Source: World Bank 0-14 (children): 26.7% 
15-24 (early working): 18.6% 
25-54 (prime working): 42.8% 
55-64 (mature working): 6.7% 
65+ (elderly): 5.2% 0-14 (children): 15-24 (early working): 25-54 (prime working): 55-64 (mature working): 65+ (elderly): Source: CIA World Factbook (2013) “Myanmar is categorized as a ‘transitional’ country in terms of its age makeup. Countries in the transitional category stand to experience significant benefits from demographic change, if their governments take advantage of the opportunity it presents. Between 1970 and 1999, these countries experienced an average annual economic growth rate of 3.6 percent.” ‘transitional’ Source: Population Action International Buddhist: 89% 
Muslim: 4% 
Baptist: 3% 
Other: 2% 
Animist: 1% 
Roman Catholic: 1% Buddhist: Muslim: Baptist: Other: Animist: Roman Catholic: Source: CIA World Factbook Petroleum 
Timber 
Tin 
Antimony 
Copper 
Tungsten 
Lead 
Coal 
Marble 
Limestone 
Precious Stones 
Natural Gas 
Hydropower Source: CIA World Factbook 261,233 Square Miles Source: FAOSTAT 2011 1990 
Agricultural: 16% 
Forest: 60% 1990 2011
 Agricultural: 19.2%
 Forest: 48.2% 2011 Source: World Bank Ambassador Derek J. Mitchell was confirmed as the US Ambassador to the Republic of the Union of Burma on June 29, 2012, by the United States Senate. He has worked on security and foreign policy issues in the region for more than 20 years. During my first year as US Ambassador, I have been privileged to be part of a new chapter in the relationship between the United States and Burma. As President Obama said to a local audience in his speech at Rangoon University here one year ago, Burma lies “at the crossroads of East and South Asia. You border the most populated nations on the planet. You have a history that reaches back thousands of years, and the ability to help determine the destiny of the fastest-growing region of the world.” Our relationship is not new. The United States was among the first countries to recognize Burma following the country’s independence from Great Britain in 1948. But due to serious political differences over the past 25 years, our relationship moved steadily into a deep freeze. Those days are over. In response to the positive changes we have witnessed in recent years, the United States has normalized diplomatic relations, exchanged ambassadors, and substantially eased economic sanctions on the country, opening the door for U.S. trade and investment. Today, we are once again reengaging at all levels and sectors to reestablish a historic partnership that promises to bring benefits to both countries and serve broad common interests. The possibilities of partnership are great, and the United States looks forward to seizing multiple opportunities to forge deep and lasting ties in coming years. * The United States’ official policy continues to be that “Burma” is the official name of the country, but in diplomatic exchanges with the government, the United States uses the name “Myanmar.” For example, in using “Myanmar” during President Thein Sein’s visit, we want to demonstrate support for and show respect to his government, which is pursuing an ambitious reform agenda. View all issues h