The Trump administration plans to exit the accord, but leaders across the US economy want the nation to remain a global leader in addressing climate change The Trump administration’s announcement undermines a key pillar in the fight against climate change and damages the world’s ability to avoid the most dangerous and costly effects of climate change and is out of step with what is happening in the US. The signatories all understand that the Paris Agreement is a blueprint for job creation, stability, and global prosperity, and that accelerating the nation’s clean energy transition is an opportunity for—not a liability to—job creation, spurring innovation, promoting trade, and ensuring American competitiveness. By declaring that “we are still in,” the signatories are putting the best interests of their constituents, customers, students, and communities first while assuring the rest of the world that American leadership on climate change extends well beyond the federal government. Signatories include some of the most populous states and cities in the US, including California, New York City, Los Angeles, and Houston, as well as several smaller cities such as Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Dubuque, Iowa. A mixture of private universities, state schools and community colleges, both small and large, have added their institutions to the statement. And Fortune 500 companies sign their names alongside hundreds of small businesses. There are multiple organizations and individuals participating in this movement, and WWF has played a convening role in the process, building on our longstanding work with cities and businesses. Today’s announcement embraces this rapidly growing movement of subnational and civil society leaders by announcing that not only are these leaders stepping forward, they are stepping forward together. “US leadership on climate change doesn’t begin or end in Washington,” said WWF’s Lou Leonard, senior vice president, climate change and energy. “Focusing on last week's disappointing decision by President Trump misses the bigger story: America is still in this fight.” View the full statement, quotes, and list of signatories. View the full statement, quotes, and list of signatories.