In February, when government officials and representatives from 13 Asian countries met in Kathmandu, Nepal, for a week-long symposium on preventing poaching, they rallied behind a single, ambitious goal: reaching zero poaching. The symposium, Towards Zero Poaching in Asia, marked the launch of a coordinated push to eradicate the poaching of tigers, rhinos and elephants—the first such region-wide effort. Hosted by Nepal’s Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation, WWF, the Global Tiger Forum, National Trust for Nature Conservation and the South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network, the symposium also showcased the concept of a Zero Poaching Toolkit designed to help participating countries achieve that goal. Discussion of tigers and rhinos was front and center. Once common throughout Asia, tigers have plummeted from a population of about 100,000 a century ago to as few as 3,200 in the wild today. The continent’s widespread poaching crisis is the biggest threat to their survival. Rising wealth in Asian countries has fueled a black market in which every part of the animal—from bones and pelt to testicles, claws and even whiskers—is sold for various purposes across Asia. All three subspecies of Asian rhino also live under the constant threat of poaching. And with populations of under 100 and 60 respectively, the Sumatran and Javan rhinos simply can’t withstand the loss of even a single animal. The discussions in Kathmandu highlighted the plight of Asian elephants (poached for their ivory tusks) as well, while shining a renewed spotlight on the threat to a host of lesser-known species such as pangolins (scales and meat), musk deer (scent glands), sun bears (meat and gallbladders) and pythons (skins). "When people think about poaching, they often first think of the African rhino and elephant," said Simon Stuart, chair of the IUCN Species Survival Commission, while presenting at the symposium. "However,…species in Asia are far more at risk from extinction unless we increase measures against poaching and the illegal wildlife trade." As the only Asian country that's hit the zero poaching mark thus far, Nepal made a fitting host for discussions about how to reverse that grim reality. The Himalayan nation has achieved 365 days without a single poaching incident not once, but twice: in 2011 for rhinos, and for 12 months ending in February 2014 for rhinos, tigers and elephants. In proving that zero poaching is possible, Nepal has also proven that economic and political might aren't requisites for success. The country has little of either compared to neighboring behemoths like China and India. Its entire GDP of $19.3 billion is barely higher than the estimated $19 billion value of the global illegal wildlife trade. Instead, Nepal's victories stem from the political will to systematically address poaching. Its success can be linked directly to how the country's communities, rangers, army, police and judiciary are all motivated to address the problem in every link of a sophisticated crime chain. "Poaching is an organized, professional business," said Diwakar Chapagain, deputy director of wildlife trade monitoring for WWF-Nepal. "To stop it, antipoaching must be the same." View all issues h