A sudden splash breaks the warm silence of the lagoon. As soon as the net touches the surface, Emelly Miralda starts pulling it in at a fast but steady pace. A glittering mass of sardines emerges from the water, some of them tangled in the mesh, others flopping violently. She loosens the net and a downpour of silver fish falls inside the small boat. A barracuda the size of her leg already lies lifeless on the floor. Her husband thrusts a long stick into the lagoon to keep the boat still. Three of their four children, chins and cheeks cupped in their hands, watch closely as their mother frees the few remaining fish from the net. A 10-month-old baby sleeps in a cradle. “Only a female can do this,” she brags with a grin. Miralda hopes to teach her kids how to fish one day—it’s a skill and a way of life she fears will become more difficult as illegal fishing, climate change, and unchecked tourism continue to hurt fish and coral populations. As she talks, Miralda sets aside a few sardines to use later as bait. Of the 13 functional shrimp farms that are members of the Belize Shrimp Growers Association, seven are scattered on the creeks flowing into the Placencia Lagoon. According to a 2008 report commissioned by WWF, when the first set of shrimp farmers established operations in the 1980s, they hoped their wastewater—rich in nutrients like nitrates and phosphates—would promote the healthy growth of seagrass and other plant life. But they had miscalculated: By 2007 only 7% of the original underwater pastures remained. Local manatee populations, once attracted by the seagrass beds, began to leave the area—and those that stayed began to get sick. Some individuals had so many parasites blocking their respiratory system they could barely breathe. And manatees were not the only ones feeling the impacts. Around that same time, algal blooms fueled by excessive nutrients were being reported in creeks with shrimp farm effluent outlets. “Our water went green in the upper lagoon,” Miralda recalls. “You can’t even catch a fish [now]—they’re not there anymore.” Another change: In other places where shrimp farm effluent has been released in the past, some mangroves are developing faster and growing taller than usual—a growth that may not be a good thing. Greater height means less stability, which means increased erosion and more vulnerability to damaging winds and storms. But that negative trend has been changing. In the past seven years, with help from WWF, shrimp farms around Belize have been improving water management and adopting sustainable practices so that their products could earn certification as responsibly farmed seafood. Those practices are showing results, including a more rigorous and nature-based approach to filtration of wastewater and the careful monitoring of nutrients that affect water chemistry downstream. Since 2010, nutrient levels in the lagoon have decreased enough to meet legal standards, seagrass pastures have begun winning back lost territory, and manatee sightings have become more frequent. Today, 90% of Belize’s aquaculture shrimp production is certified as sustainable by the Aquaculture Stewardship Council—the highest percentage of any country in the world. As this turnaround continues, conditions in the lagoon for fish populations—and for fishers like Miralda—should continue to improve. The process is slow, but under way. It’s good news that shrimp farm operations have become part of the solution; still, the lagoon has a long way to go. Poorly managed dredging—such as was done when the nearby port of Big Creek was expanded in 2015—keeps eroding and adding sediment to the watershed. And much of the natural vegetation on the mainland side of the lagoon has been converted into a landscape dominated by citrus and banana plantations that can discharge agrochemicals into the water. (So far, WWF has worked together with banana producers to cut down pesticide use by 19%.) All of these pressures must be reduced if a true lagoon recovery is to occur. So in addition to the work of SEA, local volunteers and village councils, and a cadre of local developers committed to minimizing their impact on natural ecosystems, the government must also be involved. Among the goals for government action, says Gomez, would be the declaration of Placencia Lagoon as a protected area—a measure that SEA and other civil groups have been trying to push forward for almost 20 years. Now Gomez is finally confident that the management plan for the area will become a reality. “These things take a lot of time,” she says, “but thanks to WWF’s support, the management plan is done.” WWF funded the rapid ecological assessment of the lagoon, a community engagement process, and the writing of the actual management plan. An official declaration would no doubt represent a big step forward and would help to guide the types of development and industry permitted within the lagoon. But it would most likely fall short of solving illegal fishing, one of Placencia’s—and Belize’s—most challenging problems. Fishing has been the backbone of Placencia for as long as anyone there can remember. The fishers’ cooperative once had sales so high they were even able to bring electricity to the entire community in the 1970s. It’s been reported that for years fishers did not even have to fish for conch—they would just roll up their trousers and wade out from the shore to collect them. The same report notes that locals saw so many lobsters that they didn’t think they could ever run out. Things are different now. Uncontrolled extraction and the demands of a growing tourism industry have resulted in production plummeting since the last century. Villamar Godfrey, an 81-year-old fisherman and Miralda’s uncle, has seen the fish get scarcer. “We used to catch hundreds of groupers, but now most are getting depleted because there are a lot of people [fishing them out].” That’s bad business for fishers, but also for tourism. Without big schools to fish or see while snorkeling, he says, tourists will stop coming to Placencia. Rules regarding size limits, minimum weights, and fishing seasons have been created to combat overfishing, but illegal practices remain a complex issue. And while the government supports the regulations, too often it’s up to local groups like SEA to make sure law enforcement is applied. Gomez says, “We have to do it, or it won’t be done.” People need that habitat to thrive almost as much as the fish do. Healthy coral reefs, mangrove systems, and seagrass beds form the backbone of a complex ecosystem that is closely linked to Placencians’ lives. Of course, the Placencia Peninsula and its surrounding waters make up only one of Belize’s regions, each of which has its own unique ecological and economic characteristics. Getting to know those regions and coming to understand exactly how closely natural resources and human livelihoods are connected are key components of research being done through the Natural Capital Project, a partnership between WWF, The Nature Conservancy, the University of Minnesota, and Stanford University. With funding from numerous other partners, the Natural Capital team has conducted extensive mapping exercises, community consultations, and data modeling in order to define which ecosystems are healthiest and which are most in danger. Produced for the Belize government in partnership with the Belize Coastal Zone Management Authority and Institute (CZMAI), the work drew on the skills of experts in ecology, coastal engineering, fisheries science, and other disciplines. And according to Nadia Bood, a marine scientist at WWF’s field office in Belize, the team has been able to quantify “what kinds of services those [natural] areas offer to our livelihoods, to the national economy, and to society.” View all issues h