At 9:15 on a chilly Wednesday morning in September, the entire student body of Poplar High School is barreling along Montana Highway 13 in a fleet of school buses. There’s little competition on the road, which slices cleanly through the center of Fort Peck Indian Reservation—a two-million-acre stretch of prairie in northeast Montana that’s home to the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes. Bright sunlight bounces off the landscape rolling by in muted golds and browns: shorn wheat fields, cattle pastures, twisting creeks lined with poplars. The 11th graders in the first bus seem unenthused about the field trip that’s removing them from class. In the seat in front of me, two girls sporting chunky black headphones slump against each other, cocooned in their own music as a Jimmy Eat World hit plays over the speaker system. Behind me two boys crack slang-laced jokes. But when the bus turns off the highway—first onto a gravel road, then a mere track snaking between hills—heads begin swiveling toward the windows. We hit a deep pothole and the students shout with surprise. Suddenly, at the top of a knoll, our destination appears in the distance: a cluster of tiny white cones poking from the prairie like teeth. They’re tipis. And they’re standing in the middle of the reservation’s buffalo pasture, where a week-long “Buffalo People Summit” is under way. Sixteen years ago, Fort Peck brought 100 buffalo (a colloquial term for bison) from another reservation to its own lands, ending a 130-year absence of the huge, shaggy mammals from the region. Since then, the reservation has become one of the biggest proponents of a new vision for restoring large herds of buffalo to tribal lands across the Northern Great Plains. It’s a vision that seeks to benefit not just the buffalo, but also the people who historically relied on them for everything from food and shelter to spiritual guidance—people such as the Assiniboine and Sioux. If managed well, the species that used to sustain them could answer various economic, social, and even health needs these tribes are facing today. But only a small, dedicated group of leaders at Fort Peck is currently driving that vision forward. Most of the reservation’s 7,000 residents have never even seen its buffalo herds. The summit aims to change that, starting with Fort Peck’s elementary, middle, and high school students—the young Native Americans this effort will depend on in the future. One Friday in June, several months before the summit, Robbie Magnan climbs into a pickup to give our WWF group a tour of Fort Peck’s buffalo pastures. The hills look like green velvet. Magnan, a burly Army veteran who wears jeans, a black biker vest, and his hair cinched into a neat ponytail, could probably drive here in his sleep. In addition to directing Fort Peck’s Fish and Game Department, he’s been running the reservation’s buffalo program for 16 years, and either he or his staff members are out here almost daily to check on its herds. It’s a big job that runs on a thousand tiny details, which occur to Magnan almost incessantly throughout the drive. When we reach the outermost fence to the business herd pastures, he points out the constant vigilance required to maintain those fences and effectively protect—and cordon off—bison land. When we pass a wooden water trough for the bison, we pause so he can check the water quality. And when, at the top of a hill, we encounter a panorama of undulating green prairie, Magnan mentions a distant plot of land he’d like to purchase and add to the buffalo pastures he’s been slowly expanding. Magnan’s thoroughness is one of the biggest reasons Fort Peck’s buffalo herds now total more than 400 animals with 25,000 acres available to graze on. It also reflects a practical concern for his people: Alongside their historical connection to the buffalo, they have very real, very pressing needs. One such need is economic growth. Native American reservations are home to some of the most economically depressed communities in the country, and Fort Peck is no exception. Jobs here are hard to come by, and often hard to keep due to high rates of drug and alcohol addiction among residents. In 2013, the reservation’s unemployment rate was higher than 50%, and roughly 75% of its children were living in poverty. “Bringing buffalo here just for history’s sake would be a luxury these tribes couldn’t afford,” Jorgensen says. Instead, Magnan has been working to turn the buffalo into a financial asset for Fort Peck. To do so, he’s helped develop a system that divides the animals into two separately run herds. One is a business herd that can be used primarily to generate revenue through live animal sales, meat sales, and a small number of trophy hunts each year. The other is a more wide-ranging conservation herd that can support tourism and provide meat for cultural events and community programs—everything from powwows to school lunches. By mid-morning on the day of the high schoolers’ visit to the summit, the skies have clouded over and a cold, aggressive wind beats against the 20-odd tipis, making the canvas of each one jump. But the interior of Ramey L. Escarcega-Growing Thunder and Darryl Growing Thunder’s tipi feels cozy thanks to the fur-covered buffalo hide lining the ground and door flap. Ramey, the director of Fort Peck’s Language and Culture Department, is leading a buffalo anatomy lesson—not about how the various body parts work, but how they were used by her Sioux ancestors. Sitting cross-legged beside her husband Darryl, she takes out a box made of buffalo hide and passes the tools inside it to the students seated around them. There’s a glossy horn (used for spoons and headdresses); a dried, crumpled-in bladder (for water containers); hooves (wind chimes and rattles); and a bushy-tipped tail (fly swatters). “We used everything,” Darryl says. Their tent is decked in traditional colors: handprints punctuating the canvas in bold reds, yellows, and blacks; brilliantly patterned rugs over the ground; and Ramey herself, wearing beaded blue moccasins and a skirt made entirely of rainbow-hued ribbons. It’s an aesthetic that contrasts oddly with the students’ black jeans and hoodies, neon shoes, and—in one case—vivid blue hair. But a connection sparks between them when Ramey holds up a necklace bristling with what look like golf tees. “These are buffalo teeth,” she says, grinning. “Would you guys wear this?” “Totally! It looks cool!” says a girl in skinny jeans. Cultural revitalization isn’t the only benefit of the buffalo program being highlighted at the summit. Ask Cheyenne Foote about what the program is achieving, and you’ll hear a story of health benefits. “I used to weigh 225 pounds,” says Foote, a slight woman with graying hair and large, earnest eyes. When Fort Peck received the initial business herd of 100 buffalo in 2000, she cut beef from her diet and switched to buffalo, which contains more protein and significantly less fat. Foote says eating buffalo—along with other leaner meats such as elk and deer—helped her shed more than 100 pounds. The weight loss, in turn, helped her gain firm control over her diabetes, an illness that 16% of American Indian and Alaska Native adults suffer from—nearly double the rate for the US adult population. “Now I walk three miles a day,” she says. “Last year was my second Thanksgiving feeling like I was diabetes-free.” During the first day of the summit, when Fort Peck’s elementary school students visited the buffalo pastures, I spotted the conservation herd on a nearby hill and pointed them out to several girls. “Those aren’t buffalo, they’re cows!” one said chidingly. Clearly, there’s a lot of work ahead if Fort Peck’s economic, cultural, and health champions want these herds to benefit their people and their land in a long-lasting way. But as Ramey L. Escarcega-Growing Thunder says, the summit felt like a big step in the right direction. For one thing, it’s already inspiring action in the larger community. “One of the fifth-grade teachers who came to the summit,” she says, “started a door decorating contest for her whole school the very next day. It was all about buffalo!” Learn more about bison and their role in the Northern Great Plains. Learn more about bison and their role in the Northern Great Plains. View all issues h