Family, business and a long-term view of the land As a thunderstorm approaches on an unexpectedly cool July morning, a brown-haired boy clambers down into a ravine in a forest outside the tiny community of Genoa, just east of Texarkana—a city that straddles the Texas-Arkansas line. He makes his way down to a shallow, clear-water creek. Above him tower century-old shortleaf pines, along with beech and oak trees. The canopy nearly blots out the darkening sky. Along the creek grow ferns, shrubs and grassy sedges rarely seen in this region. Harrison Torrans, like 11-year-old boys everywhere, is fascinated by the running water, delighted to be traipsing in the forest, climbing over fallen logs, picking up sticks, and ducking under low-hanging branches. Trailing Harrison are his parents, Bob and DeMita; his sister, Claire; and their friend John Cook, who works for Domtar, a paper manufacturer with a mill in nearby Ashdown. John, Bob, and DeMita graduated from Texas High together and share an easy familiarity. Bob and John finish each other’s sentences from time to time. All of them grew up just as captivated by these woods as Harrison is right now. Jean owns another tract of land, purchased by her father in the 1970s, which does not possess the sentimental value of the pristine forest of her childhood summers. She sold the timber off the 30-acre plot 20 years ago, replanting pine and allowing the hardwood to regenerate naturally. The pines were thinned last year, so today this tract resembles a more natural timber stand for the region, as does her brother Bob’s land just down the road. Bob’s 80 acres were bought by his grandfather in 1906—and he too inherited his father’s love for the land and a reluctance to cut timber. So it took John Cook a long time to convince Bob that it would make sense to harvest those trees, which consisted of amature stand growing on a dry and less-productive site. Finally, in 2005, Bob had 50 acres cut and replanted in faster-growing loblolly pine. A 30-acre section of mature-growth timber located roughly in the center was preserved. John Cook says that Domtar recognizes that FSC-certified paper is its growing market. “That’s important,” he adds, “since demand for single-sheet paper, which is produced at the Ashdown mill, is contracting at a 4% annual clip nationally.” On occasion, when there is high inventory at the Ashdown mill site, wood purchases are curtailed—but not for FSC-certified timber. And while the percentage of FSC-certified wood that goes into the Ashdown mill remains low, Cook says, company officials are determined to increase that amount. “We always buy it,” says John. “That has been our promise to our landowners association. We are always open to them—Easter Sunday, Super Bowl Sunday—we’re buying their wood.” Darrell Pendris, Southeast US regional manager for FSC-US, notes that “this region is home to most of the world’s paper production, plus some key biodiversity hotspots. FSC certification enables landowners to derive economic benefits while being recognized for their leadership practices in maintaining biodiversity.” “As the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations notes, it’s a challenge ‘to demonstrate the simple idea that one of the best ways of saving a forest is to use it,’” she says. “It’s done by using renewable resources in a responsible way that can be maintained for the long term. In effect,” she adds, “We keep trees growing." View all issues h