The negotiators gathering in Dubai today for the UN COP28 climate summit are fully aware of the challenge before them. The first iteration of the global stocktake report, a key component of the Paris Agreement released in the lead-up to this year’s summit, paints a sobering picture: while we have made strides since 2010, the current trajectory of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions still falls perilously short of the targets set to limit warming. Fortunately, a growing number of leaders recognize the stakes—and the opportunity. They understand that renewable energy is about more than averting climatic disaster; it is about enhancing lives, invigorating economies and building resilient communities. For this reason, we’re seeing an unprecedented flurry of activity across every sector and at every level of society. From federal action to private sector innovation, from state policymakers to local governments and from faith-based groups to healthcare providers, a diverse range of actors are driving the clean energy revolution and reaping the rewards that come with leading the way. Let’s start with the big picture view: the federal level. The Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) of 2022 committed nearly $369 billion for clean energy and climate initiatives projected to slash US greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by 2030. The landmark law has already generated over 100,000 new jobs and is projected to generate millions more over the next decade. Of course, we already knew renewable energy is a powerhouse job creator: research shows that investment in renewables generates three times more jobs than similar investments in fossil fuels. Savvy business leaders have read the writing on the wall. The vast majority of Fortune 500 companies have set climate or energy commitments, a clear indicator that sustainability is becoming integral to corporate success. Companies do not make these commitments merely for philanthropy; they attract talent, enhance customer loyalty and contribute positively to the bottom line. In towns and cities across the nation, investments in renewable energy are also investments in public health, safety, faith services, education and more. For example, Boston Medical Center’s Behavioral Health Center in Brockton, MA has completely reinvented its facility, utilizing solutions like geothermal heating and rooftop solar to achieve net-zero carbon emissions. They understood that sustainability and public health are inextricably linked and took steps to ensure their approach reflected that reality. The savings from their transition not only recouped the costs of the facility but ultimately enhanced the community's level of care. The same is true in Erie, Pennsylvania, where the Central Fire Station, now equipped with solar panels and a backup battery system, stands as a testament to how renewable energy can fortify essential services, ensuring their operation even during power outages. Likewise in Raleigh, North Carolina, where Oak City Baptist Church installed solar panels and battery storage, ensuring reliable power for their services and becoming a lifeline to the community in the event of an emergency. Their initiative not only strengthens community resilience but also paves the way for financial savings and energy independence. These examples illustrate a “whole-of-society” approach to tackling climate change. It's a movement that unites governments, corporations and communities in a common pursuit. They are proof of a society mobilizing in the face of climate adversity, transforming challenges into opportunities for a resilient and equitable future. And yet, for this transition to achieve its full potential, government at every level—federal, state and local—is an essential partner. It's not just about setting ambitious targets; it's about creating the conditions that enable broader and faster progress. Financial incentives, policy frameworks and international cooperation are key levers in accelerating this transition—and it’s on these areas that the negotiators at COP28 must focus their attention. That's one reason I'm pleased to see the addition of the Local Climate Action Summit (LCAS) during the first few days of this year's COP. The inclusion of LCAS, a collaboration of national and subnational actors dedicated to addressing the climate crisis, recognizes that a whole-of-society approach is essential to success. To those negotiators in Dubai, and to the world-at-large, I say look to the leaders, not the laggards. The above examples should serve as both inspiration and a call to action. By scaling up our efforts and embracing renewable energy solutions, we can chart a course towards a future where economic growth, social well-being and environmental sustainability are not competing interests but harmonious goals. Let us seize the moment to forge a legacy that future generations will look back on with pride, a legacy defined not by what we had to give up, but by what we chose to build together.