Growing up in the lush, green landscape of central Viet Nam, Blup Phu spent a lot of time in the evergreen forests close to his home in Karoong Aho. As a teenager, many mornings he would don a pair of plastic sandals and climb the rolling hills that surround his village, with his grandparents nimbly leading the way. As they ascended, the rising sun would lift the blanket of clouds from the valley, revealing sweeping vistas of the rice paddies below where fellow villagers, often clad in the distinctive red-black brocade of their Ta Oi ethnic group, were already hard at work. In the forest, Phu found a respite from the relentless tropical heat and could glimpse an array of wondrous creatures, like muntjac deer with their magnificent antlers, red-shanked douc langurs, and Annamite striped rabbits. But for Phu, now 34, these aren’t all happy memories. Those forays into the forest had a clear mission: to snare animals, feed the family, and sell the meat. For 12 years, he and his brother would help carry the carcasses back to their village in baskets, until things came to a head one day when Phu witnessed a particularly distressing incident involving a mother monkey dying while her baby watched on. “This is very cruel,” Phu recalls saying to his family. “If we keep doing this, there will be nothing left for the next generation to see.” He pledged to halt his visits and did so until 2021 when he was invited to become part of a team of community-based forest guards under the auspices of WWF’s Carbon and Biodiversity (CarBi) project. Launched in 2011 and funded by the German government, CarBi’s goals include the protection, restoration, and sustainable use of ecosystems, as well as the conservation of biodiversity. “Joining the group made me realize how important the forest is,” says Phu, describing how it supplies the village with clean water and fresh air while preventing landslides. “A healthy forest teeming with plant and animal life makes everything and everyone thrive,” he adds. Phu’s ties to the forest were further cemented when he began working in the nearby Thua Thien Hue Saola Nature Reserve alongside government rangers charged with law enforcement. Under a mosaic of partnerships, including the United States Agency for International Development Biodiversity Conservation (USAID BCA) project, Phu and his fellow guards work with WWF to maintain healthy forests and wildlife populations. Today, Phu spends 22 days every month in the forest, protecting the wildlife and beauty of this very special part of Viet Nam. The Central Annamites cover more than 5.6 million acres comprising one of mainland Asia’s largest contiguous primary forests. Dominated by the mountain range that straddles Viet Nam and Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the region escaped the frosty grip of the last ice age, providing a warm, wet refuge for species to evolve uninterrupted. One bright morning, Phu and four teammates heave camouflage-patterned rucksacks onto their shoulders and set off on their usual patrol in a part of the 60-square-mile reserve that’s roughly a 10-minute motorbike ride from his house. At regular intervals, Phu pulls out a smartphone and keys their coordinates into a Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tool—SMART for short. Should the team spot any snares, signs of illegal logging, or rare endemic species, he will log these too. A few hours’ drive from the Saola Nature Reserve, a community in the Bac Hai Van watershed is cultivating multiple native tree species to replace the acacias that once dominated the landscape, stop encroachment into the forest, and increase climate resilience. Each tree on the roughly 25-acre site bears a laminated label with a QR code that can be scanned for information like species, age, and the ideal times to harvest seeds. Funded by IKEA, the project has established almost 25 acres of seed banks for healthy, native “mother trees” that can produce good-quality seedlings, explains Tran Quoc Hung, director of the local forest management board leading the project. The community can then sell both seeds and seedlings, replicating the model and propagating more native trees throughout the Central Annamites. The projects in Bac Hai Van and Doi village reflect a larger trend in Viet Nam. As incomes rise, public interest in conserving wildlife and protecting the environment has grown, along with a proliferation of passionate local conservation NGOs and increasing investments from the likes of IKEA and other big firms that source timber and other supplies from Viet Nam’s plantation forests. One day before work, Phu reflects on how he came to be a guardian of the forest. He recalls a defining moment while on patrol, when his team encountered a monkey caught in a snare. They quickly freed it, but instead of scampering away as monkeys usually do, the uninjured animal stayed close by for a full 30 minutes, watching them from a distance—as if in gratitude, says Phu. It was a full-circle moment, redemption for the actions of his youth, Phu adds. “I really want to contribute to forest protection and biodiversity conservation,” he says. “I know what I do is small, but I just try my best.” The United States Agency for International Development Biodiversity Conservation (USAID BCA) project was launched in 2020 to maintain and increase forest quality and protect and stabilize wildlife populations across 1.7 million acres of forest in Viet Nam. Funded primarily by USAID, the $43 million, five-year project represents the largest single biodiversity investment in the country to date. WWF is leading implementation, in partnership with communities, government stakeholders, other NGOs, and development partners. “Since its launch, USAID BCA has helped strengthen livelihoods for forest-dependent communities, improve management of protected areas, establish community-based patrol teams to monitor illegal activities, equip forest rangers with advanced spatial monitoring and reporting tools, and increase public awareness of the need to protect wildlife, including reducing consumption of wildlife meat,” says Aler Grubbs, mission director for USAID Viet Nam. The magnitude of this investment sets it apart from previous projects in one clear way. “Before, funding was limited to small areas,” says Van Ngoc Thinh, CEO of WWF-Viet Nam. “Now we’re building a whole network,” he adds—an evolution that offers the potential for impact at an unprecedented scale. Learn more about the USAID BCA project. Learn more about the USAID BCA project. View all issues h