Luis Hernández knows his crops. “Allá es yuca.” That’s cassava. “Allí hay un plátano.” Right there is a banana plant. Walking down the neat rows of a highland farm in the Sierra del Merendón, a rural belt of mountains in northern Honduras, Hernández pauses to name each crop we pass. It’s mid-morning in mid-October—late in the rainy season—and around us the clouds that blanketed the mountainsides at dawn are lifting away unevenly, trailing tattered hems over the patchworks of forest and farmland on each slope. Hernández, who lives in one of the houses clustered farther up the hill, has dark, thoughtful eyes and a small frame that looks smaller still against the panorama behind him. In one row he points out coffee bushes, legume trees and tomato plants; the next row of yellow-green stalks, he says, is all corn. “When you see a mountain or slope that was completely eroded and had no trees, and you go back and see that there are banana trees, forest trees, orange trees—that everything is greener—you know this freshwater conservation work is worth the effort. ” “That’s called intercropping,” says José Vásquez, leader of WWF’s agriculture work in the region. As he walks over to join us, Vásquez explains that such alternating rows strengthen a plot’s ability to retain the soil while also increasing the number of harvest periods per year. “First [they harvest] the corn, then the bananas, then the coffee,” he says. “Otherwise they would only be planting corn.” The mountains of the Sierra del Merendón are home to dozens of small communities that depend, like this one, on subsistence farming. Intercropping is a new technique here. As we follow a winding footpath down the hill, José Gómez, a veteran farmer in a red t-shirt, calls our attention to other improvements. A raised circle of soil around a tree trunk forms a mini-terrace on a steep slope, protecting the roots from erosion. A notch cut into the hillside, discreet but deep, catches water that might otherwise wash straight down the field. These methods were introduced to Gómez’s community several years ago through a partnership between The Coca-Cola Company and WWF. The partnership is working to conserve the region’s fresh water through a number of initiatives with different local stakeholders, which include private companies, regional nonprofits and farmers such as Gómez. Gómez was one of the first farmers in the community to start collaborating with the partnership, after recognizing that its agricultural projects did not just aim to protect the mountain’s forests and rivers: they also aimed to boost the productivity of the farms. “The idea is to work with communities…and help them improve their livelihoods,” says María Amalia Porta, a senior program officer in freshwater for WWF Mesoamerican Reef office and the manager of the partnership’s work in the region since its launch in 2007. Farther down the footpath, rushing water becomes audible. Porta says it’s one of the numerous small tributaries that feed into the larger Manchaguala River, which in turn flows into the Chamelecón— a major river that carries the fresh water from these mountains northeast until it empties into the Caribbean about 40 miles away. One of the biggest reasons behind the partnership’s work in the Sierra del Merendón is the destination of that fresh water when it eventually reaches the sea: a massive coral reef. The Mesoamerican Reef is the second-longest barrier reef in the world after the Great Barrier Reef, stretching almost 700 miles from the tip of Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula to the coastal waters off Guatemala and Honduras. In addition to at least 66 different coral species, the reef supports five species of marine turtle, more than 350 species of mollusk, and more than 500 species of fish, including rainbow-colored parrotfish and filter-feeding whale sharks, the world’s biggest fish. Globally, reefs generate billions of dollars in revenue each year through tourism and recreation, biodiversity, coastal protection services and fisheries. Studies of reefs in the Caribbean have estimated that they annually account for several hundred million dollars through fisheries and several billion more through tourism. The reef also supports more than 2 million people in the region, and the fishing boats roving its waters and the umbrellas dotting the white shorelines nearby attest to the very real economic values attached to its underwater ecosystem.
All of the smaller watersheds feeding into the Chamelecón constitute a single river basin system; there are about 400 such basins draining around the Mesoamerican Reef. And like the coral community itself, the ridge-to-reef system is one that rests on delicate and tightly interwoven balances. The human population in the L-shaped band of terrain bordering the reef has exploded since the mid-20th century, straining all of those balances through increased human activity in the form of commercial development, industrial processes and agriculture. The latter two have had particular impact in Guatemala and Honduras, where manufacturing and farming form the economic backbone of the regions affecting the reef. In the valleys and flatter regions, wastewater from factories, large-scale farms and communities has carried harmful pollutants out toward the corals. Higher up, in the foothills and mountains themselves, poor farming techniques have increased soil erosion, burdening the waterways with excess sediment that essentially chokes the corals and spurs harmful amounts of algae growth. The Mesoamerican Reef forms one end of a broader ecoregion that begins farther inland, in high-altitude cloud forests such as those in Manchaguala. It’s an area bound by the flow of fresh water, which collects in the mountains and trickles into creeks and streams that flow, eventually, into major rivers that empty into the Caribbean. Evaporation along the coasts generates moisture in the air that drifts inland, completing the cycle. Moisture condenses around the mountains and enters the ground through fog and heavy rainfall. Groundwater from the soil, along with runoff, erosion and other pollutants, enters streams and small rivers that carry it downhill. Small rivers feed into larger ones that wend their way through foothills, valleys and flatter regions. The fresh water flows out into the sea through the mouths of the major rivers. Currents carry some of the fresh water out to coral reefs lining the seafloors along the coasts. Water evaporates over the shoreline and shallow waters of the coast, and the heat pushes it upward, renewing the cycle. View all issues h