Roger and Vicki Sant: Paying it forward to the next generation of conservation leaders “Sometimes it can be too easy to forget that among the grand landscapes and gorgeous creatures there are people whose lives are intertwined with these resources.” In 1994, the Russell E. Train Education for Nature Program (EFN) was created at WWF to offer financial and educational support to the next generation of international conservation leaders. Named in honor of WWF’s Chairman and Founder Emeritus Russ Train, and guided by his conservation ethos, EFN answered a need that was as simple as it was profound. “Russ believed with every fiber of his being that the single most important thing we could do for conservation was invest in the training of young men and women around the world, so they could manage their own natural resources,” says Roger Sant, former chairman and current member of WWF’s Board, and a longtime close personal friend of Train. And that is precisely what EFN has done for nearly 20 years: help to empower local leaders and communities around the world. The first primatologist in Laos was an EFN grantee. So were Gabon’s only female national park warden and the leading orchid expert in Peru. Roger Sant and Russ Train met in the way that so many Washingtonians do: through work. It was 1974, and Russ was administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. Roger had moved to D.C. to serve at the Federal Energy Administration. But unlike a lot of work friendships, this one was built on more than just inside jokes and once-a-week lunches. It was built on a mutual devotion to the environment, a commitment to public service, and a belief that not taking oneself too seriously was very important. Roger’s wife Vicki and Russ’s wife Aileen also became fast friends, and the two couples began building a bond that would come to span nearly 40 years. Russell E. Train believed deeply in the value of developing local conservation leaders around the world. To honor him, WWF is determined to expand the reach of EFN to nurture a greater number of conservation leaders. To that end, an anonymous donor has stated an intention to give $2.5 million over five years for WWF to use as a one-to-one match to leverage an additional $2.5 million in an effort to double the number of EFN grants awarded. If you are interested in learning more, please contact Charles Sheerin at 202.495.4639. View all issues h