In the western reaches of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where well-trodden footpaths supplant roads and native dialects still ring through the forest, women shoulder the burdens of daily life. As the sun rises, they ready food for their husbands and children and set out for the fields bordering their villages. There, they turn the soil they’ve nurtured, plant the land they’ve prepared, and harvest the crops they’ve grown to feed and clothe the people who depend on them. They use breaks in the day to fish, make soap, or weave mats. Then, as the sun sinks, they fix another meal. Here, women are at the center of the household and the heart of local livelihoods, yet they are often excluded from community-level decision-making about the natural resources on which they rely. “Women have a wealth of knowledge that we need to tap into, because they play a major role as protectors of the natural resources,” says Nathalie Simoneau, senior gender and social inclusion specialist for WWF, who focuses on mainstreaming gender and social issues into WWF programs. “They have to have a greater voice. They have to be involved in making decisions about how the land is used.” “Whenever I have an idea, I tell them. I’m also the first one to implement it. And when [other members of Sala Ozwa] see it, they are interested and come do it, too.” The women are currently raising rows of fast-growing hardwood trees, acacia, and cassava all in the same plot of land. Peanuts and other small crops grow among the larger plants, helping to maximize the yields from the field with limited environmental impact, and provide the community with nutritious, high-value food they can sell for income or feed to their families. And many of these trees and crops fix nitrogen in the soil, too, helping to enrich it. “It’s a harsh life for women in this village,” Balako says. Ashen skeletons of trees once burned to create more open land still dot the landscape. Around her, women bend low and swing their tools into the soil, still singing off and on. A handful of their young daughters wander between crop rows. “When we come to work, we are able to share with one another and spend the day singing to create some joy for ourselves. We work as a community to help each individual succeed.” The women of Sala Ozwa are also gaining equal footing with men in making decisions about natural resources—and in general. The previously all-male local development committee now includes six women, with Balako serving as vice president. Women are benefiting financially, too. Part of their harvest goes to market, meaning that for the first time, women are generating their own incomes. They say they want profits to go to school fees and toward sewing machines that they can learn to use. Balako, for one, knows exactly what she wants to do with her new income: send her children—both her son and her daughter—to school. Lobota’s group recently harvested and sold peanuts, earning 150,000 Congolese francs (CF)—about US$95 and an excellent return for women in this region. They decided to reinvest 100,000 CF from their profits into the association, and then distribute the remaining 50,000 CF among the 35 women and two men who care for the land. Some women are involved in other income-generating activities in addition to farming. Lobota makes soap from scratch to sell in Oshwe, and her Batwa community also owns equipment—which they both use and rent to others—to make palm oil from palm fruit harvested in the vicinity. “With this association, we are able to bring some money, and the men are able to bring some money, and we can put it together,” Lobota says. “Now we have a say in family affairs.” “There’s been a big change since women have been allowed in the [development] committee. There’s a hope that things will get better for us and that we’ll be received as autonomous people.” “It’s a way to put our kids through school, to feed them, and to pay for their medical bills,” Ngabo says in her native Bateke language. Like other associations working with WWF, the women of Mpelu also practice agroforestry. They have grown wenge trees for hardwood and to attract the caterpillars they like to eat, and they have planted cassava in between. Already, the 10 women in the association are using harvest profits to purchase clothes for themselves and their children—a necessity once funded by men. And women now have the right to participate in the local development committee, too. Recently they persuaded the committee to allow women to join the men in selling products at local markets. “There’s been a big change since women have been allowed in the committee,” Ngabo says. “There’s a hope that things will get better for us and that we’ll be received as autonomous people.” Ngabo sees herself as a disseminator of ideas and information, even inviting women who are not formally a part of the association to meetings so they can discuss household issues and support one another in ensuring the village’s children are safe and healthy. As the community continues to evolve, the women plan to move forward with their fishing and farming techniques—and be prepared to take advantage of ecotourism opportunities in years to come. View all issues h