This story was originally published by WWF-Asia Pacific Exposure. Where northeast Thailand meets Central Lao PDR, a river traverses the landscape, forming the borders of each country. Despite creating a physical barrier between the two nations, the waters of the Mekong have long united the people of each side, serving as a source of food, transport, and income for more than 60 million people in the region. On one side, in Had Hae village of Nakhon Phanom province, Thailand, three fishermen sit beneath a small wooden gazebo, looking over the water to their neighbors. “When we go out to fish, we often meet the Laotians,” said one of them, Phairat Sarasit, pointing to the weather-worn fishing boats across the river. “Most of them are our friends.” But things don’t always work out as agreed. As Lao PDR grew more developed, dirt roads turned into concrete and wooden shacks converted into houses. Fishing practices evolved, increasing tension between the two countries, and changing the dynamics of the river. “Their rules and our rules are not the same,” Wanu said about their community’s fishing guidelines. As the number of motorboats increased, fish populations began to dwindle. Snappers, once abundant, have not been seen in over a decade. Similarly, the Mekong giant catfish, a species renowned to the region, vanished almost seven years ago. “Normally we’d catch about 45 pounds of fish [per trip],” he continued. “Now, even finding 10 pounds is difficult.” Ki Mahavong, a fisherman in Savannakhet province, also faces the same issue, spending longer days to catch any fish at all. He believes that this is caused by the increasing number of fishermen who fish for trade, rather than to solely feed their families. As competition arises, more turn to destructive equipment and practices such as electrocution devices, traps with small mesh openings, and dynamite. The fishermen knew they needed to protect fish spawning grounds and conserve their fish stocks before there was none left to save. So in 2019, villagers along the Mekong riverbanks on both the Thai and Lao PDR sides set up buoys to mark new protected areas for fish to rehabilitate. With the help of WWF, they held transboundary community discussions and set up signboards showing fishing restrictions for everyone to use the river’s resources respectfully.

“No one breaks the rules. If they do, we give them three warnings,” Sport said, “but it never reaches three warnings because the first one is already enough to make people change their behavior.” The Lao-Thai Fisheries project is aimed to conserve aquatic life species in the Mekong by developing management plans for 10 villages in Lao PDR and 14 in Thailand, each with its own fish conservation zone. To reduce pressure on the natural ecosystem, the project also seeks to improve the livelihoods and income generation of villagers, as well as strengthen law enforcement and a better understanding of fishing laws among local fisheries and authorities. Besides conserving fish stock, locals like Ly Vongoudom and his team also patrol the river every day to stop any illegal fishing activities they encounter, as well as bring the perpetrators up to speed on fishing laws. “It’d be hard to divide the river,” Sport said. “After all, we are baan pee muang nong (sibling nations)."