Ricardo Schwartz was excited as he awaited the big delivery. A 10-month-old Maremma sheepdog had just made the two-day, nearly 2,000-mile journey from Patagonia to Misiones Province in the northeastern tip of Argentina, transported in a blue kennel atop a truck bed by two technicians from the Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Agropecuaria (INTA). Once it arrived, the specially trained dog would have an important job to do: help a local farmer protect his sheep from a jaguar. Together, Schwartz and the farmer had tried other methods to scare away the predator—electric fences, automatic floodlights, loud noises—but nothing had worked. Schwartz feared that if they couldn’t find a solution, the farmer would eventually kill the jaguar. But INTA had a solution. For years, the institute has been breeding sheepdogs and training them to guard livestock against predators to help minimize conflicts between herders and pumas in Patagonia, explains Schwartz. As puppies, the dogs are raised alongside a flock of sheep and spend 24 hours a day with them, which fosters a strong bond between the animals. In time, “the dog is adopted by the sheep ... and defends them as if they were family,” constantly patrolling and marking its territory. “It’s basically a sheep that barks,” he says. Schwartz understands well the challenges farmers in Misiones face. He moved to the region with his family when he was 14 years old and has been working the same land—growing yerba mate and raising chickens, pigs, and cattle—for most of his life. Some two decades ago, he too began losing his livestock to a jaguar. Then conservationists from the Fundación Vida Silvestre Argentina (or Vida Silvestre), a WWF partner organization since 1988, approached Schwartz at a cattle fair and offered to install an electric fence around his pasture. The fence was a game changer. In addition to successfully safeguarding his livestock, it transformed Schwartz into an unlikely evangelist for jaguar conservation; he’s been helping fellow farmers find nonlethal alternatives to human-jaguar conflict ever since. And sheepdogs, he believes, are a promising tool. If they work in Misiones as well as they have in Patagonia, he says, they could allow farmers and jaguars to share the land more peacefully. Managing conflict between wildlife and farmers is just one way that conservationists are working to protect and increase jaguar populations in Misiones and across the Americas, where deforestation, infrastructure development, and poaching also pose increasing threats. As those pressures on jaguars and their habitats intensify, Vida Silvestre, WWF, and a growing number of organizations, governments, and civil society groups are now banding together in an unprecedented international effort to change the trajectory for this iconic big cat. The jaguar, Panthera onca, is the largest feline in the Americas and has been an important mythological and cultural symbol among Indigenous communities for thousands of years. In pre-Columbian artwork, jaguars are depicted on tools, statues, and temples. The Maya associated the cat with the afterlife, believing it could move between the worlds of the living and the dead. And the Olmecs worshiped a half-jaguar/half-human deity, revering the creature for its strength and dominance over the natural world. While it’s estimated that between 64,000 and 173,000 jaguars still exist in the wild, the numbers of jaguars and their prey are declining in most regions. Studies suggest that the species could soon qualify as Vulnerable on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of Threatened Species. The feline has already been wiped out in Uruguay and El Salvador. And though momentum is building around a potential reintroduction of jaguars into the southern US, where large blocks of suitable habitat are available, fewer than 10 jaguars have been spotted there since 1963. For years, WWF and organizations such as Vida Silvestre have been working at the local level to conserve jaguars and their habitats. But most of these efforts were isolated projects—monitoring local populations or forest conservation initiatives in specific regions, for instance—and lacked the range-wide cooperation required to prevent vast tracts of territory from disappearing. In the Upper Paraná region of the Atlantic Forest, a priority landscape located mainly in Misiones, WWF’s work with Vida Silvestre provides an example of the complexities inherent in jaguar conservation and how the new strategy plays out on the ground. Eventually, says Rode, “there will be around 121,800 acres connecting three core jaguar habitats: Cruce Caballero Provincial Park, El Piñalito Provincial Park, and the Yabotí Biosphere Reserve.” Jaguars will have more room to breed and seek prey, which will bolster populations and help ensure their genetic diversity. At the broader scale, Rode notes, WWF’s jaguar strategy will also lead to more funding and cooperation in the region, which will propel important projects such as these corridors forward. “Now we can do many more things in more places with more people, and get closer to what we have planned,” she says. Surkin, Villanueva, and others agree that jaguar conservation and large landscape protections won’t happen overnight, and will require continued coordination across countries and collaboration among a variety of actors. But it will have been worth it. “When you save the jaguar, you save much more,” says Villanueva. “You save the water you drink, you save the air you breathe, and you save a stable climate.” Back in Misiones, Schwartz says the provincial government is now considering creating local breeding centers after witnessing Maremma sheepdogs in action. He also says that he is invested in jaguar conservation work for the long haul. “I’ve seen people who care about saving these animals while helping farmers continue with their production. That seems good to me,” he says. “I think I’ll keep doing this.” View all issues h