Saw Tar Klaw’s Friday begins in earnest when the sun breaks through the dark early morning sky. He focuses on brewing coffee and tea for those who will stop by his open-air roadside restaurant in southern Myanmar. Most of his customers at this time of day are young men from Myanmar who are heading home after having worked in neighboring Thailand all week. He constantly refills a dented but functioning silver thermos and two large floralpatterned teapots to satiate the men’s need for caffeine on their long and bumpy drive. Saw Tar Klaw’s attention shifts as the day goes on. At noon, he switches to serving wild cat and white rice, made by his wife, to adventurous tourists who stop by in minivans. After they eat, he lures them to his one-room store, located one step up from the restaurant, to subtly try to convince them to buy ice-cold washcloths that provide some relief from the intense tropical heat. Or hammocks. Or colorful women’s blouses, hanging right beside camouflage-patterned holsters for guns. The tourists are replaced midafternoon by local teenagers and twentysomethings who come by on motorbikes and pickup trucks to watch shows on the shop’s one television, and to enjoy the shade provided by his store’s thatched roof. They fill half the seats in his eight-table restaurant but don’t buy much—just a few sodas and other cold drinks. But Saw Tar Klaw seems to enjoy them most for their company. He watches TV with them for a while before tending to the small garden behind the restaurant. This is the challenge facing Myanmar—and many other countries. How can a nation grow without depleting its rich base of natural resources? And how can it do so now, before its natural resources are overexploited or degraded in exchange for short-term economic gains? When done, the assessment team packages all of those questions, answers, and models into a set of maps, databases, and stories intended to inspire decision makers to make more informed choices that lead to, among other things, adopting a green economy approach. Under this approach, the sustainable use of natural resources can be integrated into national plans and policies for the economy, energy, agriculture, land use, foreign investment, and more. While a dedicated core of conservation- minded experts have been testing the green economy approach for years, it gained special momentum after being a main theme of the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development. Since then, more and more people—from scientists to business leaders to (importantly) government leaders—have begun moving down this greener path in earnest. The approach has been integrated into policies and plans in 65 countries. This taking stock of natural resources, assessing the benefits they provide to humans, and seeing this information used to transform decisions is part of a growing movement led by The Natural Capital Project, or “NatCap”—a 10-year-old partnership among WWF, The Nature Conservancy, Stanford University, and the University of Minnesota. One of NatCap’s strengths is its integration of ecology and economy. Nature and finance were typically seen as strange bedfellows, but the people from both fields who created NatCap realized their common interest in protecting the world’s “living assets” (which quickly came to be known as “natural capital”). And that’s what it all comes down to, says the lead natural capital scientist for WWF-US, Nirmal Bhagabati, who worked with a host of WWF, NatCap, government, and other colleagues to complete the Myanmar assessment this year. “The area that the road will cut through looks a lot like the rural landscape in northeast India where I grew up,” he explains. “I’ve seen that landscape change so much over the years—in a bad way. I don’t want the same thing to happen in Myanmar, especially with climate change being so real there. There’s a sheer awesomeness to the forests in Myanmar. I want to help make sure it stays that way.”