The goat herder lives alongside wildlife in Namibia's Kunene region. Namibia’s desert elephants are uniquely adapted to the harsh terrain. Though not a subspecies of elephants, the herds have adapted remarkably well to their environment, passing on the knowledge that enables them to survive. They dig to access underground water and can walk more than 40 miles daily to find more. Recovering wildlife populations in Namibia means there are more elephants now than when Rebecca moved here about 50 years ago. There are also more lions, which occasionally attack livestock and frighten the community. With lives and livelihoods at stake, the attacks could lead to reduced tolerance of wildlife and more likelihood of retaliatory killings of some species. Rebecca explained that several management approaches have been implemented to reduce conflict with wild animals, like a lion early warning system. This system works by connecting the signal from collared lions to an antenna in the village, alerting villagers to take precautions early while the lions are still some distance away. "We are warned not to go out with the goats,” says Rebecca. For the elephants, a water reservoir was built outside the village. "It's better now, but the elephants still dig up and damage our water pipes," she says. Still, the elephants are generally well tolerated by the villagers. Tourism has softened attitudes toward them. "The villagers know that having visitors from around the world creates jobs and opportunities for them," says Rebecca. "It's good to have elephants. We were terrified of them. Now we are living with them." Conservancies are lauded as having played a key role in Namibia’s recovering wildlife populations, from endangered black rhinos to desert lions. WWF is part of a network of organizations working with the Namibian Ministry of Environment Forestry and Tourism to help communities establish new conservancies and support existing conservancies in bettering the lives of people while conserving wildlife.