This is a challenging time for conservation. Sometimes it feels like the obstacles we face are overwhelming. But every day, more and more brave people are looking beyond those obstacles, not giving in to despair, and making enlightened choices that can change our planet for the better. Read the full reporth Sililo Agness Musutu
The Convener When Sililo Agness Musutu, WWF-Zambia’s freshwater program coordinator, heard about plans to build a hydropower dam on the free-flowing Luangwa River, she knew she had to stop it somehow. This poorly conceived power project would flood whole communities, cause drought in others, devastate the river basin’s wild animal and fish populations, and irrevocably damage the wildlife tourism industry. She was certain if Zambians were aware, they wouldn’t want the dam. But she knew one voice wouldn’t be enough—she had to pull in the right people to amplify the issue. So Musutu, with help from the WWF-Zambia team, connected with leaders of multiple chiefdoms in the Luangwa basin, who talked with their communities. She brought scientists together with government agencies to discuss the impacts. She got Luangwa residents, tour guides, and revered Zambian activists to speak out for the river in national PSAs. And she worked together with WWF-US and WWF-Netherlands to get almost 200,000 signatures on a petition to protect the Luangwa. Her collaborative strategy was a huge success: In June, the Zambian government announced they were halting plans to build the dam. Christopher Pham
The Activist You’d think someone with a full-time job as an apparel designer and a side job teaching indoor cycling might feel they were too busy to commit to anything else—but not so for Christopher Pham. Galvanized by his desire to address the growing environmental crisis and alarmed about budget cuts proposed by the current administration, Pham decided he wanted to do something about it. He became a WWF Panda Ambassador, and this March he traveled from his home in Oregon to Washington, DC, to participate in WWF’s Lobby Day on Capitol Hill. There, he joined a group of 100 activists from 22 states advocating to retain funding for global conservation. As a resident of the Pacific Northwest, Pham met with senators and representatives from both Oregon and Washington. He says speaking out and being listened to by the leaders of our country was a powerful experience—and it had powerful results. Congress not only rejected the proposed budget cuts, but even increased funding to protect tropical forests and other globally important ecosystems. Agyeman Narkie Akua

The Analyst Biologist Agyeman Narkie Akua says that in Ghana’s fishing industry, it’s far more common to see women at the ports selling fish than it is to see a woman data analyst surveilling a fishing fleet. But that didn’t discourage her from becoming one of her country’s first woman “land-based observers” with the Common Oceans ABNJ Tuna Project. Working from a command center on the ground, Akua and her team electronically monitored and collected data on the fishing activities of all Ghana’s purse-seine tuna vessels. They then ran exacting data analysis, providing scientists and Ghana’s government with the clearest picture yet of what is happening with the nation’s tuna fleet. Akua points out that this work can help provide traceability for Ghana’s tuna, curb illegal fishing, and keep tuna populations viable. And just as importantly, she says the job put her in a position to educate and inspire other women, showing them this kind of work is possible. Hey Mer
The Teacher In a village tucked deep in the Dawna Tenasserim forests of Myanmar, Hey Mer, a rubber farmer, made a choice. She wouldn’t follow the example of so many who had been destroying her country’s fragile forests to create rubber farms. Instead, she decided to take a WWF-led workshop on sustainable rubber farming and production. She learned how to plant in ways that would conserve the forest and allow her to create the kind of sustainably grown rubber that’s typically in high demand with international buyers. She applied what she’d learned, and soon word spread about the high-quality product she was producing. Neighboring villagers began visiting, asking her to teach them how to do what she was doing. Today, Hey Mer has become known as a leader in her village, nurturing enthusiasm for sustainable farming and dispersing seeds of knowledge she hopes will help her entire region reap better income for all while protecting their precious forests for their children. Ricardo Alberto Airasca
The Idea Generator It was an emotional moment for Ricardo Alberto Airasca when he flipped the switch at an official opening ceremony bringing renewable energy to his hometown of Armstrong. In the late 1970s, he’d left his birthplace in Argentina’s Santa Fe province to pursue an electrical engineering degree, and then worked far away in Patagonia on wind and solar energy research. But when Armstrong asked Airasca if he’d manage their public services cooperative, he was eager to return home. He brought with him the spark of an idea: making Armstrong a renewable energy town. But, Airasca says, he believes in teamwork, not personal projects—so he and the cooperative took the idea to the community, which enthusiastically embraced it. Working with experts from local universities and supported by funding from the province—an Alliances for Climate Action member—the cooperative has built, and is helping install, solar panels on area rooftops. This provides renewable power for the area, as well as new jobs that will give young people like Airasca’s son Gustavo opportunities to stay in the community. Chhabi Magar
The Citizen Scientist Chhabi Magar walks through western Nepal’s Gauri Mahila Community Forest, reminiscing about a time only 10 years ago when this area was treeless, and the only place he’d see tigers was on rupee notes. But now, thanks to community reforestation projects, the forest is abundant—and thanks to the work Magar is doing, his dreams of seeing real wild tigers are coming true. For the past two years, Magar has been serving as a local citizen scientist, setting up and maintaining camera traps in the forest close to where he lives in order to monitor tigers’ movements. By capturing these images of the big cats in their natural habitat, scientists can get a much clearer sense of how tiger populations in the forest are faring, providing valuable insight into how to best protect them. Happily, the results of Magar’s camera trap data are contributing to some very uplifting news. Eleven years ago, only 18 tigers were counted in this region. Today, there are 87. Read the full reporth Photo Credits | Sililo Agness Musutu © James Suter/Black Bean Productions/WWF-US | Sililo Agness Musutu
© James Suter/Black Bean Productions/WWF-US | Sililo Agness Musutu and local fisher on Luangwa River © James Suter/Black Bean
Productions/WWF-US | Christopher Pham © WWF-US/Darren Higgins | Christopher Pham (center) during Lobby Day 2019 © WWF-
US/Deb Lindsey | Agyeman Narkie Akua © Kyle LaFerriere/WWF-US | Agyeman Narkie Akua and Richard Yeboah assess footage
from fishing vessels © Kyle LaFerriere/WWF-US | Hey Mer displays her rubber sheet product © Hkun Lat/WWF-US | Hey Mer © Hkun
Lat/WWF-US | Ricardo Alberto Airasca © Jason Houston/WWF-US | Ricardo Alberto Airasca with his son, Gustavo Airasca © Jason
Houston/WWF-US | Chhabi Magar © Emmanuel Rondeau/WWF-US | Chhabi Magar (center) watches WWF-Nepal tiger expert Sabita
Malla (left) install a camera trap © Emmanuel Rondeau/WWF-US