“There’s an 800-pound gorilla in the room,” says MacLean, as he looks over Bristol Bay’s flatlands. He’s referring to the proposed Pebble Mine 100 miles northeast of Bristol Bay, the plans for which include extracting 1.5 billion tons of material from deposits there and building a huge power plant and a transportation corridor. Area residents, conservationists, and scientists fear that extracting copper, gold, and molybdenum at the proposed site, which would create up to 10.2 billion tons of waste, would wreck more than 100 miles of streams, polluting salmon spawning ground and harming the ecosystem. The goal of this project is to conserve 44,000 acres of habitat around Lake Iliamna by placing three conservation easements on lands owned by Pedro Bay Corporation, ensuring sockeye salmon can return upstream to spawn in the future. KEY

 Pedro Bay Rivers—Project Area

Salmon Stream—Documented

Other Streams

Pebble Transportation Route (proposed)

 Pebble Mine Facilities (proposed) KEY Large schools of intensely red sockeye salmon returning from Bristol Bay pulse in streams and creeks edged with clusters of fireweed blossoms near the village of Pedro Bay. It sits at the northeastern end of Lake Iliamna, not far from the proposed location of Pebble Mine. The area, with its picture-perfect beauty—alder, cottonwood, spruce forests; termination dust (the first sprinkling of snow at the end of summer) on mountains; clear streams; and a giant, sparkling lake—forms the watershed for Kvichak River, which ultimately flows into Bristol Bay. Residents of Pedro Bay, conservation organizations, commercial fishers, activists, and many others joined forces to fight a very real threat to Bristol Bay’s salmon ecosystem. But there’s more work to do. Climate change is causing shifts in Alaska that are hard for communities to keep up with. For instance, salmon populations have been crashing in the Yukon, Kuskokwim, and Nushagak rivers. And threats to food security are increasing in rural Alaska. Steve MacLean emphasizes the need to build trust as WWF moves forward with our work in Alaska. “If we can demonstrate that we showed up at this one place, worked with the community there, met their expectation, then we’ve started to earn trust. People will be willing to say, ‘Alright, these people showed up and produced the results they said they would. Now let’s work with them.’ I’m so excited to see what happens with other communities.” View all issues h