Tiger population increases 63 percent The small Himalayan country of Nepal shared some big news on Global Tiger Day. Nepal’s government announced its tiger population has increased by 63 percent since the last survey in 2009—putting the number of tigers at an estimated 198 with a range between 163-235. The results The results Nepal was able to definitively confirm that wild tigers are found in 12 of the 14 districts in the Terai Arc Landscape, which is also home to rhinos, elephants and nearly 7 million people. Remarkable tiger population gains were noted in: Protecting the future Protecting the future With as few as 3,200 tigers left in the wild there is still more work to be done. Nepal’s results are a major step toward the global goal of doubling wild tiger numbers by 2022—also known as Tx2. “Tigers are a part of Nepal’s natural wealth and we are committed to ensuring these magnificent wild cats have the prey, protection and space to thrive,” said Megh Bahadur Pandey, Director General of Nepal’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation This increase in tiger numbers comes at a time when many countries are reeling under the onslaught of a poaching crisis. It is a testament to increased government commitment at all levels, effective intelligence networks and strong support from local communities. In recent years Nepal has stepped up antipoaching and law enforcement activities to stop wildlife crime. As both a key source and transit country for the wildlife trafficking, Nepal has had to be extremely vigilant. “We cannot afford to forget that wildlife criminals are aggressively preying upon the last of the world’s wild tigers and if we allow complacency to creep in, all the conservation gains we applaud today could be gone tomorrow,” said Shubash Lohani, Deputy Director of WWF’s Eastern Himalayas program. Toward Tx2 Toward Tx2 WWF calls on governments of other tiger range countries to commit to a series of global wild tiger counts. Three comprehensive counts, in 2016, 2020 and 2022, is the minimum required to track progress toward the goal of doubling wild tiger numbers by 2022.