Human pressures on mangrove ecosystems are not uncommon and can be exacerbated by the ever-looming threat of climate change, leaving people with few income options beyond cutting mangroves. To help alleviate that pressure, WWF is focused on ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction and supporting alternative livelihoods. Human pressures like these on mangrove ecosystems are not uncommon and can be exacerbated by the ever-looming threat of climate change, leaving people with few income options beyond cutting mangroves. To help alleviate that pressure, WWF is focused on ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction and supporting alternative livelihoods. I was in Madagascar with my WWF-US colleagues Anita van Breda and Luz Cervantes, who were hosting a series of disaster risk reduction workshops on integrating the environment into development planning, climate change adaptation planning, and pre- and post-disaster humanitarian action. The workshops were held with WWF Madagascar and their government and non-profit partners in the capitol and the northern district of Ambilobe. One memorable discussion was the emphasis on landscape-level conservation approaches—WWF Madagascar colleagues identified upland erosion as a threat to mangroves due to increased sedimentation. Not far away from the cut mangrove stand, we hiked to a viewpoint where we could see hundreds of acres of dense mangroves leading out to Ambaro Bay, managed by the Antsatrana community-based organization. “WWF started to support the pilot communities in Ambaro bay to protect, manage and restore the mangroves in 2016," said Lilia Rasolofomanana, WWF Madagscar's Mangrove Coordinator. "WWF is now collaborating with 20 community-based organizations to reinforce the community management of the mangroves, to reduce or even stop the threats to mangroves, to promote climate-smart restoration of this ecosystem and to improve the communities' livelihoods and resilience to climate change.” I was lucky to experience the amazing work that WWF Madagascar is doing firsthand. The impact of this visit has made me an advocate for the mangroves of Madagascar and left a lasting impression of the dedication that my Madagascar colleagues and their local partners have for conservation.