One family’s commitment to conservation Before starting a family with her husband, John Harris, Stephanie spent four years helping WWF engage young adults in conservation. And in 2007, Jamee Jr. spent six months helping WWF set up a marine preserve and develop sustainable economic activities in Tanzania's Mafia Island Marine Park. She now sits on the Lake Forest Open Lands Association board as well. It's easy to think that someone as dedicated as Marshall would push his children to support his favorite causes. But the reality is quite the opposite. "He never pushed us," Jamee Jr. says earnestly. "He certainly said, 'I love WWF and if you're interested in joining, let me know.' But he never said, "I really would like you to get involved.' If I suddenly said dance was my thing," she adds with a grin, "that would be okay, too." For a child growing up in the Field family, only a few things were nonnegotiable, and one was helping others. Thinking back on her childhood, Stephanie recalls, "Our parents taught us in no uncertain terms: You give back. It is only through luck that we are where we are today. It is our job and our duty. And it is an example we need to set for our own children." This focus on philanthropy has had a tremendous impact on the entire family. Stephanie muses, "The greatest thing my father did was teach by example. He would get up every day and he'd go out and help these organizations like it was his job. Even with the amount of money he has been able to give, his real legacy is his work ethic and commitment. Far more than what he has given himself, what matters to my father is how he has been able to raise awareness and do so much more." The other nonnegotiable when you're a member of the Field family? Fishing. Every child expresses a love for the pastime—except Stephanie, who admits she doesn't enjoy fishing quite as much as her siblings do. Abby's husband, Lloyd Gerry, is an avid outdoorsman and fisherman (and a member of WWF's National Council as well). "Salmon fishing is a little cold for me," Abby confesses, "but I love going to warm places to fish. My husband and I got together on our first date because of fishing. And we went fishing on our honeymoon." Every member of the family has fishing stories to tell. For Marshall's son, Marshall VI, fishing brought father and son together: "When I was really young, we fished together. And we still do. We have fished all over—salmon in Iceland, marlin in Costa Rica, and sailfish in the Bahamas." One of the more famous family stories is of the time Marshall stopped a round of golf at the famed course in Augusta, Georgia, to fish a pond along one of the fairways. "I said 'This is like a 12-pound bass, I've got to go.' It was the biggest bass I'd ever seen in my life, so that's what I did." Asked if he caught the fish, Marshall admits with a chuckle, "No, that fish just laughed at me." Marshall and Jamee's grandkids range in age from six months to 22 years. And there are already signs that the apples won't fall far from the tree. The eldest, Marshall VI's daughter, is in college and interested in philanthropy. Abby's children share the family's love for nature. Stephanie's daughter has an interest in rescuing sea turtles and sells lemonade to raise money for WWF; her son wants to help great white sharks. Jamee Jr.'s children are only one and three years old, so she is "starting them with a love for nature first." When they are older, she plans to take them on family trips, the way her parents did, and get them involved in volunteering and community projects. Each member of the family has his or her own idea of what being a Field means, but all feel a responsibility to make the world a better place. Marshall says that, from the beginning, he set out to leave Chicago "slightly better than when I got here." Despite the admission that he hasn't "figured out how yet," he continues to fight the good fight. In the process he has inspired his wife and children, and likely his grandchildren and future generations, to give back not just to Chicago, but to the world. The family is incredibly close. Hugs are shared often, as are jokes and colorful tales. Many of these stories center around family trips. When the kids were younger, Marshall and Jamee took the family on an adventure every August—to Africa, Alaska, the Galápagos Islands. Jamee Jr. recalls, "We didn't go to Disney World or a resort in Mexico. We went around the world and saw places few people have the opportunity to see. Places that revolved around nature." These trips had an impact. "Taking a family trip every year expanded my view of environmental and humanitarian issues," confirms Abby. During a trip to Mexico, they had the opportunity to see whales off the Pacific coast of the Baja Peninsula and witness monarch butterflies hibernating in the mountain forests there. Jamee Jr. recalls vividly that the flapping of butterfly wings "sounded like thunder"; Abby calls the whale experience one of her favorites of all time. For more than 50 years, WWF's work to protect the future of nature has brought people together, including families like the Fields, who pass on their love and support for our mission from generation to generation. What unites these families is a passion for helping others and protecting life on Earth. It is because of their remarkable generosity, and yours, that we are able to continue our work throughout the world—protecting species, ensuring the flow of fresh water, restoring forest habitat, keeping oceans clean and healthy, addressing climate threats, and finding ways to feed a growing population. Every day, we are reminded of the power of people to transform the world for the better. We are tremendously grateful for the unwavering commitment of all of the families, small and large, who are helping WWF do just that. View all issues h