Q. As you’ve helped those teams roll out the safeguards framework, what has excited or impressed you most about the work there? Q. As you’ve helped those teams roll out the safeguards framework, what has excited or impressed you most about the work there? A. I have been struck by how deeply my colleagues around the world care about their work with communities. It’s clear that WWF staff possess a deep knowledge and have built meaningful relationships with diverse stakeholders in their landscapes. I’m impressed by the thoughtfulness of conservation program designs and the eagerness of teams to continuously improve through what has turned out to be a rich process of critical reflection. As we move from risk analysis to mitigation, I’m excited to help WWF teams create models, using the good practices already in place, to ensure that we’re always bringing our best to bear in how we protect nature – including putting the voices and priorities of our partners at the forefront of our plans. A. Q. You’ve been with WWF since 2011. Over that time, how would you say WWF has created positive change for communities and species? Q. You’ve been with WWF since 2011. Over that time, how would you say WWF has created positive change for communities and species? A. I think WWF’s biggest contributions to communities have been when we help them to: claim their land and natural resource rights; strengthen and improve community-based natural resource management programs; promote sustainable and climate resilient production practices in agricultural, fisheries and aquaculture systems; and implement community- and nature-based solutions to climate change. We’ve helped show how ecosystem services support local health, increase food security and income, and help people weather the impacts of climate change. A. Q. There are so many challenging realities in the world today. What keeps you up at night? Given all those threats, what role must conservation play? Q. There are so many challenging realities in the world today. What keeps you up at night? Given all those threats, what role must conservation play? A. Climate
change threatens the future of both nature and people. It is already affecting Indigenous peoples, local communities, and their territories in devastating ways. Current funding and strategies just aren’t enough to ensure that vulnerable people continue to thrive—and in some cases, simply survive. A. The CARE-WWF Alliance has tested the kinds of integrated, climate-smart conservation and development solutions that we desperately need to address the most pressing challenges of our time. As a global community, we must push for accountability so that the biggest contributors to climate change invest in adaptation, including community-based adaptation, and mitigation, including nature-based solutions. WWF needs to be bolder in partnering with indigenous peoples’ and development organizations and influencing companies and governments to take urgent action on climate change.