When we think about fighting climate change, we tend to focus on the usual suspects – energy, transportation, and manufacturing. But there’s one industry we often forget about that’s responsible for about ten percent of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions: agriculture. And when you combine agriculture, forestry, and other land uses, you’re looking at about a quarter of all greenhouse gas emissions. The connection between food and land use and global climate change is the subject of a special report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a United Nations body that assesses the science of climate change for the benefit of global policymakers. IPCC’s August 2019 report focuses especially on the impact of agriculture—with good reason. Agriculture accounts for about 40 percent of the land we occupy and 70 percent of the water we consume. Food production often goes hand in hand with water pollution, deforestation, and loss of wildlife biodiversity. And by contributing to global warming, agriculture emissions propel a cycle where it will be more and more difficult to reliably grow enough food to nourish everyone. These impacts are significant, but we also have substantial and largely untapped opportunities for improvement. To make these changes at scale and put a real dent in agriculture’s climate change impact, we need everyone on board. We need new technologies to improve efficiency; we need innovative financing that incentivizes planet-smart practices; we need businesses to collaborate and coordinate to drive unsustainable sourcing out of their supply chains, and we need governments to implement and enforce stronger regulations. Even individual consumers have a role to play by wasting less food, advocating for better policies, and supporting companies that are moving in the right direction. This IPCC report will put this issue on the radar of world leaders, but we need more than awareness. In the past 10 years, we’ve seen lots of commitments from stakeholders, especially corporations, to improve practices for more sustainable agriculture. For the next 10 years, we need to see action. There’s still time to limit the impacts of climate change and prepare for what’s ahead. But we must act now to build efficient and resilient food systems that can feed the planet without hurting our climate – and ourselves -- in the long run.