Twilight eases toward dusk as Everildys Córdoba and four beach monitors walk along a stretch of sand looking for sea turtles. It’s May and they are in the municipality of Acandí, amid an isolated stretch of mountains and marshes in northwestern Colombia, just five miles from the border with Panama. It’s a beautiful beach, soft and expansive. But despite Acandí’s relative remoteness, the outside world is always present: Pressures as diverse as climate change, the migrant crisis, and plastic pollution are all leaving a mark. As Córdoba and the others thread a path along the high-tide line, picking their way over plastic bottles, food containers, and a high-heeled shoe, their eyes remain peeled for signs of marine life. Córdoba, who represents the Cocomasur community council—one of Acandí’s three local governance bodies—is here to observe the incredible creatures at the heart of the beach monitors’ work. As they walk, a dark form takes shape in the sea, growing larger each time a wave breaks. “It’s a leatherback,” says a monitor. It’s the first sea turtle of the night. The group watches attentively as the female leatherback makes landfall and slowly, laboriously, moves up the beach. A short distance from the water’s edge, she begins to dig, flinging loose sand with her flippers as she burrows down, hollows out a nest, and deposits her eggs. The monitors, all from local communities, begin their work. Wearing headlamps with red, turtle-safe lights, they carefully extract the eggs, placing the glossy white orbs into a black plastic garbage bag. They record the date, time, and number of eggs and measure the turtle. When they have removed all the eggs from the nest cavity, they carry them to a purpose-built enclosure a short distance away, where a predator-proof fence will protect them until they hatch. Leatherbacks are the largest sea turtles in the world, measuring up to nine feet in length and weighing up to 1,500 pounds. Listed as a vulnerable species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, their numbers are decreasing worldwide. “The young people are the torchbearers of our legacy.” In collaboration with the government of Colombia, communities, other NGOs, and agencies, WWF and a core group of partners are supporting the future of Colombia’s sustainable development and enduring conservation goals. WWF is grateful to those partners who have helped secure the long-term protection of 79 million acres of Colombia’s most treasured places and charted a course for other nations to follow in financing the protection of their own landscapes and seascapes. View all issues h