By Erik Vance with additional reporting by Laura Margison By all appearances, Kyle Wallis has a perfect life. A college graduate, he has a steady job as an engineer at a local power plant. He owns a house right near his hometown of Palacios, Texas. He has two kids, a supportive wife, and a 401(k). Yet, late on a chilly Saturday morning in November, jet-lagged from a business trip the previous day, he's here at the docks loading pallets full of shrimp. Kyle owns a nominal percentage of one of the seven boats operated by his father Craig's company, but that's not why he's here on this frigid pier. "It's a family heritage thing for me. It's been born and bred in me. I've been here doing it since I was eight years old—being around the waterfront," he says. "You are going out on the water, catching food for the American people, feeding the public. You feel like you are doing something worthwhile." Kyle is a third-generation shrimp boat owner. This morning, one of his father's boats is unloading about 20,000 pounds of brown shrimp that will soon find its way from the Gulf of Mexico to dinner plates throughout the United States. There's not a lot to be done; his father and the crew have it well in hand. But Kyle takes a few turns on the forklift anyway, loading 1,500-lb pallets piled high with orange bags of shrimp into a freezer truck. He talks a little business with his dad and jokes with some of the workers, but mostly he just takes it all in. He says that this is all he really wants—to take over the family business running shrimp boats on the Gulf. He'd quit his job tomorrow, taking a pay cut, and work here full time if he thought the US shrimping industry would be here long enough for his kids to go to college. But instead he waits. Alongside his father. "I've got a son who wants to get back involved [in the company]. But is this business here for another 30 years?" Craig Wallis says. "You can't stay in business if you can't pay your bills." The Wallises haven't bought a new boat since 2000 and still run some bought in the 1970s. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 15 years ago the Gulf fleet was 3,000 to 4,000 strong, but today it's around 1,400 (a local shrimp advisory panel estimates that no more than 1,000 are active). The opposite end of the bay, once full of shrimpers, now has only a few smaller boats run by aging Vietnamese fishers who came here after the war. Off the coast of Galveston, Texas, deckhand Arthur Miller sorts shrimp from bycatch on the Sherry Diane. Miller, setting nets on the Sherry Diane. Gulf shrimpers have had a tough run lately, between monster storms and exploding oil platforms. But what keeps Craig Wallis awake at night and what keeps Kyle out of the business is something more pervasive, something harder to overcome: competition from a global market, much of which is either caught illegally or grown in poorly regulated farms. It's a problem that goes far beyond shrimp or the Gulf of Mexico. Since the 1980s, humans have found ways to take marine life from the seas at an astounding rate. In some parts of the world, huge portions of a vessel’s catch can be made up of non-targeted, commercially useless species—bycatch that goes overboard, left to rot on the ocean bottom. In others, boats willfully defy conservation laws and decimate whole populations. And in others, captains even use slave labor to fill out their ranks. Meanwhile, years of hard-fought environmental advances have made US waters some of the most closely monitored in the world. Alaskan fisheries are a global model for sustainable management; California’s coast has one of the world's best systems of marine protected areas; and swordfish, red snapper and even the long lost Atlantic cod are coming back to life. Of course many other countries have worked hard to create sustainable fisheries off their coasts as well. Mozambique requires boats to avoid "no take" fishing zones; traditional lobstermen in Mexico use some of the most sustainable practices in the world; fewer Fijian tuna boats set out now than in the past, allowing the species to recover. But many developing countries simply do not have the resources required to effectively police their waters—something WWF is helping to fix in targeted waters around the world. Even though US waters and fisheries are now well-regulated, about 90% of seafood on US tables is imported, often from those places with few fishing laws or poor enforcement. Today, while law-abiding US fishers are recognized as crucial partners in saving our oceans, they are increasingly undercut by the influx of illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) seafood across our borders. In few places is the American fisher's efforts to survive this challenge more apparent than along the Gulf Coast. A Wallis Brothers' deckhand unloads bags of frozen shrimp. Fishers Daisy Moore and Jake Cressionie onboard the Anna Marie. Pelicans rest near the docks at Katie's Seafood Market in Galveston. Workers unload black drum and sheepshead at Harlon's LA Fish & Seafood. Employee Bill Reichenbach outside Katie's Seafood Market. A young girl plays in the surf at Galveston. "Illegal fishing is a social justice issue," says Alfred "Bubba" Cook, who works with tuna fisheries in the South Pacific for WWF. "You've got guys that are out there desperately trying to do the right thing, and they simply can't compete with the guys who are doing it illegally." He says Fijian tuna fishers have taken to using onboard observers, cameras and traceability measures to ensure their fisheries are sustainable. But they are still undercut by a host of fishing boats that sweep in every year and decimate local tuna stocks for the international trade. Those stark points are driven home later, during lunch in Nacio's kitchen. Wiping fingers slathered in shrimp juice and mayonnaise, he pulls out an iPad to watch a video about Thai fishers forced to work on the high seas under threat of beatings or death—just the sort of ugly ripple effect illegal and unregulated fishing can cause. In fact, WWF is working with US companies and Thai producers to clean up those ugly practices, but the news still stops Nacio cold. The broad man with calloused hands who grew up on the water, who has spent decades honing his craft to protect the oceans, who didn't finish high school but has speaking engagements across the world, shakes his head. "This is why people should know what they're eating," he says. View all issues h