How to make one of the greatest environmental challenges of our time a priority at home and abroad The scientific consensus is clear and compelling: our climate is changing at a dangerous and unprecedented rate. Every year, we are seeing increasingly severe impacts, including more frequent and more intense droughts, floods and wildfires; dropping agricultural yields; rising sea levels; and acidifying oceans. At the root of these changes is a warming climate driven by man-made changes to the atmosphere, largely from rising greenhouse gas emissions coming from power plants, transportation, industry, and deforestation. Honor international commitments on climate change
Climate change is an international problem requiring an international solution. In 2015, the world laid the groundwork for that solution with the Paris Agreement, which was signed by 194 countries and came into effect in November 2016. The agreement requires countries to submit national plans to reduce emissions and sets us on a path to limit global warming to 2 degrees Celsius or less. The US was instrumental in helping to achieve the agreement and should continue to play a positive role in its implementation, including working to meet or exceed our own Paris commitments. Read more. Honor international commitments on climate change Read more. Reduce US carbon emissions
As the largest historical emitter of fossil fuels and the world’s largest economy, the US has a leading role to play in reducing global emissions and driving the transition toward cleaner forms of energy. The American people strongly support these objectives, as do businesses, municipalities, and many state and local governments. Under the Clean Air Act, the US is legally required to regulate carbon pollution to protect human health and welfare. Read more. Reduce US carbon emissions Read more. Promote renewable energy
We must double down on the renewable energy transition that is well under way by continuing to support policies and incentives that increase the deployment and uptake of renewable energy. These include: important tax incentives for solar and wind energy production; continued investment in clean energy research; and the development and deployment of smart grid infrastructure that encourages renewable energy and brings it to high-demand markets. Read more. Promote renewable energy Read more. Support climate science
Through agencies such as the Department of Energy, NASA, NOAA and the U.S. Geological Survey, the United States has been a global leader on climate science and research. These programs provide critical data on the changes that are underway in our atmosphere, what is driving them, and what the present and future impacts will be on the U.S., its security, its economy, and its citizens. Read more. Support climate science Read more. Learn more about how WWF works to secure transformative change at all levels of government in the U.S. and overseas. Learn more about how WWF works to secure transformative change at all levels of government in the U.S. and overseas.