Grassland birds are spectacular in their beauty and their behavior. The meadowlark’s song is as much a part of the grasslands as the plants themselves, and there’s nothing more thrilling than to look out across a prairie and see a short-eared owl gliding silently, wingtips brushing grasstops, as it searches for its prey. The grasslands where these birds live are often referred to as “flyover country,” but it only takes a few moments in these precious ecosystems to realize just how alive they are with birds, insects, and mammals.

Unfortunately, grassland birds also have the tragic distinction of being North America’s fastest-declining group of birds. Populations of four species in particular—the chestnut-collared longspur, lark bunting, thick-billed longspur, and Sprague’s pipit—have declined by as much as 80% since the 1960s. One of the leading drivers of their decline is the loss of the native grasslands that they depend on. Healthy, untilled grasslands provide these birds, and many other species, with the nesting habitat and the food that they need to provide for their young and refuel before migrating south for the winter. Grassland conservation policy is also something that is urgently needed. If enacted, the North American Grasslands Conservation Act (NAGCA), which has been modeled after the popular and effective North American Wetlands Conservation Act, would kickstart the voluntary protection and restoration of grasslands. If passed, a NAGCA bill could prevent additional conversion of native grasslands by creating a flexible, voluntary, and innovative program for landowners. Participants could see improved grassland and rangeland health and management, increased biodiversity and habitat for grassland birds, pollinators, and other wildlife, and greater levels of carbon sequestration to name just a few of the benefits. To survive, Grassland birds will need the support of NGOs like WWF, private landowner participation, programs on Native lands, and pro-grassland policies that provide a haven for them to feed and find shelter. So, the next time you’re flying from coast to coast and look down upon the grasslands from your airplane window, don’t just think about the sea of vegetation. Instead consider the thousands of species that are found within, like songbirds, that need our support. With it, perhaps the meadowlark will always have a song to sing and a place to sing it.