Over 40 representatives from nine of 12 snow leopard range countries gathered in Kathmandu, Nepal, in April 2016 for a workshop on climate smart conservation planning at the landscape level to protect the iconic snow leopard and its habitat. The workshop focused on building capacity for landscape level planning for snow leopard conservation among participant countries. The snow leopard’s habitat is spread out across Asia’s vast high mountain landscapes. To protect this iconic species, the twelve snow leopard range countries identified the need to go beyond isolated protected areas and conduct conservation efforts at a larger landscape level. In October 2013, all 12 range countries came together and unanimously adopted the Bishkek Declaration on Snow Leopard Conservation and the GSLEP Program, under which these nations committed to securing 20 snow leopard landscapes by 2020. “This workshop is part of the process to secure 20 snow leopard landscapes by 2020,” said Koustubh Sharma, the GSLEP program’s international coordinator. “A lot of the work has already been completed, and we hope our work here will result in landscape management plans which will be blueprints for securing the snow leopard landscapes.” “While each country ultimately formulates its own plans, there was a certain amount of standardization in the country plans for the Global Tiger Initiative. That was important because we were then able to go to global funders like the international finance institutions,” said Keshav Varma, head of the Global Tiger Initiative Council, addressing the country representatives at the closing of the landscape planning workshop. Varma also encouraged countries to tap international expertise and resources for their snow leopard conservation work. “If you think there are resources out there that we can bring to help you as you formulate your plans, we would be more than willing to help,” he said. The workshop was organized by the Global Snow Leopard Ecosystem Protection Program (GSLEP) Secretariat and the Government of Nepal. Support for the workshop was provided by the Snow Leopard Trust and the WWF Conservation and Adaptation in Asia’s High Mountains Project, which is funded by USAID.