Malaysia is the world’s second largest producer of palm oil, after Indonesia, raking in about US$9 billion from the crop in 2018—nearly 3% of the country’s gross domestic product. Sabah has supplied up to 10% of annual global trade, estimated at over 70 million metric tons. Driving palm oil demand are some 3 billion consumers across 150 countries. The edible vegetable oil is found in half of all supermarket goods and seven out of every 10 personal care products—everything from doughnuts to detergents, from ice cream to eyeliner. It’s used in animal feed and as a biofuel to power vehicles. Palm oil has many desirable properties that are hard to find in any other single ingredient: It’s stable at high temperatures; resistant to spoilage; and able to smooth lipstick, make foods crispy, and lather up shampoos. “The truth is, there are few alternatives,” says Davies. “It’s a very versatile commodity. Plus, it’s an incredibly efficient crop.” A single acre can produce 1.3 tons of palm oil in a year. In comparison, soy and coconut yields are 0.2 tons and 0.3 tons, respectively. “So you would need four to 10 times the land area to get the same amount of other oils,” he says. With global demand continuing unabated and expected to reach a whopping $US88 billion in value by 2022, palm oil looks set to stay. But when weighed in the balance, the costs of palm oil in a place like Sabah—to people as well as to forests and wildlife— have their own superlatives. When tropical forests, with their protective canopies and lush understories, give way to the uniformly spaced monocultures of palm plantations, flooding and soil erosion increase. And when forests are cleared by burning, as they often are— though generally not in Sabah—harmful greenhouse gases are released, contributing to climate change and choking the air with smoky haze clouds. Human health suffers. For example, the deforestation-induced haze clouds from Indonesia’s 2015 planting season alone are estimated to have caused more than 100,000 deaths across Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore.

Deforestation has been linked to increased rates of tropical diseases as well. Sabah, in fact, has been called ground zero for a new form of zoonotic malaria, a disease transmitted by monkeys after forest loss. And Malaysia’s 1999 outbreak of the deadly Nipah virus emerged after huge numbers of bats were displaced from their forest habitats and forced closer to people and livestock.

But the challenges in palm oil production are not limited to the impacts of deforestation. For example, despite its contributions to economic growth, the industry has also been associated with poor wages and conditions for laborers, and in some cases serious rights violations, that must be addressed across the sector.

So if replacing palm oil isn’t an option, then the question is this: How do we produce it in a way that’s sustainable in the long run—a way that’s better for people, for threatened species, and for the forests that support them both? “We need to improve sustainable production through better labor and agricultural practices, and minimize further deforestation,” says Davies. “The key is finding a balance.” Helping Sabah find that balance is where Living Landscapes comes in. “The idea,” says Nicholas Fong, who manages the program for WWF-Malaysia, “is to create a shared vision around balancing production with conservation, to analyze a landscape holistically and determine which areas would be most suitable for production, protection, or restoration.” “The aim is to get diverse stakeholders to come together and agree on how to balance competing land-use needs,” he continues, “to talk through how we can produce palm oil but also have healthy rivers and protect our forests and wildlife.” For example, Sabah has now developed a statewide map of high conservation value areas that can guide landscape-level planning and surrounding land use—including where and where not to expand palm oil production. In turn, WWF-Malaysia is convening district-level planners, oil palm growers, and representatives of civil society in several landscapes to test and codify these maps into district development plans. Many corporations also have goals targeting improved labor standards and other issues that contribute to lower-risk business environments, says Gamble. “Increasingly, they want to do business in places where government takes these issues seriously.” By supporting Living Landscapes and Sabah’s jurisdictional approach, Unilever aims not only to improve the sustainability of its own growers but also to foster a better business environment overall. Unilever joined HSBC Bank as an early leader in Sabah, and others have since followed suit. “The bottom line here,” Gamble says, “is that businesses are responding to increasing global demand for sustainability in their supply chains. And this becomes a compelling reason for them to directly support ground-level strategies in the places their products come from, so we can jointly take on these sustainability issues at scale.” The good news is that Living Landscapes isn’t starting from scratch, especially when it comes to sustainable production. In 2015, Malaysia introduced a voluntary sustainability standard, called Malaysian Sustainable Palm Oil (MSPO), and subsequently mandated that all players in the industry, from plantations to processing facilities, meet the standard by 2019 in order to operate legally. “It’s about taking care of people, planet, and profit,” says Nazlan Mohamad, the sustainability manager at Sawit Kinabalu. To attain certification, firms have to demonstrate they have effective management practices in place, transparent and traceable record keeping, and safe and fair working conditions. They also have to demonstrate environmentally friendly operating practices, such as using renewable energy where possible, maintaining the quality and availability of ground and surface water, and conducting soil and wildlife surveys prior to planting. “We’ve been asked to take care of the environment more,” says Arni Mansur, who has worked as an herbicide sprayer at Sawit Kinabalu for over a decade. Sitting on a narrow wooden bench outside her company-provided accommodation, a well-ventilated concrete house fronted by a trimmed lawn, she gestures down the road to a row of brightly colored recycling bins. “We can’t throw rubbish in the river,” she says. “We used to sweep up the leaves that fall and burn them. But now we have to put them in bins, and a truck comes along to collect them.”

MSPO has already moved the needle on sustainable palm oil production in Malaysia. Now Sabah seeks to take it further, calling for all its oil palm stakeholders to meet the more stringent international Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) standard by 2025. This sets Sabah’s palm oil further apart on the international market. To comprehend what it’s like to work on such a massive scale, it helps to see how varied a single landscape can be. Sabah Softwoods Berhad is a sprawling 148,000-acre oil palm plantation. Across undulating hills, the characteristic trees extend for miles. There are also rows of Eucalyptus and Albizia trees, introduced species that the company sells for wood chips and round logs. But part of the estate feels different: The trees here don’t grow in neat, plantation-style rows, and they’re a mix of heights and species. Laran trees and napier grass grow chest- and head-high. Unlike in the palm plantations, the undergrowth is fairly thick, although the canopy cover is too sparse to provide relief from the unrelenting tropical sun. Sabah Softwoods comprises industrial tree plantations, oil palm plantations, and a wildlife corridor. Native tree planting is now cofunded by Sabah Softwoods and Unilever. Covering 2,600 acres in an 8.7-mile stretch, the corridor was established in 2014 to connect two forest reserves, Ulu Kalumpang and Ulu Segama. View all issues h