WWF's Marcene Mitchell, SVP Climate Change From the beginning, the 26th Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), known as COP26, had a different, nervous sort of energy. For the first time since Paris, the parties would be expected to enhance their ambition through their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). Going into the COP, the latest information showed that, while collective ambition increased relative to previous NDCs, the aggregate impact of the new NDCs were not going to leave us anywhere near the 1.5-degree goals of the Paris Agreement, raising the stakes of the progress it would take to have a successful agreement. Still, with many of us undertaking our first trip of any kind since the COVID-19 pandemic began (its own source of anxiety), country delegates, NGO representatives, journalists, and a host of others descended upon Glasgow to endure the discomfort of long walks and long lines, daily COVID testing, and hours of meeting in masks, but determined to make progress, and full of hope. The hope was that, with the world's eyes upon us, COP would become a forcing event that would bring leaps in ambition. The World Leader Summit and the presence of Prince Charles and President Joe Biden during the first few days of the event signaled that action this year would be frontloaded. And indeed, while the negotiators were just getting warmed up, momentum was building from those gathered just outside the negotiation rooms in the Blue Zone. Among the most notable: And those were all in the first few days. As the first week wore on, progress from high emitting states was slow. Leaders from China and Russia were not at the talks, the US Congress did not pass the BBB bill, and while India raised its long-term ambition, it (along with China) did not address its transition out of coal. Outside the COP26 venue, pressure was mounting for more action and, in the words of Greta Thunberg, less blah, blah, blah. Thousands of activists shouted, marched, drummed and danced in the streets of Glasgow, calling for more. More integrity, more justice, more change. There was a fierce sense of urgency in these protestors, one that I share. We are not on track to meet our goal of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees centigrade, and have less than nine years to turn things around. We simply must move beyond talking about our plans and begin executing on them.