High-profile TV coverage of tigers in captivity may give the impression that breeding tigers in captivity is the only way to save the species, but that’s far from true. High-profile TV coverage of tigers in captivity may give the impression that breeding tigers in captivity is the only way to save the species, but that’s far from true. Globally, there are some legitimate conservation breeding programs for tigers that are important for research purposes. However, there are estimated to be over 8,000 tigers in captive tiger facilities across China, Laos, Thailand, and Viet Nam and over 5,000 in the US, with most providing absolutely no conservation benefit to the world’s remaining 3,900 wild tigers. Oftentimes, facilities keeping captive tigers promote misinformation about their benefit to conservation, misleading the public to further the facilities’ profits brought in by visitors. Leigh Henry, WWF-US's director of wildlife policy, shares four facts about white tigers, and captive tigers in general, that illustrate why the promotion of “endangered” white tigers, as just one example, is a ploy of those wanting to profit from captive tigers while providing no benefit to wild tiger conservation. White tigers are not a separate subspecies of tiger. There is only one tiger species and only two recognized subspecies in the world—the Continental (Panthera tigris tigris) and the Sunda (Panthera tigris sondaica). The color of the white tiger's fur is the result of a genetic mutation called leucism. In fact, this white coat would be a hindrance in the wild, as it doesn’t provide a tiger with any camouflage, which greatly reduces their chance of survival. The white tiger is a result of a rare genetic mutation and the most efficient way to breed them is by using two tigers who have the recessive genes needed to produce offspring with a white coat. In captive breeding facilities these two individuals are often related, making inbreeding common. In the US, all white tigers originate from a single male white continental tiger which was imported to the country decades ago. Inbreeding all tigers, not just white tigers, is common in captive facilities and inbred animals suffer from a range of significant health problems. Common issues include spinal deformities, defective organs, and immune deficiencies. Instead of admiring the color of the tigers’ coats, we should be asking ourselves why these tigers are here in the first place, instead of in the wild.