On a cold but bright August morning in 2016, Bas Huijbregts found himself somewhere he never expected to be: in a helicopter surveying a small number of black rhinos that were browsing in Namibia’s Etosha National Park. As the chopper drew closer to the ground, Huijbregts focused on the task at hand: to mark each of the large mammals with a bright paintball splash. Every year, during the dry season, park management and Namibia’s government undertake a weeks-long operation to count all the park’s rhinos. Given the immensity of the area, the count is done by air, and the animals are marked with paint to keep track of those that have already been counted. Huijbregts, then the newly appointed manager (and now the director) of African species conservation at WWF, was passing through the park when he received an impromptu invitation to join in the count. Over an evening braai of barbequed sausages and potatoes, chief warden Pierre Du Preez asked Huijbregts if he knew how to play paintball. Following the start of the current wildlife crime surge in Namibia about seven years ago, WWF created a program to bring together key civil society and donor partners in support of the government’s efforts to halt poaching and wildlife trafficking. Namibia’s whole-of-government approach “works across the entire law enforcement chain, ranging from community participation and pride to park rangers patrolling in the field, and on through investigations, forensics, prosecution, and policy change,” says Greg Stuart-Hill, a senior conservation planner at WWF-Namibia who works closely with Huijbregts. “[Their approach is] not only very good at protecting rhinos but also at dismantling wildlife crime syndicates, which threaten economic development and the rule of law, as well as wild species,” says Huijbregts. One of Namibia’s biggest successes has been the government’s ability to intercept poachers before animals are harmed and to secure meaningful sentences for higher-level criminals. “That happens almost nowhere else in the world,” says Huijbregts. “It is saving many rhino lives, and it’s the result of significant efforts in this whole-of-government approach.” In 2020, 46 preemptive arrests made during seven incidents represented 28% of all rhino trafficking cases in the country. Key to this proactive intervention is the strong sense of pride and responsibility felt by local communities, who allow rhinos to roam through their lands without barriers or fences. Though the population of rhinos on these communal lands is smaller than that found in some national parks, it is significant—especially when you consider the African continent as a whole. “It is incredible that Africa’s largest free-roaming rhino population lives on communal lands in Namibia,” says Huijbregts. “These are not formally protected areas; local communities protect the wildlife on their lands, and they are doing an amazing job for rhinos.” Poaching, however, isn’t the only threat rhinos face. Black rhinos are highly territorial and largely solitary, so they require vast areas to roam. The population density of black rhinos, for example, can be as low as one animal per 40 square miles in Namibia’s arid deserts. “Rhinos breed better when they are at lower densities,” says Barney Long, the senior director of conservation strategies at Re:wild, a WWF partner. “That’s because there are more resources per individual rhino. There’s less competition between males. Females can be more focused on breeding rather than finding food. And they’re less disturbed, because they’re not having to constantly move away from others.” To give the animals more space to roam and breed, WWF has been involved in capturing wild rhinos and moving them to other parts of their historic range in order to establish or increase viable breeding populations and to improve the odds of their surviving an acute threat like a natural disaster. The Namibian government, together with WWF and other partners, has been translocating black rhinos for three decades. And since its inception in 2003, the Black Rhino Range Expansion Project (BRREP) in South Africa has seen 270 animals successfully released to establish 13 new populations within the country, and even internationally, with releases in Liwonde National Park in Malawi in 2019. At least 13 calves were born in 2020 across BRREP project sites in South Africa and Malawi. Two are second generation, meaning their grandmothers were among those moved to create new populations. Translocation has helped expand and increase populations not only of Africa’s rhinos but also of Asia’s. Nepal’s Chitwan National Park, for example, is a stronghold for greater one-horned rhinos. In fact, the current population of rhinos in Nepal is the highest recorded since the establishment of this park. According to the country’s 2021 National Rhino Count, more than 694 of Nepal’s 752 rhinos reside there (another 2,900 or more are found in neighboring India). In 1986, the government decided to shift some animals to three other national parks; WWF has assisted in these efforts since the beginning. Moving rhinos is a massive operation, says Nilanga Jayasinghe, manager of Asian species conservation and the lead on greater one-horned rhino work for WWF-US. When she participated in a translocation in 2015, there were at least 250 people involved, as well as 30 captive elephants used for tracking rhinos. She vividly remembers the operation, which adhered to International Union for Conservation of Nature translocation and reintroduction guidelines: The team spent hours on elephant-back in the midday heat scouring the dense, tall grass. When they found a rhino, about 10 elephants encircled it while a technician scrambled up a nearby tree to dart it with tranquilizer. After that, the team moved in quickly, fitting the rhino with a GPS radio collar and drawing blood and other samples before using a wooden sleigh to load it onto a waiting truck. Once in a traveling crate, the animal was given an antidote to awaken it before being driven overnight to another site. “It was a very intense operation,” says Jayasinghe, who witnessed a female and a male being captured, translocated, and released. India also conducts similar relocations, and the two countries collaborate closely to manage their rhinos. Of course, rhino conservation wouldn’t be possible without the help of those who live in the buffer zones surrounding the national parks, says Bhatta. “Over the years, WWF has supported local communities in their aspiration to be rightful custodians and primary stakeholders in biodiversity-related local development. Now they have homestays where people host tourists for income. They conduct patrols to monitor and address illegal activity and build awareness of ways to better coexist with the wildlife that share their land.” Thirty-year-old Kewal Chaudhary—the president of a Community Based Anti-Poaching Unit in Lamichaur, a buffer zone located in the western part of Chitwan National Park—has been involved in these activities for nearly a decade. Sometimes, he and up to 15 other community members patrol the community forests, walking for hours through the short, sparse undergrowth and middle-sized trees, even patrolling overnight, looking for poachers or signs of suspicious activity. Other times, Chaudhary and his team attend to cases of human-wildlife conflict. Rhinos like to graze in community forests, where people often go to gather firewood or harvest grass. The animals are also fond of visiting sugarcane and wheat fields in the village for tasty treats, which inadvertently damages the crops and leads to conflict. Calls usually come in the dead of night, and when they do, “our rapid response team goes to the spot and calms people down,” says Chaudhary. They also help those affected fill in the forms needed to claim compensation from the authorities for losses—to crops or property, for example—caused by rhinos or other wildlife. “People used to get very aggressive, but now many understand that if we save the animals, they will save us too,” he says. “They will [help us earn] money through tourism. Without the rhinos, animals, and forests, it’s not possible.” View all issues h