Three and a half years ago, Steven Skarda traveled from Procter & Gamble’s corporate engineering office in Ohio to WWF’s headquarters in Washington, DC. He faced a challenge: The multinational company had set ambitious renewable energy goals for its US-based facilities in response to the climate crisis, and as the company’s lead on climate and energy issues, it was Skarda’s job to figure out how to hit those targets. WWF said it could help. Procter & Gamble had at that point been focusing its efforts on a manufacturing site in Georgia, and WWF had already convened conversations with Georgia Power and other large corporations with operations in the area— including The Coca-Cola Company and Mars—about getting more renewables onto the grid in the state. But Procter & Gamble still wanted more solar and wind power for its operations. At the time, regulated monopolies like Georgia Power offered few or no options for customers to buy renewable energy directly, and weren’t planning to offer them. Few utilities knew that more corporations wanted renewable energy to power their operations. With pressure from customers, employees, and shareholders— and based on a growing realization of the impacts America’s electricity footprint has on the climate—many corporations were already trying to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels and cut greenhouse gas emissions. Not only that, but as the price of electricity from renewables continued to drop dramatically, it made sense for the bottom line, too. But even in places where utilities were interested in diversifying and meeting their customers’ needs, public utility commissions and other stakeholders often weren’t on the same page. That kept individual companies from getting what they wanted—and also prevented large-scale changes across energy markets. Watching this play out, Marty Spitzer, who directs WWF’s work on climate and renewable energy, says that while some companies had been talking one-on-one with utilities about renewables, they just weren’t getting as far as they wanted, as fast as they needed. “The conclusion we came to was that we needed more companies in the game,” he says. “Their voice needed to be louder.” At the meeting in DC, Skarda was joined by representatives from 13 other corporations and three other nongovernmental organizations: BSR (Business for Social Responsibility), Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI), and World Resources Institute (WRI). The meeting was “a chance for everyone to decide what hurdles they all faced and how they could work together to overcome them,” says Spitzer. From Skarda’s point of view, Procter & Gamble wanted to help transform the electricity industry, and was ready to get started. “I give a lot of credit to the WWF team,” he says. “They understood how powerful it was to have all of us in the room.” “It's been great to see the increased level of ambition that the private sector has taken in regard to the deployment of renewables and the clean energy economy.” The 2015 Paris Agreement, negotiated under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, sets goals to make the world carbon neutral by mid-century and to limit global warming to well below 2 degrees Celsius— aiming for 1.5 degrees. Quickly getting on track to reach these goals would provide the best chance to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. The agreement, which went into effect in November 2016, included emission reduction targets from nearly 200 nations and is the most ambitious and important global commitment to curb climate change in history. By its design, it also creates the opportunity for nations to continuously strengthen their climate actions over time. Strengthening country actions over time is critical because even if the new US presidential administration doesn’t withdraw from the Paris accord or roll back federal policies designed to meet US commitments—which it has promised to do—on a global level, a gap remains between pledges made in Paris and what scientists say is necessary to avoid the worst climate impacts. In effect, even if all countries’ commitments set in Paris are met, the agreement would only get us halfway there. To help close that emissions gap, REBA’s 60 gigawatt goal is intended to reduce emissions beyond the US’s Paris commitment. But with the new administration’s support for the Paris deal uncertain, Spitzer says, this bold 60 gigawatt goal may end up having to help replace US government action. And by making the business case for renewable energy, Spitzer says, corporations give policy-makers courage to align emissions reductions with what scientists say must be done to prevent catastrophic changes and protect public health, water supplies, and economies. All this makes voluntary corporate action critical, says Spitzer. “Business, he says, “is going to be particularly important for reducing actual emissions and helping rally both the public and government leaders to take more serious steps to solve the climate crisis.” “REBA and the Buyers’ Principles have been remarkable in opening the eyes of legislators, regulators, governors, policymakers, and utilities about the corporate demand for renewables, and in getting them to the table to start engaging with corporate buyers in meaningful discussions.” “In light of the election, the role that U.S. companies, as well as other major energy buyers, including cities, play is even more essential. And because businesses are making renewable energy the new normal, where they go, others will follow. We fully expect to see the growth continue — the momentum is now unstoppable.” View all issues h