At A Turning Point for the Amazon, the Thomas Lovejoy Science for Nature Symposium, we'll discuss the Amazon's resilience to threats and disturbances and solutions to keep the Amazon and its people thriving. Fourteen years ago, Miguel Chasoy, a young Inga-Kamëntšá Indigenous man living in Putumayo, Colombia, and his family were plunged into an economic crisis after losing their crops. Chasoy left behind his trade as a farmer to become an artisan, and this led him to start a new business with his brothers and cousins. Their company, the SHINYAK Association, uses Indigenous techniques to make furniture, instruments, ornaments, and Indigenous masks. Chasoy’s business is one of six Indigenous enterprises in Putumayo selected by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID)-funded Amazon Indigenous Rights and Resources (AIRR) project to receive technical and financial support. In Colombia, the project was led by the Indigenous Peoples Organization of the Northern Amazon of Putumayo (OZIP), the Indigenous Peoples Organization of the Colombian Amazon (OPIAC), and WWF in partnership with NESsT, which invests in social enterprises in emerging markets and worldwide. AIRR was established to further the work and support the rights of Indigenous peoples in the Amazon who are facing large-scale infrastructure development and extractive activities that affect their livelihoods. The project will also lead to reduced emissions from forest loss and the conservation of biodiversity. As part of its efforts, AIRR works with Indigenous enterprises to help them grow and consolidate their businesses through a combination of grants, loans, and market access. To begin the AIRR selection process in Putumayo, the Indigenous Economy Committee (CEI)—formed by OPIAC, OZIP, WWF, and NESsT representatives—launched the call for proposals using WhatsApp, phone calls, and other outlets in October 2020. After a month and a half, CEI reviewed and interviewed 122 applicants, shortlisted 33, and narrowed the awardees down to six businesses. The primary criteria considered included sustainability and income generation. With AIRR support, SHINYAK has received strategic advice to define its business model and type of client and to expand its client portfolio. The company is improving its administrative, commercial, management, and marketing capacities to achieve this. And in terms of investments, SHINYAK has been awarded funds to develop its work plan and acquire machinery and equipment. Along with efforts in Colombia, AIRR is being implemented in Brazil, Ecuador, and Peru through a partnership between WWF, the Amazon Indigenous Peoples Organization, national Indigenous organizations, and nongovernmental organizations. AIRR started in August 2019 and will run until August 2024.