The Don Luciano, a weather-beaten 45-foot fishing boat, motors out of Cocholgüe harbor in the early morning darkness. Behind the vessel, the houses of the village spill down the steep hillside toward the rocky harbor, where a narrow beach is lined by brightly painted boats in various states of repair. Cocholgüe, a cove on Chile’s central coast, is home to roughly 2,000 fishermen and their families. As Captain Fabian Rodriguez steers, his crew of six snoozes in cramped bunks despite the deafening diesel engine. The Don Luciano is one of the larger examples of Chile’s 9,300 artisanal fishing boats, which brought in 1.3 million tons of seafood in 2012. The crew members emerge onto the rolling deck with the rising sun and pull on bright orange overalls and jackets and turquoise gloves. A beach ball-sized float marks the first set of gillnets, which are 200 feet long and suspended 10 feet above the seafloor. A muscular choreography begins: two men pull up the nylon nets, using a motorized winch when arm strength isn’t enough; two more disentangle hake that have been snagged by their gills (hence the term “gillnet”); and two coil the ropes and stack the empty nets. The piles of fish grow, but painfully slowly, as seagulls bob in the swells and pelicans glide past in military formation. When the process is finished two hours later, the men reset the nets and use buckets of seawater to sluice fish slime from the decks and each other. The next set of nets is even more disappointing, with gaping holes left by boat anchors, stiff currents, or maybe sea lions. Rodriguez shakes his head as he steers toward home around noon. Today’s catch looks to be about 15 boxes, each holding 60 pounds of fish, which will earn each man about $10. Rodriguez, a fisherman for 20 years, remembers when an average haul was 30 to 40 boxes. “You very rarely had a small catch, but not now,” he says. “These last few years it’s been low.” The decline is in evidence in places like Cocholgüe. Antonio Bustos, president of the local fishermen’s union, is a bear of a man with a handshake toughened by decades at sea. “I’m a dignified man,” he says. “I don’t want to live off of handouts. I want to work and earn my money.” But it’s getting harder and harder to make ends meet, he says, with prices falling and the fish getting smaller and harder to find every year. “Our kids don’t want to be fishermen anymore.” Many artisanal fishermen blame large industrial vessels (defined as boats more than 60 feet long) for the dwindling catches. They say these big boats fish indiscriminately beyond about five nautical miles out—but still within the historical artisanal fishing grounds—and misreport their catch. In 2012, 175 registered industrial vessels caught nearly as much as Chile’s entire artisanal fleet. Unregulated artisanal fishing is also a problem, says Bustos. Illegally caught hake sell for roughly $10 per box versus the $20-$30 that legal fishermen have to charge to cover costs. “Our legal catch is better-quality, bigger fish,” says Bustos. But given that price competition, law-abiding fishermen struggle to make a profit. “Chile is blessed with rich waters that provide the high-quality seafood—and the protein it provides. Yet the country is now at a crossroads. Its fisheries can either follow the downward path that has plagued so many countries, or it can take a road to recovery by adopting strong governance of its fish stocks, grounded in the best science available and an honest commitment to sustainability.” But wild fisheries are still struggling, and one way to take some of the pressure off is to farm fish instead. Six hundred miles south of Santiago, where Chile’s geography starts to dissolve into a fractal maze of mountains and water, a grid of metal walkways floats in a channel near the city of Puerto Montt. Under a gloomy sky, a worker in a rain jacket and rubber boots tosses food pellets into one of 10 pens, open on the surface but contained by underwater netting, that form the structure. The surface boils, evoking images of piranhas and unlucky swimmers. Here, though, it’s two-week-old coho salmon: 50,000 in each 10,000-square-foot pen, to be exact, or half a million fish in less than two and a half acres. Workers, who live in floating buildings nearby, monitor their charges through underwater cameras and speak about them almost as if they were children. “If they’re not eating, something isn’t right,” says Francisco Elgueta Diaz, operations manager for the Chiloé plant of AquaChile, the country’s largest salmon exporter. Sometimes they have to vaccinate every fish, individually, by hand. Aquaculture has been practiced for thousands of years, starting in ancient China, but it wasn’t until the mid-20th century that “fish farming” grew into a truly large-scale food source. Today it’s the fastest-growing part of the world food economy, accounting for about a third of all fish consumed. In Chile, aquaculture is a $5 billion industry, with 2,300 active operations employing 120,000 people directly or indirectly. The country is the second-largest producer of farmed salmon after Norway but, as it has elsewhere, the aquaculture industry has drawn criticism for polluting and otherwise disturbing natural habitats and ecosystems. Those negative impacts can also spread. Crowded underwater pens can contaminate their surroundings with feces and food pellets (often made, ironically, from wild-caught fish). Escaped fish can spread disease and out-compete native species. In many areas, the ships that supply the farms and feeding-machine generators create constant noise, which may be short-circuiting cetacean communications and driving away marine mammals like the Chilean dolphin. And the sometimes-heavy use of antibiotics is thought by some to increase antibiotic resistance in people. To top it off, in 2007 an outbreak of the Infectious Salmon Anemia virus (ISA) rocked Chile’s aquaculture industry, causing production to plunge by 40% and dovetailing with the worldwide economic crisis to cause widespread unemployment in areas where fishing is a way of life. AquaChile is one of two salmon producers that have worked directly with WWF to improve the sustainability of their operations. They’re also part of the Global Salmon Initiative, an agreement announced in August 2013 by 15 of the world’s leading salmon farming companies to have their farms ready for certification by the Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) by 2020. That would mean 70% of the world’s farmed salmon would be independently evaluated to meet strict standards of environmental, economic and social benefits. At the entrance to Cocholgüe, where the Don Luciano plies the water nearly every day, is a sign bearing a poem by the Chilean writer Francisco Coloane. “All life comes from the sea,” it says. “There is an infinity in the depth of the ocean that man does not yet know.” What we do know, however, is that safeguarding fisheries has a ripple effect on the entire marine environment, affecting everything from seabirds and sea turtles to marine mammals such as fur seals and dolphins. Healthy ocean ecosystems are more resilient to emerging threats such as warming water temperatures and ocean acidification. Making fisheries sustainable over the long term is critical for the billions of people who depend on fish for their food and livelihoods. Still, human actions have altered the bounty of fish once found in the ocean depths: we have made that seemingly endless bounty finite. That’s where WWF’s experience working on complicated issues from all sides comes into play, says Bosshard. To solve this challenge, he adds, “we must try to engage with what is really, really complex.” View all issues h