WWF's Dekila Chungyalpa explains the common ground between faith leaders and conservation groups However, creating that intention and then moving from intention to action often requires a number of factors: transformation or reawakening of individual values and motivations, confirmation of social norms, external validation from respected sources, and personal conviction that the individual has sufficient capacity and control to effect change. Those factors relate strongly to the reasons why WWF works with faith leaders and religious institutions: because more than 80% of the human population follows a faith; because faiths influence beliefs, understanding, and preferences; because faiths offer behavior-reinforcing resources and interactions; and because faiths provide some of the oldest moral frameworks for social action. So social science suggests that faith can be a powerful tool for creating a more sustainable world. But, other discussions are also profoundly important in the work we do. Several studies have shown that when religious or spiritual people set specific goals based on faith, they monitor themselves and are more disciplined in meeting them. In a world where simply balancing human needs and the protection of nature will require a massive shift in attitude and behavior, merging conservation and faith-based goals may be a critical avenue for effecting change at the scale required. Moreover, there is a striking confulence in how conservationists and religious leaders view the place of humanity in the context of our larger world. This is the common ground for the conversation taking place between faith leaders and conservation groups such as ours around the world today: that sustainability begins with letting go of our own self-importance, and awakening to our oneness with the universe and our kinship with all of creation. 

All religions value nature, whether they couch it in terms of stewardship of creation or compassion for living beings. This common ground is what allows us to work with faith leaders and religious institutions as they motivate environmentally friendly behavioral intent, establish religious environmental norms, and validate positive environmental behavior. Faiths and the conservation movement are not at odds with each other. In fact, many of us already share an understanding that we are but fractions of a larger ecological system—that we are all integral parts of a greater universal whole. Lear more about Dekila Chungyalpa and WWF's Sacred Earth initiative. Dekila Chungyalpa WWF's Sacred Earth initiative. View all issues h